Neural Attentive Circuits
Martin Weiss∗,1,6 Nasim Rahaman∗,1,2 Francesco Locatello3 Chris Pal 1,6,7
Yoshua Bengio1,5,7 Bernhard Schölkopf 2 Nicolas Ballas †,4 Li Erran Li†,3
∗,†
1

Mila, Quebec AI Institute
3
AWS AI 4 Meta AI

Equal contribution, random order.
2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
Université de Montréal 6 Polytechnique Montréal
7
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

5

Abstract
Recent work has seen the development of general purpose neural architectures that
can be trained to perform tasks across diverse data modalities. General purpose
models typically make few assumptions about the underlying data-structure and
are known to perform well in the large-data regime. At the same time, there
has been growing interest in modular neural architectures that represent the data
using sparsely interacting modules. These models can be more robust out-ofdistribution, computationally efficient, and capable of sample-efficient adaptation
to new data. However, they tend to make domain-specific assumptions about the
data, and present challenges in how module behavior (i.e., parameterization) and
connectivity (i.e., their layout) can be jointly learned. In this work, we introduce
a general purpose, yet modular neural architecture called Neural Attentive Circuits
(NACs) that jointly learns the parameterization and a sparse connectivity of neural
modules without using domain knowledge. NACs are best understood as the
combination of two systems that are jointly trained end-to-end: one that determines
the module configuration and the other that executes it on an input. We demonstrate
qualitatively that NACs learn diverse and meaningful module configurations on
the Natural Language and Visual Reasoning for Real (NLVR2) dataset without
additional supervision. Quantitatively, we show that by incorporating modularity in
this way, NACs improve upon a strong non-modular baseline in terms of low-shot
adaptation on CIFAR and Caltech-UCSD Birds dataset (CUB) by about 10 percent,
and OOD robustness on Tiny ImageNet-R by about 2.5 percent. Further, we find
that NACs can achieve an 8x speedup at inference time while losing less than 3
percent performance. Finally, we find NACs to yield competitive results on diverse
data modalities spanning point-cloud classification, symbolic processing and textclassification from ASCII bytes, thereby confirming its general purpose nature.

1

Introduction

General purpose neural models like Perceivers [29] do not make significant assumptions about the
underlying data-structure of the input and tend to perform well in the large-data regime. This enables
the application of the same model on a variety of data modalities, including images, text, audio,
point-clouds, and arbitrary combinations thereof [29, 28]. This is appealing from an ease-of-use
perspective, since the amount of domain-specific components is minimized, and the resulting models
can function well out-of-the-box in larger machine learning pipelines, e.g., AlphaStar [28].
At the same time, natural data generating processes can often be well-represented by a system of
sparsely interacting independent mechanisms [41, 46], and the Sparse Mechanism Shift hypothesis
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

