Sketching based Representations for Robust Image
Classification with Provable Guarantees
Nishanth Dikkala⇤
Google Research
nishanthd@google.com
Jelani Nelson⇤
UC Berkeley
minilek@gmail.com

Sankeerth Rao Karingula⇤
Google Research
sankeerth1729@gmail.com

Raghu Meka⇤
UC Los Angeles
raghuvardhan@gmail.com

Rina Panigrahy⇤
Google Research
rinap@google.com

Xin Wang⇤
Google Research
wanxin@google.com

Abstract
How do we provably represent images succinctly so that their essential latent
attributes are correctly captured by the representation to as high level of detail as
possible? While today’s deep networks (such as CNNs) produce image embeddings
they do not have any provable properties and seem to work in mysterious noninterpretable ways. In this work we theoretically study synthetic images that are
composed of a union or intersection of several mathematically specified shapes
using thresholded polynomial functions (for e.g. ellipses, rectangles). We show
how to produce a succinct sketch of such an image so that the sketch “smoothly”
maps to the latent-coefficients producing the different shapes in the image. We
prove several important properties such as: easy reconstruction of the image from
the sketch, similarity preservation (similar shapes produce similar sketches), being
able to index sketches so that other similar images and parts of other images can be
retrieved, being able to store the sketches into a dictionary of concepts and shapes
so parts of the same or different images that refer to the same shape can point to
the same entry in this dictionary of common shape attributes.

1

Introduction

A first step in many computer vision systems is to learn a succinct representation of an input image
(or a set of images) which retains all the useful information about the image. Today, there are several
deep networks that can take images and produce useful embedding representations [4, 7, 2]. Deep
approaches are extremely complex and hard to understand. Moreover, for the tasks they aim to
solve, it is unclear if we need such a non-interpretable ([6, 1]) approach which is also known to
be very brittle ([17]). Previously hand-crafted feature construction approaches such as SIFT [13]
used to dominate. These were also heuristic and not theoretically guaranteed to work. In addition,
they focused heavily on local features which might not be good at understanding important global
information such as shape.
Ideally we would like representations of images to be such that they capture the essential latent
semantic attributes of the image. If the images are produced by some generative process then the
latent attributes correspond to parameters used in the generative process. Further, given a large
collection of images, it can be desirable to create a dictionary or an index of commonly occurring
latent attributes so that each image may be viewed as a set of pointers into this global dictionary.
To study this problem theoretically, we use a simple generative process for producing images using
⇤

Alphabetical author order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

