FiLM: Frequency improved Legendre Memory Model
for Long-term Time Series Forecasting
Tian Zhou⇤†

Ziqing Ma⇤ Xue Wang Qingsong Wen Liang Sun
Tao Yao Wotao Yin Rong Jin†
{tian.zt,maziqing.mzq,xue.w,qingsong.wen,liang.sun}@alibaba-inc.com
{tao.yao,wotao.yin,jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that deep learning models such as RNNs and Transformers have brought significant performance gains for long-term forecasting of
time series because they effectively utilize historical information. We found, however, that there is still great room for improvement in how to preserve historical
information in neural networks while avoiding overfitting to noise presented in the
history. Addressing this allows better utilization of the capabilities of deep learning
models. To this end, we design a Frequency improved Legendre Memory model,
or FiLM: it applies Legendre Polynomials projections to approximate historical
information, uses Fourier projection to remove noise, and adds a low-rank approximation to speed up computation. Our empirical studies show that the proposed
FiLM significantly improves the accuracy of state-of-the-art models in multivariate
and univariate long-term forecasting by (20.3%, 22.6%), respectively. We also
demonstrate that the representation module developed in this work can be used as
a general plug-in to improve the long-term prediction performance of other deep
learning modules. Code is available at https://github.com/tianzhou2011/FiLM/.

1

Introduction

Long-term forecasting refers to making predictions based on the history for a long horizon in the
future, as opposed to short-term forecasting. Long-term time series forecasting has many key
applications in energy, weather, economics, transportation, and so on. It is more challenging than
ordinary time series forecasting. Some of the challenges in long-term forecasting include long-term
time dependencies, susceptibility to error propagation, complex patterns, and nonlinear dynamics.
These challenges make accurate predictions generally impossible for traditional learning methods
such as ARIMA. Although RNN-like deep learning methods have made breakthroughs in time series
forecasting Rangapuram et al. (2018); Salinas et al. (2020), they often suffer from problems such
as gradient vanishing/exploding Pascanu et al. (2013), which limits their practical performance.
Following the success of Transformer Vaswani et al. (2017) in the NLP and CV communities Vaswani
et al. (2017); Devlin et al. (2019); Dosovitskiy et al. (2021); Rao et al. (2021), it also shows promising
performance in capturing long-term dependencies for time series forecasting Wen et al. (2022b);
Zhou et al. (2022); Wu et al. (2021); Zhou et al. (2021). We provide an overview of this line of work
(including deep recurrent networks and efficient Transformers) in the appendix A.
In order to achieve accurate predictions, many deep learning researchers increase the complexity
of their models, hoping that they can capture critical and intricate historical information. These
⇤ Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

