Capturing Graphs with Hypo-Elliptic Diffusions
Csaba Toth⇤
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford

Darrick Lee⇤
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford

toth@maths.ox.ac.uk

Celia Hacker
Department of Mathematics
EPFL
celia.hacker@epfl.ch

leed@maths.ox.ac.uk

Harald Oberhauser
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford

oberhauser@maths.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Convolutional layers within graph neural networks operate by aggregating information about local neighbourhood structures; one common way to encode such
substructures is through random walks. The distribution of these random walks
evolves according to a diffusion equation defined using the graph Laplacian. We
extend this approach by leveraging classic mathematical results about hypo-elliptic
diffusions. This results in a novel tensor-valued graph operator, which we call
the hypo-elliptic graph Laplacian. We provide theoretical guarantees and efficient
low-rank approximation algorithms. In particular, this gives a structured approach
to capture long-range dependencies on graphs that is robust to pooling. Besides the
attractive theoretical properties, our experiments show that this method competes
with graph transformers on datasets requiring long-range reasoning but scales only
linearly in the number of edges as opposed to quadratically in nodes.

1

Introduction

Obtaining a latent description of the non-Euclidean structure of a graph is central to many applications.
One common approach is to construct a set of features for each node that represents the local
neighborhood of this node; pooling these node features then provides a latent description of the whole
graph. A classic way to arrive at such node features is by random walks: at the given node one starts
a random walk, and extracts a summary of the local neighbourhood from its sample trajectories. We
revisit this random walk construction and are inspired by two classical mathematical results:
Hypo-elliptic Laplacian. In the Euclidean case of Brownian motion B = (Bt )t 0 evolving in Rn ,
the quantity u(t, x) = E[f (Bt )|B0 = x] solves the heat equation @t u = u on [0, 1)⇥Rn ,
u(0, x) = f (x). Seminal work of Gaveau [23] in the 1970s shows that if one replaces f (Bt )
in the expectation by a functional of the whole trajectory, F (Bs : s 2 [0, t]), then a pathdependent heat equation can be derived where the classical Laplacian is replaced by the
hypo-elliptic Laplacian.
Free Algebras. A simple way to capture a sequence – for us, a sequence of nodes visited by a random
walk on a graph – is to associate with each sequence element an element in an algebra1
and multiply these algebra elements together. If the algebra multiplication is commutative,
*

Equal contribution; order determined by random coin flip.
An algebra is a vector space where one can multiply elements; e.g. the set of n ⇥ n matrices with matrix
multiplication. This multiplication can be non-commutative; e.g. A · B 6= B · A for general matrices A, B.
1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

