4D Unsupervised Object Discovery
Yuqi Wang1,2

Yuntao Chen3

Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3

1 Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3 Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI_CAS
{wangyuqi2020,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
chenyuntao08@gmail.com

Abstract
Object discovery is a core task in computer vision. While fast progresses have been
made in supervised object detection, its unsupervised counterpart remains largely
unexplored. With the growth of data volume, the expensive cost of annotations
is the major limitation hindering further study. Therefore, discovering objects
without annotations has great significance. However, this task seems impractical
on still-image or point cloud alone due to the lack of discriminative information.
Previous studies underlook the crucial temporal information and constraints naturally behind multi-modal inputs. In this paper, we propose 4D unsupervised object
discovery, jointly discovering objects from 4D data – 3D point clouds and 2D
RGB images with temporal information. We present the first practical approach
for this task by proposing a ClusterNet on 3D point clouds, which is jointly iteratively optimized with a 2D localization network. Extensive experiments on
the large-scale Waymo Open Dataset suggest that the localization network and
ClusterNet achieve competitive performance on both class-agnostic 2D object
detection and 3D instance segmentation, bridging the gap between unsupervised
methods and full supervised ones. Codes and models will be made available at
https://github.com/Robertwyq/LSMOL.

1

Introduction

Computer vision researchers have been trying to locate objects in complex scenes without human
annotations for a long time. Current supervised methods achieve remarkable performance on 2D
detection [31, 15, 30, 38, 6] and 3D detection [49, 27, 34, 33, 47], benefiting from high-capacity
models and massive annotated data, but tend to fail for scenarios that lack training data. Therefore,
unsupervised object discovery is critical for relieving the demand for training labels in deep networks,
where raw data are infinite and cheap, but annotations are limited and expensive.
However, unsupervised object discovery in complex scenes used to believe impractical. Only a
few studies pay attention to this field and achieve limited performance in simple scenarios, far
inferior to the supervised model. Recent methods [35, 42] discover objects on 2D still-image
utilizing the self-supervised learning [7, 43] to distinguish primary objects from the background,
then fine-tune a localization network using the pseudo label. Although these methods outperform
the previous generation of object proposal methods [39, 2, 50], their detection results are still far
behind supervised models. Furthermore, contrastive learning-guided methods have difficulty in
distinguishing different instances within the same category. Alternatively, the 3D point cloud can be
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

