Annihilation of Spurious Minima
in Two-Layer ReLU Networks

Yossi Arjevani
The Hebrew University
yossi.arjevani@gmail.com

Michael Field
UC Santa Barbara
Mike.field@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the optimization problem associated with fitting two-layer ReLU neural
networks with respect to the squared loss, where labels are generated by a target
network. Use is made of the rich symmetry structure to develop a novel set of tools
for studying the mechanism by which over-parameterization annihilates spurious
minima. Sharp analytic estimates are obtained for the loss and the Hessian spectrum at different minima, and it is proved that adding neurons can turn symmetric
spurious minima into saddles; minima of lesser symmetry require more neurons.
Using Cauchy’s interlacing theorem, we prove the existence of descent directions
in certain subspaces arising from the symmetry structure of the loss function. This
analytic approach uses techniques, new to the field, from algebraic geometry, representation theory and symmetry breaking, and confirms rigorously the effectiveness
of over-parameterization in making the associated loss landscape accessible to
gradient-based methods. For a fixed number of neurons and inputs, the spectral
results remain true under symmetry breaking perturbation of the target.

1

Introduction

An outstanding question in deep learning (DL) concerns the ability of simple gradient-based methods
to successfully train neural networks despite the nonconvexity of the associated optimization problems.
Indeed, nonconvex optimization landscapes may have spurious (i.e., non-global local) minima with
large basins of attraction and this can cause a complete failure of these methods. Evidence suggests
that this problem can be circumvented by the use of a large number of parameters in DL models.
In view of the complexity exhibited by contemporary neural networks and the absence of suitable
analytic tools, much recent research has focused on two-layer ReLU networks as a realistic starting
point for a theoretical study [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. The two-layer networks considered were typically of
the form:
f (x; W, α) := α⊤φ(W x),

W ∈ M (k, d), α ∈ Rk ,

(1)

where φ(z) := max{0, z} is the ReLU function acting entrywise and M (k, d) denotes the space of
k × d matrices. In order to isolate the study of optimization-related obstructions due to nonconvexity
from issues pertaining to the expressive power of two-layer networks, data has been often assumed to
be fully realizable. This was further motivated by hardness results which indicated a strict barrier
inherent to the explanatory power of distribution-free approaches operating in complete generality
[8, 9, 10]. For the squared loss, the resulting, highly nonconvex, expected loss is

2 
1
,
(2)
L(W, α) := Ex∼D f (x; W, α) − f (x; V, β)
2
where D denotes a probability distribution over the input space, W ∈ M (k, d), α ∈ Rk are the
optimization variables, and V ∈ M (d, d), β ∈ Rd are fixed parameters.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

