Confident Adaptive Language Modeling
Tal Schuster1,⇤ Adam Fisch2,⇤
Mostafa Dehghani1

Dara Bahri1
1

Jai Gupta1

Vinh Q. Tran1

Google Research

2

Yi Tay1

Donald Metzler1

CSAIL, MIT

Abstract
Recent advances in Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) have led
to significant performance improvements across many tasks. These gains come
with a drastic increase in the models’ size, potentially leading to slow and costly
use at inference time. In practice, however, the series of generations made by
LLMs is composed of varying levels of difficulty. While certain predictions truly
benefit from the models’ full capacity, other continuations are more trivial and can
be solved with reduced compute. In this work, we introduce Confident Adaptive
Language Modeling (CALM), a framework for dynamically allocating different
amounts of compute per input and generation timestep. Early exit decoding involves
several challenges that we address here, such as: (1) what confidence measure to
use; (2) connecting sequence-level constraints to local per-token exit decisions; and
(3) attending back to missing hidden representations due to early exits in previous
tokens. Through theoretical analysis and empirical experiments on three diverse
text generation tasks, we demonstrate the efficacy of our framework in reducing
compute—speedup of up to ⇥3—while provably maintaining high performance.1

1

Introduction

Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have led to breakthroughs in language understanding and language generation across almost every widely-used Natural Language Processing
(NLP) task considered in the field today [5; 15; 17; 20; 51; 52; 53; 75; 89; 73]. Autoregressive
language modeling provides a flexible framework for solving complex tasks with a unified natural
language input and output format, while also relaxing the need for large-scale task-specific data
collection and training [67; 15; 17; 58; 80]. The large size of LLMs, however, results in massive
computational load that might be limiting for certain real-world applications (e.g., machine translation) [9; 30; 42; 49; 59; 63; 71]. This is especially pronounced in the autoregressive decoding process
where the full stack of Transformer layers is repeatedly computed for each output token [37; 40; 86].
While large models do better in general, the same amount of computation may not be required for
every input to achieve similar performance (e.g., depending on if the input is easy or hard) [66]. Early
exiting is a promising approach to decreasing the computational cost of multilayered architectures
such as those used in Transformer-based LLMs, where the number of layers used by the model is
dynamically decided on an input-by-input basis [18; 23; 57; 60; 70]. In this setting, an LLM can
choose to generate a new token based off the representation at an intermediate layer instead of using
the full model, and save computation as a result. A natural question that arises, however, is when is it
a good decision to exit early, as opposed to wait? Naively choosing when to exit can be suboptimal in
terms of saving computation time, and also result in unpredictable degradations to model performance,
especially when predictions depend on each other, as in autoregressive language generation.
⇤

1

Project leads. Correspondence to: talschuster@google.com
Code: https://github.com/google-research/t5x/tree/main/t5x/contrib/calm

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

