Global Convergence of
Federated Learning for Mixed Regression
Lili Su
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University
l.su@northeastern.edu

Jiaming Xu
The Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
jiaming.xu868@duke.edu

Pengkun Yang
Center for Statistical Science
Tsinghua University
yangpengkun@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of model training under Federated Learning when
clients exhibit cluster structure. We contextualize this problem in mixed regression, where each client has limited local data generated from one of k unknown
regression models. We design an algorithm that achieves global convergence from
any initialization, and works even when local data volume is highly unbalanced –
there could exist clients that contain O(1) data points only. Our algorithm first runs
˜
moment descent on a few anchor clients (each with ⌦(k)
data points) to obtain
coarse model estimates. Then each client alternately estimates its cluster labels
and refines the model estimates based on FedAvg or FedProx. A key innovation
in our analysis is a uniform estimate on the clustering errors, which we prove by
bounding the VC dimension of general polynomial concept classes based on the
theory of algebraic geometry.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [MMR+ 17] enables a massive number of clients to collaboratively train
models without disclosing raw data. Heterogeneity in clients renders local data non-IID and highly
unbalanced. For example, smartphone users have different preferences in article categories (e.g.
politics, sports or entertainment) and have a wide range of reading frequencies. In fact, distribution
of the local dataset sizes is often heavy-tailed [DDPM13, FAC, FHK12].
Existing methods to deal with data heterogeneity can be roughly classified into three categories: a
common model, fully personalized models, and clustered personalized models; see Section 2 for
detailed discussion. Using a common model to serve highly heterogeneous clients has fundamental
drawbacks; recent work [SXY21] rigorously quantified the heterogeneity level that the common
model can tolerate with. Fully personalized models [SCST17, MNB+ 21] often do not come with
performance guarantees as the underlying optimization problem is generally hard to solve. In this
work, we focus on clustered personalized models [SMS20], i.e., clients within the same cluster share
the same underlying model and clients across clusters have relatively different underlying models.
The main challenge is that the cluster identities of the clients are unknown. We target at designing
algorithms that simultaneously learn the clusters and train models for each cluster.
A handful of simultaneous clustering and training algorithms have been proposed [MMRS20,
XLS+ 21, LLV21, GCYR20], mostly of which are heuristic and lack of convergence guarantees
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

