CroCo: Self-Supervised Pre-training
for 3D Vision Tasks by Cross-View Completion

Philippe Weinzaepfel
Romain Brégier
Boris Chidlovskii

Vincent Leroy

Yohann Cabon

Vaibhav Arora

Gabriela Csurka

Thomas Lucas
Leonid Antsfeld
Jérôme Revaud

NAVER LABS Europe
https://europe.naverlabs.com/research/computer-vision/croco/

Abstract
Masked Image Modeling (MIM) has recently been established as a potent pretraining paradigm. A pretext task is constructed by masking patches in an input
image, and this masked content is then predicted by a neural network using visible
patches as sole input. This pre-training leads to state-of-the-art performance
when finetuned for high-level semantic tasks, e.g. image classification and object
detection. In this paper we instead seek to learn representations that transfer well
to a wide variety of 3D vision and lower-level geometric downstream tasks, such
as depth prediction or optical flow estimation. Inspired by MIM, we propose an
unsupervised representation learning task trained from pairs of images showing
the same scene from different viewpoints. More precisely, we propose the pretext
task of cross-view completion where the first input image is partially masked, and
this masked content has to be reconstructed from the visible content and the second
image. In single-view MIM, the masked content often cannot be inferred precisely
from the visible portion only, so the model learns to act as a prior influenced
by high-level semantics. In contrast, this ambiguity can be resolved with crossview completion from the second unmasked image, on the condition that the
model is able to understand the spatial relationship between the two images. Our
experiments show that our pretext task leads to significantly improved performance
for monocular 3D vision downstream tasks such as depth estimation. In addition,
our model can be directly applied to binocular downstream tasks like optical flow
or relative camera pose estimation, for which we obtain competitive results without
bells and whistles, i.e., using a generic architecture without any task-specific design.

Figure 1: Auto-completion vs. Cross-view completion tasks. Left: given a masked image, a model
trained for auto-completion can only leverage the visible context to fill-in the blanks and thus relies
mainly on high-level semantic information. Right: given an additional view of the same scene,
cross-view completion makes precise reconstruction possible, assuming that the model is able to
understand both the scene geometry and the spatial relationship between the two images.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

