Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation with
Prototype-based Consistency Regularization

1

Hai-Ming Xu1 , Lingqiao Liu1∗, Qiuchen Bian2 , Zhen Yang3
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide,
2
Northeastern University, 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{hai-ming.xu, lingqiao.liu}@adelaide.edu.au ,
bian.qiu@northeastern.edu , yang.zhen@hauwei.com

Abstract
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation requires the model to effectively propagate
the label information from limited annotated images to unlabeled ones. A challenge
for such a per-pixel prediction task is the large intra-class variation, i.e., regions belonging to the same class may exhibit a very different appearance even in the same
picture. This diversity will make the label propagation hard from pixels to pixels.
To address this problem, we propose a novel approach to regularize the distribution
of within-class features to ease label propagation difficulty. Specifically, our approach encourages the consistency between the prediction from a linear predictor
and the output from a prototype-based predictor, which implicitly encourages features from the same pseudo-class to be close to at least one within-class prototype
while staying far from the other between-class prototypes. By further incorporating
CutMix operations and a carefully-designed prototype maintenance strategy, we
create a semi-supervised semantic segmentation algorithm that demonstrates superior performance over the state-of-the-art methods from extensive experimental
evaluation on both Pascal VOC and Cityscapes benchmarks2 .

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision and has been widely used in many
vision applications [32, 2, 29]. Despite the advances, most existing successful semantic segmentation
systems [26, 6, 9, 46] are supervised, which require a large amount of annotated data, a timeconsuming and costly process. Semi-supervised semantic segmentation [49, 44, 30, 20, 8, 45, 19, 38]
is a promising solution to this problem, which only requires a limited number of annotated images
and aims to learn from both labeled and unlabeled data to improve the segmentation performance.
Recent studies in semi-supervised learning approaches suggest that pseudo-labeling [24, 1, 43] and
consistency-based regularization [23, 3, 40] are two effective schemes to leverage the unlabeled
data. Those two schemes are often integrated into a teacher-student learning paradigm: the teacher
model generates pseudo labels to train a student model that takes a perturbed input [34]. In such a
scheme, and also for most pseudo-labeling-based approaches, the key to success is how to effectively
propagate labels from the limited annotated images to the unlabeled ones. A challenge for the
semi-supervised semantic segmentation task is the large intra-class variation, i.e., regions belonging
to the same class may exhibit a very different appearance even in the same picture. This diversity will
make the label propagation hard from pixels to pixels.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to regularize the distribution of within-class features
to ease label propagation difficulty. Our method adopts two segmentation heads (a.k.a, predictors):
∗
2

Corresponding author
Code is available at https://github.com/HeimingX/semi_seg_proto.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

