Hub-Pathway: Transfer Learning from A Hub of
Pre-trained Models
Yang Shu, Zhangjie Cao, Ziyang Zhang§ , Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng LongB
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
§
Advanced Computing and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd
{shuyang5656,caozhangjie14}@gmail.com, {jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Transfer learning aims to leverage knowledge from pre-trained models to benefit
the target task. Prior transfer learning work mainly transfers from a single model.
However, with the emergence of deep models pre-trained from different resources,
model hubs consisting of diverse models with various architectures, pre-trained
datasets and learning paradigms are available. Directly applying single-model
transfer learning methods to each model wastes the abundant knowledge of the
model hub and suffers from high computational cost. In this paper, we propose
a Hub-Pathway framework to enable knowledge transfer from a model hub. The
framework generates data-dependent pathway weights, based on which we assign
the pathway routes at the input level to decide which pre-trained models are activated and passed through, and then set the pathway aggregation at the output
level to aggregate the knowledge from different models to make predictions. The
proposed framework can be trained end-to-end with the target task-specific loss,
where it learns to explore better pathway configurations and exploit the knowledge
in pre-trained models for each target datum. We utilize a noisy pathway generator
and design an exploration loss to further explore different pathways throughout
the model hub. To fully exploit the knowledge in pre-trained models, each model
is further trained by specific data that activate it, which ensures its performance
and enhances knowledge transfer. Experiment results on computer vision and reinforcement learning tasks demonstrate that the proposed Hub-Pathway framework
achieves the state-of-the-art performance for model hub transfer learning.

1

Introduction

With the emergence of large-scale datasets, various large-scale deep models are developed in wide
range of areas such as computer vision [18, 65, 72] and natural language processing [16, 6]. These
models not only show state-of-the-art performance in the tasks that they are designed for, but also
achieve high performance when fine-tuned on various downstream tasks with different distributions.
On the other hand, due to the requirement of large-scale annotated data, deep learning is still difficult
to apply in specific domains without sufficient data [34]. Therefore, transfer learning, which aims to
transfer knowledge from existing models and datasets to the target task, has attracted more and more
attention recently [75, 6].
Current deep learning paradigm tends to increase the scale of the pre-trained model to embed more
knowledge into the model, which can be transferred to more diverse tasks [25, 6]. However, infinitely
increasing the model scale requires machines with larger storage and stronger GPUs, which are
expensive and cost much energy. Instead, many pre-trained models from different resources are
already available, including pre-trained on diverse datasets or tasks, e.g. ImageNet for classification [55], or BERT for language modelling [16], pre-trained with diverse learning paradigms, e.g.
supervised learning [29], self-supervised learning [19] or unsupervised learning [9] and with various
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

