Fine-Grained Semantically Aligned
Vision-Language Pre-Training

Juncheng Li 1, 2∗ †
Lingxi Xie 2

Xin He 2†

Longhui Wei 2†

Yueting Zhuang 1‡

Long Qian 1
Qi Tian 2‡

Linchao Zhu 1
Siliang Tang 1‡

1

Zhejiang University, 2 Huawei Cloud
{junchengli, qianlong0926, zhulinchao, yzhuang, siliang}@zju.edu.cn
{hexin80, weilonghui1, tian.qi1}@huawei.com, 198808xc@gmail.com

Abstract
Large-scale vision-language pre-training has shown impressive advances in a wide
range of downstream tasks. Existing methods mainly model the cross-modal
alignment by the similarity of the global representations of images and texts, or
advanced cross-modal attention upon image and text features. However, they fail
to explicitly learn the fine-grained semantic alignment between visual regions and
textual phrases, as only global image-text alignment information is available. In
this paper, we introduce LOUPE , a fine-grained semantically aLigned visiOnlangUage PrE-training framework, which learns fine-grained semantic alignment
from the novel perspective of game-theoretic interactions. To efficiently compute
the game-theoretic interactions, we further propose an uncertainty-aware neural
Shapley interaction learning module. Experiments show that LOUPE achieves stateof-the-art performance on a variety of vision-language tasks. Furthermore, without
any object-level human annotations and fine-tuning, LOUPE achieves competitive
performance on object detection and visual grounding. More importantly, LOUPE
opens a new promising direction of learning fine-grained semantics from largescale raw image-text pairs. The repository of this work is at https://github.
com/YYJMJC/LOUPE.

1

Introduction

Learning transferable cross-modal representations from large-scale vision-language pre-training has
exhibited remarkable performance on a wide variety of downstream tasks. Most existing works can be
classified into two categories: dual-encoder and fusion-encoder. The dual-encoder methods [17, 26,
35, 49] adopt two separate encoders to embed images and texts, and model the cross-modal alignment
by the cosine similarity between the global features of images and texts. While such architecture
is efficient for large-scale image-text retrieval by pre-computing image and text representations
offline, they fail to model fine-grained semantic alignment between visual regions and textual phrases.
On the other hand, the fusion-encoder methods [7, 19, 20, 25, 30, 34, 43, 42] attempt to use a
single multi-modal encoder to jointly model the concatenated sequence of images and texts. These
methods simulate soft alignment via advanced cross-modal attention [45]. However, they can only
learn implicit alignment by end-to-end training, lacking explicit supervision to encourage semantic
∗

Work done when interning at Huawei Cloud.
Equal Contribution.
‡
Corresponding Authors.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

