Hybrid Neural Autoencoders for Stimulus Encoding in
Visual and Other Sensory Neuroprostheses

Jacob Granley
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara
jgranley@ucsb.edu

Lucas Relic
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara
lucasrelic@ucsb.edu

Michael Beyeler
Department of Computer Science
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences
University of California, Santa Barbara
mbeyeler@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Sensory neuroprostheses are emerging as a promising technology to restore lost
sensory function or augment human capabilities. However, sensations elicited
by current devices often appear artificial and distorted. Although current models
can predict the neural or perceptual response to an electrical stimulus, an optimal
stimulation strategy solves the inverse problem: what is the required stimulus to
produce a desired response? Here, we frame this as an end-to-end optimization
problem, where a deep neural network stimulus encoder is trained to invert a known
and fixed forward model that approximates the underlying biological system. As a
proof of concept, we demonstrate the effectiveness of this hybrid neural autoencoder
(HNA) in visual neuroprostheses. We find that HNA produces high-fidelity patientspecific stimuli representing handwritten digits and segmented images of everyday
objects, and significantly outperforms conventional encoding strategies across all
simulated patients. Overall this is an important step towards the long-standing
challenge of restoring high-quality vision to people living with incurable blindness
and may prove a promising solution for a variety of neuroprosthetic technologies.

1

Introduction

Sensory neuroprostheses are emerging as a promising technology to restore lost sensory function or
augment human capacities [1, 2]. In such devices, diminished sensory modalities (e.g., hearing [3],
vision [4, 5], cutaneous touch [6]) are re-enacted through streams of artificial input to the nervous
system. For example, visual neuroprostheses electrically stimulate neurons in the early visual system
to elicit neuronal responses that the brain interprets as visual percepts. Such devices have the potential
to restore a rudimentary form of vision to millions of people living with incurable blindness.
However, all of these technologies face the challenge of interfacing with a highly nonlinear system of
biological neurons whose role in perception is not fully understood. Due to the limited resolution of
electrical stimulation, prostheses often create neural response patterns foreign to the brain. Consequently, sensations elicited by current sensory neuroprostheses often appear artificial and distorted
[7, 8]. A major outstanding challenge is thus to identify a stimulus encoding that leads to perceptually
intelligible sensations. Often there exists a forward model, f (Fig. 1A), constrained by empirical
data, that can predict a neuronal or (ideally) perceptual response to the applied stimulus (see [9] for a
recent review). To find the stimulus that will elicit a desired response, one essentially needs to find
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

