Repairing Neural Networks by
Leaving the Right Past Behind

Ryutaro Tanno∗1 Melanie F. Pradier1 Aditya Nori1 Yingzhen Li2
Microsoft Health Futures, Cambridge, UK 2Imperial College London, UK

1

Abstract
Prediction failures of machine learning models often arise from deficiencies in training
data, such as incorrect labels, outliers, and selection biases. However, such data points
that are responsible for a given failure mode are generally not known a priori, let alone a
mechanism for repairing the failure. This work draws on the Bayesian view of continual
learning, and develops a generic framework for both, identifying training examples
which have given rise to the target failure, and fixing the model through erasing
information about them. This framework naturally allows leveraging recent advances
in continual learning to this new problem of model repairment, while subsuming
the existing works on influence functions and data deletion as specific instances.
Experimentally, the proposed approach outperforms the baselines for both identification
of detrimental training data and fixing model failures in a generalisable manner.

1 Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models often exhibit unexpected failures once deployed in the “wild”. Recent
lines of research aim to alleviate different well-known shortcomings in supervised models, such as
vulnerability to annotation errors [1] and adversarial attacks [2], sensitivity to data shifts [3], and biases to
underrepresented subgroups [4, 5, 6]. However, it is often challenging to anticipate beforehand all plausible
failure scenarios, and protect against them pre-emptively. This motivates developing a technique that is
able to repair a model on demand, as new failure cases arise in practice.
Undesirable behaviours of ML models commonly stem from defects in the training data. However, it is unclear how to detect the causes of such failures automatically, rendering a manual troubleshooting necessary.
Furthermore, once the problems are uncovered, one would still need to design fixes, which typically involve
further data curation/collection, and model retraining/redesigning from scratch. Executing the above steps
demand not only time, but also mature expertise in the relevant ML areas, a scarcity in the present job market.
This work introduces an approach to identifying a set of most detrimental training examples that have caused
failure cases observed at test time, and to subsequently repairing the model on these failures by deleting
those culprits. At the basis of both cause identification and repairment steps is the approximation of “counterfactual” posterior distribution where some training examples are assumed absent. We formalise this as a
Bayesian continual (un)learning problem [7], where the above counterfactual posterior is estimated by deleting the evidence of selected training data from the current posterior. We note that, while other factors (e.g.
model class and optimisation) may play a role, we focus on “data debugging” and investigate, to what extent,
prediction failures could be remedied by only intervening on data and updating the model accordingly.
Fig. 1 gives an overview of the proposed approach for model repairment, which operates in two steps
by 1) identifying causes of failure among training data, and 2) updating the model by erasing the
“memories” of those harmful examples. Importantly, the proposed framework is agnostic to why a particular
datapoint hurts model performance, handling both, issues in the input data and/or labels. We only require
specification of the set of failed cases for which we wish to improve performance.
∗

Now at DeepMind, UK. Correspondence to rtanno@google.com and yingzhen.li@imperial.ac.uk

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

