Experimental Design for Linear Functionals in
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces

Mojmír Mutný
ETH Zürich
mojmir.mutny@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea.ethz.ch

Abstract
Optimal experimental design seeks to determine the most informative allocation of
experiments to infer an unknown statistical quantity. In this work, we investigate the
optimal design of experiments for estimation of linear functionals in reproducing
kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs). This problem has been extensively studied in the
linear regression setting under an estimability condition, which allows estimating
parameters without bias. We generalize this framework to RKHSs, and allow
for the linear functional to be only approximately inferred, i.e., with a fixed bias.
This scenario captures many important modern applications, such as estimation
of gradient maps, integrals, and solutions to differential equations. We provide
algorithms for constructing bias-aware designs for linear functionals. We derive
non-asymptotic confidence sets for fixed and adaptive designs under sub-Gaussian
noise, enabling us to certify estimation with bounded error with high probability.

1

Introduction

Optimal Experimental Design (OED) aims to determine data collection schemes – designs – to
efficiently estimate unknown quantities of interest given limited resources (Chaloner and Verdinelli,
1995). As common, we model experiments via an oracle that yields a (noisy) response to a given
input. A design is usually either an (adaptive) policy for querying the oracle, or a (nonadaptive) fixed
allocation of query budget to different oracle inputs. OED has a rich history and close relations to the
field of bandits (Szepesvari and Lattimore, 2020) and active learning (Settles, 2009).
We consider the regression setting, where observations at a fixed input x ∈ X can be obtained via the
noisy oracle by:
y = θ⊤ Φ(x) + ϵ where x ∈ X
(1)
and ·⊤ · denotes the inner product in a Hilbert space Hκ , ϵ is independent, sub-Gaussian noise with
known variance proxy σ 2 , and θ is a bounded element from a separable reproducing kernel Hilbert
space Hκ from kernel κ, with a bound θ⊤ V0 θ ≤ λ−1 , where V0 : Hk → Hk is a positive definite
operator. 1 Depending on whether λ is known or unknown, we will propose different estimators. The
norm constraint (under V0 ) can be interpreted as a bound on the total effect and its parameters if
the Hilbert space is finite dimensional. For infinite dimensional spaces this assumption can model
the additional constraint on regularity. For example, for kernels that induce Sobolev spaces, it
explicitly bounds the total squared derivatives of functions – quantities known to govern complexity
of approximation difficulty. The exact bound depends on the specific definition of κ, but if two
spaces are isometrically isomorphic, the difference can be absorbed to V0 to induce the desired prior
regularity, e.g., the regularity of the derivatives. Here we assume that kernel κ and the operator V0
are known due to prior analysis and/or first principles modeling of the system.
In contrast to the classical ED task of estimating θ (see Fedorov and Hackl, 1997), we are interested
in estimating a projection of θ. Namely, let C : Hκ → Rp be a known linear operator. The map C is
1

In most cases, but not all, V0 is chosen to be the identity.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

