Prune and distill: similar reformatting of image
information along rat visual cortex and deep neural
networks
Paolo Muratore1 , Sina Tafazoli1,2 , Eugenio Piasini1 , Alessandro Laio1,3 , Davide Zoccolan§,1
International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States of America
3
Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Trieste, Italy
1

2

§

To whom correspondence should be addressed: zoccolan@sissa.it

Abstract
Visual object recognition has been extensively studied in both neuroscience and
computer vision. Recently, the most popular class of artificial systems for this
task, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), has been shown to provide
excellent models for its functional analogue in the brain, the ventral stream in
visual cortex. This has prompted questions on what, if any, are the common
principles underlying the reformatting of visual information as it flows through a
CNN or the ventral stream. Here we consider some prominent statistical patterns
that are known to exist in the internal representations of either CNNs or the
visual cortex and look for them in the other system. We show that intrinsic
dimensionality (ID) of object representations along the rat homologue of the
ventral stream presents two distinct expansion-contraction phases, as previously
shown for CNNs. Conversely, in CNNs, we show that training results in both
distillation and active pruning (mirroring the increase in ID) of low- to middle-level
image information in single units, as representations gain the ability to support
invariant discrimination, in agreement with previous observations in rat visual
cortex. Taken together, our findings suggest that CNNs and visual cortex share a
similarly tight relationship between dimensionality expansion/reduction of object
representations and reformatting of image information.

1

Introduction

Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) currently stand as our best class of models of visual
processing in the brain [1, 2, 3], showing success in: (1) predicting the tuning of individual neurons
[4] and bold responses [5] at various stages of the ventral stream; (2) accounting for the ability of
ventral stream neurons to encode a variety of object properties [6]; and (3) controlling their activity via
synthetic stimuli inferred through model inversion [7, 8]. This suggests that the objective-optimization
framework of deep learning offers a parsimonious explanation of the inner workings of complex,
hierarchical brain circuits [9], although the latter are likely shaped by very different learning processes
(e.g., unsupervised adaptation to the spatiotemporal statistics of the visual input [10, 11]. Despite
this success, key differences between biological and artificial hierarchical networks exist (e.g., in
sensitivity to noise or adversarial examples [12, 13]), possibly highlighting core dissimilarities in
how information is processed in the two systems.
In this study, we investigated whether a similar reformatting of image information takes place along
rat visual cortex and a representative CNN (VGG-16). We started from the observation that the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

