Cluster Randomized Designs for
One-Sided Bipartite Experiments

Jennifer Brennan∗
Paul G. Allen School of
Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
jrbrennan@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
mirrokni@google.com

Jean Pouget-Abadie
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
jeanpa@google.com

Abstract
The conclusions of randomized controlled trials may be biased when the outcome
of one unit depends on the treatment status of other units, a problem known as
interference. In this work, we study interference in the setting of one-sided bipartite
experiments in which the experimental units—where treatments are randomized
and outcomes are measured—do not interact directly. Instead, their interactions are
mediated through their connections to interference units on the other side of the
graph. Examples of this type of interference are common in marketplaces and twosided platforms. The cluster-randomized design is a popular method to mitigate
interference when the graph is known, but it has not been well-studied in the
one-sided bipartite experiment setting. In this work, we formalize a natural model
for interference in one-sided bipartite experiments using the exposure mapping
framework. We first exhibit settings under which existing cluster-randomized
designs fail to properly mitigate interference under this model. We then show
that minimizing the bias of the difference-in-means estimator under our model
results in a balanced partitioning clustering objective with a natural interpretation.
We further prove that our design is minimax optimal over the class of linear
potential outcomes models with bounded interference. We conclude by providing
theoretical and experimental evidence of the robustness of our design to a variety
of interference graphs and potential outcomes models.

1

Introduction

Interference is a well-studied phenomenon in causal inference, whereby the treatment status of one
unit can affect the outcome of another. Formally a violation of the Stable Unit Treatment Value
Assumption [1], interference has been studied in many settings, including agricultural studies [2],
clinical trials [3], social networks [chap. 16 of 4, 5, 6, 7], and marketplaces [8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
Marketplaces exhibit unique forms of interference because they involve two types of units: buyers
and sellers. Units of the same type do not interact directly, but rather their interactions are mediated
through their interactions with units of the opposite type. For example, when buyers compete to
buy limited goods, an increase in the price one buyer is willing to pay for a good will affect the
market-clearing rate for that good, thus increasing the price for all other buyers.
Marketplace experiments can be conceptualized as running an experiment on a bipartite graph
between buyers and sellers, with edges representing buyer-seller interactions. Other settings beyond
marketplaces can also be formalized as bipartite graphs, such as content platforms (matching viewers
to creators) or ride-sharing apps (matching riders to drivers) [13]. We consider perhaps the most
∗

Work done while the author was an intern at Google Research, New York, NY.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

