Matryoshka Representation Learning

Aditya Kusupati∗ †⋄ , Gantavya Bhatt∗† , Aniket Rege∗† ,
Matthew Wallingford† , Aditya Sinha⋄ , Vivek Ramanujan† , William Howard-Snyder† ,
Kaifeng Chen⋄ , Sham Kakade‡ , Prateek Jain⋄ and Ali Farhadi†
†
University of Washington, ⋄ Google Research, ‡ Harvard University
{kusupati,ali}@cs.washington.edu, prajain@google.com

Abstract
Learned representations are a central component in modern ML systems, serving a multitude of downstream tasks. When training such representations, it
is often the case that computational and statistical constraints for each downstream task are unknown. In this context, rigid fixed-capacity representations
can be either over or under-accommodating to the task at hand. This leads us
to ask: can we design a flexible representation that can adapt to multiple downstream tasks with varying computational resources? Our main contribution is
Matryoshka Representation Learning (MRL) which encodes information at
different granularities and allows a single embedding to adapt to the computational
constraints of downstream tasks. MRL minimally modifies existing representation
learning pipelines and imposes no additional cost during inference and deployment.
MRL learns coarse-to-fine representations that are at least as accurate and rich as
independently trained low-dimensional representations. The flexibility within the
learned Matryoshka Representations offer: (a) up to 14× smaller embedding
size for ImageNet-1K classification at the same level of accuracy; (b) up to 14×
real-world speed-ups for large-scale retrieval on ImageNet-1K and 4K; and (c) up
to 2% accuracy improvements for long-tail few-shot classification, all while being
as robust as the original representations. Finally, we show that MRL extends seamlessly to web-scale datasets (ImageNet, JFT) across various modalities – vision
(ViT, ResNet), vision + language (ALIGN) and language (BERT). MRL code and
pretrained models are open-sourced at https://github.com/RAIVNLab/MRL.

1

Introduction

Learned representations [55] are fundamental building blocks of real-world ML systems [62, 86].
Trained once and frozen, d-dimensional representations encode rich information and can be used
to perform multiple downstream tasks [4]. The deployment of deep representations has two steps:
(1) an expensive yet constant-cost forward pass to compute the representation [27] and (2) utilization
of the representation for downstream applications [48, 84]. Compute costs for the latter part of the
pipeline scale with the embedding dimensionality as well as the data size (N ) and label space (L).
At web-scale [15, 80] this utilization cost overshadows the feature computation cost. The rigidity in
these representations forces the use of high-dimensional embedding vectors across multiple tasks
despite the varying resource and accuracy constraints that require flexibility.
Human perception of the natural world has a naturally coarse-to-fine granularity [26, 30]. However,
perhaps due to the inductive bias of gradient-based training [79], deep learning models tend to diffuse
“information” across the entire representation vector. The desired elasticity is usually enabled in the
existing flat and fixed representations either through training multiple low-dimensional models [27],
jointly optimizing sub-networks of varying capacity [9, 95] or post-hoc compression [36, 57]. Each
of these techniques struggle to meet the requirements for adaptive large-scale deployment either
∗

Equal contribution – AK led the project with extensive support from GB and AR for experimentation.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

