A Communication-Efficient Distributed Gradient
Clipping Algorithm for Training Deep Neural
Networks
Mingrui Liu1⇤, Zhenxun Zhuang2 , Yunwen Lei3 , Chunyang Liao4
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
2
Meta Platforms, Inc., Bellevue, WA, 98004, USA
3
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, United Kingdom
4
Department of Mathematics, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77840, USA
mingruil@gmu.edu, oldboymls@gmail.com, yunwen.lei@hotmail.com
1

Abstract
In distributed training of deep neural networks, people usually run Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) or its variants on each machine and communicate with
other machines periodically. However, SGD might converge slowly in training
some deep neural networks (e.g., RNN, LSTM) because of the exploding gradient
issue. Gradient clipping is usually employed to address this issue in the single
machine setting, but exploring this technique in the distributed setting is still in
its infancy: it remains mysterious whether the gradient clipping scheme can take
advantage of multiple machines to enjoy parallel speedup. The main technical
difficulty lies in dealing with nonconvex loss function, non-Lipschitz continuous
gradient, and skipping communication rounds simultaneously. In this paper, we
explore a relaxed-smoothness assumption of the loss landscape which LSTM was
shown to satisfy in previous works, and design a communication-efficient gradient
clipping algorithm. This algorithm can be run on multiple machines, where each
machine employs a gradient clipping scheme and communicate with other machines
after multiple steps of gradient-based updates. Our algorithm is proved to have
O N1✏4 iteration complexity and O( ✏13 ) communication complexity for finding
an ✏-stationary point in the homogeneous data setting, where N is the number of
machines. This indicates that our algorithm enjoys linear speedup and reduced
communication rounds. Our proof relies on novel analysis techniques of estimating
truncated random variables, which we believe are of independent interest. Our
experiments on several benchmark datasets and various scenarios demonstrate that
our algorithm indeed exhibits fast convergence speed in practice and thus validates
our theory.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved tremendous successes in many domains including computer vision [23,
15], natural language processing [5] and game [39]. To obtain good empirical performance, people
usually need to train large models on a huge amount of data, and it is usually very computationally
expensive. To speed up the training process, distributed training becomes indispensable [4]. For
example, Goyal et al. [12] trained a ResNet-50 on ImageNet dataset by distributed SGD with
minibatch size 8192 on 256 GPUs in only one hour, which not only matches the small minibatch
⇤
Corresponding Author: Mingrui Liu (mingruil@gmu.edu). The code is available at https://github.
com/MingruiLiu-ML-Lab/Communication-Efficient-Local-Gradient-Clipping

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

