Scalable Multi-agent Covering Option Discovery
based on Kronecker Graphs

Jiayu Chen
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
chen3686@purdue.edu

Jingdi Chen
The George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
jingdic@gwu.edu

Tian Lan
The George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
tlan@gwu.edu

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract
Covering option discovery has been developed to improve the exploration of RL
in single-agent scenarios with sparse reward signals, through connecting the most
distant states in the embedding space provided by the Fiedler vector of the state
transition graph. Given that joint state space grows exponentially with the number
of agents in multi-agent systems, existing researches still relying on single-agent
option discovery either become prohibitive or fail to directly discover joint options
that improve the connectivity of the joint state space. In this paper, we show how
to directly compute multi-agent options with collaborative exploratory behaviors
while still enjoying the ease of decomposition. Our key idea is to approximate the
joint state space as a Kronecker graph, based on which we can directly estimate
its Fiedler vector using the Laplacian spectrum of individual agents’ transition
graphs. Further, considering that directly computing the Laplacian spectrum is
intractable for tasks with infinite-scale state spaces, we further propose a deep
learning extension of our method by estimating eigenfunctions through NN-based
representation learning techniques. The evaluation on multi-agent tasks built with
simulators like Mujoco, shows that the proposed algorithm can successfully identify
multi-agent options, and significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art. Codes are
available at: https://github.itap.purdue.edu/Clan-labs/Scalable_MAOD_via_KP.

1

Introduction

Option discovery [1] enables temporally-abstract actions to be constructed and utilized in RL, which
can significantly improve the performance of RL agents. Among recent developments, Covering
Option Discovery [2, 3] has been shown to be an effective approach to improve the exploration in
environments with sparse reward signals. In particular, it first computes the second smallest eigenvalue
λ2 and the corresponding eigenvector F (i.e., Fiedler vector [4]) of the Laplacian matrix extracted
from the state transition process in RL. Then, options are built to connect the states corresponding
to the minimum or maximum in F , which greedily improves the algebraic connectivity of the state
space [5] and accelerate exploration within it. In this paper, we consider constructing and utilizing
covering options in MARL. Due to the exponentially-large state space in multi-agent scenarios,
a commonly-adopted way to solve this problem [6–9] is to construct individual options as if in a
single-agent environment first, and then learn to collectively leverage these individual options to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

