Decomposed Knowledge Distillation for
Class-Incremental Semantic Segmentation

Donghyeon Baek1
Youngmin Oh1
Sanghoon Lee1
1
Junghyup Lee
Bumsub Ham1,2∗
1

Yonsei University

2

Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/DKD/

Abstract
Class-incremental semantic segmentation (CISS) labels each pixel of an image
with a corresponding object/stuff class continually. To this end, it is crucial to
learn novel classes incrementally without forgetting previously learned knowledge.
Current CISS methods typically use a knowledge distillation (KD) technique for
preserving classifier logits, or freeze a feature extractor, to avoid the forgetting
problem. The strong constraints, however, prevent learning discriminative features
for novel classes. We introduce a CISS framework that alleviates the forgetting
problem and facilitates learning novel classes effectively. We have found that
a logit can be decomposed into two terms. They quantify how likely an input
belongs to a particular class or not, providing a clue for a reasoning process of a
model. The KD technique, in this context, preserves the sum of two terms (i.e.,
a class logit), suggesting that each could be changed and thus the KD does not
imitate the reasoning process. To impose constraints on each term explicitly, we
propose a new decomposed knowledge distillation (DKD) technique, improving
the rigidity of a model and addressing the forgetting problem more effectively. We
also introduce a novel initialization method to train new classifiers for novel classes.
In CISS, the number of negative training samples for novel classes is not sufficient
to discriminate old classes. To mitigate this, we propose to transfer knowledge
of negatives to the classifiers successively using an auxiliary classifier, boosting
the performance significantly. Experimental results on standard CISS benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework.

1

Introduction

A general way of learning knowledge for neural networks is to tune network weights with examples
for all object/scene classes at hand. After finishing the learning process, the weights are normally fixed
for inference, suggesting that the current learning paradigm is not flexible enough to handle novel
classes unseen at training time. Fine-tuning the weights with additional examples for novel classes
addresses the problem in part, but this causes catastrophic forgetting [19]. Namely, neural networks
rather forget the previously learned knowledge in order to learn new information. Class-incremental
learning (CIL) targets to learn novel object/scene classes continually using training samples for those
classes only, while minimizing the forgetting problem. A key to CIL is to design a learning method
that balances between rigidity and plasticity of a model [20]. On the one hand, network weights
should not be altered abruptly in learning new information from novel classes, in order to preserve
the discriminative ability for old ones (i.e., rigidity), avoiding catastrophic forgetting. On the other
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

