SAGDA: Achieving O(−2) Communication
Complexity in Federated Min-Max Learning

Haibo Yang
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
yang.5952@osu.edu

Zhuqing Liu
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
liu.9384@osu.edu

Xin Zhang
Dept. of Statistics
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50010
xinzhang@iastate.edu

Jia Liu
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
liu@ece.osu.edu

Abstract
Federated min-max learning has received increasing attention in recent years thanks
to its wide range of applications in various learning paradigms. Similar to the
conventional federated learning for empirical risk minimization problems, communication complexity also emerges as one of the most critical concerns that affects
the future prospect of federated min-max learning. To lower the communication
complexity of federated min-max learning, a natural approach is to utilize the
idea of infrequent communications (through multiple local updates) same as in
conventional federated learning. However, due to the more complicated inter-outer
problem structure in federated min-max learning, theoretical understandings of
communication complexity for federated min-max learning with infrequent communications remain very limited in the literature. This is particularly true for settings
with non-i.i.d. datasets and partial client participation. To address this challenge,
in this paper, we propose a new algorithmic framework called stochastic sampling
averaging gradient descent ascent (SAGDA), which i) assembles stochastic gradient
estimators from randomly sampled clients as control variates and ii) leverages two
learning rates on both server and client sides. We show that SAGDA achieves a
linear speedup in terms of both the number of clients and local update steps, which
yields an O(−2 ) communication complexity that is orders of magnitude lower than
the state of the art. Interestingly, by noting that the standard federated stochastic
gradient descent ascent (FSGDA) is in fact a control-variate-free special version of
SAGDA, we immediately arrive at an O(−2 ) communication complexity result
for FSGDA. Therefore, through the lens of SAGDA, we also advance the current
understanding on communication complexity of the standard FSGDA method for
federated min-max learning.

1

Introduction

Recently, min-max optimization has drawn considerable attention from the machine learning community. Compared with conventional minimization problems (e.g., empirical risk minimization),
min-max optimization has a richer mathematical structure, thus being able to model more sophisticated learning problems that emerge from ever-emerging applications. In particular, the subclass
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

