Masked Prediction: A Parameter Identifiability View

Bingbin Liu
Carnegie Mellon University
bingbinl@cs.cmu.edu

Daniel Hsu
Columbia University
djhsu@cs.columbia.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon University
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Andrej Risteski
Carnegie Mellon University
aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
The vast majority of work in self-supervised learning have focused on assessing
recovered features by a chosen set of downstream tasks. While there are several
commonly used benchmark datasets, this lens of feature learning requires assumptions on the downstream tasks which are not inherent to the data distribution itself.
In this paper, we present an alternative lens, one of parameter identifiability: assuming data comes from a parametric probabilistic model, we train a self-supervised
learning predictor with a suitable parametric form, and ask whether the parameters
of the optimal predictor can be used to extract the parameters of the ground truth
generative model.
Specifically, we focus on latent-variable models capturing sequential structures,
namely Hidden Markov Models with both discrete and conditionally Gaussian
observations. We focus on masked prediction as the self-supervised learning task
and study the optimal masked predictor. We show that parameter identifiability is
governed by the task difficulty, which is determined by the choice of data model
and the amount of tokens to predict. Technique-wise, we uncover close connections
with the uniqueness of tensor rank decompositions, a widely used tool in studying
identifiability through the lens of the method of moments.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a relatively new approach to unsupervised learning, where the
learning algorithm learns to predict auxiliary labels generated automatically from the data without
human annotators. The hope is that with a properly designed prediction task, a successfully learned
predictor would capture some knowledge about the underlying data. While SSL has been enjoying a
rapid growth on the empirical front, theoretical understanding of why and when SSL works is still
nascent. In no small part, this is because formalizing the desired guarantees seems challenging. For
instance, the focus of SSL has largely been on learning good features, which in practice has been
quantified by downstream performance on various benchmark datasets [Wang et al., 2018, 2019,
Deng et al., 2009, Zhai et al., 2019, Tamkin et al., 2021]. To provide theoretical underpinning to this,
one needs to make extra assumptions on the relationship between the self-supervised prediction task
and the downstream tasks [Arora et al., 2019, Saunshi et al., 2020, HaoChen et al., 2021, Lee et al.,
2021a, Wang et al., 2021, Wei et al., 2021, Wen and Li, 2021].
While associating SSL with downstream supervised tasks is a useful perspective and has led to several
very interesting theoretical results, we take a step back and revisit a more general goal of SSL, which
is to learn some informative functionals of the data distribution. Naturally, the key question here is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

