Subsidiary Prototype Alignment
for Universal Domain Adaptation

Jogendra Nath Kundu1∗ Suvaansh Bhambri1∗ Akshay Kulkarni1∗
Varun Jampani2
R. Venkatesh Babu1
1

Indian Institute of Science

2

Hiran Sarkar1

Google Research

Abstract
Universal Domain Adaptation (UniDA) deals with the problem of knowledge
transfer between two datasets with domain-shift as well as category-shift. The goal
is to categorize unlabeled target samples, either into one of the “known” categories
or into a single “unknown” category. A major problem in UniDA is negative
transfer, i.e. misalignment of “known” and “unknown” classes. To this end, we
first uncover an intriguing tradeoff between negative-transfer-risk and domaininvariance exhibited at different layers of a deep network. It turns out we can strike
a balance between these two metrics at a mid-level layer. Towards designing an
effective framework based on this insight, we draw motivation from Bag-of-visualWords (BoW). Word-prototypes in a BoW-like representation of a mid-level layer
would represent lower-level visual primitives that are likely to be unaffected by the
category-shift in the high-level features. We develop modifications that encourage
learning of word-prototypes followed by word-histogram based classification.
Following this, subsidiary prototype-space alignment (SPA) can be seen as a closedset alignment problem, thereby avoiding negative transfer. We realize this with a
novel word-histogram-related pretext task to enable closed-set SPA, operating in
conjunction with goal task UniDA. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach
on top of existing UniDA techniques1 , yielding state-of-the-art performance across
three standard UniDA and Open-Set DA object recognition benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Despite the success of deep networks trained on large-scale datasets, they are found to be brittle
under input distribution shift i.e. domain-shift [6]. Thus, adapting a trained model for a new target
environment becomes challenging as data annotation is too expensive or time-consuming [7] for
every new target dataset. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (DA) [11] is one of the solutions to this
problem where knowledge is transferred from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
While most works [12, 25, 19] focused on Closed-Set DA, where source and target label sets are
shared (Cs = Ct ), recent works introduced disjoint label set scenarios like Partial DA [51, 4] (Ct ⊂ Cs )
and Open-Set DA [37, 17] (Cs ⊂ Ct ). However, the most practical setting is Universal DA (UniDA)
[48] where the relation between the source and target label sets is unknown i.e. with any number of
shared, source-private and target-private classes. In UniDA, a model is trained to categorize unlabeled
target samples into one of the shared classes (“known” classes) or into a single “unknown” class.
The major problem in UniDA is negative-transfer [38] where misalignment between the shared and
private classes degrades the adaptation performance. On the other hand, we have the domain-shift
problem, which is usually handled by learning domain-invariant features [48, 18, 21, 34]. So, we first
∗
1

equal contribution
Project Page: https://sites.google.com/view/spa-unida

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

