Risk Bounds of Multi-Pass SGD for Least Squares in
the Interpolation Regime

Difan Zou∗
The University of Hong Kong
dzou@cs.hku.hk

Jingfeng Wu∗
Johns Hopkins University
uuujf@jhu.edu

Quanquan Gu
University of California, Los Angeles
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Vladimir Braverman
Johns Hopkins University
vova@cs.jhu.edu

Sham M. Kakade
Harvard University
sham@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has achieved great success due to its superior
performance in both optimization and generalization. Most of existing generalization analyses are made for single-pass SGD, which is a less practical variant
compared to the commonly-used multi-pass SGD. Besides, theoretical analyses for
multi-pass SGD often concern a worst-case instance in a class of problems, which
may be pessimistic to explain the superior generalization ability for some particular
problem instance. The goal of this paper is to provide an instance-dependent and
algorithm-dependent excess risk bound of multi-pass SGD for least squares in
the interpolation regime, which is expressed as a function of the iteration number,
stepsize, and data covariance. We show that the excess risk of SGD can be exactly
decomposed into the excess risk of GD and a positive fluctuation error, suggesting
that SGD always performs worse, instance-wisely, than GD, in generalization. On
the other hand, we show that although SGD needs more iterations than GD to
achieve the same level of excess risk, it saves the number of stochastic gradient
evaluations, and therefore is preferable in terms of computational time.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is one of the workhorses in modern machine learning due to its
efficiency and scalability in training and good ability in generalization to unseen test data. From
the optimization perspective, the efficiency of SGD is well understood. For example, to achieve the
same level of optimization error, SGD saves the number of gradient computations compared to its
deterministic counterpart, i.e., batched gradient descent (GD) [7, 8], and therefore saves the total
amount of running time. However, the generalization ability (e.g., excess risk bounds) of SGD is far
less clear, especially from theoretical perspective.
Single-pass SGD, a less practical SGD variant where each training data is used only once, has been
extensively studied in theory. In particular, a series of works establishes excess risk bounds of
single-pass SGD for learning general smooth and convex objectives [32, 24, 26] as well as learning
least squares [3, 10, 18, 19, 27, 13, 42, 38]. In practice, though, one often runs SGD with multiple
passes over the training data and outputs the final iterate, which is referred to as multi-pass SGD (or
simply SGD in the rest of this paper when there is no confusion). Compared to single-pass SGD that
has limited number of optimization steps, multi-pass SGD allows the algorithm to perform arbitrary
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

