DiSC: Differential Spectral Clustering of Features

Ram Dyuthi Sristi, Gal Mishne
UC San Diego
La Jolla, CA, USA
{rsristi, gmishne}@ucsd.edu

Ariel Jaffe
Hebrew University
Jerusalem, Israel
ariel.jaffe@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Selecting subsets of features that differentiate between two conditions is a key
task in a broad range of scientific domains. In many applications, the features of
interest form clusters with similar effects on the data at hand. To recover such
clusters we develop DiSC, a data-driven approach for detecting groups of features
that differentiate between conditions. For each condition, we construct a graph
whose nodes correspond to the features and whose weights are functions of the
similarity between them for that condition. We then apply a spectral approach to
compute subsets of nodes whose connectivity pattern differs significantly between
the condition-specific feature graphs. On the theoretical front, we analyze our
approach with a toy example based on the stochastic block model. We evaluate
DiSC on a variety of datasets, including MNIST, hyperspectral imaging, simulated
scRNA-seq and task fMRI, and demonstrate that DiSC uncovers features that better
differentiate between conditions compared to competing methods.

1

Introduction

Detecting variables or features that separate between two or more conditions is a critical task in many
scientific domains. Often, the separation between conditions is caused by a large number of strongly
dependent features that form one or more differentiating clusters. Recovering those clusters can
provide insights into the data and its underlying mechanisms.
Strongly dependent differentiating features are common, for example, in transcriptome analysis,
where the data consists of the gene expression of multiple cells. Often, the cells correspond to two or
more biological conditions, such as various cell types, the existence of a particular disease, response
to medical treatment, or two-time points in an evolutionary process [48].
Uncovering groups of differentiating genes (also known as pathways) may significantly contribute to
our understanding of biological processes happening in one condition and not in the other. Differential
feature grouping has various other interesting applications in neuroscience [43], computer vision
and machine learning [6]. In all applications, detecting groups that are significant for differentiating
between conditions adds interpretability to the otherwise black box models.
Due to its importance in various domains, the feature selection task has been the focus of intensive
research. Often, methods for feature selection are designed to yield a sparse output, for example, by
selecting only a small number of features out of a large correlated group. One example is the best
subset selection approach, where features are iteratively added or removed until a predetermined
criterion is met. Another popular approach is to achieve a sparse output by adding regularization terms
to a linear (or general linear) model that predicts a function over the data points, e.g., class label. For
example, classical LASSO relaxes the l0 norm of the coefficient vector with its convex surrogate l1 [13,
37]. Alternatively, a recent approach aims to approximate the l0 regularizer via stochastic gates [44].
To address the case of correlated features, various extensions of LASSO were developed. Clustered
LASSO [33] promotes sparsity among the coefficients and equal significance to non-zero coefficients
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

