Recruitment Strategies That Take a Chance
Gregory Kehne
Harvard University

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University

Jingyan Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
In academic recruitment settings, including faculty hiring and PhD admissions,
committees aim to maximize the overall quality of recruited candidates, but there is
uncertainty about whether a candidate would accept an offer if given one. Previous
work has considered algorithms that make offers sequentially and are subject to a
hard budget constraint. We argue that these modeling choices may be inconsistent
with the practice of academic recruitment. Instead, we restrict ourselves to a single
batch of offers, and we treat the target number of positions as a soft constraint, so
we risk overshooting or undershooting the target. Specifically, our objective is to
select a subset of candidates that maximizes the overall expected value associated
with candidates who accept, minus an expected penalty for deviating from the target.
We first analyze the guarantees provided by natural greedy heuristics, showing
their desirable properties despite the simplicity. Depending on the structure of
the penalty function, we further develop algorithms that provide fully polynomialtime approximation schemes and constant-factor approximations to this objective.
Empirical evaluation of our algorithms corroborates these theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Anyone who has served on a faculty hiring committee or a PhD admissions committee knows that a
successful outcome requires resolving the tension between two competing goals. On the one hand,
some candidates are (perceived to be) better qualified than others, and the aim is to recruit the best
candidates. On the other hand, there are a given number of positions to be filled, and while there is
typically some flexibility, there is a real cost to recruiting too many or too few people. The tension
arises in part because the stronger a candidate is, the more likely they are to receive multiple attractive
offers and the less likely they are to accept any particular offer. In order to manage uncertainty, a
good strategy may involve a mix of offers to stellar candidates and “safer” candidates.
To formalize this problem, we assume that a recruiting entity (academic or otherwise) has access to
two numbers for each candidate i: their value xi and their probability pi of accepting an offer. We
acknowledge that in current practice, these numbers are not always explicitly estimated. However,
committees typically rank or assign numerical scores to candidates based on their strength or fit, and
savvy committees roughly estimate recruitment chances by classifying candidates as, say, “high yield,”
“low yield” or “extremely low yield”, for example, by past experience or assistive computational
tools [13, 1]. Therefore, we believe that the gap between current practice and explicit value and
probability estimates is not large.
Our approach builds on the work of Purohit et al. [12], who cast hiring under uncertainty as a
stochastic optimization problem. In their basic model, there are n candidates (each associated
with a value and probability), k positions, and t time steps. In each time step, the algorithm (i.e.,
recruitment strategy) may make an offer to a single candidate and receive a response; that is, at most
t sequential offers can be made, and the budget of k cannot be exceeded. The goal is to maximize the
expected value of candidates who accept offers. Purohit et al. [12] also consider the setting where the
algorithm may make parallel offers in each round. For both problems, they develop polynomial-time,
constant-factor approximation algorithms (with approximations ratios of 2 and 8, respectively).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

