SNN-RAT: Robustness-enhanced Spiking Neural
Network through Regularized Adversarial Training

Jianhao Ding
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
djh01998@stu.pku.edu.cn

Zhaofei Yu∗
Institute for Artificial Intelligence
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
yuzf12@pku.edu.cn

Tong Bu
Institution for Artificial Intelligence
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
putong30@pku.edu.cn

Tiejun Huang
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
tjhuang@pku.edu.cn

Jian K. Liu
School of Computing
University of Leeds
Leeds LS2 9JT
j.liu9@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are promising to be widely deployed in realtime and safety-critical applications with the advance of neuromorphic computing.
Recent work has demonstrated the insensitivity of SNNs to small random perturbations due to the discrete internal information representation. The variety of training
algorithms and the involvement of the temporal dimension pose more threats to
the robustness of SNNs than that of typical neural networks. We account for the
vulnerability of SNNs by constructing adversaries based on different differentiable
approximation techniques. By deriving a Lipschitz constant specifically for the
spike representation, we first theoretically answer the question of how much adversarial invulnerability is retained in SNNs. Hence, to defend against the broad
attack methods, we propose a regularized adversarial training scheme with low
computational overheads. SNNs can benefit from the constraint of the perturbed
spike distance’s amplification and the generalization on multiple adversarial ϵneighbourhoods. Our experiments on the image recognition benchmarks have
proven that our training scheme can defend against powerful adversarial attacks
crafted from strong differentiable approximations. To be specific, our approach
makes the black-box attacks of the Projected Gradient Descent attack nearly ineffective. We believe that our work will facilitate the spread of SNNs for safety-critical
applications and help understand the robustness of the human brain. The code is
available at https://github.com/putshua/SNN-RAT.

1

Introduction

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), unlike traditional Analog Neural Networks (ANNs), mimic the
neuronal behaviours of a biological brain through spatio-temporal dynamics and spike representation
[Gerstner et al., 2014], which represent the forefront of neural networks [Maass, 1997, Zenke
et al., 2021]. The neurons evolve their membrane potentials as time goes by and transmit discrete
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

