Decoupling Classifier for Boosting Few-shot Object
Detection and Instance Segmentation
Bin-Bin Gao1 Xiaochen Chen1 Zhongyi Huang1 Congchong Nie1 Jun Liu1
Jinxiang Lai1 Guannan Jiang2 Xi Wang2 Chengjie Wang1
1
2
Tencent YouTu Lab
CATL

Abstract
This paper focus on few-shot object detection (FSOD) and instance segmentation (FSIS), which requires a model to quickly adapt to novel classes with a few
labeled instances. The existing methods severely suffer from bias classification
because of the missing label issue which naturally exists in an instance-level fewshot scenario and is first formally proposed by us. Our analysis suggests that the
standard classification head of most FSOD or FSIS models needs to be decoupled
to mitigate the bias classification. Therefore, we propose an embarrassingly simple
but effective method that decouples the standard classifier into two heads. Then,
these two individual heads are capable of independently addressing clear positive
samples and noisy negative samples which are caused by the missing label. In this
way, the model can effectively learn novel classes while mitigating the effects of
noisy negative samples. Without bells and whistles, our model without any additional computation cost and parameters consistently outperforms its baseline and
state-of-the-art by a large margin on PASCAL VOC and MS-COCO benchmarks
for FSOD and FSIS tasks.1

1

Introduction

Fully supervised deep convolutional neural network have achieved remarkable progress on various
computer vision tasks, such as image classification [15], object detection [12, 3, 29], semantic segmentation [22, 2] and instance segmentation [14] in recent years. However, the superior performance
heavily depends on a large amount of annotated images. In contrast, humans can quickly learn novel
concepts from a few training examples. To this end, a few-shot learning paradigm [8] is presented,
and its goal aims to adapt novel classes when only providing a few labeled examples (instances).
Unfortunately, existing few-shot models are still far behind humans, especially for few-shot object
detection (FSOD) and few-shot instance segmentation (FSIS).
Various methods have been proposed to tackle the problem of the FSOD and FSIS. The earlier
works [34, 39] mainly follow meta-learning paradigm [9] to acquire task-level knowledge on base
classes and generalize better to novel classes. However, these methods usually suffer from a complicated training process (episodic training) and data organization (support query pair). The recent
transfer-learning (fine-tuning) methods [33, 35, 31, 1, 28] significantly outperforms the earlier
meta-learning ones. Furthermore, it is more simple and efficient. These transfer-learning methods mainly follow a fully supervised object detection or instance segmentation framework, e.g.,
Faster-RCNN [30] or Mask-RCNN [14]. Therefore, it may be suboptimal for few-shot scenario.
The PASCAL VOC [4] and MS-COCO [21] are widely used to evaluate the performance of object
detection or instance segmentation. Under a fully supervised setting, the model can be well-trained
1

Corresponding author: B.-B. Gao (csgaobb@gmail.com) and C. Wang (jasoncjwang@tencent.com).
https://csgaobb.github.io/Projects/DCFS.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

