SPD domain-specific batch normalization to crack
interpretable unsupervised domain adaptation in EEG
Reinmar J. Kobler1,2 , Jun-ichiro Hirayama1 , Qibin Zhao1 , Motoaki Kawanabe1,2
1
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (RIKEN AIP), Tokyo, Japan
2
Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute International (ATR), Kyoto, Japan
kobler.reinmar@gmail.com, qibin.zhao@riken.jp
jun-ichiro.hirayama@a.riken.jp, kawanabe@atr.jp

Abstract
Electroencephalography (EEG) provides access to neuronal dynamics noninvasively with millisecond resolution, rendering it a viable method in neuroscience
and healthcare. However, its utility is limited as current EEG technology does
not generalize well across domains (i.e., sessions and subjects) without expensive
supervised re-calibration. Contemporary methods cast this transfer learning (TL)
problem as a multi-source/-target unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problem and address it with deep learning or shallow, Riemannian geometry aware
alignment methods. Both directions have, so far, failed to consistently close the
performance gap to state-of-the-art domain-specific methods based on tangent
space mapping (TSM) on the symmetric, positive definite (SPD) manifold. Here,
we propose a machine learning framework that enables, for the first time, learning domain-invariant TSM models in an end-to-end fashion. To achieve this, we
propose a new building block for geometric deep learning, which we denote SPD
domain-specific momentum batch normalization (SPDDSMBN). A SPDDSMBN
layer can transform domain-specific SPD inputs into domain-invariant SPD outputs,
and can be readily applied to multi-source/-target and online UDA scenarios. In
extensive experiments with 6 diverse EEG brain-computer interface (BCI) datasets,
we obtain state-of-the-art performance in inter-session and -subject TL with a
simple, intrinsically interpretable network architecture, which we denote TSMNet.
Code: https://github.com/rkobler/TSMNet

1

Introduction

Electroencephalography (EEG) measures multi-channel electric brain activity from the human
scalp with millisecond precision [1]. Transient modulations in the rhythmic brain activity can
reveal cognitive processes [2], affective states [3] and a person’s health status [4]. Unfortunately,
these modulations exhibit low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), domain shifts (i.e., changes in the data
distribution) and have low specificity, rendering statistical learning a challenging task - particularly in
the context of brain-computer interfaces (BCI) [5] where the goal is to predict a target from a short
segment of multi-channel EEG data in real-time.
Under domain shifts, domain adaptation (DA), defined as learning a model from a source domain
that performs well on a related target domain, offers principled statistical learning approaches with
theoretical guarantees [6, 7]. DA in the BCI field mainly distinguishes inter-session and -subject
transfer learning (TL) [8]. In inter-session TL, domain shifts, are expected across sessions mainly
due to mental drifts (low specificity) as well as differences in the relative positioning of the electrodes
and their impedances. Inter-subject TL is more difficult, as domain shifts are additionally driven by
structural and functional differences in brain networks as well as variations in the performed task [9].
These domain shifts are traditionally circumvented by recording labeled calibration data and fitting
domain-specific models [10, 11]. As recording calibration data is costly, models that are robust to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

