Deep Learning Methods for Proximal Inference via
Maximum Moment Restriction
Benjamin Kompa⇤
Department of Biomedical Informatics
Harvard Medical School
benjamin_kompa@hms.harvard.edu
Thomas Kolokotrones
Department of Epidemiology
Harvard School of Public Health
thomas_kolokotrones@hms.harvard.edu

David R. Bellamy*
Department of Epidemiology, CAUSALab
Harvard School of Public Health
david_bellamy@g.harvard.edu
James M. Robins
Department of Epidemiology, CAUSALab
Harvard School of Public Health
robins@hsph.harvard.edu

Andrew L. Beam
Department of Epidemiology, CAUSALab
Harvard School of Public Health
andrew_beam@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
The No Unmeasured Confounding Assumption is widely used to identify causal
effects in observational studies. Recent work on proximal inference has provided alternative identification results that succeed even in the presence of unobserved confounders, provided that one has measured a sufficiently rich set of proxy variables,
satisfying specific structural conditions. However, proximal inference requires
solving an ill-posed integral equation. Previous approaches have used a variety
of machine learning techniques to estimate a solution to this integral equation,
commonly referred to as the bridge function. However, prior work has often been
limited by relying on pre-specified kernel functions, which are not data adaptive and
struggle to scale to large datasets. In this work, we introduce a flexible and scalable
method based on a deep neural network to estimate causal effects in the presence
of unmeasured confounding using proximal inference. Our method achieves state
of the art performance on two well-established proximal inference benchmarks.
Finally, we provide theoretical consistency guarantees for our method.

1

Introduction

Causal inference is concerned with estimating the effect of a treatment A on an outcome Y from
either observational data or the results of a randomized experiment. An estimand of primary
importance is the average causal effect (ACE), which is the expected difference in Y caused by
changing the treatment from value a to a0 for each unit in the study population, and is defined as
a contrast between the expected value of the potential outcomes at the two levels of the treatment:
0
E[Y a ] E[Y a ]. However, in observational settings, the ACE is rarely equal to the observed
difference in conditional means, E[Y |A = a0 ] E[Y |A = a] due to confounding. In an attempt
to eliminate the influence of confounding, investigators measure putative confounders X and
subsequently make adjustments for X in their analyses.
⇤

Denotes equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

