Cache-Augmented Inbatch Importance Resampling
for Training Recommender Retriever
Jin Chen1 , Defu Lian2⇤, Yucheng Li2 , Baoyun Wang3 , Kai Zheng1 , Enhong Chen2
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, 3 Hisense
chenjin@std.uestc.edu.cn, liandefu@ustc.edu.cn, liycustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
wangbaoyun@hisense.com, zhengkai@uestc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recommender retrievers aim to rapidly retrieve a fraction of items from the entire
item corpus when a user query requests, with the representative two-tower model
trained with the log softmax loss. For efficiently training recommender retrievers
on modern hardwares, inbatch sampling, where the items in the mini-batch are
shared as negatives to estimate the softmax function, has attained growing interest.
However, existing inbatch sampling based strategies just correct the sampling
bias of inbatch items with item frequency, being unable to distinguish the user
queries within the mini-batch and still incurring significant bias from the softmax.
In this paper, we propose a Cache-Augmented Inbatch Importance Resampling
( IR) for training recommender retrievers, which not only offers different negatives
to user queries with inbatch items, but also adaptively achieves a more accurate
estimation of the softmax distribution. Specifically, IR resamples items from the
given mini-batch training pairs based on certain probabilities, where a cache with
more frequently sampled items is adopted to augment the candidate item set, with
the purpose of reusing the historical informative samples. IR enables to sample
query-dependent negatives based on inbatch items and to capture dynamic changes
of model training, which leads to a better approximation of the softmax and further
contributes to better convergence. Finally, we conduct experiments to validate the
superior performance of the proposed IR compared with competitive approaches.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems (RS) [9, 10, 23, 24] have been prevalently developmented to address the issue
of information overload, with the purpose of mining potential preferred items for users, bringing
great commercial revenues to enterprises. Recommender retrievers, which retrieve a subset of
highly relevant items from numerous items, are a key component of the commonly-used two-stage
architecture [9, 13, 34]. The two-tower models, where the queries and items are represented with
separate models, are representative of retrieval models. Generally, given the similarity scores of user
and item embeddings, the models attempt to minimize the loss function [10, 17], i.e., the log-softmax
loss, guiding the interacted items having higher similarity scores. However, it is extremely inefficient
to calculate the partition function in the log-softmax loss over the item corpus. Negative Sampling,
which samples a number of items to estimate the partition function or the gradient, has attained
growing interests in recommender retrievers [16, 25, 31, 34, 35].
A straightforward method is to take the static uniform distribution as the proposal distribution to
sample items from the entire item set. Nevertheless, restricted by the computational resource, a more
⇤

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

