O PEN FWI: Large-scale Multi-structural
Benchmark Datasets for Full Waveform Inversion
Chengyuan Deng1,2,∗
Peng Jin1,4

Shihang Feng1,∗

Yinan Feng1

Hanchen Wang1

Qili Zeng1

Yinpeng Chen5

Xitong Zhang1,3
Youzuo Lin1

1

Los Alamos National Laboratory 2 Rutgers University 3 Michigan State University
4
The Pennsylvania State University 5 Microsoft Research
{charles.deng, shihang, hanchen.wang, xitongz, pjin, ynf, ylin}@lanl.gov
qili.zeng.cs@gmail.com, yiche@microsoft.com

Abstract
Full waveform inversion (FWI) is widely used in geophysics to reconstruct highresolution velocity maps from seismic data. The recent success of data-driven
FWI methods results in a rapidly increasing demand for open datasets to serve
the geophysics community. We present O PEN FWI, a collection of large-scale
multi-structural benchmark datasets, to facilitate diversified, rigorous, and reproducible research on FWI. In particular, O PEN FWI consists of 12 datasets (2.1TB
in total) synthesized from multiple sources. It encompasses diverse domains in
geophysics (interface, fault, CO2 reservoir, etc.), covers different geological subsurface structures (flat, curve, etc.), and contains various amounts of data samples
(2K - 67K). It also includes a dataset for 3D FWI. Moreover, we use O PEN FWI to
perform benchmarking over four deep learning methods, covering both supervised
and unsupervised learning regimes. Along with the benchmarks, we implement
additional experiments, including physics-driven methods, complexity analysis,
generalization study, uncertainty quantification, and so on, to sharpen our understanding of datasets and methods. The studies either provide valuable insights into
the datasets and the performance, or uncover their current limitations. We hope
O PEN FWI supports prospective research on FWI and inspires future open-source
efforts on AI for science. All datasets and related information (including codes)
can be accessed through our website at https://openfwi-lanl.github.io/

1

Introduction

Understanding subsurface velocity structures is critical to a myriad of subsurface applications, such
as carbon sequestration, reservoir identification, subsurface energy exploration, earthquake early
warning, etc [1]. They can be reconstructed from seismic data with full waveform inversion (FWI),
which is governed by partial differential equations (PDEs) and can be formulated as a non-convex
optimization problem. FWI has been intensively studied in the paradigm of physics-driven approaches [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Negative complications of these approaches include high
computation consumption, cycle-skipping, and ill-posedness issues.
With the advance in deep learning techniques, researchers have been actively exploring data-driven
solutions for complicated FWI problems [13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. Recently, data-driven approaches have
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

