Structural Analysis of Branch-and-Cut and the
Learnability of Gomory Mixed Integer Cuts

Maria-Florina Balcan
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Siddharth Prasad
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
sprasad2@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Optimized Markets, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Ellen Vitercik
Management Science and Engineering Department
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
vitercik@stanford.edu

Abstract
The incorporation of cutting planes within the branch-and-bound algorithm, known
as branch-and-cut, forms the backbone of modern integer programming solvers.
These solvers are the foremost method for solving discrete optimization problems
and have a vast array of applications in machine learning, operations research, and
many other fields. Choosing cutting planes effectively is a major research topic
in the theory and practice of integer programming. We conduct a novel structural
analysis of branch-and-cut that pins down how every step of the algorithm is
affected by changes in the parameters defining the cutting planes added to an integer
program. Our main application of this analysis is to derive sample complexity
guarantees for using machine learning to determine which cutting planes to apply
during branch-and-cut. These guarantees apply to infinite families of cutting planes,
such as the family of Gomory mixed integer cuts, which are responsible for the
main breakthrough speedups of integer programming solvers. We exploit geometric
and combinatorial structure of branch-and-cut in our analysis, which provides a
key missing piece for the recent generalization theory of branch-and-cut.

1

Introduction

Integer programming (IP) solvers are the most widely-used tools for solving discrete optimization
problems. They have many applications in machine learning, operations research, and other fields, including MAP inference [34], combinatorial auctions [52], NLP [37], neural network verification [17],
interpretable classification [61], training of optimal decision trees [13], and optimal clustering [48].
Under the hood, IP solvers use the tree-search algorithm branch-and-bound [41] augmented with
cutting planes, known as branch-and-cut (B&C). A cutting plane is a linear constraint that is added
to the linear programming (LP) relaxation at any node of the search tree. With a carefully selected
cut, the LP guidance can more efficiently lead B&C to the optimal integral solution. Cutting planes,
specifically the family of Gomory mixed integer cuts (GMI) which we study in this paper, are
responsible for breakthrough speedups of modern IP solvers [15, 21].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

