Making Sense of Dependence: Efficient Black-box
Explanations Using Dependence Measure

Paul Novello 1 2

Thomas Fel 2 3

David Vigouroux 1 2

1

IRT Saint Exupery, France, 2 Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute,
Université de Toulouse, France 3 Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, USA
paul.novello@irt-saintexupery.com

Abstract
This paper presents a new efficient black-box attribution method built on HilbertSchmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC). Based on Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Spaces (RKHS), HSIC measures the dependence between regions of an input image
and the output of a model using the kernel embedding of their distributions. It thus
provides explanations enriched by RKHS representation capabilities. HSIC can be
estimated very efficiently, significantly reducing the computational cost compared
to other black-box attribution methods. Our experiments show that HSIC is up to 8
times faster than the previous best black-box attribution methods while being as
faithful. Indeed, we improve or match the state-of-the-art of both black-box and
white-box attribution methods for several fidelity metrics on Imagenet with various
recent model architectures. Importantly, we show that these advances can be transposed to efficiently and faithfully explain object detection models such as YOLOv4.
Finally, we extend the traditional attribution methods by proposing a new kernel
enabling an ANOVA-like orthogonal decomposition of importance scores based
on HSIC, allowing us to evaluate not only the importance of each image patch but
also the importance of their pairwise interactions. Our implementation is available
at https://github.com/paulnovello/HSIC-Attribution-Method.

1

Introduction

Artificial Intelligence has established itself as the reference technique for tackling many real-world
automation tasks. Consequently, the diversity of its applications is growing and reaching fields where
its outputs can contribute to critical decision-making. In such cases, it is essential to be able to
provide explanations for each link of the decision chain, including AI algorithms. Over the past
decade, many techniques have emerged to explain the predictions of these algorithms [43, 36, 41,
15, 52, 32, 31, 27, 26, 38], marking the birth of a new field called Explainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI). The tools developed in this research field, mostly designed to explain neural networks, have
already proven helpful. For instance, it has been used in model debugging, identification of new
development strategies for practitioners, and failure understanding.
Initial approaches are based on analyzing the internal state of neural networks during inference,
often relying on input gradients or activation values of hidden layers [43, 41, 15, 25]. However,
the gradient only reflects the model’s operation in an infinitesimal neighborhood around an input
and can therefore be misleading [18]. Furthermore, their applicability is limited to the case where
the final user has access to the implementation of the model. Therefore, such methods cannot be
applied in the most common use cases, e.g. when models are made available by third parties through
API calls or specialized hardware. In order to address this issue, some black-box approaches have
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

