EGSDE: Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation via
Energy-Guided Stochastic Differential Equations

1

Min Zhao1 , Fan Bao1 , Chongxuan Li2,3∗ , Jun Zhu1∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, THU-Bosch ML Center, Tsinghua University, China
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods , Beijing, China
4
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
gracezhao1997@gmail.com; bf19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn; dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Score-based diffusion models (SBDMs) have achieved the SOTA FID results in unpaired image-to-image translation (I2I). However, we notice that existing methods
totally ignore the training data in the source domain, leading to sub-optimal solutions for unpaired I2I. To this end, we propose energy-guided stochastic differential
equations (EGSDE) that employs an energy function pretrained on both the source
and target domains to guide the inference process of a pretrained SDE for realistic
and faithful unpaired I2I. Building upon two feature extractors, we carefully design
the energy function such that it encourages the transferred image to preserve the
domain-independent features and discard domain-specific ones. Further, we provide an alternative explanation of the EGSDE as a product of experts, where each
of the three experts (corresponding to the SDE and two feature extractors) solely
contributes to faithfulness or realism. Empirically, we compare EGSDE to a large
family of baselines on three widely-adopted unpaired I2I tasks under four metrics.
EGSDE not only consistently outperforms existing SBDMs-based methods in
almost all settings but also achieves the SOTA realism results without harming the
faithful performance. Furthermore, EGSDE allows for flexible trade-offs between
realism and faithfulness and we improve the realism results further (e.g., FID
of 51.04 in Cat → Dog and FID of 50.43 in Wild → Dog on AFHQ) by tuning
hyper-parameters. The code is available at https://github.com/ML-GSAI/EGSDE.

1

Introduction

Unpaired image-to-image translation (I2I) aims to transfer an image from a source domain to a
related target domain, which involves a wide range of computer vision tasks such as style transfer,
super-resolution and pose estimation [35]. In I2I, the translated image should be realistic to fit the
style of the target domain by changing the domain-specific features accordingly, and faithful to
preserve the domain-independent features of the source image. Over the past few years, generative
adversarial networks [12] (GANs)-based methods [10, 60, 54, 36, 3, 57, 44, 19, 17, 26, 10] dominated
this field due to their ability to generate high-quality samples.
In contrast to GANs, score-based diffusion models (SBDMs) [48, 16, 34, 49, 2, 31] perturb data to
a Gaussian noise by a diffusion process and learn the reverse process to transform the noise back
to the data distribution. Recently, SBDMs achieved competitive or even superior image generation
performance to GANs [9] and thus were naturally applied to unpaired I2I [7, 32], which have achieved
∗

Correspondence to Chongxuan Li and Jun Zhu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

