LieGG: Studying Learned Lie Group Generators

Artem Moskalev
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
a.moskalev@uva.nl

Anna Sepliarskaia
Machine Learning Research Unit
TU Wien
seplanna@gmail.com

Ivan Sosnovik
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
i.sosnovik@uva.nl

Arnold Smeulders
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
a.w.m.smeulders@uva.nl

Abstract
Symmetries built into a neural network have appeared to be very beneficial for a
wide range of tasks as it saves the data to learn them. We depart from the position
that when symmetries are not built into a model a priori, it is advantageous for
robust networks to learn symmetries directly from the data to fit a task function. In
this paper, we present a method to extract symmetries learned by a neural network
and to evaluate the degree to which a network is invariant to them. With our method,
we are able to explicitly retrieve learned invariances in a form of the generators
of corresponding Lie-groups without prior knowledge of symmetries in the data.
We use the proposed method to study how symmetrical properties depend on a
neural network’s parameterization and configuration. We found that the ability of a
network to learn symmetries generalizes over a range of architectures. However, the
quality of learned symmetries depends on the depth and the number of parameters.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are efficient, for one because they can convert the translation
symmetry in the data into a built-in translation-equivariance property of the network without exhausting the data to learn the equivariance. Group-equivariant networks generalize this property to rotation
[6, 42, 39, 20], scale [35, 33, 4], and other symmetries defined by matrix groups [14]. Equipping a
neural network with prior known symmetries has proved to be data-efficient.
Recent works [13, 21, 46] have demonstrated that hard coding the symmetry into a neural network
does not always lead to a better generalization. Often, soft or learned equivariance is more advantageous mostly in terms of data efficiency and accuracy [38]. Moreover, architectures with no
equivariance built-in, such as transformers [11] and multi-layer perceptron mixers [36], achieve a
remarkable performance on a wide range of problems. Effectively, they learn their own geometrical
priors without explicit symmetry constraints [8]. This raises the following questions to study in this
paper. To what degree do neural networks learn symmetries? How accurately do learned symmetries
reflect the true symmetries in the data? Can we support the capability of neural networks for learning
symmetries? We present a method to study symmetries learned by neural networks to address the
questions.
In the paper, we depart from Lie group theory and develop a method that can retrieve symmetries
learned from the data by any neural network (Figure 1). Our method only makes the assumption that
Source code: https://github.com/amoskalev/liegg
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

