Causally motivated multi-shortcut identification &
removal
Jiayun Zheng
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Maggie Makar⇤
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract
For predictive models to provide reliable guidance in decision making processes,
they are often required to be accurate and robust to distribution shifts. Shortcut
learning–where a model relies on spurious correlations or shortcuts to predict
the target label–undermines the robustness property, leading to models with poor
out-of-distribution accuracy despite good in-distribution performance. Existing
work on shortcut learning either assumes that the set of possible shortcuts is known
a priori or is discoverable using interpretability methods such as saliency maps,
which might not always be true. Instead, we propose a two step approach to (1)
efficiently identify relevant shortcuts, and (2) leverage the identified shortcuts to
build models that are robust to distribution shifts. Our approach relies on having
access to a (possibly) high dimensional set of auxiliary labels at training time,
some of which correspond to possible shortcuts. We show both theoretically and
empirically that our approach is able to identify a sufficient set of shortcuts leading
to more efficient predictors in finite samples.

1

Introduction

Despite their immense success, predictors constructed from deep neural networks (DNNs) tend to
have poor performance under distribution shift [7, 24, 5, 14]. One reason behind such brittleness is
“shortcut learning”: when a predictor relies on shortcuts, i.e., spurious correlations between the inputs
and the target label that are easy to learn and are predictive of the target label in the training data
[15]. If these spurious correlations no longer exist when the test distribution shifts, the accuracy of
the predictor deteriorates. Here, we study the problem of learning a performant predictor whose risk
is invariant to interventions that change the association between shortcuts and the target label. Our
work tackles two limitations in previous literature on addressing shortcut learning. First, previous
work often assumes that the set of shortcuts are known in advance, or is easily identifiable using
interpretability methods such as saliency maps. Second, much of the existing work assumes that there
are a few (often one) shortcuts.
To tackle these limitations, we study methods to identify shortcuts, and build models that are robust
(i.e., invariant) to possibly many shortcuts. Throughout, we will use the example of detecting the
presence and severity of diabetic retionpathy (DR) using images taken using a funduscope. We focus
on a setting where we are also given multiple auxiliary labels (e.g., the type of funduscope, patient
age, sex and previous medical history) at training but not test time. A subset of these auxiliary data
label factors of variation (i.e., shortcuts) that we want to be invariant to but the rest might be redundant
for the purpose of shortcut removal. We propose a method to identify this subset of relevant auxiliary
labels for shortcut removal, and then exploit the identified subset to construct a predictor whose risk
is approximately invariant across a well-defined family of test-distributions.
⇤

Corresponding author, email: mmakar@umich.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

