Beyond Rewards: a Hierarchical Perspective on
Offline Multiagent Behavioral Analysis

Shayegan Omidshafiei
somidshafiei@google.com

Andrei Kapishnikov
kapishnikov@google.com

Lucas Dixon
ldixon@google.com

Yannick Assogba
yassogba@google.com

Been Kim
beenkim@google.com
Google Research

Abstract
Each year, expert-level performance is attained in increasingly-complex multiagent
domains, where notable examples include Go, Poker, and StarCraft II. This rapid
progression is accompanied by a commensurate need to better understand how
such agents attain this performance, to enable their safe deployment, identify
limitations, and reveal potential means of improving them. In this paper we take
a step back from performance-focused multiagent learning, and instead turn our
attention towards agent behavior analysis. We introduce a model-agnostic method
for discovery of behavior clusters in multiagent domains, using variational inference
to learn a hierarchy of behaviors at the joint and local agent levels. Our framework
makes no assumption about agents’ underlying learning algorithms, does not
require access to their latent states or policies, and is trained using only offline
observational data. We illustrate the effectiveness of our method for enabling the
coupled understanding of behaviors at the joint and local agent level, detection of
behavior changepoints throughout training, discovery of core behavioral concepts,
demonstrate the approach’s scalability to a high-dimensional multiagent MuJoCo
control domain, and also illustrate that the approach can disentangle previouslytrained policies in OpenAI’s hide-and-seek domain.

1

Introduction

Multiagent approaches have driven numerous advances in artificial intelligence research, with seminal
examples including TD-gammon [1], DeepBlue [2], AlphaGo [3], AlphaZero [4], Libratus [5],
AlphaStar [6], OpenAI Five [7], and Pluribus [8]. During training, many of these approaches seek to
push the performance of agents as measured by a reward signal, or derivatives thereof.
Despite this, post-hoc methods that seek to understand agent interactions often use less reward-centric
techniques. Instead, insights are drawn from behavioral analysis to identify unique or interesting
agent strategies. Examples include clustering-based analysis of neuron activations and trajectories
in capture-the-flag [9], inspection of trajectories in a hide-and-seek domain to detect interesting
behaviors such as agents that learn to exploit the underlying physics engine [10], monitoring of
statistics such as pass ranges and frequencies in humanoid football [11], and analysis of AlphaZero’s
acquisition of chess knowledge [12]. Crucially, such insights are often drawn via manual analysis
and detection of behavioral clusters, or use of statistics associated with certain behaviors as defined
by humans experts (e.g., various skills and relevant metrics in humanoid football).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

