On the Effect of Pre-training for Transformer in
Different Modality on Offline Reinforcement Learning
Shiro Takagi ⇤
Independent Researcher
takagi4646@gmail.com

Abstract
We empirically investigate how pre-training on data of different modalities, such as
language and vision, affects fine-tuning of Transformer-based models to Mujoco
offline reinforcement learning tasks. Analysis of the internal representation reveals
that the pre-trained Transformers acquire largely different representations before
and after pre-training, but acquire less information of data in fine-tuning than
the randomly initialized one. A closer look at the parameter changes of the pretrained Transformers reveals that their parameters do not change that much and
that the bad performance of the model pre-trained with image data could partially
come from large gradients and gradient clipping. To study what information
the Transformer pre-trained with language data utilizes, we fine-tune this model
with no context provided, finding that the model learns efficiently even without
context information. Subsequent follow-up analysis supports the hypothesis that
pre-training with language data is likely to make the Transformer get context-like
information and utilize it to solve the downstream task.

1

Introduction

The past few years have witnessed the tremendous success of pre-trained Transformer-based models
[1] on versatile natural language processing (NLP) tasks. This is because pre-training with a large
corpus enables Transformer-based models to gain rich universal language representations transferable
to vast downstream tasks [2, 3, 4]. Remarkably, recent studies demonstrate that Transformers pretrained with language data can efficiently solve even non-NLP tasks [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Because of its
versatility, it has been suggested that Transformers pre-trained with a large corpus could be called a
kind of universal computation engines [5].
One area worthwhile attempting to study the benefits of pre-trained Transformer is reinforcement
learning because the applicability of pre-training to this area still has room to be explored [11, 12, 13].
In this vein of research, Reid et al. studied the effect of pre-training of Transformers on offline
reinforcement learning (offline RL) tasks [9]. Their study demonstrates a surprising contrast that
pre-training with image significantly deteriorates performance, while that with language data does
not negatively affect downstream tasks, rather it even improves performance for some datasets.
However, it is not yet known how the presence or absence of pre-training and its content leads to
differences in the performance of downstream tasks. What information does/doesn’t the model
pre-trained on language data (language-pre-trained model) leverage to solve downstream tasks, and
why does the model pre-trained on image data (image-pre-trained model) result in catastrophic
performance? In this paper, we approach these questions by analyzing the inside of the Transformer
⇤

https://t46.github.io/
Code is available at https://github.com/t46/pre-training-different-modality-offline-rl.
LaTeX source is available at https://github.com/t46/paper-pre-training-different-modality-offline-rl.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

