WinoGAViL: Gamified Association Benchmark
to Challenge Vision-and-Language Models

Yonatan Bitton†∗ Nitzan Bitton-Guetta‡∗ Ron Yosef † Yuval Elovici‡
Mohit Bansal¶ Gabriel Stanovsky† Roy Schwartz†
†
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem ‡ Ben Gurion University
¶
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{nitzangu,elovici}@bgu.ac.il; mbansal@cs.unc.edu
{yonatan.bitton,ron.yosef,gabriel.stanovsky,roy.schwartz1}@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
While vision-and-language models perform well on tasks such as visual question
answering, they struggle when it comes to basic human commonsense reasoning
skills. In this work, we introduce WinoGAViL: an online game of vision-andlanguage associations (e.g., between werewolves and a full moon), used as a
dynamic evaluation benchmark. Inspired by the popular card game Codenames,
a “spymaster” gives a textual cue related to several visual candidates, and another
player tries to identify them. Human players are rewarded for creating associations
that are challenging for a rival AI model but still solvable by other human players.
We use the game to collect 3.5K instances, finding that they are intuitive for humans
(>90% Jaccard index) but challenging for state-of-the-art AI models, where the
best model (ViLT) achieves a score of 52%, succeeding mostly where the cue
is visually salient. Our analysis as well as the feedback we collect from players
indicate that the collected associations require diverse reasoning skills, including
general knowledge, common sense, abstraction, and more. We release the dataset,
the code and the interactive game, allowing future data collection that can be used
to develop models with better association abilities.1

1

Introduction

Humans can intuitively reason about how a cue is associated with an image [1, 2, 3]. For example, in
Figure 1, the word werewolf may be intuitively associated with images of a puppy and a full moon.
These reasoning skills go beyond object detection and similarity and require rich cultural and world
knowledge. Cognitive studies suggest that this kind of associative thinking involves connecting distant
concepts in the human memory, organized as a network of interconnected ideas [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. On the
other hand, vision-and-language models often fail when faced with tasks that require commonsense
reasoning and cultural knowledge [9, 10, 11, 12], motivating the construction of a challenging high
quality vision-and-language benchmark.
In this work, we introduce a Gamified Association benchmark to challenge Vision-and-Language
models (WinoGAViL). Inspired by Winograd Schema Challenge [13], we suggest WinoGAViL as a
benchmark for multimodal machine commonsense reasoning and association abilities. Similar to the
Codenames game,2 each instance in WinoGAViL is composed of a textual cue, a number k, and a set
of candidate images. The task is to select the k images most associated with the cue. We refer to the
∗

Equal contribution.
https://winogavil.github.io/
2
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codenames_(board_game)
1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

