Algorithms and Hardness for Learning Linear
Thresholds from Label Proportions
Rishi Saket
Google Research India
rishisaket@google.com

Abstract
We study the learnability of linear threshold functions (LTFs) in the learning from
label proportions (LLP) framework. In this, the feature-vector classifier is learnt
from bags of feature-vectors and their corresponding observed label proportions
which are satisfied by (i.e., consistent with) some unknown LTF. This problem has
been investigated in recent work ([37]) which gave an algorithm to produce an
LTF that satisfies at least (2/5)-fraction of a satisfiable collection of bags, each of
size  2, by solving and rounding a natural SDP relaxation. However, this SDP
relaxation is specific to at most 2-sized bags and does not apply to bags of larger
size.
In this work we provide a fairly non-trivial SDP relaxation of a non-quadratic
formulation for bags of size 3. We analyze its rounding procedure using novel
matrix decomposition techniques to obtain an algorithm which outputs an LTF
satisfying at least (1/12)-fraction of the bags of size  3. We also apply our
techniques to bags of size q 4 to provide a ⌦ (1/q)-approximation guarantee for
a weaker notion of satisfiability. We include comparative experiments on simulated
data demonstrating the applicability of our algorithmic techniques.
From the complexity side we provide a hardness reduction to produce instances
with bags of any constant size q. Our reduction proves the NP-hardness of satisfying
more than (1/q) + o(1) fraction of a satisfiable collection of such bags using as
hypothesis any function of constantly many LTFs, showing thereby that the problem
is harder to approximate as the bag size q increases. Using a strengthened analysis,
for q = 2 we obtain a (4/9) + o(1) hardness factor for this problem, improving
upon the (1/2) + o(1) factor shown by [37].

1

Introduction

Our work studies the computational learnability of linear threshold functions (LTFs) in the learning
from label proportions (LLP) framework, which is a generalization of traditional supervised learning.
In this, a bag B is a set of some (say q) feature vectors {x1 , . . . , xq } with a corresponding {0, 1}-label
proportion B 2 [0, 1] implying that exactly q B out of the q feature-vectors have 1 as their true
label. Given a collection (or distribution) of (B, B ) consistent with an unknown classifier, in LLP
the goal is to fit a feature-vector level classifier hypothesis that matches the bag label proportions as
closely as possible. One way to formalize this is by defining that a hypothesis classifier satisfies a
bag (B, B ) iff its predicted label proportion equals B , with the goal being to maximize the number
of bags satisfied by the hypothesis. This notion of satisfiability boils down to supervised learning
when all bags are of size 1, and is a reasonable measure of classifier performance for small bags.
An LTF over d-dimensional feature-vectors x is given by pos(g(x)) for some linear function
Pd
g(x1 , . . . , xd ) = i=1 ci xi + cd+1 , where pos(z) := {z>0} . Recently, [37] studied the proper
LLP learnability of LTFs i.e, given a collection of bags and their label proportions consistent with an
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

