DevFly: Bio-inspired Development of Binary
Connections for Locality Preserving Sparse Codes

Tianqi Wei ∗
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK EH8 9AB
tianqi-wei@outlook.com

Rana Alkhoury Maroun
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK EH8 9AB
rana.e.elkhoury@gmail.com

Qinghai Guo
ACS Lab
Huawei Technologies
Shenzhen, China
guoqinghai@huawei.com

Barbara Webb
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK EH8 9AB
B.Webb@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural circuits undergo developmental processes which can be influenced by
experience. Here we explore a bio-inspired development process to form the
connections in a network used for locality sensitive hashing. The network is a
simplified model of the insect mushroom body, which has sparse connections from
the input layer to a second layer of higher dimension, forming a sparse code. In
previous versions of this model, connectivity between the layers is random. We
investigate whether the performance of the hash, evaluated in nearest neighbour
query tasks, can be improved by process of developing the connections, in which
the strongest input dimensions in successive samples are wired to each successive
coding dimension. Experiments show that the accuracy of searching for nearest
neighbours is improved, although performance is dependent on the parameter
values and datasets used. Our approach is also much faster than alternative methods
that have been proposed for training the connections in this model. Importantly, the
development process does not impact connections built at an earlier stage, which
should provide stable coding results for simultaneous learning in a downstream
network.

1

Introduction

The insect mushroom body (MB) is a learning centre in the insect brain, and its function is of interest
as a neural architecture for efficient association of arbitrary sensory patterns to actions. The MB is a
shallow network, with an input layer of projection neurons (PNs) that sparsely connect to a larger
number of Kenyon cells (KCs), which are fully connected to a small number of MB output neurons
(MBONs). In this paper we focus on the PN to KC connectivity, and consider how the activity pattern
in KCs could provide an efficient code for the input that enhances the appropriate generalisation from
previously experienced patterns to new inputs. In the MB, only a small portion of KCs is activated
at any time (Honegger et al., 2011), which is known as sparse coding (Olshausen & Field, 2004).
Sparse coding facilitates learning by letting each KC represent a more specific pattern of sensory
inputs, which reduces unintended association with a different pattern during learning (Treves & Rolls,
1991). Ideally, similarity in sensory input space should map to similarity in the space of sparse codes.
∗

Now at School of Artificial intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

