Tenrec: A Large-scale Multipurpose Benchmark
Dataset for Recommender Systems

Guanghu Yuan1,3,4∗ , Fajie Yuan2∗ , Yudong Li1 , Beibei Kong1 , Shujie Li4 , Lei Chen3 ,
Min Yang3 , Chenyun Yu5 , Bo Hu1 , Zang Li1 , Yu Xu1 , Xiaohu Qie1
1
Tencent 2 Westlake University
3
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Science and Technology of China 5 Sun Yat-sen University
gh.yuan0@gmail.com, yuanfajie@westlake.edu.cn, ustclsj@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{lei.chen,min.yang}@siat.ac.cn, yuchy35@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{elsonli,echokong,harryyfhu,gavinzli, henrysxu,tigerqie}@tencent.com

Abstract
Existing benchmark datasets for recommender systems (RS) either are created at a
small scale or involve very limited forms of user feedback. RS models evaluated
on such datasets often lack practical values for large-scale real-world applications.
In this paper, we describe Tenrec* , a novel and publicly available data collection
for RS that records various user feedback from four different recommendation
scenarios. To be specific, Tenrec has the following five characteristics: (1) it is
large-scale, containing around 5 million users and 140 million interactions; (2) it
has not only positive user feedback, but also true negative feedback (vs. one-class
recommendation); (3) it contains overlapped users and items across four different
scenarios; (4) it contains various types of user positive feedback, in forms of clicks,
likes, shares, and follows, etc; (5) it contains additional features beyond the user IDs
and item IDs. We verify Tenrec on ten diverse recommendation tasks by running
several classical baseline models per task. Tenrec has the potential to become a
useful benchmark dataset for a majority of popular recommendation tasks. Our
source codes, datasets and leaderboards are available at https://github.com/
yuangh-x/2022-NIPS-Tenrec* .

1

Introduction

Recommender systems (RS) aim to estimate user preferences on items that users have not yet
seen. Progress in deep learning (DL) has spawned a wide range of novel and complex neural
recommendation models. Many improvements have been achieved in prior literature, however, much
of them performs evaluation on non-benchmark datasets or on datasets at a small scale by modern
standard. This has led to severe reproducibility and credibility problems in the RS community.
For example, [34] showed that many ‘advanced’ baselines reported in previous papers are largely
suboptimal, even underperforms the vanilla matrix factorization (MF) [21], an old baseline proposed
over a decade ago. [33] further demonstrated that with a careful setup dot product is superior to the
*
Equal contribution. Fajie designed the research, Guanghu performed the research; Fajie, Guanghu, Lei
and Min wrote the paper; Fajie, Min, Yudong and Beibei launched the research project; Guanghu, Beibei and
Yudong collected the data; Shujie assisted in performing partial experiments. Experiments of this work were
mainly performed when Guanghu interned at Tencent.
*
Tenrec (a hedgehog-like mammal) here means that the dataset is collected from the recommendation
platforms of Tencent, and that it can be used to benchmark ten diversified recommendation tasks.
*
Email Fajie & Guanghu if you want to launch a new leaderboard for an important RS task using Tenrec.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

