Hyper-Representations as Generative Models:
Sampling Unseen Neural Network Weights
Konstantin Schürholt
konstantin.schuerholt@unisg.ch
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science
University of St.Gallen

Boris Knyazev
b.knyazev@samsung.com
Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal

Xavier Giró-i-Nieto
xavier.giro@upc.edu
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

Damian Borth
damian.borth@unisg.ch
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science
University of St.Gallen

Abstract
Learning representations of neural network weights given a model zoo is an emerging and challenging area with many potential applications from model inspection,
to neural architecture search or knowledge distillation. Recently, an autoencoder
trained on a model zoo was able to learn a hyper-representation, which captures
intrinsic and extrinsic properties of the models in the zoo. In this work, we extend hyper-representations for generative use to sample new model weights. We
propose layer-wise loss normalization which we demonstrate is key to generate
high-performing models and several sampling methods based on the topology of
hyper-representations. The models generated using our methods are diverse, performant and capable to outperform strong baselines as evaluated on several downstream tasks: initialization, ensemble sampling and transfer learning. Our results
indicate the potential of knowledge aggregation from model zoos to new models
via hyper-representations thereby paving the avenue for novel research directions.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, countless neural network models have been trained and uploaded to different
model hubs. Many factors such as random initialization and no global optimum ensure that the
trained models are different from one another. What could we learn from such a population of neural
network models? Since the parameter space of neural networks is complex and high-dimensional,
representation learning from such populations (often referred to as model zoos) has become an
emerging and challenging area.
Recent work along that direction has demonstrated the ability of such learned representations to
capture intrinsic and extrinsic properties of the models in a zoo [40, 37, 27]. According to [37], NNs
populate a low dimensional manifold, which can be learned with an autoencoder via self-supervised
learning directly from the model paramters (weights and biases) without access to the original image
data and labels. This so called hyper-representation has been demonstrated to be useful to predict
several model properties such as accuracy, hyperparameters or architecture configurations.
However, [37] focused on discriminative downstream tasks by exploiting the encoder only. We take
one step further and extend their work towards the generative downstream tasks by sampling model
weights directly from the task-agnostic hyper-representation. To that end, we introduce a layer-wise
normalization that improves the quality of decoded neural network weights significantly. Based on
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

