BOND: Benchmarking Unsupervised Outlier Node
Detection on Static Attributed Graphs
Kay Liu1,⇤ , Yingtong Dou1,8,⇤ , Yue Zhao2,⇤, Xueying Ding2 , Xiyang Hu2 ,
Ruitong Zhang3 , Kaize Ding4 , Canyu Chen5 , Hao Peng3 , Kai Shu5 ,
Lichao Sun6 , Jundong Li7 , George H. Chen2 , Zhihao Jia2 , Philip S. Yu1
1
University of Illinois Chicago 2 Carnegie Mellon University
3
Beihang University 4 Arizona State University 5 Illinois Institute of Technology
6
Lehigh University 7 University of Virginia 8 Visa Research
benchmark@pygod.org

Abstract
Detecting which nodes in graphs are outliers is a relatively new machine learning
task with numerous applications. Despite the proliferation of algorithms developed
in recent years for this task, there has been no standard comprehensive setting for
performance evaluation. Consequently, it has been difficult to understand which
methods work well and when under a broad range of settings. To bridge this gap,
we present—to the best of our knowledge—the first comprehensive benchmark for
unsupervised outlier node detection on static attributed graphs called BOND, with
the following highlights. (1) We benchmark the outlier detection performance of
14 methods ranging from classical matrix factorization to the latest graph neural
networks. (2) Using nine real datasets, our benchmark assesses how the different
detection methods respond to two major types of synthetic outliers and separately
to “organic” (real non-synthetic) outliers. (3) Using an existing random graph
generation technique, we produce a family of synthetically generated datasets of
different graph sizes that enable us to compare the running time and memory usage
of the different outlier detection algorithms. Based on our experimental results, we
discuss the pros and cons of existing graph outlier detection algorithms, and we
highlight opportunities for future research. Importantly, our code is freely available
and meant to be easily extendable:
https://github.com/pygod-team/pygod/tree/main/benchmark

1

Introduction

Outlier detection (OD) on a graph refers to the task of identifying which nodes in the graph are
outliers. This is a key machine learning (ML) problem that arises in many applications, such as social
network spammer detection [77], sensor fault detection [27], financial fraudster identification [22],
and defense against graph adversarial attacks [33]. Unlike classical OD on tabular and time-series
data, graph OD has additional challenges: (1) the graph data structure in general carries richer
information, and thus more powerful ML models are needed to learn informative representations, and
(2) with more complex ML models, training can be more computationally expensive in terms of both
running time and memory consumption [35, 47], posing challenges for time-critical (i.e., low time
budget) and resource-sensitive (e.g., limited GPU memory) applications.
Despite the importance of graph OD and many algorithms being developed for it in recent years,
there is no comprehensive benchmark on graph outlier detection, which we believe has hindered
the development and understanding of graph OD algorithms. In fact, a recent graph OD survey
calls for “system benchmarking” and describes it as “the key to evaluating the performance of graph
OD techniques” [55]. We remark that there already are benchmarks for general graph mining (e.g.,
⇤

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

