Accelerating SGD for Highly Ill-Conditioned
Huge-Scale Online Matrix Completion
Gavin Zhang
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
jialun2@illinois.edu

Hong-Ming Chiu
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
hmchiu2@illinois.edu

Richard Y. Zhang
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
ryz@illinois.edu

Abstract
The matrix completion problem seeks to recover a d ⇥ d ground truth matrix of
low rank r ⌧ d from observations of its individual elements. Real-world matrix completion is often a huge-scale optimization problem, with d so large that
even the simplest full-dimension vector operations with O(d) time complexity become prohibitively expensive. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is one of the
few algorithms capable of solving matrix completion on a huge scale, and can
also naturally handle streaming data over an evolving ground truth. Unfortunately,
SGD experiences a dramatic slow-down when the underlying ground truth is illconditioned; it requires at least O( log(1/✏)) iterations to get ✏-close to ground
truth matrix with condition number . In this paper, we propose a preconditioned
version of SGD that preserves all the favorable practical qualities of SGD for
huge-scale online optimization while also making it agnostic to . For a symmetric ground truth and the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) loss, we prove that
the preconditioned SGD converges to ✏-accuracy in O(log(1/✏)) iterations, with
a rapid linear convergence rate as if the ground truth were perfectly conditioned
with  = 1. In our experiments, we observe a similar acceleration for item-item
collaborative filtering on the MovieLens25M dataset via a pair-wise ranking loss,
with 100 million training pairs and 10 million testing pairs. [See supporting code
at https://github.com/Hong-Ming/ScaledSGD.]

1

Introduction

The matrix completion problem seeks to recover an underlying d ⇥ d ground truth matrix M of low
rank r ⌧ d from observations of its individual matrix elements Mi,j . The problem appears most
prominently in the context of collaborative filtering and recommendation system, but also numerous
other applications. In this paper, we focus on the symmetric and positive semidefinite variant of
the problem, in which the underlying matrix M can be factored as M = ZZ T where the factor
matrix Z is d ⇥ r, though that our methods have natural extensions to the nonsymmetric case. We
note that the symmetric positive semidefinite variant is actually far more common in collaborative
filtering, due to the prevalence of item-item models, which enjoy better data (most platforms contain
several orders of magnitude more users than items) and more stable recommendations (the similarity
between items tends to change slowly over time) than user-user and user-item models.
For the full-scale, online instances of matrix completion that arise in real-world collaborative filtering, stochastic gradient descent or SGD is the only viable algorithm for learning the underlying
matrix M . The basic idea is to formulate a candidate matrix of the form XX T with respect to a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

