PulseImpute: A Novel Benchmark Task for
Pulsative Physiological Signal Imputation

Maxwell A. Xu1 , Alexander Moreno1*, 2 , Supriya Nagesh1 , V. Burak Aydemir1 ,
David W. Wetter3 , Santosh Kumar4 , James M. Rehg1
1
Georgia Tech, 2 Luminous Computing, 3 University of Utah, 4 University of Memphis
{maxxu,...,rehg}@gatech.edu

Abstract
The promise of mobile health (mHealth) is the ability to use wearable sensors
to monitor participant physiology at high frequencies during daily life to enable
temporally-precise health interventions. However, a major challenge is frequent
missing data. Despite a rich imputation literature, existing techniques are ineffective for the pulsative signals which comprise many mHealth applications, and a lack
of available datasets has stymied progress. We address this gap with PulseImpute,
the first large-scale pulsative signal imputation challenge which includes realistic
mHealth missingness models, an extensive set of baselines, and clinically-relevant
downstream tasks. Our baseline models include a novel transformer-based architecture designed to exploit the structure of pulsative signals. We hope that PulseImpute
will enable the ML community to tackle this important and challenging task.

1

Introduction

The goal of mobile health (mHealth) is to use continuously collected signals from wearable devices,
such as smart watches, to passively monitor a user’s health states during daily life and deliver
interventions to improve health outcomes. The use of devices such as Fitbit [17] to monitor physical
activity has become an established practice, with large-scale consumer adoption. Even more exciting
is the increasing feasibility of measuring complex health states, such as stress [25], by leveraging highfrequency physiological signals from wearable sensing technologies. A subset of these physiological
signals are pulsative, which we define as signals that have a quasiperiodic structure with specific signal
morphologies (e.g. the QRS complex in electrocardiography (ECG)), which vary over time and across
populations due to their origins in the cardiopulmonary system. ECG and Photoplethysmography
(PPG) signals are examples of such pulsative signals. The rich signal structure, especially in terms of
shape and timing has significant clinical value, for tasks such as heart disease diagnosis [59].
However, a key challenge is addressing missing data, which is commonplace and arises from multiple
causes such as insecure sensor attachment or data transmission loss [47]. Current mHealth systems
either employ simple imputation methods, such as KNN [44], or simply do not trigger health
interventions when inputs are missing [51]. Since mHealth biomarkers may require multiple signals
as input [25], the latter approach can lead to long intervals of missingness due to the juxtaposition of
missingness patterns across the inputs. However, the quasiperiodic nature of these signals provides
rich information for imputation, which can be exploited by modeling morphological structures over
time. Additionally, the accuracy with which a signal’s morphology can be recovered has a direct
impact on downstream task performance, as specific waveform shapes have clinical significance
and may imply specific disease states. Furthermore, the well-defined signal morphologies allow for
straightforward interpretation of reconstruction. Thus, pulsative signals provide a novel context for
the development of ML imputation methods, especially in comparison to prior imputation tasks.
∗

Work was done while the author was at Georgia Tech.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

