Learning Audio-Visual Dynamics Using Scene Graphs
for Audio Source Separation

Moitreya Chatterjee1∗
Narendra Ahuja1
Anoop Cherian2∗
metro.smiles@gmail.com
n-ahuja@illinois.edu
cherian@merl.com
1
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, MA

Abstract
There exists an unequivocal distinction between the sound produced by a static
source and that produced by a moving one, especially when the source moves
towards or away from the microphone. In this paper, we propose to use this
connection between audio and visual dynamics for solving two challenging tasks
simultaneously, namely: (i) separating audio sources from a mixture using visual
cues, and (ii) predicting the 3D visual motion of a sounding source using its separated audio. Towards this end, we present Audio Separator and Motion Predictor
(ASMP) – a deep learning framework that leverages the 3D structure of the scene
and the motion of sound sources for better audio source separation. At the heart
of ASMP is a 2.5D scene graph capturing various objects in the video and their
pseudo-3D spatial proximities. This graph is constructed by registering together
2.5D monocular depth predictions from the 2D video frames and associating the
2.5D scene regions with the outputs of an object detector applied on those frames.
The ASMP task is then mathematically modeled as the joint problem of: (i) recursively segmenting the 2.5D scene graph into several sub-graphs, each associated
with a constituent sound in the input audio mixture (which is then separated) and (ii)
predicting the 3D motions of the corresponding sound sources from the separated
audio. To empirically evaluate ASMP, we present experiments on two challenging
audio-visual datasets, viz. Audio Separation in the Wild (ASIW) and Audio Visual
Event (AVE). Our results demonstrate that ASMP achieves a clear improvement in
source separation quality, outperforming prior works on both datasets, while also
estimating the direction of motion of the sound sources better than other methods.

1

Introduction

Events around us are often audio-visual in nature and our senses have evolved to leverage this
multimodal synergy to better reason about the world. For example, the sight of a kid laughing aloud
while sliding down a slide allows us to associate the laughing sound with the kid and get a sense
of his/her direction of motion, even when a myriad of other sounds are present in the scene. In this
paper, we propose to leverage this synergy between sight and sound for solving two challenging tasks
simultaneously, viz.: (i) separating audio sources from a mixture using visual cues, and (ii) the novel
task of predicting the 3D visual motion of the sounding source using its corresponding separated
audio.
Typical approaches to visually-guided audio source separation use weakly- or self- supervised models
trained to separate a mixture of acoustic sources into its constituents by conditioning on appropriate
visual regions [8, 13, 55, 56]. Such approaches impose constraints on the space of the separated audio
(e.g., cyclic consistency, object identifiability, etc.) to derive gradients for training the underlying
∗

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

