Minimax Optimal Fixed-Budget Best Arm
Identification in Linear Bandits
Junwen Yang
Institute of Operations Research and Analytics
National University of Singapore
junwen_yang@u.nus.edu
Vincent Y. F. Tan
Department of Mathematics
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Institute of Operations Research and Analytics
National University of Singapore
vtan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We study the problem of best arm identification in linear bandits in the fixed-budget
setting. By leveraging properties of the G-optimal design and incorporating it into
the arm allocation rule, we design a parameter-free algorithm, Optimal Designbased Linear Best Arm Identification (OD-LinBAI). We provide a theoretical
analysis of the failure probability of OD-LinBAI. Instead of all the optimality gaps,
the performance of OD-LinBAI depends only on the gaps of the top d arms, where
d is the effective dimension of the linear bandit instance. Complementarily, we
present a minimax lower bound for this problem. The upper and lower bounds
show that OD-LinBAI is minimax optimal up to constant multiplicative factors in
the exponent, which is a significant theoretical improvement over existing methods
(e.g., BayesGap, Peace, LinearExploration and GSE), and settles the question
of ascertaining the difficulty of learning the best arm in the fixed-budget setting.
Finally, numerical experiments demonstrate considerable empirical improvements
over existing algorithms on a variety of real and synthetic datasets.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit problem is a model that exemplifies the exploration-exploitation tradeoff in
online decision making. It has various applications in drug design, online advertising, recommender
systems, and so on. In stochastic multi-armed bandit problems, the agent sequentially chooses an
arm from the given arm set at each time step and then observes a random reward drawn from the
unknown distribution associated with the chosen arm.
The standard multi-armed bandit problem, where the arms are not correlated with one another,
has been studied extensively in the literature. While the regret minimization problem aims at
maximizing the cumulative rewards by the trade-off between exploration and exploitation [1–4], the
pure exploration problem focuses on efficient exploration with specific goals, e.g., to identify the
best arm [5–11]. There are two complementary settings for the problem of best arm identification:
(i) Given T ∈ N, the agent aims to maximize the probability of finding the best arm in at most T
time steps; (ii) Given δ > 0, the agent aims to find the best arm with the probability of at least
1 − δ in the smallest number of steps. These settings are respectively known as the fixed-budget and
fixed-confidence settings.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

