A Unifying Framework for Online Optimization with
Long-Term Constraints

Matteo Castiglioni∗
Politecnico di Milano

Andrea Celli†
Bocconi University

Giulia Romano∗
Politecnico di Milano

Alberto Marchesi∗
Politecnico di Milano
Nicola Gatti∗
Politecnico di Milano

Abstract
We study online learning problems in which a decision maker has to take a sequence
of decisions subject to m long-term constraints. The goal of the decision maker is
to maximize their total reward, while at the same time achieving small cumulative
constraints violation across the T rounds. We present the first best-of-both-world
type algorithm for this general class of problems, with no-regret guarantees both in
the case in which rewards and constraints are selected according to an unknown
stochastic model, and in the case in which they are selected at each round by an
adversary. Our algorithm is the first to provide guarantees in the adversarial setting
with respect to the optimal fixed strategy that satisfies the long-term constraints. In
particular, it guarantees a ρ/(1 + ρ) fraction of the optimal reward and sublinear
regret, where ρ is a feasibility parameter related to the existence of strictly feasible
solutions. Our framework employs traditional regret minimizers as black-box
components. Therefore, by instantiating it with an appropriate choice of regret
minimizers it can handle the full-feedback as well as the bandit-feedback setting.
Moreover, it allows the decision maker to seamlessly handle scenarios with nonconvex rewards and constraints. We show how our framework can be applied in
the context of budget-management mechanisms for repeated auctions in order to
guarantee long-term constraints that are not packing (e.g., ROI constraints).

1

Introduction

We study online learning problems where a decision maker takes decisions over T rounds. At each
round t, the decision xt ∈ X is chosen before observing a reward function ft together with a set
of m time-varying constraint functions gt . The decision maker is allowed to make decisions that
are not feasible, provided that the overall sequence of decisions obeys the long-term constraints
PT
t=1 gt (xt ) ≤ 0, up to a small cumulative violation across the T rounds. The problem becomes
that of finding a sequence of decisions xt which guarantees a reward close to that of the best fixed
decision in hindsight while satisfying long-term constraints. This type of framework was first proposed
by Mannor et al. [36], and it has numerous applications ranging from wireless communication [36]
and multi-objective online classification [13], to safe online learning [4].
Mannor et al. [36] show that guaranteeing sublinear regret and sublinear cumulative constraints
violation is impossible even when ft and gt are simple linear functions. Therefore, previous works
either focus on the case in which constraints are generated i.i.d. according to some unknown stochastic
∗

†

DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, {matteo.castiglioni, alberto.marchesi, giulia.romano, nicola.gatti}@polimi.it.
Computing Sciences Department, Bocconi University, andrea.celli2@unibocconi.it.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

