Communication Acceleration of Local Gradient
Methods via an Accelerated Primal-Dual Algorithm
with Inexact Prox
Abdurakhmon Sadiev∗
KAUST†, MIPT‡, ISP RAS§
abdurakhmon.sadiev@kaust.edu.sa

Dmitry Kovalev
KAUST
dakovalev1@gmail.com

Peter Richtárik
KAUST
richtarik@gmail.com

Abstract
Inspired by a recent breakthrough of Mishchenko et al. [2022], who for the first
time showed that local gradient steps can lead to provable communication acceleration, we propose an alternative algorithm which obtains the same communication
acceleration as their method (ProxSkip). Our approach is very different, however:
it is based on the celebrated method of Chambolle and Pock [2011], with several
nontrivial modifications: i) we allow for an inexact computation of the prox operator of a certain smooth strongly convex function via a suitable gradient-based
method (e.g., GD, Fast GD or FSFOM), ii) we perform a careful modification of
the dual update step in order to retain linear convergence. Our general results offer
the new state-of-the-art rates for the class of strongly convex-concave saddle-point
problems with bilinear coupling characterized by the absence of smoothness in
the dual function. When applied to federated learning, we obtain a theoretically
better alternative to ProxSkip: our method requires fewer local steps (O(κ1/3 ) or
O(κ1/4 ), compared to O(κ1/2 ) of ProxSkip), and performs a deterministic number
of local steps instead. Like ProxSkip, our method can be applied to optimization
over a connected network, and we obtain theoretical improvements here as well.

1

Introduction

Communication efficiency of distributed stochastic gradient descent (SGD) can be improved, often
dramatically, via a simple trick: instead of synchronizing the parameters across the parallel workers
after every SGD step, let the workers perform multiple optimization steps using their local loss and
data only before synchronizing. This trick dates back at least to two or three decades ago [Mangasarian,
1995], and may be much older. Due to its simplicity, it has been repeatedly rediscovered [Povey et al.,
2014, Moritz et al., 2016, Ma et al., 2017]. It is the basis of the famous federated averaging (FedAvg)
algorithm of McMahan et al. [2016, 2017], which is the workhorse of federated learning [Konečný
et al., 2016b,a]; see also the recent surveys on federated learning [Li et al., 2020a, Kairouz et al.,
2019] and federated optimization [Wang et al., 2021b].
∗
This work was written while A. Sadiev was a research intern at KAUST during the last semester of his MS
studies at the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia.
†
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
‡
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
§
Institute for System Programming of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Research Center for Trusted
Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

