Momentum Adversarial Distillation: Handling Large
Distribution Shifts in Data-Free Knowledge
Distillation
Kien Do, Hung Le, Dung Nguyen, Dang Nguyen, Haripriya Harikumar,
Truyen Tran, Santu Rana, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2I2), Deakin University, Australia
{k.do, thai.le, dung.nguyen, d.nguyen, h.harikumar,
truyen.tran, santu.rana, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Data-free Knowledge Distillation (DFKD) has attracted attention recently thanks
to its appealing capability of transferring knowledge from a teacher network to a
student network without using training data. The main idea is to use a generator
to synthesize data for training the student. As the generator gets updated, the
distribution of synthetic data will change. Such distribution shift could be large if
the generator and the student are trained adversarially, causing the student to forget
the knowledge it acquired at previous steps. To alleviate this problem, we propose
a simple yet effective method called Momentum Adversarial Distillation (MAD)
which maintains an exponential moving average (EMA) copy of the generator
and uses synthetic samples from both the generator and the EMA generator to
train the student. Since the EMA generator can be considered as an ensemble
of the generator’s old versions and often undergoes a smaller change in updates
compared to the generator, training on its synthetic samples can help the student
recall the past knowledge and prevent the student from adapting too quickly to new
updates of the generator. Our experiments on six benchmark datasets including
big datasets like ImageNet and Places365 demonstrate the superior performance of
MAD over competing methods for handling the large distribution shift problem.
Our method also compares favorably to existing DFKD methods and even achieves
state-of-the-art results in some cases.

1

Introduction

With the development of deep learning, more pretrained deep neural networks have been released
to the public [5, 10, 18, 38, 43]. However, their superior performances often come with big sizes,
causing difficulties in deployment of these pretrained networks on resource-constrained devices. This
leads to the demand for transferring knowledge from a cumbersome pretrained source network (called
“teacher”) to a compact target network (called “student”) with a minimal loss of performance. This
task is regarded as Knowledge Distillation (KD) [19].
The original idea of KD is to make use of class probabilities predicted by the teacher which encapsulate
the hidden correlation among classes as training signals for the student. Note that such “dark”
knowledge [19] is generally not available if the student is trained directly on raw data with one-hot
labels. Later, various KD methods have been proposed to improve the quality of knowledge transfer.
For example, AT [47] matches the spatial attention maps at intermediate layers of the student and the
teacher. SPD [42] encourages the similarity between the student’s and teacher’s feature correlation
matrices. PKT [36] transfers the conditional probability between two samples computed via kernel
density estimation on the feature space. RKD [35] exploits relational knowledge for distillation. VID
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

