On Privacy and Personalization in
Cross-Silo Federated Learning

Ziyu Liu

Shengyuan Hu Zhiwei Steven Wu Virginia Smith
Carnegie Mellon University
{kzliu, shengyuanhu, zstevenwu, smithv}@cmu.edu

Abstract
While the application of differential privacy (DP) has been well-studied in crossdevice federated learning (FL), there is a lack of work considering DP and its
implications for cross-silo FL, a setting characterized by a limited number of
clients each containing many data subjects. In cross-silo FL, usual notions of
client-level DP are less suitable as real-world privacy regulations typically concern
the in-silo data subjects rather than the silos themselves. In this work, we instead
consider an alternative notion of silo-specific sample-level DP, where silos set their
own privacy targets for their local examples. Under this setting, we reconsider the
roles of personalization in federated learning. In particular, we show that meanregularized multi-task learning (MR-MTL), a simple personalization framework,
is a strong baseline for cross-silo FL: under stronger privacy requirements, silos
are incentivized to federate more with each other to mitigate DP noise, resulting
in consistent improvements relative to standard baseline methods. We provide an
empirical study of competing methods as well as a theoretical characterization
of MR-MTL for mean estimation, highlighting the interplay between privacy and
cross-silo data heterogeneity. Our work serves to establish baselines for private
cross-silo FL as well as identify key directions of future work in this area.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning often rely on large, centralized datasets [84, 23, 65], but curating
such data may not always be viable, particularly when the data contains private information and must
remain siloed across clients (e.g. mobile devices or hospitals). Recently, federated learning (FL) [71,
50] has emerged as a paradigm for learning from such distributed data, but it has been shown that its
data minimization principle alone may not provide adequate privacy protection for participants [101,
102]. To obtain formal privacy guarantees, there has thus been extensive work applying differential
privacy (DP) [27, 28] to various parts of the FL pipeline (e.g. [32, 73, 41, 48, 4, 63, 44, 83, 34]).
Existing approaches for differentially private FL are typically designed for client-level DP in that
they protect the federated clients, such as mobile devices (“user-level”), tasks in multi-task learning
(“task-level”), or data silos like institutions (“silo-level”), and DP is achieved by clipping and noising
the client model updates. While client-level DP is considered a strong privacy notion as all data of a
single client is protected, it may not be suitable for cross-silo FL, where there are fewer clients but
each hold many data subjects that require protection. For example, when hospitals/banks/schools
wish to federate patient/customer/student records, it is the people owning those records rather than
the participating silos that should be protected. In fact, laws and regulations may mandate such
participation in FL be disclosed publicly [96], compromising the privacy of the federating clients.
In this work, we instead consider a more natural model of silo-specific sample-level privacy (Fig. 1,
with variants appearing in [41, 66, 109, 51]): the k-th silo may set its own (εk , δk ) sample-level DP
target for any learning algorithm with respect to its local dataset. With this formulation in mind, we
then reconsider the impact of privacy, heterogeneity, and personalization in cross-silo FL. In particular,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

