Low-Rank Modular Reinforcement Learning via
Muscle Synergy
Heng Dong∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University
drdhxi@gmail.com

Tonghan Wang∗
Harvard University
twang1@g.harvard.edu

Jiayuan Liu
IIIS, Tsinghua University
georgejiayuan@gmail.com

Chongjie Zhang
IIIS, Tsinghua University
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Modular Reinforcement Learning (RL) decentralizes the control of multi-joint
robots by learning policies for each actuator. Previous work on modular RL has
proven its ability to control morphologically different agents with a shared actuator policy. However, with the increase in the Degree of Freedom (DoF) of robots,
training a morphology-generalizable modular controller becomes exponentially
difﬁcult. Motivated by the way the human central nervous system controls numerous muscles, we propose a Synergy-Oriented LeARning (S OLAR) framework that
exploits the redundant nature of DoF in robot control. Actuators are grouped into
synergies by an unsupervised learning method, and a synergy action is learned to
control multiple actuators in synchrony. In this way, we achieve a low-rank control at the synergy level. We extensively evaluate our method on a variety of robot
morphologies, and the results show its superior efﬁciency and generalizability, especially on robots with a large DoF like Humanoid++ and UNIMALs.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has contributed signiﬁcantly to the sensorimotor control of both
simulated [Heess et al., 2017, Zhu et al., 2020] and real-world [Levine et al., 2016, Mahmood
et al., 2018] robots. Monolithic learning is a popular paradigm for learning control policies. In this
paradigm, a policy inferring a joint action for all limb actuators based on a global sensory state is
learned. Although monolithic learning has made impressive progress [Chen et al., 2020, Kuznetsov
et al., 2020], it has two major shortcomings. First, the input and output space is large. For robots
with more joints, learning controlling policies puts a heavy burden on the representational capacity of neural networks. Second, the input and output dimensions are ﬁxed, making it inﬂexible to
transfer the learned control policies to robots with different morphologies.
Modular reinforcement learning provides an elegant solution to these problems. In this learning
paradigm [Wang et al., 2018], the control policy is decentralized [Peng et al., 2021], and each limb
actuator is controlled by a local policy. Recent research efforts show that the local policies can learn
high-performance and transferable control strategies by sharing parameters [Huang et al., 2020],
communicating to each other by message passing [Huang et al., 2020], and adaptively paying attention to other actuators via graph neural networks [Kurin et al., 2020]. By exploiting the ﬂexibility
and generalizability provided by modularity, a modular policy can now control robots of up to thousands of morphologies [Gupta et al., 2021a].
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

