A Near-Optimal Primal-Dual Method for Off-Policy
Learning in CMDP

Fan Chen
School of Mathematics
Peking University
chern@pku.edu.cn

Junyu Zhang∗
Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Management
National University of Singapore
junyuz@nus.edu.sg

Zaiwen Wen
Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research, Center For Machine Learning Research
Peking University
wenzw@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
As an important framework for safe Reinforcement Learning, the Constrained
Markov Decision Process (CMDP) has been extensively studied in the recent literature. However, despite the rich results under various on-policy learning settings,
there still lacks some essential understanding of the offline CMDP problems, in
terms of both the algorithm design and the information theoretic sample complexity lower bound. In this paper, we focus on solving the CMDP problems where
only offline data are available. By adopting the
single-policy con concept of the ∗ 
centrability coefficient C ∗ , we establish an Ω min{|S||A|,|S|+I}C
sample com(1−γ)3 ϵ2
plexity lower bound for the offline CMDP problem, where I stands for the number
of constraints. By introducing a simple but novel deviation control mechanism,
we propose a near-optimal primal-dual learning algorithm called DPDL. This algorithm provably guarantees zero constraint violation and its sample complexity
matches the above lower bound except for an Õ((1 − γ)−1 ) factor. Comprehensive discussion on how to deal with the unknown constant C ∗ and the potential
asynchronous structure on the offline dataset are also included.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is an important tool for modeling the real world tasks that involve
sequential decision making. Such RL problems are often mathematically described as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) that maximizes a cumulative sum of rewards. The safe reinforcement
learning, on the other hand, not only cares the reward maximization, but also attempts to ensure a
reasonable system performance with respect to certain safety constraints. Such safety constrained
RL problems are often formulated as the Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) M =
(S, A, P, r, u, γ, ρ0 ), where S is a finite state space, A is a finite action space, γ ∈ (0, 1) is the
discount factor, P (s′ | s, a) stands for the transition probability from s to s′ under the action a for
∀(s, a, s′ ) ∈ S ×A×S, and r : S ×A → [−1, 1] is the reward function, (ui : S ×A → [−1, 1])i∈[I]
is a set of I utility functions, ρ0 is the initial state distribution over S. The goal of CMDP is to find
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

