You Never Stop Dancing: Non-freezing Dance
Generation via Bank-constrained Manifold Projection

Jiangxin Sun∗
Sun Yat-sen University
sunjx5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Huang Hu
Peking University
tonyhu@pku.edu.cn

Chunyu Wang
Microsoft Research Asia
chnuwa@microsoft.com
Hanjiang Lai
Sun Yat-sen University
laihanj3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Jian-Fang Hu†
Sun Yat-sen University
hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Zhi Jin
Sun Yat-sen University
jinzh26@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
One of the most overlooked challenges in dance generation is that the autoregressive frameworks are prone to freezing motions due to noise accumulation.
In this paper, we present two modules that can be plugged into the existing models to enable them to generate non-freezing and high fidelity dances. Since the
high-dimensional motion data are easily swamped by noise, we propose to learn
a low-dimensional manifold representation by an auto-encoder with a bank of
latent codes, which can be used to reduce the noise in the predicted motions, thus
preventing from freezing. We further extend the bank to provide explicit priors
about the future motions to disambiguate motion prediction, which helps the predictors to generate motions with larger magnitude and higher fidelity than possible
before. Extensive experiments on AIST++, a public large-scale 3D dance motion
benchmark, demonstrate that our method notably outperforms the baselines in
terms of quality, diversity and time length.

1

Introduction

Dancing to music has been one of the most popular art forms since ancient days. It can vividly
express human’s emotions and fulfill social communications even before symbolic languages came
along. Nowadays, there are a booming number of people sharing their dance videos on the popular
media platforms such as YouTube and TikTok, which drives the strong need for automatic AI
choreography to help users create their own dances. The task is related to general human motion
prediction [22, 25, 31, 38, 39, 42] except that it poses new challenges: i) dance generation needs to
produce high-fidelity motions for about three minutes to cover a music which is much longer than that
in general motion prediction; ii) dance generation needs to handle more diverse and stylistic motions
(e.g., ballet Jazz, hip-pop, etc.). The high spatio-temporal complexity requires more expressive
models so as to generate high-fidelity dance motions.
∗

This work was done when Jiangxin Sun was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
Hu is also with Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Guangzhou,
China and Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

