Learning to Constrain Policy Optimization with
Virtual Trust Region
Hung Le, Thommen Karimpanal George, Majid Abdolshah, Dung Nguyen,
Kien Do, Sunil Gupta, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied AI Institute, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
thai.le@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
We introduce a constrained optimization method for policy gradient reinforcement
learning, which uses a virtual trust region to regulate each policy update. In addition to using the proximity of one single old policy as the normal trust region, we
propose forming a second trust region through another virtual policy representing
a wide range of past policies. We then enforce the new policy to stay closer to
the virtual policy, which is beneficial if the old policy performs poorly. More importantly, we propose a mechanism to automatically build the virtual policy from
a memory of past policies, providing a new capability for dynamically learning
appropriate virtual trust regions during the optimization process. Our proposed
method, dubbed Memory-Constrained Policy Optimization (MCPO), is examined
in diverse environments, including robotic locomotion control, navigation with
sparse rewards and Atari games, consistently demonstrating competitive performance against recent on-policy constrained policy gradient methods.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) is the current workhorse in machine learning. Using neural networks to approximate value and policy functions enables classical approaches such as Q-learning
[29] and policy gradient [23] to achieve promising results on many challenging problems such as
Go, Atari games and robotics [21, 15, 12, 13]. Compared to Deep Q-learning, deep policy gradient
(PG) methods are often more flexible and applicable to discrete and continuous action problems.
However, these methods tend to suffer from high sample complexity and training instability since
the gradient may not accurately reflect the policy gain when the policy changes substantially [6].
This is exacerbated for deep policy networks where numerous parameters need to be optimized, and
minor updates in parameter space can lead to considerable changes in policy space.
To address this issue, one solution is to regularize each policy update by restricting the Kullback–
Leibler (KL) divergence between the new policy and the previous one, which can guarantee monotonic policy improvement [17]. However, jointly optimizing the approximate advantage function
and the KL term does not work in practice [17]. Therefore, Schulman et al. (2015) proposed Trust
Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) to constrain the new policy within a KL divergence radius,
which requires second-order gradients. Alternatives such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
[19] use a simpler first-order optimization with adaptive KL or clipped surrogate objective while
still maintaining the reliable performance of TRPO. Recent methods recast the problem through a
new lens using Expectation-Maximization or Mirror Descent Optimization, and this also results in
first-order optimization with KL divergence term in the loss function [1, 22, 31, 24].
An issue with the above methods is that the previous policy used to restrict the new policy may be
suboptimal and thus unreliable in practice. For example, due to stochasticity and approximations,
the new policy may fall into a local optimum even under trust-region optimizations. Then in the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

