A Theoretical Framework for Inference Learning

Nick Alonso1∗, Beren Millidge3 , Jeff Krichmar1,2 , Emre Neftci1,2,4
1

Department of Cognitive Science, UC Irvine
Department of Computer Science, UC Irvine
3
MRC Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of Oxford
4
Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, RWTH Aachen, Germany
and Peter Grünberg Institute, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany
2

Abstract
Backpropagation (BP) is the most successful and widely used algorithm in deep
learning. However, the computations required by BP are challenging to reconcile with known neurobiology. This difficulty has stimulated interest in more
biologically plausible alternatives to BP. One such algorithm is the inference learning algorithm (IL). IL trains predictive coding models of neural circuits and has
achieved equal performance to BP on supervised and auto-associative tasks. In contrast to BP, however, the mathematical foundations of IL are not well-understood.
Here, we develop a novel theoretical framework for IL. Our main result is that IL
closely approximates an optimization method known as implicit stochastic gradient
descent (implicit SGD), which is distinct from the explicit SGD implemented by BP.
Our results further show how the standard implementation of IL can be altered to
better approximate implicit SGD. Our novel implementation considerably improves
the stability of IL across learning rates, which is consistent with our theory, as a key
property of implicit SGD is its stability. We provide extensive simulation results
that further support our theoretical interpretations and find IL achieves quicker
convergence when trained with mini-batch size one while performing competitively
with BP for larger mini-batches when combined with Adam.

1

Introduction

Backpropagation (BP) [33], the most successful and ubiquitously used learning algorithm in deep
learning, has long been criticized as being incompatible with known neurobiology [10, 21]. For example, unlike the highly interconnected, recurrent circuits in the brain, BP performs credit assignment
through a separate feedback stream that does not alter feedforward (FF) signals [10, 21]. Additionally, standard implementations of BP are largely incompatible with energy efficient, neuromorphic
hardware, due, in part, to BP’s non-local gradient computations. These concerns have motivated
neuroscientists and engineers to search for alternatives to BP that use more biologically compatible,
local learning rules.
One alternative to BP is the inference learning algorithm (IL) [32, 43, 37]. IL is the standard
learning algorithm used to train predictive coding (PC) models of biological neural circuits (e.g.
[32, 13, 39, 4, 1, 7]). Within neuroscience, PC models have grown in popularity, where some even
propose PC may be a canonical biological circuit [15, 14, 4]. IL works by first minimizing an energy
function, known as free energy, w.r.t. neuron activities using the recurrent computations involved in
predictive coding. At convergence, IL updates weights to further minimize energy. Unlike standard
BP, IL uses local learning rules and recurrent circuits instead of a separate feedback stream to perform
∗

Correspondence to nalonso2@uci.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

