Improved Regret Analysis for Variance-Adaptive
Linear Bandits and Horizon-Free Linear Mixture
MDPs
Yeoneung Kim∗
Gachon University
yeoneung@gachon.ac.kr

Insoon Yang
Seoul National University
insoonyang@snu.ac.kr

Kwang-Sung Jun
University of Arizona
kjun@cs.arizona.edu

Abstract
In online learning problems, exploiting low variance plays an important role in
obtaining tight performance guarantees yet is challenging because variances are
often not known a priori. Recently, considerable progress has been made by
Zhang et al. (2021) where they obtain a variance-adaptive regret bound for linear
bandits without knowledge of the variances and a horizon-free regret bound for
linear mixture Markov decision processes (MDPs). In this paper, we present
novel analyses that improve their
√ regret bounds significantly. For linear bandits,
√
K
1.5
we achieve Õ(min{d K, d
∑k=1 σk2 } + d2 ) where d is the dimension of the
features, K is the time horizon, and σk2 is the noise variance at time step k, and
Õ ignores polylogarithmic dependence, which is a factor of d3 improvement. For
linear mixture MDPs with the assumption of maximum cumulative reward
√ in an
episode being in [0, 1], we achieve a horizon-free regret bound of Õ(d K + d2 )
where d is the number of base models and K is the number of episodes. This is a
factor of d3.5 improvement in the leading term and d7 in the lower order term. Our
analysis critically relies on a novel peeling-based regret analysis that leverages the
elliptical potential ‘count’ lemma.

1

Introduction

In online learning, variance often plays an important role in achieving low regret bounds. For
example, for the prediction with expert
√ advice problem, Hazan and Kale [11] proposed an algorithm
that achieves a regret bound of O( VARK ) where VARK is a suitably-defined variance of the loss
function up to time step K, without knowing VARK ahead of time. The implication is that when
the given sequence of loss functions
√ has a small variance, one can perform much better than the
previously known regret bound O( K). For multi-armed bandits, Audibert et al. [2] proposed an
algorithm that achieves regret bounds that depends on the variances of the arms, which means that,
again, the regret bound becomes smaller as the variances become smaller.
It is thus natural to obtain similar variance-adaptive bounds for other problems. For example,√in ddimensional stochastic contextual bandit problems, the optimal worst-case regret bound is Õ(σd K)
where Õ hides polylogarithmic dependencies and σ 2 is a uniform upper bound on the noise variance.
Following the developments in other online learning problems, it is natural to ask if we can develop
a similar variance-adaptive regret bound. The recent work by Zhang et al. [31] has
√ provided an
5
2
affirmative answer. Their algorithm called VOFUL achieves a regret bound of Õ(d4.5 ∑K
k=1 σk +d )
where σk2 is the (unknown) noise variance at time step k. This implies that, indeed, it is possible
∗

Work done while at Seoul National University.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

