FlyView: a bio-informed optical flow truth dataset for
visual navigation using panoramic stereo vision

Alix Leroy∗
Oxford Flight Group,
Department of Biology,
University of Oxford,
Oxford, OX1 3SZ, UK
alix.leroy@jesus.ox.ac.uk

Graham K. Taylor
Oxford Flight Group,
Department of Biology,
University of Oxford,
Oxford, OX1 3SZ, UK
graham.taylor@biology.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Flying at speed through complex environments is a difficult task that has been
performed successfully by insects since the Carboniferous [1], but remains a
challenge for robotic and autonomous systems. Insects navigate the world using
optical flow sensed by their compound eyes, which they process using a deep neural
network implemented on hardware weighing just a few milligrams. Deploying an
insect-inspired network architecture in computer vision could therefore enable more
efficient and effective ways of estimating structure and self-motion using optical
flow. Training a bio-informed deep network to implement these tasks requires
biologically relevant training, test, and validation data. To this end, we introduce
FlyView1 , a novel bio-informed truth dataset for visual navigation. This simulated
dataset is rendered using open source 3D scenes in which the agent’s position is
known at every frame, and is accompanied by truth data on depth, self-motion, and
motion flow. This dataset comprising 42,475 frames has several key features that
are missing from existing optical flow datasets, including: (i) panoramic camera
images, with a monocular and binocular field of view matched to that of a fly’s
compound eyes; (ii) dynamically meaningful self-motion, modelled on motion
primitives or the 3D trajectories of drones and flies; and (iii) complex natural and
indoor environments, including reflective surfaces, fog, and clouds.

1

Introduction

Changes in illumination (e.g. shadows, reflections), occlusion (e.g. vegetation, structures), and other
sources of large-scale variation (e.g. different substrates, water bodies) present critical challenges
to visual navigation in natural and indoor environments. Optical flow is an important visual cue
that insects such as flies use to navigate such environments with a brain containing approximately
100,000 neurons and weighing only a few milligrams [2]. Optical flow has also been used by drones
for navigation tasks involving estimation of attitude and position, using inefficient and constrained
algorithms whose application is typically limited to simple tasks such as holding position in hover.
Bio-informed technologies have therefore been suggested for making optical flow algorithms available
for small platforms [3–10], potentially reducing the number of onboard sensors required for navigation
[11, 12]. These bio-informed approaches are often distinguished by their use of cameras with a very
large field of view, which is important both to estimating the structure of the environment, and to
inferring self-motion during complex flight maneuvers.
∗
1

Corresponding author
https://github.com/Ahleroy/FlyView

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

