Diffusion-based Molecule Generation with Informative
Prior Bridges
Lemeng Wu⇤
University of Texas at Austin
lmwu@cs.utexas.edu
Xingchao Liu
University of Texas at Austin
xcliu@cs.utexas.edu

Chengyue Gong⇤
University of Texas at Austin
cygong@cs.utexas.edu

Mao Ye
University of Texas at Austin
my21@cs.utexas.edu

Qiang Liu
University of Texas at Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
AI-based molecule generation provides a promising approach to a large area of
biomedical sciences and engineering, such as antibody design, hydrolase engineering, or vaccine development. Because the molecules are governed by physical laws,
a key challenge is to incorporate prior information into the training procedure to
generate high-quality and realistic molecules. We propose a simple and novel approach to steer the training of diffusion-based generative models with physical and
statistics prior information. This is achieved by constructing physically informed
diffusion bridges, stochastic processes that guarantee to yield a given observation
at the fixed terminal time. We develop a Lyapunov function based method to
construct and determine bridges, and propose a number of proposals of informative
prior bridges for both high-quality molecule generation and uniformity-promoted
3D point cloud generation. With comprehensive experiments, we show that our
method provides a powerful approach to the 3D generation task, yielding molecule
structures with better quality and stability scores and more uniformly distributed
point clouds of high qualities.

1

Introduction

As exemplified by the success of AlphafoldV2 [22] in solving protein folding, deep learning techniques have been creating new frontiers on molecular sciences [46]. In particular, the problem of
building deep generative models for molecule design has attracted increasing interest with a magnitude
of applications in physics, chemistry, and drug discovery [e.g., 2, 3, 26]. Recently, diffusion-based
generative model have been applied to molecule generation problems [9, 19] and obtain superior
performance. The idea of these methods is to corrupt the data with diffusion noise and learn a neural
diffusion model to revert the corruption process to generate meaningful data from noise.
A key challenge in deep generative models for molecule and 3D point generation is to efficiently
incorporate strong prior information to reflect the physical and problem-dependent statistical properties of the problems at hand. In fact, a recent fruitful line of research [11, 23, 37] have shown
promising results by introducing inductive bias into the design of model architectures to reflect
physical constraints such as SE(3) equivariance. In this work, we present a different paradigm of
prior incorporation tailored to diffusion-based generative models, and leverage it to yield substantial
improvement in both 1) high-quality and stable molecule generation and 2) uniformity-promoted
point cloud generation. Our contributions are summarized as follows.
⇤

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

