Bridging the Gap Between Vision Transformers and
Convolutional Neural Networks on Small Datasets
Zhiying Lu, Hongtao Xie∗ , Chuanbin Liu∗ , Yongdong Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
arieseirack@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie,liucb92,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
There still remains an extreme performance gap between Vision Transformers
(ViTs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) when training from scratch on
small datasets, which is concluded to the lack of inductive bias. In this paper, we
further consider this problem and point out two weaknesses of ViTs in inductive
biases, that is, the spatial relevance and diverse channel representation. First, on
spatial aspect, objects are locally compact and relevant, thus fine-grained feature
needs to be extracted from a token and its neighbors. While the lack of data hinders
ViTs to attend the spatial relevance. Second, on channel aspect, representation
exhibits diversity on different channels. But the scarce data can not enable ViTs
to learn strong enough representation for accurate recognition. To this end, we
propose Dynamic Hybrid Vision Transformer (DHVT) as the solution to enhance
the two inductive biases. On spatial aspect, we adopt a hybrid structure, in which
convolution is integrated into patch embedding and multi-layer perceptron module,
forcing the model to capture the token features as well as their neighboring features.
On channel aspect, we introduce a dynamic feature aggregation module in MLP
and a brand new "head token" design in multi-head self-attention module to help
re-calibrate channel representation and make different channel group representation
interacts with each other. The fusion of weak channel representation forms a strong
enough representation for classification. With this design, we successfully eliminate
the performance gap between CNNs and ViTs, and our DHVT achieves a series
of state-of-the-art performance with a lightweight model, 85.68% on CIFAR-100
with 22.8M parameters, 82.3% on ImageNet-1K with 24.0M parameters. Code is
available at https://github.com/ArieSeirack/DHVT.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have dominated in Computer Vision (CV) field as the
backbone for various tasks like classification [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], object detection [8, 9, 10] and
segmentation [11, 12, 13]. These years have witnessed the rapid growth of another promising
alternative architecture paradigm, Vision Transformers (ViTs). They have already exhibited great
performance in common tasks, such as classification [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19], object detection
[20, 21, 22] and segmentation [23, 24].
ViT [14] is the pioneering model that brings Transformer architecture [25] from Natural Language
Processing (NLP) into CV. It has a higher performance upper bound than standard CNNs, while it
is at the cost of expensive computation and extremely huge amount of training data. The vanilla
ViT needs to be firstly pre-trained on the huge dataset JFT-300M [14] and then fine-tuned on the
common dataset ImageNet-1K [26]. Under this experimental setting, it shows higher performance
than standard CNNs. However, when training from scratch on ImageNet-1K only, the accuracy is
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

