Semi-Supervised Learning with Decision Trees:
Graph Laplacian Tree Alternating Optimization

Arman Zharmagambetov
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Merced

azharmagambetovu mer ed.edu

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Merced

m arreira-perpinanu mer ed.edu

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning seeks to learn a machine learning model when only a
small amount of the available data is labeled. The most widespread approach uses
a graph prior, which encourages similar instances to have similar predictions. This
has been very successful with models ranging from kernel machines to neural networks, but has remained inapplicable to decision trees, for which the optimization
problem is much harder. We solve this based on a reformulation of the problem
which requires iteratively solving two simpler problems: a supervised tree learning problem, which can be solved by the Tree Alternating Optimization algorithm;
and a label smoothing problem, which can be solved through a sparse linear system. The algorithm is scalable and highly effective even with very few labeled
instances, and makes it possible to learn accurate, interpretable models based on
decision trees in such situations.

1 Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is an important subfield of machine learning which has received a
lot of attention in recent years given today’s growing amount of data and widespread deployment of
machine learning systems. One of the major reasons is that SSL is applicable when labels are scarce.
This is in contrast to the traditional fully supervised learning, which requires access to a large amount
of high-quality labeled data. However, obtaining such samples is often costly, time-consuming and
sometimes even impractical. Therefore, SSL methods have received much praise in the machine
learning literature [40] and they are widely used in many applications. A common strategy in SSL
is to assume that similar instances have similar predictions, which is commonly incorporated into
an objective as a graph prior (e.g. graph Laplacian).
In this paper, we study the problem of training a decision tree model by leveraging a small percentage
of labeled data and a much larger sample of unlabeled data. Why trees? First, trees are considered
to be interpretable models, since the prediction is obtained by routing an input along a unique rootto-leaf path, which can be reformulated as if-then rules. Second, they are widely used in a wide
spectrum of applications, such as data mining [30], computer vision [13], finance, etc. They are
typically employed as base learners in an ensemble (e.g. bagging [3] or boosting [15]). However,
they are used as standalone predictors as well. For instance, recent algorithmic advances in training
non-greedy trees have shown that oblique trees can perform competitively well in a number of tasks
and strike a good balance between accuracy and interpretability [6, 5, 16–18, 34, 36].
However, like many non-linear methods, decision trees are well known to overfit for small-sized
(labeled) data, which is the case in SSL. As an illustration, consider fig. 1, that shows a synthetic
binary classification problem in 2D. An oblique tree achieves a certain good performance when it
is provided the entire population of labeled data. But the error significantly increases if a tree is
trained on six labeled instances only (plot 3). Whereas the benefit is evident when we provide all
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

