Policy Optimization with Linear Temporal Logic
Constraints
Cameron Voloshin
Caltech

Hoang M. Le
Argo AI

Swarat Chaudhuri
UT Austin

Yisong Yue
Argo AI
Caltech

Abstract
We study the problem of policy optimization (PO) with linear temporal logic (LTL)
constraints. The language of LTL allows flexible description of tasks that may be
unnatural to encode as a scalar cost function. We consider LTL-constrained PO as
a systematic framework, decoupling task specification from policy selection, and
as an alternative to the standard of cost shaping. With access to a generative model,
we develop a model-based approach that enjoys a sample complexity analysis for
guaranteeing both task satisfaction and cost optimality (through a reduction to a
reachability problem). Empirically, our algorithm can achieve strong performance
even in low-sample regimes.

1

Introduction

The standard reinforcement learning (RL) framework aims to find a policy that minimizes a cost
function. The premise is that this scalar cost function can completely capture the task specification
(known as the “reward hypothesis” [55, 53]). To date, almost all theoretical understanding of RL is
focused on this cost minimization setting (e.g., [62, 32, 31, 57, 45, 9, 24, 19, 10, 3, 4, 40, 47, 48]).
However, capturing real-world task specifications using scalar costs can be challenging. For one, realworld tasks often consist of objectives that are required, as well as those that are merely desirable. By
combining these objectives into scalar costs, one erases the distinction between these two categories
of tasks. Also, there is recent theoretical evidence that certain tasks are simply not reducible to scalar
costs [1] (see Section 2). In practice, one circumvents these challenges using heuristics such as
adding “breadcrumbs” [54]. However, such heuristics can lead to catastrophic failures in which the
learning agent ends up exploiting the cost function in an unanticipated way [49, 61, 28, 68, 44].
In response to these limitations, recent work has studied alternative RL paradigms that use Linear
Temporal Logic (LTL) to specify tasks (see Section 7). LTL is a modeling language that can express
desired characteristics of future paths of the system [11]. The notation is precise enough to allow
the specification of both the required and desired behaviors; the cost minimization is left only to
discriminate between which LTL-satisfying policy is “best”. This ensures that the main objective —
e.g., time, energy, or effort — does not have any relation to the task and is easily interpretable.
Existing work on RL with LTL constraints tends to make highly restrictive assumptions. Examples
include (i) known mixing time of the optimal policy [23], (ii) the assumption that every policy
satisfies the task eventually [64], or (iii) known optimal discount factor [26], all of which assist in
task satisfaction verification. These assumptions have complex interactions with the environment,
making them impractical if not impossible to calculate. The situation is made more complex by
recent theoretical results [66, 7] that show that there are LTL tasks that are not PAC-MDP-learnable.
In this paper, we address these limitations through a novel policy optimization framework for RL
under LTL constraints. Our approach relies on two assumptions that are significantly less restrictive
than those in prior work and circumvent the negative results on RL-modulo-LTL: the availability
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

