ComGAN: Unsupervised Disentanglement and
Segmentation via Image Composition

Rui Ding
Central South University
ruiding@csu.edu.cn

Kehua Guo∗
Central South University
guokehua@csu.edu.cn

Zheng Wu
Central South University
wuzhenghuse@gmail.com

Xiangyuan Zhu
Central South University
zhuxiangyuan@csu.edu.cn

Liwei Wang
Central South University
wang.liwei@csu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose ComGAN, a simple unsupervised generative model, which simultaneously generates realistic images and high semantic masks under an adversarial loss
and a binary regularization. In this paper, we first investigate two kinds of trivial
solutions in the compositional generation process, and demonstrate their source
is vanishing gradients on the mask. Then, we solve trivial solutions from the perspective of architecture. Furthermore, we redesign two fully unsupervised modules
based on ComGAN (DS-ComGAN), where the disentanglement module associates
the foreground, background and mask with three independent variables, and the
segmentation module learns object segmentation. Experimental results show that
(i) ComGAN’s network architecture effectively avoids trivial solutions without any
supervised information and regularization; (ii) DS-ComGAN achieves remarkable
results and outperforms existing semi-supervised and weakly supervised methods
by a large margin in both the image disentanglement and unsupervised segmentation tasks. It implies that the redesign of ComGAN is a possible direction for
future unsupervised work.1

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1] have been successful in realistic image generation [2, 3],
and recent work on GAN-based image composition [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] has shown that GANs identify
and disentangle a class of objects from the background. To direct that GANs learn the distinction
between foreground and background, this kind of work commonly requires the following assumption:
Assumption 1 (Image composition [10] ) An image x taken from the world is typically composed
of foreground xf and background xb , which can be decomposed by the following equation:
x = xf ⊙ xm + xb ⊙ (1 − xm ),

(1)

where xm is the mask, and the ⊙ denotes element wise multiplication operator.
It is notable that the Assumption 1 is mild and achieves significant outcomes in many areas. For
example, the models [11, 12] capture meaningful foreground segmentation masks via exactly coupling
different foregrounds and backgrounds. C3-GAN [13] proposes a scene decomposition-based method
to enforce the model to learn the features of foreground objects. Yang et al. [14, 15] detect moving
∗
1

Corresponding author
Code and data are available at https://github.com/Ruiding1/ComGAN

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

