Single Loop Gaussian Homotopy Method for
Non-convex Optimization
Hidenori Iwakiri⇤
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN AIP
iwakiri-hidenori2020@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Shinji Ito
NEC Corporation, RIKEN AIP
i-shinji@nec.com

Yuhang Wang⇤
The University of Tokyo
utyuuhikou@gmail.com

Akiko Takeda
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN AIP
takeda@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The Gaussian homotopy (GH) method is a popular approach to finding better
stationary points for non-convex optimization problems by gradually reducing a
parameter value t, which changes the problem to be solved from an almost convex
one to the original target one. Existing GH-based methods repeatedly call an
iterative optimization solver to find a stationary point every time t is updated,
which incurs high computational costs. We propose a novel single loop framework
for GH methods (SLGH) that updates the parameter t and the optimization decision
variables at the same. Computational complexity analysis is performed on the
SLGH algorithm under various situations: either a gradient or gradient-free oracle
of a GH function can be obtained for both deterministic and stochastic settings. The
convergence rate of SLGH with a tuned hyperparameter becomes consistent with
the convergence rate of gradient descent, even though the problem to be solved is
gradually changed due to t. In numerical experiments, our SLGH algorithms show
faster convergence than an existing double loop GH method while outperforming
gradient descent-based methods in terms of finding a better solution.

1

Introduction

Let us consider the following non-convex optimization problem:
minimize f (x),
x2Rd

(1)

where f : Rd ! R is a non-convex function. Let us also consider the following stochastic setting:
f (x) := E⇠ [f¯(x; ⇠)],

(2)

where ⇠ is the random variable following a probability distribution P from which i.i.d. samples can
be generated. Such optimization problems attract significant attention in machine learning, and at
the same time, the need for optimization algorithms that can find a stationary point with smaller
objective value is growing. For example, though it is often said that simple gradient methods can find
global minimizers for deep learning (parameter configurations with zero or near-zero training loss),
such beneficial behavior is not universal, as noted in [16]; the trainability of neural nets is highly
dependent on network architecture design choices, variable initialization, etc. There are also various
other highly non-convex optimization problems in machine learning (see e.g., [13]).
⇤

The first two authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

