ActionSense: A Multimodal Dataset
and Recording Framework for Human Activities
Using Wearable Sensors in a Kitchen Environment

Joseph DelPreto∗ , Chao Liu∗ , Yiyue Luo, Michael Foshey, Yunzhu Li,
Antonio Torralba, Wojciech Matusik, and Daniela Rus
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA 02139
{delpreto, chaoliu, yiyueluo, mfoshey, liyunzhu}@csail.mit.edu
{torralba, wojciech, rus}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces ActionSense, a multimodal dataset and recording framework with an emphasis on wearable sensing in a kitchen environment. It provides
rich, synchronized data streams along with ground truth data to facilitate learning
pipelines that could extract insights about how humans interact with the physical
world during activities of daily living, and help lead to more capable and collaborative robot assistants. The wearable sensing suite captures motion, force, and
attention information; it includes eye tracking with a first-person camera, forearm muscle activity sensors, a body-tracking system using 17 inertial sensors,
finger-tracking gloves, and custom tactile sensors on the hands that use a matrix
of conductive threads. This is coupled with activity labels and with externallycaptured data from multiple RGB cameras, a depth camera, and microphones. The
specific tasks recorded in ActionSense are designed to highlight lower-level
physical skills and higher-level scene reasoning or action planning. They include
simple object manipulations (e.g., stacking plates), dexterous actions (e.g., peeling
or cutting vegetables), and complex action sequences (e.g., setting a table or loading
a dishwasher). The resulting dataset and underlying experiment framework are
available at https://action-sense.csail.mit.edu. Preliminary networks and analyses
explore modality subsets and cross-modal correlations. ActionSense aims to
support applications including learning from demonstrations, dexterous robot control, cross-modal predictions, and fine-grained action segmentation. It could also
help inform the next generation of smart textiles that may one day unobtrusively
send rich data streams to in-home collaborative or autonomous robot assistants.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art machine learning for object detection and natural language processing speak to the
power of large, high-quality datasets. We seek to facilitate similar leaps forward in the fields of
robotic assistants and human action understanding. A key ingredient in training more capable and
collaborative robots will be new, high-quality human activity datasets. These must span multiple
sensing modalities well-suited to complex, unstandardized environments such as the human home.
Towards this end, we propose ActionSense, a new multimodal activity dataset and recording
framework with a particular emphasis on wearable sensors. ActionSense aims to provide detailed
recordings of humans performing everyday actions, enabling insights into manipulation, task planning,
and teaching robots by demonstration. It has the potential to advance in-home robotics as well as our
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

