Deterministic Langevin Monte Carlo with
Normalizing Flows for Bayesian Inference

Richard D.P. Grumitt
Department of Astronomy, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China
Biwei Dai
Physics Department, University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Uroš Seljak
Physics Department, University of California
and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Abstract
We propose a general purpose Bayesian inference algorithm for expensive likelihoods, replacing the stochastic term in the Langevin equation with a deterministic
density gradient term. The particle density is evaluated from the current particle
positions using a Normalizing Flow (NF), which is differentiable and has good
generalization properties in high dimensions. We take advantage of NF preconditioning and NF based Metropolis-Hastings updates for a faster convergence. We
show on various examples that the method is competitive against state of the art
sampling methods.

1

Introduction

The task of Bayesian inference is to determine the posterior p(x|y) of d parameters x given the
likelihood p(y|x) of some data y and given the prior p(x), such that the posterior is given by
Bayes theorem as p(x|y) = p(y|x)p(x)/p(y). While we have access to the joint p(x, y) =
p(y|x)p(x), the normalization p(y) is generally unknown. Bayesian posterior inference can be
related to the general task of finding a stationary distribution in an external potential by defining
U (x) = − ln p(y|x) − ln p(x) = L(x) + P(x), where L(x) is the negative log likelihood and P(x)
the negative log prior. A common approach to this task is to use a particle based Langevin equation,
which solves a stochastic differential equation (SDE) for the particle evolution (Langevin Monte
Carlo, LMC). A related method is Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [Duane et al., 1987], which
uses particle positions and velocities to evolve the particles. In these cases the long time equilibrium
solution is that of the target distribution, the posterior p(x|y). LMC and HMC are two of the most
popular gradient based implementations of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), but for finite step
size they require Metropolis-Hastings (MH) adjustment to become unbiased. In this case they have
theoretical convergence guarantees to the stationary distribution (under mild ergodicity assumptions),
but suffer from chain element correlations, which may render the convergence to be very slow.
In this paper we propose a Deterministic Langevin Monte Carlo (DLMC) with Normalizing Flows
(NF). It uses a random initialization from the prior, but the subsequent evolution is deterministic,
replacing the stochastic velocity term in the Langevin equation with a deterministic density gradient
term. To avoid the need to solve the Fokker-Planck equation directly we evaluate the density
defined by the current particle positions via an NF, and then use its gradient to update the first order
particle Langevin dynamics. NFs are differentiable and have good generalization properties in high
dimensions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

