Empirical Phase Diagram for Three-layer Neural
Networks with Inﬁnite Width
Hanxu Zhou1 , Qixuan Zhou1 , Zhenyuan Jin1 , Tao Luo1,2 , Yaoyu Zhang1,3 , Zhi-Qin John Xu1∗,
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Institute of Natural Sciences, MOE-LSC
and Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
CMA-Shanghai, Shanghai Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Technology

Abstract
Substantial work indicates that the dynamics of neural networks (NNs) is closely
related to their initialization of parameters. Inspired by the phase diagram for
two-layer ReLU NNs with inﬁnite width (Luo et al., 2021), we make a step towards drawing a phase diagram for three-layer ReLU NNs with inﬁnite width.
First, we derive a normalized gradient ﬂow for three-layer ReLU NNs and obtain two key independent quantities to distinguish different dynamical regimes for
common initialization methods. With carefully designed experiments and a large
computation cost, for both synthetic datasets and real datasets, we ﬁnd that the
dynamics of each layer also could be divided into a linear regime and a condensed
regime, separated by a critical regime. The criteria is the relative change of input
weights (the input weight of a hidden neuron consists of the weight from its input
layer to the hidden neuron and its bias term) as the width approaches inﬁnity during the training, which tends to 0, +∞ and O(1), respectively. In addition, we
also demonstrate that different layers can lie in different dynamical regimes in a
training process within a deep NN. In the condensed regime, we also observe the
condensation of weights in isolated orientations with low complexity. Through
experiments under three-layer condition, our phase diagram suggests a complicated dynamical regimes consisting of three possible regimes, together with their
mixture, for deep NNs and provides a guidance for studying deep NNs in different initialization regimes, which reveals the possibility of completely different
dynamics emerging within a deep NN for its different layers.

1

Introduction

As neural networks (NNs) have been employed to extensive practical and scientiﬁc problems, such
as computer vision, natural language processing, and automatic driving, etc. Studying the rationale
behind them can help us comprehend the principles behind NNs and better use NNs. For example,
the initialization of neural network parameters plays an important role in the training dynamics and
generalization of NN ﬁtting.
Several types of initialization schemes are often used in practical trainings, such as He initialization
(He et al., 2015), LeCun initialization (LeCun et al., 2012), Xavier initialization (Glorot and Bengio,
2010), etc. Theoretical study further explores how initialization affects the training dynamics of NNs.
For example, the NTK scaling (Jacot et al., 2018; Chizat and Bach, 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2020) leads to a training where parameters stay at a small neighborhood of the initialization,
therefore, the NN after training can be well approximated by the ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion at the
∗

Corresponding author: xuzhiqin@sjtu.edu.cn.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

