The Effects of Regularization and Data Augmentation
are Class Dependent

Randall Balestriero
Meta AI Research, FAIR
NYC, USA
rbalestriero@meta.com

Leon Bottou
Meta AI Research, FAIR
NYC, USA
leonb@meta.com

Yann LeCun
Meta AI Research, FAIR, NYU
NYC, USA
ylecun@meta.com

Abstract
Regularization is a fundamental technique to improve a model’s generalization performances by limiting its complexity. Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which tend
to overfit their training data, heavily rely on regularizers such as Data-Augmentation
(DA) or weight-decay with hyper-parameters found from structural risk minimization, i.e., cross-validation. In this study, we demonstrate that the optimal regularization’s hyper-parameters found from cross-validation over all classes leads to
disastrous model performances on a minority of classes. For example, a resnet50
trained on Imagenet sees its “barn spider” test accuracy falls from 68% to 46% only
by introducing random crop DA during training. Even more surprising, such unfair
impact of regularization also appears when introducing uninformative regularizers
such as weight decay or dropout. Those results demonstrate that our search for ever
increasing generalization performance —averaged over all classes and samples—
has left us with models and regularizers that silently sacrifice performances on
some classes. This scenario can become dangerous when deploying a model on
downstream tasks e.g. an Imagenet pre-trained resnet50 deployed on INaturalist
sees its performances fall from 70% to 30% on class #8889 when introducing random crop DA during the Imagenet pre-training phase. Those results demonstrate
that finding a correct measure of a model’s complexity without class-dependent
preference remains an open research question.

1

Introduction

Machine learning and deep learning aim at learning systems to solve as accurately as possible a
given task at hand [LeCun et al., 1998, Bishop and Nasrabadi, 2006, Jordan and Mitchell, 2015].
This process often takes the form of (i) being given a finite dataset, a (differentiable) loss function,
and a performance measure, (ii) splitting the dataset into train/valid/test sets to optimizing the
system’s parameters e.g. from gradient updates of the loss on the train set while cross-validating
hyper-parameters using the valid set, and (iii) assessing the system’s performance on the test set. As
the training set is finite, and the optimal design of the system is unknown, it is common to employ
regularization during the optimization phase to reduce over-fitting [Tikhonov, 1943, Tihonov, 1963]
i.e. to decrease the system’s performance gap between train set and test set samples [Simard et al.,
1991, Chapelle et al., 2000, Bottou, 2012, Neyshabur et al., 2014]. Central to our study is the fact that
hyper-parameter selection is done via cross-validation by maximizing the valid set performance with
ad-hoc statistics e.g. the average accuracy over all samples for classes in classification tasks.
Cross-validation commonly involves many different types of regularization along with their “strengths”
[Goodfellow et al., 2016, He et al., 2021]. Most variants of regularization take one of two forms:
Data-Augmentation (DA) and weight-decay. DA is a data-driven and informed regularization strategy
that artificially increase the number of training samples [Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019]. As
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

