The Dollar Street Dataset: Images Representing the
Geographic and Socioeconomic Diversity of the World

William A. Gaviria Rojas∗
Coactive AI

Sudnya Diamos∗
Coactive AI

Vijay Janapa Reddi
Harvard University

Keertan Ranjan Kini
Coactive AI

David Kanter
MLCommons

Cody Coleman
Coactive AI

Abstract
It is crucial that image datasets for computer vision are representative and contain
accurate demographic information to ensure their robustness and fairness, especially
for smaller subpopulations. To address this issue, we present Dollar Street—a
supervised dataset that contains 38,479 images of everyday household items from
homes around the world. This dataset was manually curated and fully labeled 2 ,
including tags for objects (e.g. “toilet,” “toothbrush,” “stove”) and demographic
data such as region, country and home monthly income. This dataset includes
images from homes with no internet access and incomes as low as $26.99 per
month, visually capturing valuable socioeconomic diversity of traditionally underrepresented populations. All images and data are licensed under CC-BY, permitting
their use in academic and commercial work. Moreover, we show that this dataset
can improve the performance of classification tasks for images of household items
from lower income homes, addressing a critical need for datasets that combat bias.

1

Introduction

Large image datasets built from publicly available web data have made it possible to train deep
neural networks and realize powerful computer vision applications such as facial recognition [15],
object detection [26], optical character recognition [33] and image segmentation [13]. Seminal image
datasets, such as ImageNet [9] and Open Images [21] are commonly used for training foundation
models [6] that enable powerful downstream applications via transfer learning [37]. Given the
proliferation of these models in both industry and government, it is crucial that image datasets are
representative and contain accurate demographic information to ensure their robustness and fairness,
especially for smaller low-resource subpopulations where sometimes datasets do not even exist [29].
Work to date has highlighted the challenges in mitigating bias within these datasets. For example,
in 2018, researchers demonstrated that commercial gender classification systems misclassified
darker-skinned females at substantially higher error rates than lighter males, likely due to these
facial recognition algorithms being trained on image datasets composed primarily of lighter-skinned
subjects [7]. In other work, researchers assessed ImageNet and Open Images for geo-diversity. They
observed that both suffer from amerocentric and eurocentric representation bias that impacts the
performance of classification tasks on images from other regions [31, 23]. Beyond implicit bias when
sourcing images from the web, existing image datasets also suffer from machine-generated labels
which are prone to errors and similar biases [25], and limited licensing further prohibits the legal use
of these datasets outside of research and academic institutions. Additionally, crucial socioeconomic
∗
2

Equal contribution. The dataset can be downloaded at https://mlcommons.org/en/dollar-street
Thanks to Anna Rosling Rönnlund and the Gapminder team.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

