Global Optimal K-Medoids Clustering of One Million
Samples

Jiayang Ren† , Kaixun Hua† , Yankai Cao∗
University of British Columbia

Abstract
We study the deterministic global optimization of the K-Medoids clustering problem. This work proposes a branch and bound (BB) scheme, in which a tailored
Lagrangian relaxation method proposed in the 1970s is used to provide a lower
bound at each BB node. The lower bounding method already guarantees the maximum gap at the root node. A closed-form solution to the lower bound can be
derived analytically without explicitly solving any optimization problems, and
its computation can be easily parallelized. Moreover, with this lower bounding
method, finite convergence to the global optimal solution can be guaranteed by
branching only on the regions of medoids. We also present several tailored bound
tightening techniques to reduce the search space and computational cost. Extensive computational studies on 28 machine learning datasets demonstrate that our
algorithm can provide a provable global optimal solution with an optimality gap
of 0.1% within 4 hours on datasets with up to one million samples. Besides, our
algorithm can obtain better or equal objective values than the heuristic method. A
theoretical proof of global convergence for our algorithm is also presented.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we concentrate on the K-Medoids clustering problem: given a dataset, K-Medoids aims
to select K samples from the dataset as cluster medoids that minimize the sum of dissimilarities
from other samples to the closet medoids. Here, selecting from existing samples as medoids is called
the “medoids on samples” constraint. K-Medoids is similar to the K-Means problem except for the
arbitrary dissimilarity measurements and the “medoids on samples” constraint. Hence, K-Medoids
generally has better interpretability than K-Means [1]. K-Medoids problems are generally NP-hard to
solve exactly. So there are many heuristic methods, such as PAM [2], CLARA [3], K-means-like
method [4], and Fast-PAM [5]. However, none of them can guarantee reaching the global minimum.
To solve the K-Medoids problem deterministically, back in the 1970s, Cornuejols et al. [6] proposed a
Lagrangian relaxation method for obtaining a lower bound of the optimal value, which can guarantee
a relative optimal gap smaller than 1/e. Interestingly, to the best of our knowledge, this is the only
application in which the Lagrangian duality gap can be guaranteed within a certain threshold. Several
improvements to this method are proposed in the literature. One common direction is improving
the heuristic process of Lagrangian dual problems. [7] constructed a semi-Lagrangian relaxation,
then accelerated the heuristic process by a cutting plane method. It was further improved in [8] by
fixing variables in the heuristic process. Their works can deal with medium-scale datasets (e.g., 3000
samples). Another common direction is column generation [9, 10].
One limitation of these Lagrangian relaxation based methods is that there is no guarantee of convergence to the global optimal solution, due to the existence of duality gap. To address the global
∗

corresponding author: yankai.cao@ubc.ca.
Jiayang Ren (rjy12307@mail.ubc.ca) and Kaixun Hua (kaixun.hua@ubc.ca) contributed equally.

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

