A Communication-efficient Algorithm with Linear
Convergence for Federated Minimax Learning

Zhenyu Sun
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
zhenyusun2026@u.northwestern.edu
Ermin Wei
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
ermin.wei@northwestern.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study a large-scale multi-agent minimax optimization problem,
which models many interesting applications in statistical learning and game theory,
including Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). The overall objective is a
sum of agents’ private local objective functions. We focus on the federated setting,
where agents can perform local computation and communicate with a central server.
Most existing federated minimax algorithms either require communication per
iteration or lack performance guarantees with the exception of Local Stochastic
Gradient Descent Ascent (SGDA), a multiple-local-update descent ascent algorithm
which guarantees convergence under a diminishing stepsize. By analyzing Local
SGDA under the ideal condition of no gradient noise, we show that generally
it cannot guarantee exact convergence with constant stepsizes and thus suffers
from slow rates of convergence. To tackle this issue, we propose FedGDA-GT,
an improved Federated (Fed) Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA) method based on
Gradient Tracking (GT). When local objectives are Lipschitz smooth and stronglyconvex-strongly-concave, we prove that FedGDA-GT converges linearly with a
constant stepsize to global ϵ-approximation solution with O(log(1/ϵ)) rounds of
communication, which matches the time complexity of centralized GDA method.
Then, we analyze the general distributed minimax problem from a statistical
aspect, where the overall objective approximates a true population minimax risk
by empirical samples. We provide generalization bounds for learning with this
objective through Rademacher complexity analysis. Finally, we numerically show
that FedGDA-GT outperforms Local SGDA.

1

Introduction

In recent years, minimax learning theory has achieved significant success in attaching relevance to
many modern machine learning and statistical learning frameworks, including Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [1–3], reinforcement learning [4], adversarial training [5, 6], robust estimation
and optimization [7–11], and domain adaptation [12, 13]. Generally, a minimax learning problem is
modeled as a game between two players with opposite goal, i.e., one minimizes the objective while
the other maximizes it.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

