Staggered Rollout Designs Enable Causal Inference
Under Interference Without Network Knowledge

Mayleen Cortez-Rodriguez
Center for Applied Math
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
mec383@cornell.edu

Matthew Eichhorn
Center for Applied Math
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
meichhorn@cornell.edu

Christina Lee Yu
Operations Research and Information Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
cleeyu@cornell.edu

Abstract
Randomized experiments are widely used to estimate causal effects across many
domains. However, classical causal inference approaches rely on independence
assumptions that are violated by network interference, when the treatment of one
individual influences the outcomes of others. All existing approaches require
at least approximate knowledge of the network, which may be unavailable or
costly to collect. We consider the task of estimating the total treatment effect
(TTE), the average difference between the outcomes when the whole population is
treated versus when the whole population is untreated. By leveraging a staggered
rollout design, in which treatment is incrementally given to random subsets of
individuals, we derive unbiased estimators for TTE that do not rely on any prior
structural knowledge of the network, as long as the network interference effects
are constrained to low-degree interactions among neighbors of an individual. We
derive bounds on the variance of the estimators, and we show in experiments that
our estimator performs well against baselines on simulated data. Central to our
theoretical contribution is a connection between staggered rollout observations and
polynomial extrapolation.

1

Introduction

A cornerstone of much of the classic causal inference literature is the stable unit treatment value
assumption (SUTVA), which posits that an individual’s potential outcome is a function only of their
assigned treatment; there are no spillover effects due to the treatment of others. Such an assumption
fails to account for the ways in which individuals interact in many real-world experimental settings.
For instance, new features rolled out on social networking sites such as LinkedIn may alter these
users’ behaviors, which in turn affect how their connections (who do not have access to the feature)
interact with the platform. Individuals receiving a vaccine against an infectious disease may reduce
the transmission probability of the disease to others they interact with. Implementing a different
pricing policy for a subset of individuals in an online marketplace such as Airbnb or a platform such
as Uber could impact the experience of other users, as they compete for the same resources or same
customers. Public health measures instituted in one city can limit travel to nearby communities,
indirectly affecting their health outcomes or transit related outcomes. These examples illustrate how
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

