Depth is More Powerful than Width with Prediction
Concatenation in Deep Forest

Shen-Huan Lyu, Yi-Xiao He, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China.
{lvsh,heyx,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Random Forest (RF) is an ensemble learning algorithm proposed by Breiman [1]
that constructs a large number of randomized decision trees individually and aggregates their predictions by naive averaging. Zhou and Feng [2] further propose Deep
Forest (DF) algorithm with multi-layer feature transformation, which significantly
outperforms random forest in various application fields. The prediction concatenation (PreConc) operation is crucial for the multi-layer feature transformation
in deep forest, though little has been known about its theoretical property. In
this paper, we analyze the influence of Preconc on the consistency of deep forest.
Especially when the individual tree is inconsistent (as in practice, the individual
tree is often set to be fully grown, i.e., there is only one sample at each leaf node),
we find that the convergence rate of two-layer DF w.r.t. the number of trees M can
reach O(1/M 2 ) under some mild conditions, while the convergence rate of RF is
O(1/M ). Therefore, with the help of PreConc, DF with deeper layer will be more
powerful than the shallower layer. Experiments confirm theoretical advantages.

1

Introduction

Random forest (RF) [1] is a state-of-art classification and regression algorithm that constructs a
number of randomized individual decision trees during a parallel training phase and predicts by
naive averaging the results. Recently, Zhou and Feng [2] propose Deep Forest (DF) algorithm with
multi-layer feature transformation to investigate the possibility of tree-based representation learning.
Benefiting from the multi-layer feature transformation in the cascade structure with prediction
concatenation (PreConc), DF outperforms various tree-based algorithms [1, 3–5] in empirical study,
and have been involved in real applications such as medicine [6], computer vision [7], remote sensing
[8], financial fraud detection [9], etc. Numerous variants have been extended to various tasks and
meet with remarkable success in [10–13]. There are also variants [14, 15] aiming at improving
performance and reducing computational cost.
Empirical successes have attracted attention to the theoretical analysis of DF. Since its PreConc
operation transforms features layer by layer, and each layer consists of complex non-parametric
random forest estimators, analyzing the impact of the new features extracted from these estimators
on generalization performance is important. To start theoretical analysis on DF, Lyu et al. [16]
prove a margin-based generalization bound for additive new features in DF. Then, Pang et al. [14]
prove an upper bound on the sample efficiency and inspire an efficient improvement for reducing
computational cost of DF. In the direction of consistency, Arnould et al. [17] provide tight lower and
upper bounds on the excess risk of a shallow centered random tree network, which leverages the new
features to improve the performance of a single centered random tree. Assuming that the original and
new features are separated and independently used in two stages, Lyu et al. [18] prove that the new
features based on prediction are easy to cause overfitting risk, and propose to use the interaction of
decision rules to alleviate it.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

