Deep Generative Model for Periodic Graphs

Shiyu Wang
Emory University
shiyu.wang@emory.edu

Xiaojie Guo
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
xguo7@gmu.edu
Liang Zhao†
Emory University
liang.zhao@emory.edu

Abstract
Periodic graphs are graphs consisting of repetitive local structures, such as crystal
nets and polygon mesh. Their generative modeling has great potential in real-world
applications such as material design and graphics synthesis. Classical models either
rely on domain-specific predefined generation principles (e.g., in crystal net design),
or follow geometry-based prescribed rules. Recently, deep generative models have
shown great promise in automatically generating general graphs. However, their
advancement into periodic graphs has not been well explored due to several key
challenges in 1) maintaining graph periodicity; 2) disentangling local and global
patterns; and 3) efficiency in learning repetitive patterns. To address them, this
paper proposes Periodical-Graph Disentangled Variational Auto-encoder (PGDVAE), a new deep generative model for periodic graphs that can automatically learn,
disentangle, and generate local and global graph patterns. Specifically, we develop
a new periodic graph encoder consisting of global-pattern encoder and local-pattern
encoder that ensures to disentangle the representation into global and local semantics. We then propose a new periodic graph decoder consisting of local structure
decoder, neighborhood decoder, and global structure decoder, as well as the assembler of their outputs that guarantees periodicity. Moreover, we design a new model
learning objective that helps ensure the invariance of local-semantic representations
for the graphs with the same local structure. Comprehensive experimental evaluations have been conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
The code and appendix is available in the Supplemental Material. The code of
PGD-VAE is available at https://github.com/shi-yu-wang/PGD-VAE.

1

Introduction

Graphs is a ubiquitous data structure that describes
objects and their relations. As a special type of
graphs, periodic graphs are graphs that consist of
repetitive local structures. They naturally characterize many real-world applications ranging from crystal nets containing repetitive unit cells to polygon
mesh data containing repetitive grids (Figure 1) [51].
Hence, understanding, modeling, and generating periodic graphs have great potential in real-world applications such as material design and graphics synthesis.
Different from general graphs, modeling generative
process of periodic graphs requires to ensure the peri-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Examples of periodic graphs where
basic units are highlighed: (a) structure of
tridymite; (b) structure of graphene and (c)
triangular grids [39]

† Corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

