UniGAN: Reducing Mode Collapse in GANs using a
Uniform Generator
Ziqi Pan, Li Niu∗, Liqing Zhang∗
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{panziqi_ai, ustcnewly}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the significant progress that has been made in the training of Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs), the mode collapse problem remains a major challenge in training GANs, which refers to a lack of diversity in generative samples. In
this paper, we propose a new type of generative diversity named uniform diversity,
which relates to a newly proposed type of mode collapse named u-mode collapse
where the generative samples distribute nonuniformly over the data manifold. From
a geometric perspective, we show that the uniform diversity is closely related with
the generator uniformity property, and the maximum uniform diversity is achieved
if the generator is uniform. To learn a uniform generator, we propose UniGAN, a
generative framework with a Normalizing Flow based generator and a simple yet
sample efficient generator uniformity regularization, which can be easily adapted
to any other generative framework. A new type of diversity metric named udiv is
also proposed to estimate the uniform diversity given a set of generative samples in
practice. Experimental results verify the effectiveness of our UniGAN in learning
a uniform generator and improving uniform diversity.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks [1] (GANs) are a technique for unsupervised learning generative
models to capture an unknown data distribution. Given training samples, two modules, a generator
and a discriminator, contest with each other in form of a zero-sum game, where the generator aims to
produce realistic samples and the discriminator aims to distinguish generative samples from real data.
Though originally proposed as a generative model for unsupervised learning, GANs have also been
widely used in a variety of learning scenarios [2, 3, 4] due to not only their ability to learning highly
structured probability distributions but also their theoretical implications [1, 5, 6].
GANs training is notoriously difficult and is very sensitive to almost every aspect of its setup due to
the dynamic training paradigm [7, 8]. Despite significant progress [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] have been
made in the training of GANs, the mode collapse [15] problem remains a major challenge in training
GANs, which refers to a lack of diversity in generative samples [15]. Existing methods reduce mode
collapse by modifying model architectures [3, 16, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20], proposing novel optimization
algorithms [21, 22, 23, 24, 25] and regularizations [26, 27, 28, 29], etc. Several works also provide
empirical explanations or formal analysis for mode collapse, including catastrophic forgetting [30] of
the discriminator, sample weighting [31], and binary hypothesis testing [15].
In this paper, we adopt the manifold hypothesis [32, 33] to formalize our analysis and develop our
framework named UniGAN for reducing mode collapse. The manifold hypothesis assumes that high
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

