Outlier Suppression: Pushing the Limit of Low-bit
Transformer Language Models

Xiuying Wei1, 2 , Yunchen Zhang2, 4 , Xiangguo Zhang2 , Ruihao Gong1, 2 ,
Shanghang Zhang3 , Qi Zhang2 , Fengwei Yu2 , Xianglong Liu1∗
1
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
2
SenseTime Research, 3 Peking University
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{weixiuying, zhangyunchen, zhangxiangguo, gongruihao}@sensetime.com
shanghang@pku.edu.cn, xlliu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Transformer architecture has become the fundamental element of the widespread
natural language processing (NLP) models. With the trends of large NLP models,
the increasing memory and computation costs hinder their efficient deployment
on resource-limited devices. Therefore, transformer quantization attracts wide
research interest. Recent work recognizes that structured outliers are the critical bottleneck for quantization performance. However, their proposed methods
increase the computation overhead and still leave the outliers there. To fundamentally address this problem, this paper delves into the inherent inducement
and importance of the outliers. We discover that γ in LayerNorm (LN) acts as
a sinful amplifier for the outliers, and the importance of outliers varies greatly
where some outliers provided by a few tokens cover a large area but can be clipped
sharply without negative impacts. Motivated by these findings, we propose an
outlier suppression framework including two components: Gamma Migration
and Token-Wise Clipping. The Gamma Migration migrates the outlier amplifier
to subsequent modules in an equivalent transformation, contributing to a more
quantization-friendly model without any extra burden. The Token-Wise Clipping
takes advantage of the large variance of token range and designs a token-wise
coarse-to-fine pipeline, obtaining a clipping range with minimal final quantization loss in an efficient way. This framework effectively suppresses the outliers
and can be used in a plug-and-play mode. Extensive experiments prove that our
framework surpasses the existing works and, for the first time, pushes the 6-bit posttraining BERT quantization to the full-precision (FP) level. Our code is available
at https://github.com/wimh966/outlier_suppression.

1

Introduction

Transformer [1] has been one of the most common architectures in natural language processing along
with lots of popular self-supervised models, such as BERT [2], RoBERTa [3], XLNet [4] and BART
[5]. While these pre-trained models have demonstrated a significant superiority in performance, the
memory and computation overheads have been a popular concern, particularly in the real development.
Therefore, model compression [6, 7, 8, 9] has attracted much attention from both academia and
industry. Among them, quantization [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20], working in the
low-precision arithmetic fashion, is one of the key approaches to compress large models and fit them
into the lightweight devices.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

