Phase transitions in when feedback is useful
Lokesh Boominathan
Department of ECE
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
lokesh.boominathan@rice.edu

Xaq Pitkow
Dept. of Neuroscience, Dept. of ECE
Baylor College of Medicine, Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
xaq@rice.edu

Abstract
Sensory observations about the world are invariably ambiguous. Inference about
the world’s latent variables is thus an important computation for the brain. However, computational constraints limit the performance of these computations. These
constraints include energetic costs for neural activity and noise on every channel.
Efficient coding is one prominent theory that describes how such limited resources
can best be used. In one incarnation, this leads to a theory of predictive coding,
where predictions are subtracted from signals, reducing the cost of sending something that is already known. This theory does not, however, account for the costs or
noise associated with those predictions. Here we offer a theory that accounts for
both feedforward and feedback costs, and noise in all computations. We formulate
this inference problem as message-passing on a graph whereby feedback serves as
an internal control signal aiming to maximize how well an inference tracks a target
state while minimizing the costs of computation. We apply this novel formulation
of inference as control to the canonical problem of inferring the hidden scalar
state of a linear dynamical system with Gaussian variability. The best solution
depends on architectural constraints, such as Dale’s law, the ubiquitous law that
each neuron makes solely excitatory or inhibitory postsynaptic connections. This
biological structure can create asymmetric costs for feedforward and feedback
channels. Under such conditions, our theory predicts the gain of optimal predictive
feedback and how it is incorporated into the inference computation. We show
that there is a non-monotonic dependence of optimal feedback gain as a function
of both the computational parameters and the world dynamics, leading to phase
transitions in whether feedback provides any utility in optimal inference under
computational constraints.

1

Introduction

A critical computation for the brain is to infer the world’s latent variables from ambiguous observations. Computational constraints, including metabolic costs and noisy signals, limit the performance
of these inferences. Efficient coding [1] is a prominent theory that describes how limited resources
can be used best. In one incarnation, this leads to the theory of predictive coding [2], which posits
that predictions are sent along feedback channels to be subtracted from signals at lower cortical areas;
only the difference returns to the higher areas along feedforward channels, reducing the metabolic or
informational cost of sending redundant signals already known to the higher areas. This theory does
not, however, account for the additional costs or noise associated with the feedback. Depending on
the costs for sending predictions and the reliability of signals encoding those predictions, we expect
different optimal strategies to perform computationally constrained inferences. For example, if the
feedback channel is too unreliable and expensive, we hypothesize that it is not worth sending any
predictions at all. Here we offer a more general theory of inference that accounts for the costs and
reliabilities of the feedback and feedforward channels, and the relative importance of good inferences
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

