P2P: Tuning Pre-trained Image Models for Point
Cloud Analysis with Point-to-Pixel Prompting

Ziyi Wang∗ Xumin Yu∗ Yongming Rao∗
Jie Zhou Jiwen Lu†
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
{wziyi22, yuxm20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
raoyongming95@gmail.com;
{lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Nowadays, pre-training big models on large-scale datasets has become a crucial
topic in deep learning. The pre-trained models with high representation ability and
transferability achieve a great success and dominate many downstream tasks in
natural language processing and 2D vision. However, it is non-trivial to promote
such a pretraining-tuning paradigm to the 3D vision, given the limited training
data that are relatively inconvenient to collect. In this paper, we provide a new
perspective of leveraging pre-trained 2D knowledge in 3D domain to tackle this
problem, tuning pre-trained image models with the novel Point-to-Pixel prompting for point cloud analysis at a minor parameter cost. Following the principle
of prompting engineering, we transform point clouds into colorful images with
geometry-preserved projection and geometry-aware coloring to adapt to pre-trained
image models, whose weights are kept frozen during the end-to-end optimization
of point cloud analysis tasks. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate
that cooperating with our proposed Point-to-Pixel Prompting, better pre-trained
image model will lead to consistently better performance in 3D vision. Enjoying prosperous development from image pre-training field, our method attains
89.3% accuracy on the hardest setting of ScanObjectNN, surpassing conventional
point cloud models with much fewer trainable parameters. Our framework also
exhibits very competitive performance on ModelNet classification and ShapeNet
Part Segmentation. Code is available at https://github.com/wangzy22/P2P.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of deep learning and computing hardware, neural networks are experiencing explosive growth in model size and representation capacity. Nowadays, pre-training big models
has become an important research topic in both natural language processing [14, 52, 4, 60] and computer vision [51, 53, 20, 57], and has achieved a great success when transferred to downstream tasks
with fine-tuning [21, 10, 9, 2, 20] or prompt-tuning [51, 45, 67, 59, 29, 35] strategies. Fine-tuning is
a traditional tuning strategy that requires a large amount of trainable parameters, while prompt tuning
is a recently emerged lightweight scheme to convert downstream tasks into the similar form as the
pre-training task. However, such prevalence of the pretraining-tuning pipeline cannot be obtained
without the support of numerous training data in pre-training stage. Language pre-training leading
work Megatron-Turing NLG [60] with 530 billion parameters is trained on 15 datasets containing
over 338 billion tokens, while Vision MoE [57] with 14.7 billion parameters is trained on JFT-300M
dataset [62] including 305 million training images.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

