Flare7K: A Phenomenological Nighttime Flare
Removal Dataset
Yuekun Dai Chongyi Li Shangchen Zhou Ruicheng Feng
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Chen Change Loy

{YDAI005, chongyi.li, s200094, ruicheng002, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
https://Nukaliad.github.io/projects/Flare7K

Abstract
Artificial lights commonly leave strong lens flare artifacts on images captured
at night. Nighttime flare not only affects the visual quality but also degrades
the performance of vision algorithms. Existing flare removal methods mainly
focus on removing daytime flares and fail in nighttime. Nighttime flare removal
is challenging because of the unique luminance and spectrum of artificial lights
and the diverse patterns and image degradation of the flares captured at night.
The scarcity of nighttime flare removal datasets limits the research on this crucial
task. In this paper, we introduce, Flare7K, the first nighttime flare removal dataset,
which is generated based on the observation and statistics of real-world nighttime
lens flares. It offers 5,000 scattering and 2,000 reflective flare images, consisting
of 25 types of scattering flares and 10 types of reflective flares. The 7,000 flare
patterns can be randomly added to flare-free images, forming the flare-corrupted
and flare-free image pairs. With the paired data, we can train deep models to restore
flare-corrupted images taken in the real world effectively. Apart from abundant
flare patterns, we also provide rich annotations, including the labeling of light
source, glare with shimmer, reflective flare, and streak, which are commonly absent
from existing datasets. Hence, our dataset can facilitate new work in nighttime flare
removal and more fine-grained analysis of flare patterns. Extensive experiments
show that our dataset adds diversity to existing flare datasets and pushes the frontier
of nighttime flare removal.

1

Introduction

Lens flare is an optical phenomenon in which intense light is scattered or reflected in an optical
system. It leaves a radial-shaped bright area and light spots on the captured photo. The effects of
flares are more severe in the nighttime environment due to multiple artificial lights. This phenomenon
may lead to low contrast and suppressed details around the light sources, degrading the image’s visual
quality and the performance of vision algorithms. Taking nighttime driving with stereo cameras as an
example, the scattering flare may be misestimated as close obstacles by stereo matching algorithms.
For aerial object tracking, the bright spots introduced by the lens flare may mislead the algorithm
to track flares rather than flying objects [15]. To avoid these potential risks raised by lens flare, the
mainstream approach is to optimize the hardware design, such as using specially-designed lens group
or applying anti-reflective coating. Although professional lenses can mitigate the flare effect, they
cannot solve the inherent problem of flare. Besides, fingerprints, dust, and wear in front of the lens
often bring unexpected flare that cannot be alleviated by hardware, especially in smartphone and
monitor imaging. A flare removal algorithm is thus highly desired.
Typical flares can be broadly categorized into three major types: scattering flare, reflective flare, and
lens orb (a.k.a. backscatter) [27, 11, 9]. We distinguish these three flares according to their response
to the light source movement. Scattering flares are caused by dust and scratches on the lens. This
type of flare will produce radial line patterns. When moving the lens or the light source, the scattering
will always wrap around the light source and keep the same pattern on the captured photo. Reflective
flares are caused by multiple reflections between air-glass interfaces in a lens system [9]. Their
patterns are determined by the shape of the aperture and lens structure. Such patterns often manifest
as a series of circles and polygons on the captured photo [10]. Different from scattering flares, when
moving the camera, reflective flares will move in the direction opposite to the light source. Lens orbs
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

