Neural Basis Models for Interpretability
Filip Radenovic
Meta AI

Abhimanyu Dubey
Meta AI

Dhruv Mahajan
Meta AI

Abstract
Due to the widespread use of complex machine learning models in real-world
applications, it is becoming critical to explain model predictions. However, these
models are typically black-box deep neural networks, explained post-hoc via methods with known faithfulness limitations. Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) are
an inherently interpretable class of models that address this limitation by learning a
non-linear shape function for each feature separately, followed by a linear model
on top. However, these models are typically difficult to train, require numerous
parameters, and are difficult to scale. We propose an entirely new subfamily of
GAMs that utilizes basis decomposition of shape functions. A small number of basis functions are shared among all features, and are learned jointly for a given task,
thus making our model scale much better to large-scale data with high-dimensional
features, especially when features are sparse. We propose an architecture denoted
as the Neural Basis Model (NBM) which uses a single neural network to learn
these bases. On a variety of tabular and image datasets, we demonstrate that for
interpretable machine learning, NBMs are the state-of-the-art in accuracy, model
size, and, throughput and can easily model all higher-order feature interactions.
Source code is available at github.com/facebookresearch/nbm-spam.

1

Introduction

Real world machine learning models [14, 61] are mostly used as a black-box, i.e., it is very difficult
to analyze and understand why a specific prediction was made. In order to explain such black-box
models, an instance-specific local interpretable model is often learned [38, 50]. However, these
approaches tend to be unstable and unfaithful [1, 52], i.e., they often misrepresent the model’s
behavior. On the other hand, a family of models known as generalized additive models (GAMs) [24]
have been used for decades as an inherently interpretable alternative to black-box models.
GAMs learn a shape function for each feature independently, and outputs of such functions are added
(with a bias term) to obtain the final model prediction. All models from this family share an important
trait: the impact of any specific feature on the prediction does not rely on the other features, and can
be understood by visualizing its corresponding shape function. Original GAMs [24] were fitted using
splines, which have since been improved in explainable boosting machines (EBMs) [36] by fitting
boosted decision trees, or very recently in neural additive models (NAMs) [2] by fitting deep neural
networks (DNNs). A drawback for all the aforementioned approaches is that for each shape function,
they require either millions of decision trees [36], or a DNN with tens of thousands of parameters [2],
making them prohibitively expensive for learning datasets with a large number of features.
In this work, we propose a novel subfamily of GAMs, which, unlike previous approaches, learn
to decompose each feature’s shape function into a small set of basis functions shared across all
features. The shape functions are fitted as the feature-specific linear combination of these shared
bases, see Figure 1. At an abstract level, our approach is motivated by signal decomposition using
traditional basis functions like the Fourier basis [9] or Legendre polynomials [45], where a weighted
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

