Structural Pruning via Latency-Saliency Knapsack
Maying Shen⇤, Hongxu Yin⇤, Pavlo Molchanov, Lei Mao, Jianna Liu, Jose M. Alvarez
NVIDIA
{mshen,dannyy,pmolchanov,lmao,jiannal,josea}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Structural pruning can simplify network architecture and improve inference speed.
We propose Hardware-Aware Latency Pruning (HALP) that formulates structural
pruning as a global resource allocation optimization problem, aiming at maximizing the accuracy while constraining latency under a predefined budget on targeting
device. For filter importance ranking, HALP leverages latency lookup table to track
latency reduction potential and global saliency score to gauge accuracy drop. Both
metrics can be evaluated very efficiently during pruning, allowing us to reformulate global structural pruning under a reward maximization problem given target
constraint. This makes the problem solvable via our augmented knapsack solver,
enabling HALP to surpass prior work in pruning efficacy and accuracy-efficiency
trade-off. We examine HALP on both classification and detection tasks, over varying networks, on ImageNet and VOC datasets, on different platforms. In particular,
for ResNet-50/-101 pruning on ImageNet, HALP improves network throughput
by 1.60⇥/1.90⇥ with +0.3%/ 0.2% top-1 accuracy changes, respectively. For
SSD pruning on VOC, HALP improves throughput by 1.94⇥ with only a 0.56
mAP drop. HALP consistently outperforms prior art, sometimes by large margins.
Project page at https://halp-neurips.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) act as the central tenet behind the rapid development in
computer vision tasks such as classification, detection, segmentation, image synthesis, among others.
As performance boosts, so do model size, computation, and latency. With millions, sometimes billions
of parameters (e.g., GPT-3 [4]), modern neural networks face increasing challenges upon ubiquitous
deployment, that mostly faces stringent constraints such as energy and latency [9, 46, 45, 55]. In
certain cases like autonomous driving, a breach of real-time constraint not only undermines user
experience, but also imposes critical safety concerns. Even for cloud service, speeding up the
inference directly translates into higher throughput, allowing more clients and users to benefit from
the service.
One effective and efficient method to reduce model complexity is network pruning. The primary
goal of pruning is to remove the parameters, along with their computation, that are deemed least
important for inference [2, 20, 37, 45]. Compatible with other compression streams of work such as
quantization [5, 64, 73], dynamic inference [31, 67, 70], and distillation [23, 47, 69], pruning enables
a flexible tuning of model complexity towards varying constraints, while requiring much less design
efforts by neural architecture search [58, 61, 65] and architecture re-designs [24, 42, 59]. Thus, in this
work, we study pruning, in particular structured pruning that reduces channels to benefit off-the-shelf
platforms, e.g., GPUs.
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

