Lipschitz Bandits with Batched Feedback

Yasong Feng
Shanghai Center for Mathematical Sciences
Fudan University
ysfeng20@fudan.edu.cn

Zengfeng Huang∗
School of Data Science
Fudan University
huangzf@fudan.edu.cn

Tianyu Wang∗
Shanghai Center for Mathematical Sciences
Fudan University
wangtianyu@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study Lipschitz bandit problems with batched feedback, where the
expected reward is Lipschitz and the reward observations are communicated to the
player in batches. We introduce a novel landscape-aware algorithm, called Batched
Lipschitz Narrowing (BLiN), that optimally solves this problem. Specifically,
we show that for a T -step problem with Lipschitz reward of zooming dimension
dz , ouralgorithm
 achieves theoretically optimal (up to logarithmic factors) regret
dz +1
e
d
+2
z
rate O T
using only O (log log T ) batches. We also provide complexity
analysis for this problem. Our theoretical lower bound implies that Ω(log log T )
batches are necessary for any algorithm to achieve the optimal regret. Thus, BLiN
achieves optimal regret rate using minimal communication.

1

Introduction

Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) algorithms aim to exploit the good options while explore the decision
space. These algorithms and methodologies find successful applications in artificial intelligence
and reinforcement learning [e.g., 37]. While the classic MAB setting assumes that the rewards are
immediately observed after each arm pull, real-world data often arrives in different patterns. For
example, observations from clinical trials are often be collected in a batched fashion [34]. Another
example is from online advertising, where strategies are tested on multiple customers at the same
time [10]. In such cases, any observation-dependent decision-making should comply with this
data-arriving pattern, including MAB algorithms.
In this paper, we study the Lipschitz bandit problem with batched feedback – a MAB problem where
the expected reward is Lipschitz and the reward observations are communicated to the player in
batches. In such settings, rewards are communicated only at the end of the batches, and the algorithm
can only make decisions based on information up to the previous batch. Existing Lipschitz bandit
algorithms heavily rely on timely access to the reward samples, since the partition of arm space
may change at any time. Therefore, they can not solve the batched feedback setting. To address
this difficulty, we present a novel adaptive algorithm for Lipschitz bandits with communication
constraints, named Batched Lipschitz Narrowing (BLiN). BLiN learns the landscape of the reward by
adaptively narrowing the arm set, so that regions of high reward are more frequently played. Also,
BLiN determines the data collection procedure adaptively, so that only very few data communications
are needed.
∗

Corresponding authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

