Learning Robust Rule Representations for Abstract
Reasoning via Internal Inferences

Wenbo Zhang1,2,3

Likai Tang2,3

Site Mo4

Sen Song2,3

Xianggen Liu1,∗

1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence, Tsinghua University
4
College of Electrical Engineering, Sichuan University
{zhangwb19, tanglk20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{mosite, xianggenliu}@scu.edu.cn, songsen@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Abstract reasoning, as one of the hallmarks of human intelligence, involves collecting information, identifying abstract rules, and applying the rules to solve new
problems. Although neural networks have achieved human-level performances
in several tasks, the abstract reasoning techniques still far lag behind due to the
complexity of learning and applying the logic rules, especially in an unsupervised
manner. In this work, we propose a novel framework, ARII, that learns rule representations for Abstract Reasoning via Internal Inferences. The key idea is to
repeatedly apply a rule to different instances in hope of having a comprehensive
understanding (i.e., representations) of the rule. Specifically, ARII consists of a rule
encoder, a reasoner, and an internal referrer. Based on the representations produced
by the rule encoder, the reasoner draws the conclusion while the referrer performs
internal inferences to regularize rule representations to be robust and generalizable.
We evaluate ARII on two benchmark datasets, including PGM and I-RAVEN. We
observe that ARII achieves new state-of-the-art records on the majority of the
reasoning tasks, including most of the generalization tests in PGM. Our codes are
available at https://github.com/Zhangwenbo0324/ARII.

1

Introduction

Abstract reasoning, the ability to extract patterns and rules from concrete instances and apply them
to solve new problems, is one of the hallmarks of human intelligence. It is a critical topic to endow
neural networks with the capacity of abstract reasoning on the road from artificial intelligence (AI) to
human-like intelligence. As “thinking in pictures” is one of the most effortless and natural ways for
humans to perform inference, Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) test [1] is a widely accepted task
to evaluate AI’s reasoning ability. As shown in Fig 1, an RPM problem contains an incomplete 3 × 3
matrix where the bottom-right entry is missing. The subjects are aware that the rows in the matrix
implicitly share identical rules and are asked to pick the suitable answer from the choices that would
best complete the missing entry. Considering that the RPM test is shown to be highly correlated with
real intelligence [2] in cognitive and psychological science, AI community recently presents a huge
interest in this task to explore the model’s capacity of abstract reasoning [3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
In the early years, computational models for RPM usually assume access to the symbolic representations of images and thus solve RPM with heuristics. Recently, various neural networks are proposed
∗

Xianggen Liu is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

