When Adversarial Training Meets Vision
Transformers: Recipes from Training to Architecture

Dongxian Wu2 Yifei Wang3 Yiwen Guo4 Yisen Wang1,5∗
1
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE),
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
The University of Tokyo
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
4
Independent Researcher
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Yichuan Mo1

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have recently achieved competitive performance in
broad vision tasks. Unfortunately, on popular threat models, naturally trained
ViTs are shown to provide no more adversarial robustness than convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). Adversarial training is still required for ViTs to defend against such adversarial attacks. In this paper, we provide the first and
comprehensive study on the adversarial training recipe of ViTs via extensive
evaluation of various training techniques across benchmark datasets. We find
that pre-training and SGD optimizer are necessary for ViTs’ adversarial training.
Further considering ViT as a new type of model architecture, we investigate its
adversarial robustness from the perspective of its unique architectural components. We find, when randomly masking gradients from some attention blocks or
masking perturbations on some patches during adversarial training, the adversarial
robustness of ViTs can be remarkably improved, which may potentially open up
a line of work to explore the architectural information inside the newly designed
models like ViTs. Our code is available at https://github.com/mo666666/
When-Adversarial-Training-Meets-Vision-Transformers.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the overwhelming advances of Vision Transformers (ViTs) [1, 2].
Different from widely deployed Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [3, 4] that adopt a series
of local convolutional operations on input images, ViTs adopt self-attention mechanisms [5] on a
sequence of image patches. Based on large-scale pre-training, ViTs have achieved competitive and
even better performance compared to CNNs in several fields such as semantic segmentation [6], object
detection [7], and image generation [8]. Despite their great success on a growing number of vision
tasks, ViTs fail in providing more adversarial robustness than CNNs on popular threat models [9, 10].
To defend against such adversarial examples crafted by adding human-imperceptible perturbations to
images [11, 12], ViTs still demand adversarial training (adversarial training) [13–16], an approach
that incorporates adversarial examples into training and obtains notable empirical robustness.
Notably, the implementation details of adversarial training make a big difference on CNNs backbones
[17], which motivates us to comprehensively evaluate various training techniques for adversarial
training of ViTs and thus provide the first implementation benchmark for the training recipes of
ViTs under adversarial training. Since adversarial training is quite different from natural training,
different insights are discovered, for example, pre-training is useful for adversarial robustness and
∗

Corresponding author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

