Look More but Care Less in Video Recognition

1

Yitian Zhang1∗ Yue Bai1 Huan Wang1 Yi Xu1 Yun Fu1,2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University

Abstract
Existing action recognition methods typically sample a few frames to represent
each video to avoid the enormous computation, which often limits the recognition
performance. To tackle this problem, we propose Ample and Focal Network
(AFNet), which is composed of two branches to utilize more frames but with less
computation. Specifically, the Ample Branch takes all input frames to obtain
abundant information with condensed computation and provides the guidance for
Focal Branch by the proposed Navigation Module; the Focal Branch squeezes the
temporal size to only focus on the salient frames at each convolution block; in
the end, the results of two branches are adaptively fused to prevent the loss of
information. With this design, we can introduce more frames to the network but
cost less computation. Besides, we demonstrate AFNet can utilize fewer frames
while achieving higher accuracy as the dynamic selection in intermediate features
enforces implicit temporal modeling. Further, we show that our method can be
extended to reduce spatial redundancy with even less cost. Extensive experiments
on five datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method. Our
code is available at https://github.com/BeSpontaneous/AFNet-pytorch.

1

Introduction

Online videos have grown wildly in recent years and video analysis is necessary for many applications
such as recommendation [6], surveillance [4, 5] and autonomous driving [31, 17]. These applications
require not only accurate but also efficient video understanding algorithms. With the introduction of
deep learning networks [3] in video recognition, there has been rapid advancement in the performance
of the methods in this area. Though successful, these deep learning methods often cost huge
computation, making them hard to be deployed in the real world.
In video recognition, we need to sample multiple frames to represent each video which makes the
computational cost scale proportionally to the number of sampled frames. In most cases, a small
proportion of all the frames is sampled for each input, which only contains limited information
of the original video. A straightforward solution is to sample more frames to the network but the
computation expands proportionally to the number of sampled frames.
There are some works proposed recently to dynamically sample salient frames [29, 16] for higher
efficiency. The selection step of these methods is made before the frames are sent to the classification
network, which means the information of those unimportant frames is totally lost and it consumes a
considerable time for the selection procedure. Some other methods proposed to address the spatial
redundancy in action recognition by adaptively resizing the resolution based on the importance of
each frame [23], or cropping the most salient patch for every frame [28]. However, these methods
still completely abandon the information that the network recognizes as unimportant and introduce a
policy network to make decisions for each sample which leads to extra computation and complicates
the training strategies.
∗

Corresponding Author: markcheung9248@gmail.com.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

