Look where you look! Saliency-guided Q-networks for
generalization in visual Reinforcement Learning

David Bertoin†
IRT Saint-Exupéry
ISAE-SUPAERO
IMT, INSA Toulouse
ANITI
Toulouse, France
david.bertoin@irt-saintexupery.com

Adil Zouitine†
IRT Saint-Exupéry
ISAE-SUPAERO
Toulouse, France
adil.zouitine@irt-saintexupery.com

Mehdi Zouitine†
IRT Saint-Exupéry
IMT, Université Paul Sabatier
Toulouse, France
mehdi.zouitine@irt-saintexupery.com

Emmanuel Rachelson†
ISAE-SUPAERO
Université de Toulouse
ANITI
Toulouse, France
emmanuel.rachelson@isae-supaero.fr

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning policies, despite their outstanding efficiency in simulated visual control tasks, have shown disappointing ability to generalize across
disturbances in the input training images. Changes in image statistics or distracting background elements are pitfalls that prevent generalization and real-world
applicability of such control policies. We elaborate on the intuition that a good
visual policy should be able to identify which pixels are important for its decision,
and preserve this identification of important sources of information across images.
This implies that training of a policy with small generalization gap should focus
on such important pixels and ignore the others. This leads to the introduction of
saliency-guided Q-networks (SGQN), a generic method for visual reinforcement
learning, that is compatible with any value function learning method. SGQN vastly
improves the generalization capability of Soft Actor-Critic agents and outperforms
existing state-of-the-art methods on the Deepmind Control Generalization benchmark, setting a new reference in terms of training efficiency, generalization gap,
and policy interpretability.

1

Introduction

Deploying reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton and Barto, 2018] algorithms in real-life situations
requires overcoming a number of still open challenges. Among these is the ability for the trained
control policies to focus their attention on causal state features and ignore confounding factors
[Machado et al., 2018, Henderson et al., 2018]. In visual RL tasks, this implies for instance being able
to ignore the background and other distracting factors, even when they might be somehow correlated
with progress within the task at hand. Despite a very active trend of research on the topic of closing
the generalization gap for RL agents [Cobbe et al., 2019, 2020, Song et al., 2019, Hansen et al., 2021,
Hansen and Wang, 2021], current algorithms are still rather brittle when it comes to filtering out such
distracting factors, which hinders their applicability to real-life scenarios.
†

These authors contributed equally to this work

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

