Enhanced Meta Reinforcement Learning using
Demonstrations in Sparse Reward Environments
Desik Rengarajan⇤ Sapana Chaudhary⇤
Jaewon Kim Dileep Kalathil Srinivas Shakkottai
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University
{desik,sapanac,jwkim8804,dileep.kalathil,sshakkot}@tamu.edu

Abstract
Meta reinforcement learning (Meta-RL) is an approach wherein the experience
gained from solving a variety of tasks is distilled into a meta-policy. The metapolicy, when adapted over only a small (or just a single) number of steps, is able
to perform near-optimally on a new, related task. However, a major challenge to
adopting this approach to solve real-world problems is that they are often associated
with sparse reward functions that only indicate whether a task is completed partially
or fully. We consider the situation where some data, possibly generated by a suboptimal agent, is available for each task. We then develop a class of algorithms
entitled Enhanced Meta-RL using Demonstrations (EMRLD) that exploit this
information—even if sub-optimal—to obtain guidance during training. We show
how EMRLD jointly utilizes RL and supervised learning over the offline data to
generate a meta-policy that demonstrates monotone performance improvements.
We also develop a warm started variant called EMRLD-WS that is particularly
efficient for sub-optimal demonstration data. Finally, we show that our EMRLD
algorithms significantly outperform existing approaches in a variety of sparse
reward environments, including that of a mobile robot.

1

Introduction

Meta-Reinforcement Learning (meta-RL) is an approach towards quickly solving similar tasks while
only gathering a few samples for each task. The fundamental idea behind approaches such as the
popular Model Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) [9] is to determine a universal meta-policy by
combining the information gained over working on several tasks. This meta-policy is optimized in a
manner such that, when adapted using a small number of samples gathered for a given task, it is able
to perform near optimally on that specific task. While the dependence of MAML on only a small
number of samples for task-specific adaptation is very attractive, its also means that these samples
must be highly representative of that task for meaningful adaptation and meta-learning. However,
in many real-world problems, rewards provided are sparse in that they might only provide limited
feedback. For instance, there might be a reward only if a robot gets close to designated way point,
with no reward otherwise. Hence, MAML is likely to fail on both counts of task-specific adaptation
and optimization of the meta-policy over tasks in sparse reward environments. Making progress
towards learning a viable meta-policy in such settings is challenging without additional information.
Many real-world tasks are associated with empirically determined policies used in practice. Such
policies could be inexpert, but even limited demonstration data gathered from applying these policies
could contain valuable information in the sparse reward context. While the fact that the policy
generating the data could be inexpert suggests that direct imitation might not be optimal, supervised
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

