Deep invariant networks with differentiable
augmentation layers

Cédric Rommel, Thomas Moreau & Alexandre Gramfort
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, Palaiseau, 91120, France
{firstname.lastname}@inria.fr

Abstract
Designing learning systems which are invariant to certain data transformations is
critical in machine learning. Practitioners can typically enforce a desired invariance
on the trained model through the choice of a network architecture, e.g. using
convolutions for translations, or using data augmentation. Yet, enforcing true
invariance in the network can be difficult, and data invariances are not always known
a piori. State-of-the-art methods for learning data augmentation policies require
held-out data and are based on bilevel optimization problems, which are complex to
solve and often computationally demanding. In this work we investigate new ways
of learning invariances only from the training data. Using learnable augmentation
layers built directly in the network, we demonstrate that our method is very versatile.
It can incorporate any type of differentiable augmentation and be applied to a broad
class of learning problems beyond computer vision. We provide empirical evidence
showing that our approach is easier and faster to train than modern automatic
data augmentation techniques based on bilevel optimization, while achieving
comparable results. Experiments show that while the invariances transferred to a
model through automatic data augmentation are limited by the model expressivity,
the invariance yielded by our approach is insensitive to it by design.

1

Introduction

Inductive biases encoding known data symmetries are key to make deep learning models generalize in high-dimensional settings such as computer vision, speech processing and computational
neuroscience, just to name a few. Convolutional layers [1] are the perfect illustration of this, as
their translation equivariant property allowed to reduce dramatically the size of the hypothesis space
compared to fully-connected layers, opening the way for modern computer vision achievements [2].
This illustrates one way to encode desired symmetries in deep learning models by hard-coding them
directly in the network architecture. An alternative way is to use data augmentation, where transformations encoding the desired symmetries are applied to the training examples, thus adding additional
cost when such symmetry is not recognized by the model. While in the first case invariances are built
in the network by design and are therefore a hard constraint, data augmentation promotes certain
invariances more softly. As opposed to being built-in, desired invariances are here trained-in [3].
In both cases, the invariances present in the data are not always known beforehand. While relevant
invariances are intuitive for some tasks such as object recognition (e.g. a slightly tilted or horizontally
flipped picture of a mug, still represents a mug), the same cannot be said for many important
predictive tasks such as classifying brain signals into different sleep stages [4, 5]. In order to be able
to tackle this problem of learning optimal systems from complex data two strategies are pursued in the
literature: neural architecture search (NAS) which aims to find the best architectural elements from
the training data, and automatic data augmentation (ADA) which aims to learn augmentation policies
automatically from a given dataset. Both fields tackle the problem very similarly, by parametrizing the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

