Learning-based Motion Planning in Dynamic
Environments Using GNNs and Temporal Encoding
Ruipeng Zhang
UCSD

Chenning Yu
UCSD

Jingkai Chen
MIT

Chuchu Fan
MIT

Sicun Gao
UCSD

Abstract
Learning-based methods have shown promising performance for accelerating motion planning, but mostly in the setting of static environments. For the more
challenging problem of planning in dynamic environments, such as multi-arm
assembly tasks and human-robot interaction, motion planners need to consider the
trajectories of the dynamic obstacles and reason about temporal-spatial interactions
in very large state spaces. We propose a GNN-based approach that uses temporal
encoding and imitation learning with data aggregation for learning both the embeddings and the edge prioritization policies. Experiments show that the proposed
methods can significantly accelerate online planning over state-of-the-art complete
dynamic planning algorithms. The learned models can often reduce costly collision
checking operations by more than 1000x, and thus accelerating planning by up to
95%, while achieving high success rates on hard instances as well.

1

Introduction

Motion planning for manipulation has been a longstanding challenge in robotics [2, 12]. Learningbased approaches can exploit patterns in the configuration space to accelerate planning with promising
performance [31, 6, 4]. Existing learning-based approaches typically combine reinforcement learning
(RL) and imitation learning (IL) to learn policies for sampling or ranking the options at each step of the
planning process [36, 47, 5]. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a popular choice of representation
for motion planning problems, because of their capability to capture geometric information and are
invariant to the permutations of the sampled graph [21, 24, 25, 46].
Motion planning in dynamic environments, such as for multi-arm assembly and human-robot interaction, is significantly more challenging than in static environments. Dynamic obstacles produce
trajectories in the temporal-spatial space, so the motion planner needs to consider global geometric
constraints in the configuration space at each time step (Figure 1). This dynamic nature of the
environment generates the much larger space of sequences of graphs for sampling and learning, and
it is also very sensitive to the changes in one single dimension: time. A small change in the timing
of the ego-robot or the obstacles in two spatially similar patterns may result in completely different
planning problems. For instance, the dynamic obstacle may create a small time window for the
ego-robot to pass through, and if that window is missed, then the topology of configuration space can
completely change. Consequently, we need to design special architectures that can not only encode
the graph structures well, but also infer temporal information robustly. Indeed, complete search
algorithms for dynamic motion planning, such as the leading method of Safe Interval Path Planning
(SIPP) and its variations [34, 26, 11, 30], focus on reasoning about the temporal intervals that are safe
for the ego-robot. These complete algorithms typically require significantly more computation and
collision checking operations compared to the static setting. As it is proved in [37], the computational
complexity of planning with the moving obstacles is NP-hard even when the ego-robot has only a
small and fixed number of degrees of freedom of movement.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

