On the Representation Collapse of
Sparse Mixture of Experts

Zewen Chi†∗, Li Dong‡ , Shaohan Huang‡ , Damai Daik , Shuming Ma‡ , Barun Patra‡
Saksham Singhal‡ , Payal Bajaj‡ , Xia Song‡ , Xian-Ling Mao† , Heyan Huang† , Furu Wei‡
†
Beijing Institute of Technology
‡
Microsoft Corporation
k
Peking University
https://aka.ms/msragi

Abstract
Sparse mixture of experts provides larger model capacity while requiring a constant computational overhead. It employs the routing mechanism to distribute
input tokens to the best-matched experts according to their hidden representations.
However, learning such a routing mechanism encourages token clustering around
expert centroids, implying a trend toward representation collapse. In this work,
we propose to estimate the routing scores between tokens and experts on a lowdimensional hypersphere. We conduct extensive experiments on cross-lingual
language model pre-training and fine-tuning on downstream tasks. Experimental
results across seven multilingual benchmarks show that our method achieves consistent gains. We also present a comprehensive analysis on the representation and
routing behaviors of our models. Our method alleviates the representation collapse
issue and achieves more consistent routing than the baseline mixture-of-experts
methods.

1

Introduction

Scaling up model capacities has shown to be a promising way to achieve better performance on
a wide range of problems such as language model pre-training (Radford et al., 2019; Raffel et al.,
2020), and visual representation learning (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Bao et al., 2022). Despite the
effectiveness, increasing the number of parameters leads to larger computational cost, which motivates
recent studies to explore Sparse Mixture-of-Experts (SMoE) models (Shazeer et al., 2017; Fedus
et al., 2021; Lepikhin et al., 2021). SMoE increases the model capacity by building several sparselyactivated neural networks. With nearly constant computational overhead, SMoE models achieve
better performance than dense models on various tasks, including machine translation (Lepikhin et al.,
2021), image classification (Riquelme et al., 2021), and speech recognition (Kumatani et al., 2021).
The routing mechanism plays an important role in SMoE models. Given an input token, the router
measures the similarity scores between each token and experts. Then we distribute tokens to the bestmatched experts according to the routing scores. Recent studies explored various token assignment
algorithms to improve SMoE training. For instance, Lewis et al. (2021) formulate SMoE routing as
a linear assignment problem that globally maximizes token-expert similarities. Zhou et al. (2022)
have experts selecting top tokens rather than assigning tokens to top experts. Roller et al. (2021) and
Dai et al. (2022) propose to keep routing choices consistent. Many studies in recent years focus on
how to design the token-expert assignment algorithm. In this paper, we present that current routing
mechanisms tend to push hidden representations clustering around expert centroids, implying a trend
toward representation collapse, which in turn harms model performance.
∗

Zewen Chi and Damai Dai contribute during internship at Microsoft Research.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

