DeepFoids: Adaptive Bio-Inspired Fish Simulation
with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Yuko Ishiwaka1∗ †, Xiao S. Zeng2∗, Shun Ogawa1 ,
Donovan Michael Westwater2 , Tadayuki Tone1 , Masaki Nakada2‡
1
SoftBank Corp., Japan, 2 NeuralX Inc., USA

Abstract
Our goal is to synthesize realistic underwater scenes with various fish species
in different fish cages, which can be utilized to train computer vision models to
automate fish counting task. It is a challenging problem to prepare a sufficiently
diverse labeled dataset of images from aquatic environments. We solve this challenge by introducing an adaptive bio-inspired fish simulation. The behavior of
caged fish changes based on the species, size and number of fish, and the size
and shape of the cage, among other variables. In this paper, we propose a method
for achieving schooling behavior for any given combination of variables, using
multi-agent deep reinforcement learning (DRL) in various fish cages in arbitrary
environments. Furthermore, to visually reproduce the underwater scene in different
locations and seasons, we incorporate a physically-based underwater simulation.

1

Introduction

The sustainability of the food supply and the protection of marine resources are two of the most
important global issues, and are part of the agenda set by the United Nations to be achieved by 2030
§
. Fish farming is one of the keys to a sustainable seafood supply to support the global population,
as seafood consumption is growing rapidly. One of the current major problems in the fish farming
industry is managing feeding. Under-feeding slows down the growth of the fish due to malnutrition.
Over-feeding is even worse as it can kill the fish and the residual food contaminates the marine
environment. Therefore, we attempt to automate fish counting using inexpensive commercially
available RGB cameras and computer vision to optimize the amount and timing of feeding.
Deep learning has achieved great success in the field of computer vision. The quality of the dataset
determines the accuracy of deep learning models, but it is difficult to obtain data to train a fish counting
model. Ishiwaka et al. [1] proposed a fish schooling simulation called Foids, and demonstrated
the efficacy of using a CG synthetic dataset for training. Foids adds rules based on fish biology
to the Boids [2] algorithm. However, both Boids and Foids require manually setting a number of
parameters for a given fish species, which must be adjusted again should any conditions change. To
solve this problem, we propose a method to autonomously generate schooling behavior in fish using
multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. Fish behavior in a fish farming cage depends not only on
natural factors like temperature and light intensity, but also the size and shape of the fish cage, and
even the species, number, and size of the fish themselves. By taking into account biological data such
as the preferred light intensity, temperature, and inter-fish distance of each fish, our method achieved
several distinct patterns of collective behavior depending on population density through autonomous
∗

Yuko Ishiwaka and Xiao S. Zeng equally contributed to this work.
yuko.ishiwaka@g.softbank.co.jp
‡
masaki@neuralx.ai
§
https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

