Blackbox Attacks via Surrogate Ensemble Search
Zikui Cai, Chengyu Song, Srikanth Krishnamurthy,
Amit Roy-Chowdhury, M. Salman Asif⇤
University of California Riverside

Abstract
Blackbox adversarial attacks can be categorized into transfer- and query-based
attacks. Transfer methods do not require any feedback from the victim model,
but provide lower success rates compared to query-based methods. Query attacks
often require a large number of queries for success. To achieve the best of both
approaches, recent efforts have tried to combine them, but still require hundreds
of queries to achieve high success rates (especially for targeted attacks). In this
paper, we propose a novel method for Blackbox Attacks via Surrogate Ensemble
Search (BASES) that can generate highly successful blackbox attacks using an
extremely small number of queries. We first define a perturbation machine that
generates a perturbed image by minimizing a weighted loss function over a fixed
set of surrogate models. To generate an attack for a given victim model, we search
over the weights in the loss function using queries generated by the perturbation
machine. Since the dimension of the search space is small (same as the number of
surrogate models), the search requires a small number of queries. We demonstrate
that our proposed method achieves better success rate with at least 30⇥ fewer
queries compared to state-of-the-art methods on different image classifiers trained
with ImageNet (including VGG-19, DenseNet-121, and ResNext-50). In particular,
our method requires as few as 3 queries per image (on average) to achieve more
than a 90% success rate for targeted attacks and 1–2 queries per image for over a
99% success rate for untargeted attacks. Our method is also effective on Google
Cloud Vision API and achieved a 91% untargeted attack success rate with 2.9
queries per image. We also show that the perturbations generated by our proposed
method are highly transferable and can be adopted for hard-label blackbox attacks.
Furthermore, we argue that BASES can be used to create attacks for a variety of
tasks and show its effectiveness for attacks on object detection models. Our code is
available at https://github.com/CSIPlab/BASES.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network (DNN) models are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks [1–4]. Many
methods have been proposed in recent years to generate adversarial attacks [2, 5–11] (or to defend
against such attacks [6, 12–20]). Attack methods for blackbox models can be divided into two broad
categories: transfer- and query-based methods. Transfer-based methods generate attacks for some
(whitebox) surrogate models via backpropagation and test if they fool the victim models [3, 4]. They
are usually agnostic to victim models as they do not require or readily use any feedback; and they
often provide lower success rates compared to query-based methods. On the other hand, query-based
attacks achieve high success rate but at the expense of querying the victim model several times to
find perturbation directions that reduce the victim model loss [21–25]. One possible way to achieve a
high success rate while keeping the number of queries small, is to combine the transfer and query
attacks. While there has been impressive recent work along this direction [26, 10, 27, 11], the
⇤

Corresponding authors: Zikui Cai (zcai032@ucr.edu) and M. Salman Asif (sasif@ucr.edu)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

