RISE: Robust Individualized Decision Learning
with Sensitive Variables
Xiaoqing Tan
University of Pittsburgh
xit31@pitt.edu

Zhengling Qi
George Washington University
qizhengling@email.gwu.edu
Lu Tang∗
University of Pittsburgh
lutang@pitt.edu

Christopher W. Seymour
University of Pittsburgh
seymourc@pitt.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces RISE, a robust individualized decision learning framework
with sensitive variables, where sensitive variables are collectible data and important
to the intervention decision, but their inclusion in decision making is prohibited
due to reasons such as delayed availability or fairness concerns. A naive baseline is
to ignore these sensitive variables in learning decision rules, leading to significant
uncertainty and bias. To address this, we propose a decision learning framework
to incorporate sensitive variables during offline training but not include them in
the input of the learned decision rule during model deployment. Specifically, from
a causal perspective, the proposed framework intends to improve the worst-case
outcomes of individuals caused by sensitive variables that are unavailable at the
time of decision. Unlike most existing literature that uses mean-optimal objectives,
we propose a robust learning framework by finding a newly defined quantile- or
infimum-optimal decision rule. The reliable performance of the proposed method
is demonstrated through synthetic experiments and three real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been a widespread interest in developing methodology for individualized decision
rules (IDRs) based on observational data. When deriving IDRs, some collectible data are important
to the intervention decision, while their inclusion in decision making is prohibited due to reasons
such as delayed availability or fairness concerns. For example, sensitive characteristics of subjects
regarding their income, sex, race and ethnicity may not be appropriate to be used directly for
decision making due to fairness concerns. In the medical field especially for patients in severe
life-threatening conditions such as sepsis, timely bedside intervention decisions have to be made
before lab measurements are ordered, assayed and returned to the attending physicians. However, due
to the delayed availability of lab results, most of the decisions are made with great uncertainty and
bias due to partial information at hand. We define sensitive variables as variables whose inclusion into
decision rules is prohibited. The formal definition of sensitive variables will be given in Section 3.
In this work, we propose RISE (Robust Individualized decision learning with SEnsitive variables)1 , a
robust IDR framework to improve the outcome of individuals when there are informative yet sensitive
variables that are either not available or prohibited from using during IDR deployment. To achieve
this, we propose to estimate the optimal IDR by optimizing a quantile- or infimum-based objective,
∗
1

Corresponding author.
Python code is available at https://github.com/ellenxtan/rise.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

