Private and Communication-Efficient Algorithms
for Entropy Estimation
Gecia Bravo-Hermsdorff
Department of Statistics
University College London
gecia.bravo@gmail.com

Róbert Busa-Fekete
Google Research
busarobi@google.com

Andres Muñoz Medina
Google Research
ammedina@google.com

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh
Google Research
ghavamza@google.com

Umar Syed
Google Research
usyed@google.com

Abstract
Modern statistical estimation is often performed in a distributed setting where
each sample belongs to a single user who shares their data with a central server.
Users are typically concerned with preserving the privacy of their samples, and
also with minimizing the amount of data they must transmit to the server. We give
improved private and communication-efficient algorithms for estimating several
popular measures of the entropy of a distribution. All of our algorithms have
constant communication cost and satisfy local differential privacy. For a joint
distribution over many variables whose conditional independence is given by a
tree, we describe algorithms for estimating Shannon entropy that require a number
of samples that is linear in the number of variables, compared to the quadratic
sample complexity of prior work. We also describe an algorithm for estimating
Gini entropy whose sample complexity has no dependence on the support size
of the distribution and can be implemented using a single round of concurrent
communication between the users and the server. In contrast, the previously bestknown algorithm has high communication cost and requires the server to facilitate
interaction between the users. Finally, we describe an algorithm for estimating
collision entropy that matches the space and sample complexity of the best known
algorithm but generalizes it to the private and communication-efficient setting.

1

Introduction

Statistical estimation has traditionally focused on minimizing the number of samples needed to
estimate properties of a distribution. In the ‘big data’ era, statisticians and computer scientists have
also tried to minimize the space complexity of estimation algorithms, particularly in the streaming
setting. More recently, the increasing prevalence of mobile computing has led to a focus on the
privacy and communication costs of statistical estimation. In this paper, we consider the following
setting: a set of users each draw one sample from a distribution, and share information about their
sample with a central server. The central server then uses the collected data to estimate a property
of the distribution. Users are concerned with preserving the privacy of their sample, and also with
minimizing the amount of data that is transmitted to the server.
For example, consider the problem of detecting fingerprinting on the web [31]. Many websites track
users across the web without their consent by recording (enough) information about their devices
(e.g., installed fonts, operating system, timezone, etc.), a practice known as “browser fingerprinting”.
Entropy is the standard metric used to quantify the identifiability of the collected fingerprints. So a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

