Optimal Weak to Strong Learning

Martin Ritzert
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University
Aarhus, Denmark
ritzert@cs.au.dk

Kasper Green Larsen
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University
Aarhus, Denmark
larsen@cs.au.dk

Abstract
The classic algorithm AdaBoost allows to convert a weak learner, that is an algorithm that produces a hypothesis which is slightly better than chance, into a
strong learner, achieving arbitrarily high accuracy when given enough training data.
We present a new algorithm that constructs a strong learner from a weak learner
but uses less training data than AdaBoost and all other weak to strong learners to
achieve the same generalization bounds. A sample complexity lower bound shows
that our new algorithm uses the minimum possible amount of training data and is
thus optimal. Hence, this work settles the sample complexity of the classic problem
of constructing a strong learner from a weak learner.

1

Introduction

The field of boosting has been started from a classic question in learning theory asking whether
classifiers that are just slightly better than random guessing can be used to create a classifier with
arbitrarily high accuracy when given enough training data. This question was initially asked by
Kearns and Valiant [15, 16] and ignited the line of research that eventually lead to the development of
AdaBoost [7], the prototype boosting algorithm to date. AdaBoost carefully combines the predictions
of several inaccurate classifiers trained with a focus on different parts of the training data to come up
with a voting classifier that performs well everywhere.
We quantify the performance of an inaccurate learner by its advantage 𝛾 over random guessing. Said
loosely, a 𝛾-weak learner will correctly classify new data points with probability at least 1/2 + 𝛾. In
contrast, given 0 < 𝜀, 𝛿 < 1 and enough training data a strong learner outputs with probability 1 − 𝛿
over the choice of the training data and possible random choices of the algorithm a hypothesis that
correctly classifies new data points with probability at least 1 − 𝜀. The number of samples 𝑚(𝜀, 𝛿)
such that the learning algorithm achieves the desired accuracy and confidence levels is called the
sample complexity. The sample complexity is the key metric for the performance of a strong learner
and depends on the weak learner’s advantage 𝛾, the weak learner’s flexibility measured in terms of
the VC-dimension, as well as 𝜀 and 𝛿. Essentially, a construction with low sample complexity makes
the most out of the available training data.
AdaBoost [7] is the classic algorithm for constructing a strong learner from a 𝛾-weak learner. If
the weak learner outputs a hypothesis from a base set of hypotheses H , then AdaBoost constructs a
strong learner by taking a weighted majority vote among several hypotheses ℎ1 , . . . , ℎ𝑡 from H . Each
of these hypotheses is obtained by invoking the 𝛾-weak learning algorithm on differently weighted
versions of a set of training samples 𝑆. The number of samples required by AdaBoost for strong
learning depends both on the advantage 𝛾 of the weak learner and the complexity of the hypothesis
set H . If we let 𝑑 denote the VC-dimension of H , i.e. the cardinality of the largest set of data points
𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑑 such that every classification of 𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑑 can be realized by a hypothesis ℎ ∈ H , then it
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

