Wavelet Feature Maps Compression
for Image-to-Image CNNs

Shahaf E. Finder ∗ , Yair Zohav ∗ , Maor Ashkenazi ∗ , Eran Treister
The Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University
[finders,maorash]@post.bgu.ac.il

erant@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are known for requiring extensive computational resources, and quantization is among the best and most common methods
for compressing them. While aggressive quantization (i.e., less than 4-bits) performs well for classification, it may cause severe performance degradation in
image-to-image tasks such as semantic segmentation and depth estimation. In
this paper, we propose Wavelet Compressed Convolution (WCC)—a novel approach for high-resolution activation maps compression integrated with point-wise
convolutions, which are the main computational cost of modern architectures.
To this end, we use an efficient and hardware-friendly Haar-wavelet transform,
known for its effectiveness in image compression, and define the convolution on
the compressed activation map. We experiment with various tasks that benefit from
high-resolution input. By combining WCC with light quantization, we achieve
compression rates equivalent to 1-4bit activation quantization with relatively small
and much more graceful degradation in performance. Our code is available at
https://github.com/BGUCompSci/WaveletCompressedConvolution.

1

Introduction

Over the past years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have brought significant improvement
in processing images, video, and audio [35, 34]. However, CNNs require significant computational
and memory costs, which makes the usage of CNNs difficult in applications where computing power
is limited, e.g., on edge devices. To address this limitation, several approaches have been proposed
to reduce the computational costs of neural networks. Among the popular ones are weight pruning
[25, 23], architecture search [27, 33], and quantization [36, 4]. In principle, all these approaches can
be applied simultaneously on top of each other to reduce the computational costs of CNNs.
Specifically, the quantization approach relieves the computational cost of CNNs by quantizing their
weights and activation (feature) maps using low numerical precision so that they can be stored and
applied as fixed point integers [29, 4]. In particular, it is common to apply aggressive quantization
(less than 4-bit precision) to compress the activation maps [18]. However, it is known that compressing
natural images using uniform quantization is sub-optimal. Indeed, applying aggressive quantization
in certain CNNs can lead to significant degradation in the network’s performance. The impact is
especially evident for image-to-image tasks such as semantic segmentation [55] and depth prediction
[22], where each pixel has to be assigned a value. E.g., in a recent work that targets quantized U-Nets
[55], activations bit rates are kept relatively high (∼ 8 bits) while the weight bit rates are lower (down
to 2 bits). Beyond that, we note that the majority of the quantization works are applied and tested on
image classification [18, 37, and references therein] and rarely on other tasks.
∗

Contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

