Causal Discovery in Heterogeneous Environments
Under the Sparse Mechanism Shift Hypothesis
Ronan Perry1 , Julius von Kügelgen⇤ 1,2 , and Bernhard Schölkopf ⇤1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
rflperry@uw.edu, jvk@tue.mpg.de, bs@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Machine learning approaches commonly rely on the assumption of independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data. In reality, however, this assumption is
almost always violated due to distribution shifts between environments. Although
valuable learning signals can be provided by heterogeneous data from changing
distributions, it is also known that learning under arbitrary (adversarial) changes is
impossible. Causality provides a useful framework for modeling distribution shifts,
since causal models encode both observational and interventional distributions.
In this work, we explore the sparse mechanism shift hypothesis, which posits that
distribution shifts occur due to a small number of changing causal conditionals.
Motivated by this idea, we apply it to learning causal structure from heterogeneous
environments, where i.i.d. data only allows for learning an equivalence class of
graphs without restrictive assumptions. We propose the Mechanism Shift Score
(MSS), a score-based approach amenable to various empirical estimators, which
provably identifies the entire causal structure with high probability if the sparse
mechanism shift hypothesis holds. Empirically, we verify behavior predicted by
the theory and compare multiple estimators and score functions to identify the best
approaches in practice. Compared to other methods, we show how MSS bridges
a gap by both being nonparametric as well as explicitly leveraging sparse changes.

1

Introduction

Classical machine learning methods and theory presume data to be independently and identically
distributed (i.i.d.). Although there has been huge success under this assumption, research on topics
including adversarial examples [17, 58], distribution shifts [9, 46, 48, 50], and “spurious” correlations [2] has highlighted its fragility. Open questions remain as to how we can relax the i.i.d.
assumption and still learn useful models, since learning under unrestricted adversarial distribution
shifts seems infeasible [7]. Causal models naturally provide structure to a distribution via a factorization into causal mechanisms, the processes by which variables are dependent on their direct causes.
Hence, they are a natural basis for studying distribution shifts. Based on the idea of the independence
of causal mechanisms [41, 50], the sparse mechanism shift hypothesis [51] posits that distribution
shifts are the result of changes in only a subset of the causal model’s mechanisms. This presents a
promising relaxation with many potential applications throughout machine learning [3, 36, 37, 51, 61].
In particular, causal discovery—the inference of qualitative structure encoded by a graph and underlying causal relationships between variables—is a fundamental scientific problem with broad
applications for which distribution shifts have been successfully leveraged. Classical approaches,
which assume i.i.d. data from a single environment or domain, can be broadly categorized into three
⇤

Shared last author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

