Neural Set Function Extensions:
Learning with Discrete Functions in High Dimensions

Nikolaos Karalias∗
EPFL
nikolaos.karalias@epfl.ch

Joshua Robinson∗
MIT CSAIL
joshrob@mit.edu

Andreas Loukas
Prescient Design, Genentech, Roche
andreas.loukas@roche.com

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT CSAIL
stefje@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Integrating functions on discrete domains into neural networks is key to developing their capability to reason about discrete objects. But, discrete domains are
(I) not naturally amenable to gradient-based optimization, and (II) incompatible
with deep learning architectures that rely on representations in high-dimensional
vector spaces. In this work, we address both difficulties for set functions, which
capture many important discrete problems. First, we develop a framework for
extending set functions onto low-dimensional continuous domains, where many
extensions are naturally defined. Our framework subsumes many well-known
extensions as special cases. Second, to avoid undesirable low-dimensional neural
network bottlenecks, we convert low-dimensional extensions into representations
in high-dimensional spaces, taking inspiration from the success of semidefinite
programs for combinatorial optimization. Empirically, we observe benefits of our
extensions for unsupervised neural combinatorial optimization, in particular with
high-dimensional representations.

1

Introduction

While neural networks are highly effective at solving tasks grounded in basic perception (Chen et al.,
2020; Vaswani et al., 2017), discrete algorithmic and combinatorial tasks such as partitioning graphs,
and finding optimal routes or shortest paths have proven more challenging. This is, in part, due to the
difficulty of integrating discrete operations into neural network architectures (Battaglia et al., 2018;
Bengio et al., 2021; Cappart et al., 2021a). One immediate difficulty with functions on discrete spaces
is that they are not amenable to standard gradient-based training. Another is that discrete functions
are typically expressed in terms of scalar (e.g., Boolean) variables for each item (e.g., node, edge to
be selected), in contrast to the high-dimensional and continuous nature of neural networks’ internal
representations. A natural approach to addressing these challenges is to carefully choose a function
on a continuous domain that extends the discrete function, and can be used as a drop-in replacement.
There are several important desiderata that such an extension should satisfy in order to be suited to
neural network training. First, an extension should be valid, i.e., agree with the discrete function
on discrete points. It should also be amenable to gradient-based optimization, and should avoid
introducing spurious minima. Beyond these requirements, there is one additional critical consideration.
In both machine learning and optimization, it has been observed that high-dimensional representations
can make problems “easier”. For instance, neural networks rely on high-dimensional internal
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

