Fairness Transferability
Subject to Bounded Distribution Shift

Yatong Chen†, Reilly Raab†, Jialu Wang, Yang Liu∗
University of California, Santa Cruz
{ychen592, reilly, faldict, yangliu}@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Given an algorithmic predictor that is “fair” on some source distribution, will
it still be fair on an unknown target distribution that differs from the source
within some bound? In this paper, we study the transferability of statistical group
fairness for machine learning predictors (i.e., classifiers or regressors) subject to
bounded distribution shift. Such shifts may be introduced by initial training data
uncertainties, user adaptation to a deployed predictor, dynamic environments, or
the use of pre-trained models in new settings. Herein, we develop a bound that
characterizes such transferability, flagging potentially inappropriate deployments of
machine learning for socially consequential tasks. We first develop a framework for
bounding violations of statistical fairness subject to distribution shift, formulating
a generic upper bound for transferred fairness violations as our primary result. We
then develop bounds for specific worked examples, focusing on two commonly
used fairness definitions (i.e., demographic parity and equalized odds) and two
classes of distribution shift (i.e., covariate shift and label shift). Finally, we compare
our theoretical bounds to deterministic models of distribution shift and against
real-world data, finding that we are able to estimate fairness violation bounds in
practice, even when simplifying assumptions are only approximately satisfied.

1

Introduction

Distribution shift is a common, real-world phenomenon that affects machine learning deployments
when the target distribution of examples (features and labels) ultimately encountered by a datadriven policy diverges from the source distribution it was trained for. For socially consequential
decisions guided by machine learning, such shifts in the underlying distribution can invalidate fairness
guarantees and cause harm by exacerbating social disparities. Unfortunately, distribution shift can be
technically difficult or impossible to model at training time (e.g., when depending on complex social
dynamics or unrealized world events). Nonetheless, we still wish to certify the robustness of fairness
metrics for a policy on possible target distributions.
In this paper, we provide a general framework for quantifying the robustness of statistical group
fairness guarantees. We assume that the target distribution is adversarially drawn from a bounded
domain, thus reducing the hard problem of modelling distribution shift dynamics to a more tractable,
static problem. With this framework, we can detect potentially inappropriate policy applications,
prior to deployment, when fairness violation bounds are not sufficiently small.
This work bridges a gap between recent literature on domain adaptation, which has largely focused
on the transferability of prediction accuracy (rather than fairness), and algorithmic fairness, which
†
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: yangliu@ucsc.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

