Improving Generative Adversarial Networks
via Adversarial Learning in Latent Space

Yang Li1 , Yichuan Mo12 , Liangliang Shi1 , Junchi Yan1∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE),
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
{yanglily,shiliangliang,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
mo666666@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
For Generative Adversarial Networks which map a latent distribution to the target
distribution, in this paper, we study how the sampling in latent space can affect
the generation performance, especially for images. We observe that, as the neural generator is a continuous function, two close samples in latent space would
be mapped into two nearby images, while their quality can differ much as the
quality generally does not exhibit a continuous nature in pixel space. From such
a continuous mapping function perspective, it is also possible that two distant
latent samples can be mapped into two close images (if not exactly the same).
In particular, if the latent samples are mapped in aggregation into a single mode,
mode collapse occurs. Accordingly, we propose adding an implicit latent transform before the mapping function to improve latent z from its initial distribution,
e.g., Gaussian. This is achieved using well-developed adversarial sample mining
techniques, e.g. iterative fast gradient sign method (I-FGSM). We further propose
new GAN training pipelines to obtain better generative mappings w.r.t quality and
diversity by introducing targeted latent transforms into the bi-level optimization of
GAN. Experimental results on visual data show that our method can effectively
achieve improvement in both quality and diversity. The implementation is publicly
available at https://github.com/yangco-le/AdvLatGAN.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1] have shown effectiveness for generating high-fidelity
data, especially for images under various settings [2; 3; 4; 5; 6]. Based on the zero-sum game, the
model is trained by the adversarial process between the generator and the discriminator. Many efforts
have been made to achieve a more realistic generation from different perspectives. For instance,
WGAN [7], SNGAN [8], LSGAN [9] aim to design better objective functions. ImprovedGAN [10],
AC-GAN [11] propose practical training techniques. While more complex network structures are
studied in BigGAN [12], StyleGAN [13], SAGAN [14].
Despite the above progress, a relatively less studied question is how the latent space affects the
generation quality and diversity, which can be orthogonal to the above frequently studied factors
like model architectures and training techniques. In this paper, we argue that the latent samples
from a standard continuous distribution (e.g. Gaussian) can often be mapped to varying-quality
samples for the generation. One reason is that the generator is a continuous function (as neural nets)
∗

Junchi Yan is the correspondence author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

