The Sample Complexity of One-Hidden-Layer
Neural Networks
Gal Vardi
TTI Chicago and Hebrew University∗
galvardi@ttic.edu

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Nathan Srebro
TTI Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We study norm-based uniform convergence bounds for neural networks, aiming
at a tight understanding of how these are affected by the architecture and type of
norm constraint, for the simple class of scalar-valued one-hidden-layer networks,
and inputs bounded in Euclidean norm. We begin by proving that in general,
controlling the spectral norm of the hidden layer weight matrix is insufficient to
get uniform convergence guarantees (independent of the network width), while a
stronger Frobenius norm control is sufficient, extending and improving on previous
work. Motivated by the proof constructions, we identify and analyze two important
settings where (perhaps surprisingly) a mere spectral norm control turns out to be
sufficient: First, when the network’s activation functions are sufficiently smooth
(with the result extending to deeper networks); and second, for certain types of
convolutional networks. In the latter setting, we study how the sample complexity
is additionally affected by parameters such as the amount of overlap between
patches and the overall number of patches.

1

Introduction

Understanding why large neural networks are able to generalize is one of the most important puzzles
in the theory of deep learning. Since sufficiently large neural networks can approximate any function,
their success must be due to a strong inductive bias in the learned network weights, which is still not
fully understood.
A useful approach to understand such biases is studying what types of constraints on the network
weights can lead to uniform convergence bounds, which ensure that empirical risk minimization
will not lead to overfitting. Notwithstanding the ongoing debate on whether uniform convergence
can fully explain the learning performance of neural networks [Nagarajan and Kolter, 2019, Negrea
et al., 2020, Koehler et al., 2021], these bounds provide us with important insights on what normbased biases can potentially aid in generalization. For example, for linear predictors, it is wellunderstood that constraints on the Euclidean norm of the weights imply uniform convergence
guarantees independent of the number of parameters. This indicates that minimizing the Euclidean
norm (without worrying about the number of parameters) is often a useful inductive bias, whether
used explicitly or implicitly, or whether uniform convergence formally holds or not for some specific
setup. However, neural networks have a more complicated structure than linear predictors, and we
still lack a good understanding of what norm-based constraints imply a good inductive bias.
∗

Work done while the author was at the Weizmann Institute of Science

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

