A Variational Edge Partition Model for Supervised
Graph Representation Learning

1

Yilin He1∗ , Chaojie Wang2 *† , Hao Zhang3 , Bo Chen3 , Mingyuan Zhou1†
The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 Xidian University
{yilin.he,mingyuan.zhou}@mccombs.utexas.edu chaojie.wang@ntu.edu.sg
zhanghao xidian@163.com bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs), which propagate the node features through the
edges and learn how to transform the aggregated features under label supervision,
have achieved great success in supervised feature extraction for both node-level and
graph-level classification tasks. However, GNNs typically treat the graph structure
as given and ignore how the edges are formed. This paper introduces a graph
generative process to model how the observed edges are generated by aggregating
the node interactions over a set of overlapping node communities, each of which
contributes to the edges via a logical OR mechanism. Based on this generative
model, we partition each edge into the summation of multiple community-specific
weighted edges and use them to define community-specific GNNs. A variational
inference framework is proposed to jointly learn a GNN-based inference network
that partitions the edges into different communities, these community-specific
GNNs, and a GNN-based predictor that combines community-specific GNNs for
the end classification task. Extensive evaluations on real-world graph datasets
have verified the effectiveness of the proposed method in learning discriminative
representations for both node-level and graph-level classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Many real-world entities are bonded by relations, e.g., the users in a social network service are
connected by online friendships, and the atoms in molecules are held together by chemical bonds.
Representing the entities by nodes and relations by edges, a set of interconnected entities naturally
forms a graph. Reasoning about these entities and their relations could be conducted under graph
neural networks (GNNs) [1–4]. Instead of isolating the feature transformation for each individual
entity, GNNs allow the information to be exchanged between related entities. Models employing this
strategy have achieved great success in a wide range of applications involving graph-structured data,
such as classification [5, 6], link prediction [7], recommendation [8, 9], (overlapping) community
detection [10–13], and drug discovery [14].
The essence of many graph-analytic tasks could be summarized as supervised graph representation
learning, where the information on the graph is usually characterized by the node features, adjacency
matrix, and node or graph labels. A supervised machine learning pipeline is often introduced to
embed the nodes or graph under label supervision for a specific classification task. For most of
the GNN-based methods, the information on nodes and edges is composited through neighborhood
aggregation, i.e., updating the features of each node by combining the features of the surrounding
nodes. During this process, the graph structure mostly serves as a given source to indicate the nodes’
neighborship [15] or provide the weights for aggregation [5]. Treating the graph structure as given
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors. Code available at https://github.com/YH-UtMSB/VEPM

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

