Exponential Separations in Symmetric Neural
Networks
Aaron Zweig
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
az831@nyu.edu

Joan Bruna
Center for Data Science
New York University
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
In this work we demonstrate a novel separation between symmetric neural network
architectures. Specifically, we consider the Relational Network [21] architecture
as a natural generalization of the DeepSets [32] architecture, and study their
representational gap. Under the restriction to analytic activation functions, we
construct a symmetric function acting on sets of size N with elements in dimension
D, which can be efficiently approximated by the former architecture, but provably
requires width exponential in N and D for the latter.

1

Introduction

The modern success of deep learning can in part be attributed to architectures that enforce appropriate
invariance. Invariance to permutation of the input, i.e. treating the input as an unordered set, is a
desirable property when learning symmetric functions in such fields as particle physics and population
statistics. The simplest architectures that enforce permutation invariance treat each set element
individually without allowing for interaction, as captured by the popular DeepSet model [18, 32].
Several architectures explicitly enable interaction between set elements, the simplest being the
Relational Networks [21] that encode pairwise interaction. This may be understood as an instance of
self-attention, the mechanism underlying Transformers [27], which have emerged as powerful generic
neural network architectures to process a wide variety of data, from image patches to text to physical
data. Specifically, Set Transformers [12] are special instantiations of Transformers, made permutation
equivariant by omitting positional encoding of inputs, and using self-attention for pooling.
Both the DeepSets and Relational Networks architectures are universal approximators for the class of
symmetric functions. But empirical evidence suggests an inherent advantage of symmetric networks
using self-attention in synthetic settings [16], on point cloud data [12] and in quantum chemistry [17].
In this work, we formalize this question in terms of approximation power, and explicitly construct
symmetric functions which provably require exponentially-many neurons in the DeepSets model, yet
are efficiently approximated with self-attention.
This exponential separation bears notable differences from typical separation results. In particular,
while the expressive power of a vanilla neural network is characterized by depth and width, expressiveness of symmetric networks is controlled particularly by symmetric width. In contrast to depth
separations of vanilla neural networks [7], in this work we observe width separations, where the
weaker architectures (even with arbitrary depth) require exponential symmetric width to match the
expressive power of stronger architectures.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

