TANKBind: Trigonometry-Aware Neural NetworKs
for Drug-Protein Binding Structure Prediction

Wei Lu∗†
Galixir Technologies

Qifeng Wu†
Fudan University

Jixian Zhang†
Galixir Technologies

Jiahua Rao
Sun Yat-sen University

Chengtao Li
Galixir Technologies

Shuangjia Zheng∗†
Galixir Technologies
Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract
Illuminating interactions between proteins and small drug molecules is a longstanding challenge in the field of drug discovery. Despite the importance of understanding these interactions, most previous works are limited by hand-designed
scoring functions and insufficient conformation sampling. The recently-proposed
graph neural network-based methods provides alternatives to predict protein-ligand
complex conformation in a one-shot manner. However, these methods neglect
the geometric constraints of the complex structure and weaken the role of local
functional regions. As a result, they might produce unreasonable conformations
for challenging targets and generalize poorly to novel proteins. In this paper, we
propose Trigonometry-Aware Neural networKs for binding structure prediction,
TANKBind, that builds trigonometry constraint as a vigorous inductive bias into
the model and explicitly attends to all possible binding sites for each protein by
segmenting the whole protein into functional blocks. We construct novel contrastive losses with local region negative sampling to jointly optimize the binding
interaction and affinity. Extensive experiments show substantial performance gains
in comparison to state-of-the-art physics-based and deep learning-based methods
on commonly-used benchmark datasets for both binding structure and affinity
predictions with variant settings.

1

Introduction

Proteins are the workhorses of human bodies. They have a wide range of interaction partners, small
molecules, other proteins, and DNA/RNA, for example. In this paper, we focus on drug-like small
molecules as the interaction partners for proteins. The words ligands, drugs, small molecules and
compounds are used interchangeably throughout the paper. Small molecules activate or inhibit
activities of target proteins through mostly non-covalent interactions. In 2021, FDA approved 60 new
drugs, among which 36 were small molecules Kinch et al. [2022]. Understanding the mechanismof-actions and off-target effects of drug molecules typically requires analyzing the structures of the
related protein-ligand complexes Boopathi et al. [2021], Xie et al. [2011], but solving the complex
structure experimentally is a an extremely challenging task. Despite tremendous effort spent on
this topic over the last 50 years, only about 19,000 protein-ligand complex structures have been
solved experimentally using X-ray, Cryo-EM or NMR Liu et al. [2015]. On the other hand, the
estimated chemical space of drug is 1060 and estimated number of unique proteins in human body is
∗
†

Correspondance to {wei.lu, shuangjia.zheng}@galixir.com
These authors contribute equally to this work. Qifeng Wu and Jiahua Rao work as interns at Galixir.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

