Learning to Sample and Aggregate: Few-shot
Reasoning over Temporal Knowledge Graphs
Ruijie Wang1 , Zheng Li2 , Dachun Sun1 , Shengzhong Liu1 , Jinning Li1 ,
Bing Yin2 , Tarek Abdelzaher1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, IL, USA
2
Amazon.com Inc, CA, USA
{ruijiew2, dsun18, sl29, jinning4, zaher}@illinois.edu
{amzzhe, alexbyin}@amazon.com

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a realistic but underexplored problem, called few-shot
temporal knowledge graph reasoning, that aims to predict future facts for newly
emerging entities based on extremely limited observations in evolving graphs. It
offers practical value in applications that need to derive instant new knowledge
about new entities in temporal knowledge graphs (TKGs) with minimal supervision. The challenges mainly come from the few-shot and time shift properties of
new entities. First, the limited observations associated with them are insufficient
for training a model from scratch. Second, the potentially dynamic distributions
from the initially observable facts to the future facts ask for explicitly modeling
the evolving characteristics of new entities. We correspondingly propose a novel
Meta Temporal Knowledge Graph Reasoning (MetaTKGR) framework. Unlike prior
work that relies on rigid neighborhood aggregation schemes to enhance low-data
entity representation, MetaTKGR dynamically adjusts the strategies of sampling
and aggregating neighbors from recent facts for new entities, through temporally
supervised signals on future facts as instant feedback. Besides, such a meta temporal reasoning procedure goes beyond existing meta-learning paradigms on static
knowledge graphs that fail to handle temporal adaptation with large entity variance.
We further provide a theoretical analysis and propose a temporal adaptation regularizer to stabilize the meta temporal reasoning over time. Empirically, extensive
experiments on three real-world TKGs demonstrate the superiority of MetaTKGR
over state-of-the-art baselines by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Temporal Knowledge Graphs (TKGs) [34, 3, 22, 55] store temporally evolving facts (By fact, we
refer to a subject entity has a relation with an object entity at some time, e.g., “Macron” was “elected”
as “French president” in “2017”). It has been increasingly used in various knowledge-driven and
time-sensitive applications, such as social event forecasting [38, 24, 53], question answering [40],
and recommendation [70, 69, 54]. Large scale TKGs are hard to obtain due to the time-varying nature
of labels and the excessive cost of human annotation. As such, automating prediction and reasoning
about missing facts over time has attracted more recent interest [47, 10, 13, 48, 20]. However, most
prior efforts are limited to reasoning about existing entities but neglecting the commonly observed
low-data regime where many new entities emerge with extremely few observations as new events or
topics evolve over time [44]. This restricts their applicability.
Instead, inspired by the human ability to recognize new concepts from exposure to only very few
instances, we propose and solve a practical and challenging few-shot temporal knowledge graph
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

