First is Better Than Last for Language Data Influence
Chih-Kuan Yeh ⇤
Google Inc.
chihkuanyeh@google.com
Frederick Liu
Google Inc.
frederickliu@google.com

Ankur Taly
Google Inc.
ataly@google.com

Mukund Sundararajan
Google Inc.
mukunds@google.com

Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon University
Department of Machine Learning
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

The ability to identify influential training examples enables us to debug training
data and explain model behavior. Existing techniques to do so are based on the
flow of training data influence through the model parameters (Koh & Liang, 2017;
Yeh et al., 2018; Pruthi et al., 2020). For large models in NLP applications, it is
often computationally infeasible to study this flow through all model parameters,
therefore techniques usually pick the last layer of weights. However, we observe
that since the activation connected to the last layer of weights contains “shared
logic”, the data influenced calculated via the last layer weights prone to a “cancellation effect”, where the data influence of different examples have large magnitude
that contradicts each other. The cancellation effect lowers the discriminative power
of the influence score, and deleting influential examples according to this measure
often does not change the model’s behavior by much. To mitigate this, we propose
a technique called TracIn-WE that modifies a method called TracIn (Pruthi et al.,
2020) to operate on the word embedding layer instead of the last layer, where the
cancellation effect is less severe. One potential concern is that influence based on
the word embedding layer may not encode sufficient high level information. However, we find that gradients (unlike embeddings) do not suffer from this, possibly
because they chain through higher layers. We show that TracIn-WE significantly
outperforms other data influence methods applied on the last layer significantly
on the case deletion evaluation on three language classification tasks for different
models. In addition, TracIn-WE can produce scores not just at the level of the
overall training input, but also at the level of words within the training input, a
further aid in debugging.

1

Introduction

Training data influence methods study the influence of training examples on a model’s weights
(learned during the training process), and in turn on the predictions of other test examples. They
enable us to debug predictions by attributing them to the training examples that most influence them,
debug training data by identifying mislabeled examples, and fixing mispredictions via training data
curation. While the idea of training data influence originally stems from the study of linear regression
(Cook & Weisberg, 1982), it has recently been developed for complex machine learning models like
deep networks.
Prominent methods for quantifying training data influence for deep networks include influence
functions (Koh & Liang, 2017), representer point selection (Yeh et al., 2018), and TracIn (Pruthi
et al., 2020). While the details differ, all methods involves computing the gradients (w.r.t. the loss) of
the model parameters at the training and test examples. Thus, they all face a common computational
⇤

part of work done in CMU

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

