Analyzing Lottery Ticket Hypothesis from
PAC-Bayesian Theory Perspective

Keitaro Sakamoto
The University of Tokyo
sakakei-1999@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Issei Sato
The University of Tokyo
sato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) has attracted attention because it can explain
why over-parameterized models often show high generalization ability. It is known
that when we use iterative magnitude pruning (IMP), which is an algorithm to find
sparse networks with high generalization ability that can be trained from the initial
weights independently, called winning tickets, the initial large learning rate does
not work well in deep neural networks such as ResNet. However, since the initial
large learning rate generally helps the optimizer to converge to flatter minima,
we hypothesize that the winning tickets have relatively sharp minima, which is
considered a disadvantage in terms of generalization ability. In this paper, we
confirm this hypothesis and show that the PAC-Bayesian theory can provide an
explicit understanding of the relationship between LTH and generalization behavior.
On the basis of our experimental findings that IMP with a small learning rate finds
relatively sharp minima and that the distance from the initial weights is deeply
involved in winning tickets, we offer the PAC-Bayes bound using a spike-and-slab
distribution to analyze winning tickets. Finally, we revisit existing algorithms for
finding winning tickets from a PAC-Bayesian perspective and provide new insights
into these methods.

1

Introduction

The high generalization ability of modern neural networks can be attributed to the heavier overparameterization and effective learning algorithms [22, 30, 41]. This increase in the number of parameters
leads to high computational cost and high memory usage, and network pruning is one of the effective techniques for addressing these problems [12, 14, 23]. After pruning a significant number of
parameters, the pruned network can often work well with little or no accuracy loss. However, training
this sparse subnetwork independently from the initial weights often does not work, and we can only
obtain the sparse subnetwork through pruning after training the whole network.
Frankle and Carbin [10] presented “Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH)” that states the existence of
winning tickets: small but critical subnetworks which can be trained independently from scratch.
They proposed an algorithm called iterative magnitude pruning (IMP) to obtain a winning ticket.
They pointed out that, for deeper networks such as VGG [35] and ResNet [16], small learning rate
is required to obtain a winning ticket. However, since a large learning rate helps the generalization
ability of neural networks [25], the learning rate should be well controlled to find a winning ticket
that has a higher test accuracy. Frankle et al. [11] found a correlation between the stability to SGD
noise and the ability to find the winning ticket and empirically showed that the large learning rate
moves weights too much under the low-stability learning process.
In this paper, we first empirically show that winning tickets are actually more vulnerable to label noise
setting compared to the subnetwork created with the large learning rate; that is, the generalization
ability of winning tickets is degraded due to the learning rate constraint. In this connection, we then
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

