Exploring through Random Curiosity
with General Value Functions
Aditya Ramesh1 Louis Kirsch1 Sjoerd van Steenkiste2⇤ Jürgen Schmidhuber1,3,4
1
The Swiss AI Lab (IDSIA), University of Lugano (USI) & SUPSI
2
Google Research
3
AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
4
NNAISENSE
{aditya, louis, juergen}@idsia.ch, svansteenkiste@google.com

Abstract
Efficient exploration in reinforcement learning is a challenging problem commonly
addressed through intrinsic rewards. Recent prominent approaches are based on
state novelty or variants of artificial curiosity. However, directly applying them
to partially observable environments can be ineffective and lead to premature
dissipation of intrinsic rewards. Here we propose random curiosity with general
value functions (RC-GVF), a novel intrinsic reward function that draws upon
connections between these distinct approaches. Instead of using only the current
observation’s novelty or a curiosity bonus for failing to predict precise environment dynamics, RC-GVF derives intrinsic rewards through predicting temporally
extended general value functions. We demonstrate that this improves exploration
in a hard-exploration diabolical lock problem. Furthermore, RC-GVF significantly
outperforms previous methods in the absence of ground-truth episodic counts in
the partially observable MiniGrid environments. Panoramic observations on MiniGrid further boost RC-GVF’s performance such that it is competitive to baselines
exploiting privileged information in form of episodic counts.

1

Introduction

How should an agent efficiently explore environments with high-dimensional state spaces and sparse
rewards [70, 2]? An extrinsic reward-maximising agent will make little progress until it stumbles
upon a rewarding sequence of actions. In the literature, this issue is commonly addressed by providing
additional intrinsic reward to guide the agent’s exploratory behaviour [49, 12, 43].
One class of prominent approaches rely on state novelty, where an intrinsic reward in the form
of a ‘novelty bonus’ is awarded based on how often a state has been visited [65, 6]. More recent
works have extended these approaches to high dimensional state spaces where tabular counts are
inapplicable [7, 41, 10]. Another class of approaches is based on artificial curiosity, where agents are
rewarded in proportion to the prediction errors or information gains of a predictive world model [52,
60]. Curiosity-based techniques have also been scaled up to handle larger state spaces [22, 43].
Expecting an agent to have access to the complete environment state is unrealistic. In such partially
observable settings [3, 26], observations may look alike in different states, and the benefit of
approximate state novelty bonuses as intrinsic rewards is unclear. Consider the environment in
Figure 1 where an agent is required to traverse a series of blue and white tiles, yet it is only able
to observe the current tile it is standing on. The colours of the tiles alternate in a regular fashion
until the end of the corridor, where there is a surprising sequence of consecutive blue tiles. Directly
⇤

Part of this work was done while the author was a Postdoctoral researcher at IDSIA.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

