Quantile Constrained Reinforcement Learning:
A Reinforcement Learning Framework Constraining
Outage Probability

Whiyoung Jung, Myungsik Cho, Jongeui Park, Youngchul Sung∗
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
{wy.jung, ms.cho, jongeui.park, ycsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Constrained reinforcement learning (RL) is an area of RL whose objective is to
find an optimal policy that maximizes expected cumulative return while satisfying
a given constraint. Most of the previous constrained RL works consider expected
cumulative sum cost as the constraint. However, optimization with this constraint
cannot guarantee a target probability of outage event that the cumulative sum cost
exceeds a given threshold. This paper proposes a framework, named Quantile Constrained RL (QCRL), to constrain the quantile of the distribution of the cumulative
sum cost that is a necessary and sufficient condition to satisfy the outage constraint.
This is the first work that tackles the issue of applying the policy gradient theorem
to the quantile and provides theoretical results for approximating the gradient of the
quantile. Based on the derived theoretical results and the technique of the Lagrange
multiplier, we construct a constrained RL algorithm named Quantile Constrained
Policy Optimization (QCPO). We use distributional RL with the Large Deviation
Principle (LDP) to estimate quantiles and tail probability of the cumulative sum
cost for the implementation of QCPO. The implemented algorithm satisfies the
outage probability constraint after the training period.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been developed in the direction of finding an optimal policy that
maximizes expected cumulative return for a given environment. Thus, most of the works in RL
consider only rewards given by the environment to optimize the policy. However, many real-world
control problems impose constraints on the behavior of a policy. Constrained RL is an area of
RL whose objective is to find an optimal policy that maximizes expected cumulative return while
satisfying a certain constraint on the cumulative cost. A conventional constrained RL problem
(ExpCP) can be written as
P∞
Maximize V π (s0 ) := Eπ [Pt=0 γ t r(st , at )]
(ExpCP)
∞
subject to C π (s0 ) := Eπ [ t=0 γ t c(st , at )] ≤ dth ,
where the cost constraint is that the expectation of the sum of costs is less than or equal to a threshold
parameter dth . Note that the threshold dth is set on the average (i.e., expectation) of the cumulative
sum cost to avoid undesired high-cost events in this formulation. If we do not want any event causing
a positive cost, dth should be set as a sufficiently small value, i.e., dth ≈ 0. On the other hand, if
we can afford events with low costs, we can set dth properly as we desire. Most of the previous
constrained RL works solved the problem (ExpCP) [1, 12, 14, 24, 25, 28, 29] partly because the
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

