Learning Dynamical Systems via Koopman Operator
Regression in Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces
Vladimir R. Kostic⇤
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University of Novi Sad
vladimir.kostic@iit.it

Pietro Novelli ⇤
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
pietro.novelli@iit.it

Andreas Maurer
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
am@andreas-maurer.eu

Carlo Ciliberto
University College London
c.ciliberto@ucl.ac.uk

Lorenzo Rosasco
University of Genova
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
lrosasco@mit.edu

Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Abstract
We study a class of dynamical systems modelled as Markov chains that admit an
invariant distribution via the corresponding transfer, or Koopman, operator. While
data-driven algorithms to reconstruct such operators are well known, their relationship with statistical learning is largely unexplored. We formalize a framework to
learn the Koopman operator from finite data trajectories of the dynamical system.
We consider the restriction of this operator to a reproducing kernel Hilbert space
and introduce a notion of risk, from which different estimators naturally arise. We
link the risk with the estimation of the spectral decomposition of the Koopman
operator. These observations motivate a reduced-rank operator regression (RRR)
estimator. We derive learning bounds for the proposed estimator, holding both in
i.i.d. and non i.i.d. settings, the latter in terms of mixing coefficients. Our results
suggest RRR might be beneficial over other widely used estimators as confirmed
in numerical experiments both for forecasting and mode decomposition.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems [26, 38] provide a framework to study a variety of complex phenomena in science
and engineering. For instance, they find wide applications in diverse fields such as finance [46],
robotics [6, 16], atomistic simulations [32, 36, 53], open quantum system dynamics [20, 28], and
many more. Because of their practical importance, research around dynamical systems is and has
been abundant, see e.g. [17, 58] and references therein.
In light of recent machine learning progress, it is appealing to ask if the properties of dynamical
systems can be estimated (learned) from empirical data. Beyond machine learning this question
has a long history in dynamical systems [7]. The go-to reference for data-driven algorithms to
reconstruct dynamical systems is [25], where numerous methods based on so-called dynamic mode
⇤

Equal contribution, corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

