Private Multiparty Perception for Navigation
Hui Lu, Mia Chiquier, Carl Vondrick
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
{hl3231, mac2500, cv2428}@columbia.edu
https://visualmpc.cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We introduce a framework for navigating through cluttered environments by connecting multiple cameras together while simultaneously preserving privacy. Occlusions and obstacles in large environments are often challenging situations for
navigation agents because the environment is not fully observable from a single
camera view. Given multiple camera views of an environment, our approach learns
to produce a multiview scene representation that can only be used for navigation,
provably preventing one party from inferring anything beyond the output task. On a
new navigation dataset that we will publicly release, experiments show that private
multiparty representations allow navigation through complex scenes and around
obstacles while jointly preserving privacy. Our approach scales to an arbitrary
number of camera viewpoints. We believe developing visual representations that
preserve privacy is increasingly important for many applications such as navigation.

1

Introduction

Navigation through cluttered environments is a fundamental challenge in computer vision and robotics,
with many applications to autonomous vehicles and assistive technology. In the typical settings,
agents receive a camera view of the surroundings and the task is to predict the sequence of actions
needed to reach a goal destination (Figure 1 left). Today, many methods exist for solving this problem
when the environments are fully observerable or predictable [9, 31, 37, 20], both in simulation
[26] and the physical world [5, 13]. However, large environments often have many obstacles and
occlusions, which create irreducible uncertainties that cannot be resolved from just a single input
camera view.
Recently, the field has proposed different methods to combine multiple camera views together in order
to create complete representations of scenes [31, 4, 32]. These methods use the geometry of cameras
and visual correspondences between views to learn to reconstruct maps of environments, and they
are highly efficient, scaling to the size of full neighborhoods [31]. Since multiview representations
make the environment fully observerable, they allow for efficient navigation through complex scenes.
However, while these representations have many exciting applications, the concern for invasion of
individual privacy is significant. Without third parties that we can trust, it is increasingly important
to develop scene representations that safeguard individual identity and other sensitive information
contained inside visual data.
In this paper, we introduce a framework that connects multiple camera views together without
revealing private information about any of the camera views (Figure 1 right). Our approach is based
on the observation that any Boolean circuited can be cryptographically distributed between multiple
parties such that each party can only learn the output of the circuit and nothing else [38, 39]. Our
main result is that neural network inference for navigation is compatible with secure multiparty
computation and can be distributed between multiple camera views in this way. Our model creates a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

