Physics-Informed Implicit Representations
of Equilibrium Network Flows

Kevin D. Smith∗

Francesco Seccamonte∗

Ananthram Swami†

Francesco Bullo∗

Abstract
Flow networks are ubiquitous in natural and engineered systems, and in order to
understand and manage these networks, one must quantify the flow of commodities
across their edges. This paper considers the estimation problem of predicting
unlabeled edge flows from nodal supply and demand. We propose an implicit
neural network layer that incorporates two fundamental physical laws: conservation
of mass, and the existence of a constitutive relationship between edge flows and
nodal states (e.g., Ohm’s law). Computing the edge flows from these two laws is
a nonlinear inverse problem, which our layer solves efficiently with a specialized
contraction mapping. Using implicit differentiation to compute the solution’s
gradients, our model is able to learn the constitutive relationship within a semisupervised framework. We demonstrate that our approach can accurately predict
edge flows in AC power networks and water distribution systems.

1

Introduction

Network flows are a fundamental aspect of modern society, from traffic and communication networks
to power and water distribution systems. Many critical infrastructures are well-modeled as graphs,
with edges that transport vital commodities [1]. Beyond infrastructure, network flows are also central
to models in epidemiology, ecology, medicine, and chemical networks. Their dynamics have been
well-studied in compartmental systems theory [2]. Given the prevalence of flow networks in natural
and engineered systems, predicting flows in these networks is an important learning task that may
facilitate monitoring, control, optimization, and protection of these networks.
While domain-specific tools to predict network flows have been around for a while, the machine
learning community has only recently taken an interest in general-purpose models for network
flows. [3] predicts edge flows from partial measurements by making a smoothing assumption, i.e., by
minimizing nodal flow divergence. [4] improves on this approach by adding a trainable regularizer that
can incorporate side information. Both of these approaches are centered on a notion of approximate
conservation, i.e., that the net inflow to each node should be near zero. Since conservation of mass is
a universal constraint on network flows, imposing this conservation law is an important step toward
embedding physics into the model.
But the conservation law alone is not enough to uniquely determine flow, which is why both [3] and
[4] rely on heuristic regularizers to select the “best” conservation-respecting flow. In fact, physical
networks are often governed by a pair of physical laws: the conservation law, and a constitutive
relationship, which specifies the magnitude and direction of each edge flow based on “effort” variables
at each incident node (e.g., pressure or voltage). For example, in DC circuits, currents are conserved
according to Kirchoff’s current law, and Ohm’s law is the constitutive relationship that relates current
flows to nodal potentials. The conservation law and the constitutive relationship together define the
unique edge flows (and nodal efforts).
∗
Center for Control, Dynamical Systems, and Computation, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA
93106 USA, {kevinsmith, fseccamonte, bullo}@ucsb.edu
†
U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD 20783 USA, ananthram.swami.civ@army.mil

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

