Data-Driven Offline Decision-Making via
Invariant Representation Learning
Han Qi⇤ , Yi Su⇤ , Aviral Kumar⇤ , Sergey Levine
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley
{han2019, aviralk}@berkeley.edu, yisumtv@google.com (⇤ Equal Contribution)

Abstract
The goal in offline data-driven decision-making is synthesize decisions that optimize a black-box utility function, using a previously-collected static dataset, with
no active interaction. These problems appear in many forms: offline reinforcement
learning (RL), where we must produce actions that optimize the long-term reward,
bandits from logged data, where the goal is to determine the correct arm, and offline
model-based optimization (MBO) problems, where we must find the optimal design
provided access to only a static dataset. A key challenge in all these settings is
distributional shift: when we optimize with respect to the input into a model trained
from offline data, it is easy to produce an out-of-distribution (OOD) input that
appears erroneously good. In contrast to prior approaches that utilize pessimism or
conservatism to tackle this problem, in this paper, we formulate offline data-driven
decision-making as domain adaptation, where the goal is to make accurate predictions for the value of optimized decisions (“target domain”), when training only on
the dataset (“source domain”). This perspective leads to invariant objective models
(I OM), our approach for addressing distributional shift by enforcing invariance
between the learned representations of the training dataset and optimized decisions.
In I OM, if the optimized decisions are too different from the training dataset, the
representation will be forced to lose much of the information that distinguishes
good designs from bad ones, making all choices seem mediocre. Critically, when
the optimizer is aware of this representational tradeoff, it should choose not to
stray too far from the training distribution, leading to a natural trade-off between
distributional shift and learning performance.

1

Introduction

Many real-world applications of machine learning involve learning how to make better decisions from
data. When we must make a sequence of decisions (e.g., control a robot), this can be formulated as
offline reinforcement learning (RL) [27, 30], whereas in problems where we must synthesize only one
decision (e.g., a molecule that can effectively catalyze a reaction), this can be formulated as a multiarmed bandit or a data-driven model-based optimization (also known as black-box optimization [2]).
In all of these cases, an algorithm is provided with data from previous experiments consisting of
(x, y) tuples, where x represents a decision (e.g., a bandit arm, a design such as a molecule or protein,
or a sequence of actions in RL) and y represents its utility (e.g., certain property of the molecule or
the long-term reward of a trajectory). The goal is to generate the best possible decision, typically
one that is better than the best one in the dataset. All of these problem domains are united by a
common challenge: in order to improve, the decisions learned by the algorithm must differ from the
distribution of the designs in the training data, inducing distributional shift [23, 24], which must be
carefully handled.
Current methods for solving such data-driven decision-making problems try to learn some form of
a proxy model fˆ(·) that maps a decision x to its objective value y via supervised learning on the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

