On the Global Convergence Rates of Decentralized
Softmax Gradient Play in Markov Potential Games

Runyu Zhang
Harvard University

Jincheng Mei
Google Research, Brain Team

runyuzhang@fas.harvard.edu

jcmei@google.com

Bo Dai
Google Research, Brain Team
bodai@google.com

Dale Schuurmans
University of Alberta
Google Research, Brain Team
schuurmans@google.com

Na Li
Harvard University
nali@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Softmax policy gradient is a popular algorithm for policy optimization in singleagent reinforcement learning, particularly since projection is not needed for each
gradient update. However, in multi-agent systems, the lack of central coordination
introduces significant additional difficulties in the convergence analysis. Even for
a stochastic game with identical interest, there can be multiple Nash Equilibria
(NEs), which disables proof techniques that rely on the existence of a unique global
optimum. Moreover, the softmax parameterization introduces non-NE policies with
zero gradient, making it difficult for gradient-based algorithms in seeking NEs. In
this paper, we study the finite time convergence of decentralized softmax gradient
play in a special form of game, Markov Potential Games (MPGs), which includes
the identical interest game as a special case. We investigate both gradient play and
natural gradient play, with and without log-barrier regularization. The established
convergence rates for the unregularized cases contain a trajectory dependent constant that can be arbitrarily large, whereas the log-barrier regularization overcomes
this drawback, with the cost of slightly worse dependence on other factors such
as the action set size. An empirical study on an identical interest matrix game
confirms the theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent systems encounter vast application in real world scenarios, such as network routing
[35, 8], social and economic decision making [36, 30], and robotic swarms [22, 14]. In these problems,
a system consists of a group of agents interacting in a shared environment. Given the recent success
of reinforcement learning (RL), increasing attention has been drawn to the possibility of applying RL
algorithms, such as policy gradient, to multi-agent systems. However, the theoretical foundations for
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) remain limited. Unlike single-agent RL, the actions of
other agents affect the dynamics and the decision making outcome for each individual in the system,
raising additional theoretical challenges when analyzing joint performance.
The stochastic game (SG) is a classical multi-agent model that has received extensive attention in
recent MARL studies. In a stochastic game, the environment is represented by a state space that
evolves based on the joint actions of agents. Each agent in a stochastic game tries to maximize its own
total reward by making decisions independently, based on state information shared between agents.
The stochastic game model was first introduced in [31], with a series of followup works proposing
NE-seeking algorithms, particularly in the RL setting (e.g. [21, 5, 32, 6, 17, 38] and citations therein).
Given recent progress in the underlying theory of RL, many recent works have investigated finite
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

