How Transferable are Video Representations Based on
Synthetic Data?

Yo-whan Kim1,2 , Samarth Mishra2,4 , SouYoung Jin1 ,
Rameswar Panda2 , Hilde Kuehne2,3 , Leonid Karlinsky2 ,
Venkatesh Saligrama4 , Kate Saenko2,4 , Aude Oliva1,2 , Rogerio Feris2
1

MIT, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 Goethe University, 4 Boston University

Abstract
Action recognition has improved dramatically with massive-scale video datasets.
Yet, these datasets are accompanied with issues related to curation cost, privacy,
ethics, bias, and copyright. Compared to that, only minor efforts have been devoted
toward exploring the potential of synthetic video data. In this work, as a stepping
stone towards addressing these shortcomings, we study the transferability of video
representations learned solely from synthetically-generated video clips, instead of
real data. We propose SynAPT, a novel benchmark for action recognition based
on a combination of existing synthetic datasets, in which a model is pre-trained
on synthetic videos rendered by various graphics simulators, and then transferred
to a set of downstream action recognition datasets, containing different categories
than the synthetic data. We provide an extensive baseline analysis on SynAPT
revealing that the simulation-to-real gap is minor for datasets with low object and
scene bias, where models pre-trained with synthetic data even outperform their
real data counterparts. We posit that the gap between real and synthetic action
representations can be attributed to contextual bias and static objects related to
the action, instead of the temporal dynamics of the action itself. The SynAPT
benchmark is available at https://github.com/mintjohnkim/SynAPT.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-training using massive datasets, containing hundreds of thousands or even millions
of video clips, have brought significant progress in action recognition [28, 38, 1, 17]. High capacity models trained on such large datasets have shown remarkable generalization performance to
downstream tasks where training data is limited [64, 17].
While this progress is exciting, these large-scale video datasets also have shortcomings. Collecting
and annotating videos is expensive, tedious, and time-consuming. As a result, methods that learn
feature representations from unlabeled videos, including self-supervised [61], weakly-supervised [17],
and semi-supervised approaches [53], have received significant attention in recent years. However,
these works do not address other important ethical, legal, and technical issues related to processing
real-world data, as described below:
Privacy concerns. Video samples may include human interactions and activities, but often, the
individuals’ sensitive information (e.g., faces, license plates, or location indicators) is captured along.
Proprietary issues. Massive-scale datasets containing millions or billions of images and videos,
such as IG65M [17] and JFT3B [65], are not publicly available, preventing the larger community
from reproducing results, which hinders research progress.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

