Losses Can Be Blessings: Routing Self-Supervised
Speech Representations Towards Efficient
Multilingual and Multitask Speech Processing

Yonggan Fu1 , Yang Zhang2 , Kaizhi Qian2 , Zhifan Ye3 , Zhongzhi Yu1
Cheng-I Lai4 , Yingyan (Celine) Lin1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 Rice University, 4 MIT CSAIL
{yfu314,zyu401,celine.lin}@gatech.edu
{yang.zhang2,kqian}@ibm.com {zy50}@rice.edu {clai24}@mit.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) for rich speech representations has achieved empirical success in low-resource Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) and other speech
processing tasks, which can mitigate the necessity of a large amount of transcribed
speech and thus has driven a growing demand for on-device ASR and other speech
processing. However, advanced speech SSL models have become increasingly
large, which contradicts the limited on-device resources. This gap could be more
severe in multilingual/multitask scenarios requiring simultaneously recognizing
multiple languages or executing multiple speech processing tasks. Additionally,
strongly overparameterized speech SSL models tend to suffer from overfitting
when being finetuned on low-resource speech corpus. This work aims to enhance
the practical usage of speech SSL models towards a win-win in both enhanced
efficiency and alleviated overfitting via our proposed S3 -Router framework, which
for the first time discovers that simply discarding no more than 10% of model
weights via only finetuning model connections of speech SSL models can achieve
better accuracy over standard weight finetuning on downstream speech processing
tasks. More importantly, S3 -Router can serve as an all-in-one technique to enable
(1) a new finetuning scheme, (2) an efficient multilingual/multitask solution, (3)
a state-of-the-art ASR pruning technique, and (4) a new tool to quantitatively
analyze the learned speech representation. We believe S3 -Router has provided a
new perspective for practical deployment of speech SSL models. Our codes are
available at: https://github.com/GATECH-EIC/S3-Router.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network (DNN) breakthroughs have tremendously advanced the field of Automatic
Speech Recognition (ASR). However, one major driving force for powerful DNNs, i.e., the availability
of a large amount of training data, is not always possible for ASR. This is because collecting largescale transcriptions is costly, especially for low-resource spoken languages around the world, limiting
the wide application of deep ASR models. Fortunately, recent advances in self-supervised learning
(SSL) for rich speech representations [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] have achieved empirical success in
low-resource ASR, where SSL models pretrained on raw audio data without transcriptions can be
finetuned on low-resource transcribed speech to match the accuracy of their supervised counterparts.
However, there exists a dilemma between the trends of speech SSL models and the growing demand
for speech processing applications on the edge. While advanced speech SSL models become increasingly larger to learn more generalizable features, it is highly desired to process the captured speech
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

