Minimax Optimal Online Imitation Learning via
Replay Estimation

Gokul Swamy∗
Carnegie Mellon University
gswamy@cmu.edu

Nived Rajaraman∗
UC Berkeley
nived.rajaraman@berkeley.edu

Sanjiban Choudhury
Cornell University

Matthew Peng
UC Berkeley

J. Andrew Bagnell
Aurora Innovation and Carnegie Mellon University

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University

Jiantao Jiao
UC Berkeley

Kannan Ramchandran
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Online imitation learning is the problem of how best to mimic expert demonstrations, given access to the environment or an accurate simulator. Prior work has
shown that in the infinite sample regime, exact moment matching achieves value
equivalence to the expert policy. However, in the finite sample regime, even if one
has no optimization error, empirical variance can leadpto a performance gap that
scales with H 2 /Nexp for behavioral cloning and H/ Nexp for online moment
matching, where H is the horizon and Nexp is the size of the expert dataset. We
introduce the technique of replay estimation to reduce this empirical variance: by
repeatedly executing cached expert actions in a stochastic simulator, we compute a
smoother expert visitation distribution estimate to match. In the presence of parametric function approximation, we prove a meta theorem reducing the performance
gap of our approach to the parameter estimation error for offline classification
(i.e. learning the expert policy). In the tabular setting or with linear function
approximation, our meta theorem shows that the performance
p gap incurred by
3/2
e
our approach achieves the optimal O min(H /Nexp , H/ Nexp dependency,
under significantly weaker assumptions compared to prior work. We implement
multiple instantiations of our approach on several continuous control tasks and find
that we are able to significantly improve policy performance across a variety of
dataset sizes.

1

Introduction

In online imitation learning (IL), one is given access to (a) a fixed set of expert demonstrations and
(b) an environment or simulator to perform rollouts in. Many online IL approaches fall under the
umbrella of solving a moment matching problem between learner and expert trajectory distributions
Ziebart et al. [2008], Ho and Ermon [2016],
min sup Eπ [f (s, a)] − EπE [f (s, a)],
π∈Π f ∈F

(1)

where Eπ [·] denotes the expectation over a random trajectory {(s1 , a1 ), · · · , (sH , aH )} generated by
rolling out π. Swamy et al. [2021] show that for an appropriate choice of F, approximate solutions
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to gswamy@cmu.edu and nived.rajaraman@berkeley.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

