Hierarchical Graph Transformer with Adaptive
Node Sampling

Zaixi Zhang1,2 Qi Liu1,2∗, Qingyong Hu3 , Chee-Kong Lee4
1: Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2:State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, Anhui, China
3:Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 4: Tencent America
zaixi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn
qhuag@cse.ust.hk, cheekonglee@tencent.com

Abstract
The Transformer architecture has achieved remarkable success in a number of
domains including natural language processing and computer vision. However,
when it comes to graph-structured data, transformers have not achieved competitive
performance, especially on large graphs. In this paper, we identify the main
deficiencies of current graph transformers: (1) Existing node sampling strategies
in Graph Transformers are agnostic to the graph characteristics and the training
process. (2) Most sampling strategies only focus on local neighbors and neglect
the long-range dependencies in the graph. We conduct experimental investigations
on synthetic datasets to show that existing sampling strategies are sub-optimal. To
tackle the aforementioned problems, we formulate the optimization strategies of
node sampling in Graph Transformer as an adversary bandit problem, where the
rewards are related to the attention weights and can vary in the training procedure.
Meanwhile, we propose a hierarchical attention scheme with graph coarsening
to capture the long-range interactions while reducing computational complexity.
Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on real-world datasets to demonstrate
the superiority of our method over existing graph transformers and popular GNNs.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the Transformer architecture [33] and its variants (e.g., Bert [7] and ViT [8]) have
achieved unprecedented successes in natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV).
In light of the superior performance of Transformer, some recent works [21, 38] attempt to generalize
Transformer for graph data by treating each node as a token and designing dedicated positional
encoding. However, most of these works only focus on small graphs such as molecular graphs
with tens of atoms [38]. For instance, Graphormer [38] achieves state-of-the-art performance on
molecular property prediction tasks. When it comes to large graphs, the quadratic computational
and storage complexity of the vanilla Transformer with the number of nodes inhibits the practical
application. Although some Sparse Transformer methods [30, 2, 19] can improve the efficiency of
the vanilla Transformer, they have not exploited the unique characteristics of graph data and require
a quadratic or at least sub-quadratic space complexity, which is still unaffordable in most practical
cases. Moreover, the full-attention mechanism potentially introduces noise from numerous irrelevant
nodes in the full graph.
To generalize Transformer to large graphs, existing Transformer-based methods [9, 46, 7] on graphs
explicitly or implicitly restrict each node’s receptive field to reduce the computational and storage
∗

Qi Liu is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

