A Theoretical View on Sparsely Activated Networks
Cenk Baykal
Google Research
Rina Panigrahy
Google Research

Nishanth Dikkala
Google Research
Cyrus Rashtchian
Google Research

Xin Wang
Google Research

Abstract
Deep and wide neural networks successfully fit very complex functions today, but
dense models are starting to be prohibitively expensive for inference. To mitigate
this, one promising direction is networks that activate a sparse subgraph of the
network. The subgraph is chosen by a data-dependent routing function, enforcing
a fixed mapping of inputs to subnetworks (e.g., the Mixture of Experts (MoE)
paradigm in Switch Transformers). However, prior work is largely empirical,
and while existing routing functions work well in practice, they do not lead to
theoretical guarantees on approximation ability. We aim to provide a theoretical
explanation for the power of sparse networks. As our first contribution, we present
a formal model of data-dependent sparse networks that captures salient aspects
of popular architectures. We then introduce a routing function based on locality
sensitive hashing (LSH) that enables us to reason about how well sparse networks
approximate target functions. After representing LSH-based sparse networks with
our model, we prove that sparse networks can match the approximation power of
dense networks on Lipschitz functions. Applying LSH on the input vectors means
that the experts interpolate the target function in different subregions of the input
space. To support our theory, we define various datasets based on Lipschitz target
functions, and we show that sparse networks give a favorable trade-off between
number of active units and approximation quality.

1

Introduction

Overparameterized neural networks continue to yield performance gains as their sizes increase. This
trend has been most prominent with large Transformer based language models [6, 12, 32]. However,
using large, dense networks makes training and inference very expensive, and computing a forward
pass may require trillions of floating point operations (FLOPs). It is an active area of research to
improve the scalability and efficiency without decreasing the expressiveness or quality of the models.
One way to achieve this goal is to only activate part of the network at a time. For example, the
Mixture of Experts (MoE) paradigm [22, 37] uses a two-step approach. First, each input is mapped
to a certain subnetwork, known as an expert. Then, upon receiving this input, only this particular
subnetwork performs inference, leading to a smaller number of operations compared to the total
number of parameters across all experts. Some variations of this idea map parts of an input (called
tokens) individually to different experts. Another well-studied generalization is to map an input to a
group of subnetworks and aggregate their output in a weighted manner. Switch Transformers [14]
successfully use a refined version of the MoE idea, where the input may be the embedding of a token
or part of a hidden layer’s output. Researchers have investigated many ways to perform the mapping,
such as Scaling Transformers [21] or using pseudo-random hash functions [34]. In all cases, sparsity
occurs in the network because after the input is mapped to the subnetwork, only this subset of neurons
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

