VoiceBlock: Privacy through Real-Time Adversarial
Attacks with Audio-to-Audio Models
Patrick O’Reilly, Andreas Bugler, Keshav Bhandari, Max Morrison, Bryan Pardo
Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University
{patrick.oreilly2024, andreas, keshavbhandari2023}@u.northwestern.edu
pardo@northwestern.edu

Abstract
As governments and corporations adopt deep learning systems to collect and
analyze user-generated audio data, concerns about security and privacy naturally emerge in areas such as automatic speaker recognition. While audio adversarial examples offer one route to mislead or evade these invasive systems,
they are typically crafted through time-intensive offline optimization, limiting
their usefulness in streaming contexts. Inspired by architectures for audio-toaudio tasks such as denoising and speech enhancement, we propose a neural
network model capable of adversarially modifying a user’s audio stream in realtime. Our model learns to apply a time-varying finite impulse response (FIR)
filter to outgoing audio, allowing for effective and inconspicuous perturbations
on a small fixed delay suitable for streaming tasks. We demonstrate our model
is highly effective at de-identifying user speech from speaker recognition and
able to transfer to an unseen recognition system. We conduct a perceptual
study and find that our method produces perturbations significantly less perceptible than baseline anonymization methods, when controlling for effectiveness. Finally, we provide an implementation of our model capable of running
in real-time on a single CPU thread. Audio examples and code can be found at
https://interactiveaudiolab.github.io/project/voiceblock.html.

1

Introduction

Mass surveillance of voice communications is an ongoing and pervasive issue. While section 702 of
the United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act allows the government to perform targeted
monitoring of foreign communications, bulk collection practices have resulted in the warrantless
surveillance of large numbers of "incidental" foreign and domestic individuals [17]. Despite the
fact that millions of these communications are obtained without warrants, they have been used in
ordinary criminal investigations [60], undermining a core purpose of the Fourth Amendment of
the US constitution [59]: to protect the people against searches without probable cause. Many
corporations also possess the capability for large-scale collection of voice data [23], which may be
leveraged to profile users for advertising or accessed by government entities through upstream and
downstream surveillance [16]. As individuals are faced with these growing surveillance apparati, it is
worth remembering that routine surveillance of private voice communications is also corrosive to free
speech and association and tends to disproportionately affect marginalized groups [28, 18].
In the absence of identifying metadata, automatic speaker recognition systems can facilitate mass
surveillance by allowing an operator to search a database of recorded voice data for utterances from a
chosen speaker [7] or to diarise (assign utterances to individuals) transcripts of recordings [44]. Prior
to the advent of automatic speaker recognition these tasks required human analysts, forming a natural
check on surveillance overreach. We seek to restore this check by degrading the efficacy of speaker
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

