Measures of Information Reflect
Memorization Patterns
Rachit BansalX
Delhi Technological University
racbansa@gmail.com

Danish PruthiY
Amazon Web Services
danish@hey.com

Yonatan BelinkovZ
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
belinkov@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Neural networks are known to exploit spurious artifacts (or shortcuts) that co-occur
with a target label, exhibiting heuristic memorization. On the other hand, networks
have been shown to memorize training examples, resulting in example-level memorization. These kinds of memorization impede generalization of networks beyond
their training distributions. Detecting such memorization could be challenging, often requiring researchers to curate tailored test sets. In this work, we hypothesize—
and subsequently show—that the diversity in the activation patterns of different
neurons is reflective of model generalization and memorization. We quantify the
diversity in the neural activations through information-theoretic measures and find
support for our hypothesis in experiments spanning several natural language and
vision tasks. Importantly, we discover that information organization points to the
two forms of memorization, even for neural activations computed on unlabeled
in-distribution examples. Lastly, we demonstrate the utility of our findings for the
problem of model selection. The associated code and other resources for this work
are available at https://information-measures.cs.technion.ac.il.

1

Introduction

Current day deep learning networks are limited in their ability to generalize across different domains
and settings. Prior studies found that these networks rely on spurious artifacts that are correlated with
a target label (Schölkopf et al., 2012; Lapuschkin et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2019, 2020, inter alia).
We refer to learning of such artifacts (also known as heuristics or shortcuts) as heuristic memorization.
Further, neural networks can also memorize individual training examples and their labels; for instance,
when a subset of the examples are incorrectly labeled (Zhang et al., 2017; Arpit et al., 2017; Tänzer
et al., 2021). We refer to this behavior as example-level memorization. A large body of past work
has established that these facets of memorization pose a threat to generalization, especially in out-ofdistribution (OOD) scenarios where the memorized input features and corresponding target mappings
do not hold (Ben-David et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2021b; Hendrycks et al., 2021a; Shen et al., 2021). To
simulate such OOD distributions, however, researchers are required to laboriously collect specialized
and labeled datasets to measure the extent of suspected fallacies in models. While these sets make it
possible to assess model behavior over a chosen set of features, the larger remaining features remain
X Work done during a visit at the Technion, Israel. The author is now at Google Research India.
Y Work done while at Carnegie Mellon University, prior to joining Amazon.
Z Supported by the Viterbi Fellowship in the Center for Computer Engineering at the Technion.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

