Wasserstein Iterative Networks
for Barycenter Estimation

Alexander Korotin
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
a.korotin@skoltech.ru
Lingxiao Li
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
lingxiao@mit.edu

Vage Egiazarian
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia
vage.egiazarian@skoltech.ru

Evgeny Burnaev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
e.burnaev@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Wasserstein barycenters have become popular due to their ability to represent
the average of probability measures in a geometrically meaningful way. In this
paper, we present an algorithm to approximate the Wasserstein-2 barycenters
of continuous measures via a generative model. Previous approaches rely on
regularization (entropic/quadratic) which introduces bias or on input convex neural
networks which are not expressive enough for large-scale tasks. In contrast, our
algorithm does not introduce bias and allows using arbitrary neural networks. In
addition, based on the celebrity faces dataset, we construct Ave, celeba! dataset
which can be used for quantitative evaluation of barycenter algorithms by using
standard metrics of generative models such as FID.

1

Introduction

Wasserstein barycenters [1] provide a geometrically meaningful notion of the average of probability measures based on optimal transport (OT,
see [65]). Methods for computing barycenters
have been successfully applied to various practical problems. In geometry processing, shape
interpolation can be performed by barycenters
[58]. In image processing, barycenters are used
for color and style translation [49, 44], texture
mixing [50] and image interpolation [32, 56].
In language processing, barycenters can be applied to text evaluation [15]. In online learning,
barycenters are used for aggregating probabilistic forecasts of experts [31, 47, 27]. In Bayesian
inference, the barycenter of subset posteriors
Figure 1: The barycenter w.r.t. weights
converges to the full data posterior [59, 60] al1 1 1
lowing efficient computation of full posterior (α1 , α2 , α3 ) = ( 4 , 2 , 4 ) of Ave, Celeba! subsets
computed by our Algorithm 1.
based on barycenters. In reinforcement learning,
barycenters are used for uncertainty propagation The figure shows random samples from the input
[41]. Other applications are data augmentation subsets and generated images from the barycenter.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

