A New Family of Generalization Bounds
Using Samplewise Evaluated CMI

Fredrik Hellström
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
frehells@chalmers.se

Giuseppe Durisi
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
durisi@chalmers.se

Abstract
We present a new family of information-theoretic generalization bounds, in which
the training loss and the population loss are compared through a jointly convex
function. This function is upper-bounded in terms of the disintegrated, samplewise, evaluated conditional mutual information (CMI), an information measure
that depends on the losses incurred by the selected hypothesis, rather than on the
hypothesis itself, as is common in probably approximately correct (PAC)-Bayesian
results. We demonstrate the generality of this framework by recovering and extending previously known information-theoretic bounds. Furthermore, using the
evaluated CMI, we derive a samplewise, average version of Seeger’s PAC-Bayesian
bound, where the convex function is the binary KL divergence. In some scenarios,
this novel bound results in a tighter characterization of the population loss of
deep neural networks than previous bounds. Finally, we derive high-probability
versions of some of these average bounds. We demonstrate the unifying nature of
the evaluated CMI bounds by using them to recover average and high-probability
generalization bounds for multiclass classification with finite Natarajan dimension.

1

Introduction

Information-theoretic generalization bounds, i.e., generalization bounds that are expressed in terms
of information-theoretic metrics such as the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, mutual information,
and conditional mutual information (CMI), have emerged as useful tools to obtain an accurate
characterization of the performance of deep neural networks. To obtain such bounds, one compares
a posterior, that is, the distribution over the hypotheses induced by the learning algorithm, to a
reference distribution called the prior, an approach first introduced to provide probably approximately
correct (PAC) bounds for Bayesian classifiers [1, 2, 3, 4]. The connection between these results and
classic information-theoretic metrics was clarified in [5, 6], where the generalization gap, averaged
with respect to the joint posterior and data distribution, is bounded in terms of the mutual information
between the training data and the hypothesis. These bounds have since been extended in several
ways [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15].
A major step was taken in [16], in which a setting where the training set is randomly selected from a
larger supersample is considered. We refer to this setup as the CMI setting, as it leads to generalization
bounds in terms of the CMI between the hypothesis and training set selection, given the supersample.
It turns out that these bounds can be further tightened by observing that the selected hypothesis enters
the derivation only through the loss that it induces on the supersample. Using this observation, [16]
also derives bounds in terms of the information encoded in these losses rather than in the hypothesis
itself, a quantity referred to as the evaluated CMI (e-CMI). Due to the data-processing inequality,
these bounds are always tighter than the regular CMI bounds. This observation was recently further
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

