Coarse-to-Fine Vision-Language Pre-training with
Fusion in the Backbone
Zi-Yi Dou∗‡ , Aishwarya Kamath∗♮ , Zhe Gan∗†♠ , Pengchuan Zhang§ , Jianfeng Wang†
Linjie Li† , Zicheng Liu† , Ce Liu† , Yann LeCun♮ , Nanyun Peng‡ , Jianfeng Gao† , Lijuan Wang†
†
Microsoft ‡ University of California, Los Angeles ♮ New York University
{zdou,violetpeng}@cs.ucla.edu, {aish,yann.lecun}@nyu.edu, pengchuanzhang@fb.com
{zhgan,jianfw,linjli,zliu,liuce,jfgao,lijuanw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Vision-language (VL) pre-training has recently received considerable attention.
However, most existing end-to-end pre-training approaches either only aim to
tackle VL tasks such as image-text retrieval, visual question answering (VQA)
and image captioning that test high-level understanding of images, or only target
region-level understanding for tasks such as phrase grounding and object detection.
We present F IBER (Fusion-In-the-Backbone-based transformER), a new VL model
architecture that can seamlessly handle both these types of tasks. Instead of having
dedicated transformer layers for fusion after the uni-modal backbones, F IBER
pushes multimodal fusion deep into the model by inserting cross-attention into the
image and text backbones, bringing gains in terms of memory and performance. In
addition, unlike previous work that is either only pre-trained on image-text data
or on fine-grained data with box-level annotations, we present a two-stage pretraining strategy that uses both these kinds of data efficiently: (i) coarse-grained
pre-training based on image-text data; followed by (ii) fine-grained pre-training
based on image-text-box data. We conduct comprehensive experiments on a
wide range of VL tasks, ranging from VQA, image captioning, and retrieval,
to phrase grounding, referring expression comprehension, and object detection.
Using deep multimodal fusion coupled with the two-stage pre-training, F IBER
provides consistent performance improvements over strong baselines across all
tasks, often outperforming methods using magnitudes more data. Code is available
at https://github.com/microsoft/FIBER.

1

Introduction

Inspired by the success of language model pre-training [11, 51, 42], coupled with the unification of
architectures used in the NLP and computer vision communities [12, 4], vision-language pre-training
(VLP) [62, 45, 33, 6] has been receiving an increasing amount of attention. It has been proven that
VLP can establish state-of-the-art performance on visual question answering [3], visual reasoning [60],
image captioning, and image-text retrieval [41]. The pre-training objectives commonly used for these
tasks, such as image-text matching, image conditioned masked language modeling and image-text
constrastive learning, require multimodal understanding at the image level. Typically, this means the
pre-training is done using images at lower resolution (e.g., 384×384), making it possible to scale up
training by using large batch sizes.
Recently, it has also been shown that tasks such as image classification and object detection (OD),
which have been traditionally viewed as vision-only tasks, can benefit from being cast as VL
tasks [50, 25, 34, 26]. Inspired by MDETR [26], GLIP [34] reformulates standard classificationbased OD as phrase grounding. This opens up the possibility to leverage VLP for OD, and vice versa,
∗

Equal Technical Contribution

♠

Project Lead

§

Work done while at Microsoft

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

