Neural Topological Ordering for Computation Graphs

Mukul Gagrani∗
Qualcomm AI Research†
mgagrani@qti.qualcomm.com
Harris Teague
Qualcomm AI Research

Corrado Rainone∗
Qualcomm AI Research
crainone@qti.qualcomm.com

Wonseok Jeon
Qualcomm AI Research

Yang Yang‡
Google LLC

Herke Van Hoof
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands

Weiliang Will Zeng
Qualcomm AI Research

Piero Zappi
Qualcomm AI Research

Christopher Lott
Qualcomm AI Research

Roberto Bondesan
Qualcomm AI Research

Abstract
Recent works on machine learning for combinatorial optimization have shown that
learning based approaches can outperform heuristic methods in terms of speed and
performance. In this paper, we consider the problem of finding an optimal topological order on a directed acyclic graph with focus on the memory minimization
problem which arises in compilers. We propose an end-to-end machine learning
based approach for topological ordering using an encoder-decoder framework.
Our encoder is a novel attention based graph neural network architecture called
Topoformer which uses different topological transforms of a DAG for message
passing. The node embeddings produced by the encoder are converted into node
priorities which are used by the decoder to generate a probability distribution over
topological orders. We train our model on a dataset of synthetically generated
graphs called layered graphs. We show that our model outperforms, or is on-par,
with several topological ordering baselines while being significantly faster on synthetic graphs with up to 2k nodes. We also train and test our model on a set of
real-world computation graphs, showing performance improvements.

1

Introduction

Many problems in computer science amount to finding the best sequence of objects consistent with
some precedence constraints. An intuitive example comes from routing problems, where we would
like to find the shortest route between cities but we have requirements (i.e. for example to pick up
and subsequently deliver a package) on the order in which the cities should be visited [1]. Another
case is found in compiler pipelines, wherein the "cities" become operations to be executed and the
constraints come from the data dependencies between these operations, such as when the result of
an operation is an operand in a subsequent one. In this case, the metric to be optimized can be the
run time of the compiled program, or the memory required to execute the program [2]. Common
across this class of problems is their formulation in term of finding the optimal topological order
∗

Equal contribution
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
‡
Work completed during employment at Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

