Non-stationary Bandits with Knapsacks

Shang Liu† Jiashuo Jiang‡ Xiaocheng Li†
†

Imperial College Business School, Imperial College London
‡
NYU Stern School of Business
s.liu21@imperial.ac.uk, jj2398@stern.nyu.edu, xiaocheng.li@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of bandits with knapsacks (BwK) in a nonstationary environment. The BwK problem generalizes the multi-arm bandit (MAB)
problem to model the resource consumption associated with playing each arm. At
each time, the decision maker/player chooses to play an arm, and s/he will receive a
reward and consume certain amount of resource from each of the multiple resource
types. The objective is to maximize the cumulative reward over a finite horizon
subject to some knapsack constraints on the resources. Existing works study the
BwK problem under either a stochastic or adversarial environment. Our paper
considers a non-stationary environment which continuously interpolates these two
extremes. We first show that the traditional notion of variation budget is insufficient
to characterize the non-stationarity of the BwK problem for a sublinear regret due
to the presence of the constraints, and then we propose a new notion of global
non-stationarity measure. We employ both non-stationarity measures to derive
upper and lower bounds for the problem. Our results are based on a primal-dual
analysis of the underlying linear programs and highlight the interplay between the
constraints and the non-stationarity. Finally, we also extend the non-stationarity
measure to the problem of online convex optimization with constraints and obtain
new regret bounds accordingly.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem characterizes a problem for which a limited amount of
resource must be allocated between competing (alternative) choices in a way that maximizes the
expected gain. The bandits with knapsacks (BwK) problem generalizes the multi-armed bandits
problem to allow more general resource constraints structure on the decisions made over time, in
addition to the customary limitation on the time horizon. Specifically, for the BwK problem, the
decision maker/player chooses to play an arm at each time period; s/he will receive a reward and
consume certain amount of resource from each of the multiple resource types. Accordingly, the
objective is to maximize the cumulative reward over a finite time horizon and subject to an initial
budget of multiple resource types. The BwK problem was first introduced by Badanidiyuru et al.
[2013] as a general framework to model a wide range of applications, including dynamic pricing and
revenue management [Besbes and Zeevi, 2012], Adwords problem [Mehta et al., 2005] and more.
The standard setting of the BwK problem is stochastic where the joint distribution of reward and
resource consumption for each arm remains stationary (identical) over time. Under such setting, a
linear program (LP), that takes the expected reward and resource consumption of each arm as input,
both serves as the benchmark for regret analysis and drives the algorithm design [Badanidiyuru et al.,
2013, Agrawal and Devanur, 2014]. Notably, a static best distribution prescribed by the LP’s optimal
solution is used for defining the regret benchmark. An alternative setting is the adversarial BwK
problem where the reward and the consumption may no long follow a distribution and they can be
chosen arbitrarily over time. Under the adversarial setting, a sublinear regret is not achievable in
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

