Modeling the Machine Learning Multiverse
Samuel J. Bell1

Onno P. Kampman2 Jesse Dodge3 Neil D. Lawrence1
Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge
2
Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge
3
Allen Institute for AI
{sjb326,opk20,ndl21}@cam.ac.uk jessed@allenai.org
1

Abstract
Amid mounting concern about the reliability and credibility of machine learning
research, we present a principled framework for making robust and generalizable
claims: the multiverse analysis. Our framework builds upon the multiverse analysis
[1] introduced in response to psychology’s own reproducibility crisis. To efficiently
explore high-dimensional and often continuous ML search spaces, we model the
multiverse with a Gaussian Process surrogate and apply Bayesian experimental design. Our framework is designed to facilitate drawing robust scientific conclusions
about model performance, and thus our approach focuses on exploration rather
than conventional optimization. In the first of two case studies, we investigate
disputed claims about the relative merit of adaptive optimizers. Second, we synthesize conflicting research on the effect of learning rate on the large batch training
generalization gap. For the machine learning community, a multiverse analysis
is a simple and effective technique for identifying robust claims, for increasing
transparency, and a step toward improved reproducibility.

1

Introduction

Machine learning research faces mounting concern about the reliability of our results and the
credibility of our claims [2–20]. The field of psychology has faced a similar crisis [21], and
confrontation with its shortcomings has sparked practical innovations [1, 22–25]. One such innovation
is of direct relevance to the machine learning community: the multiverse analysis [1].
Throughout any investigation, scientists make decisions about how to perform their work. In
psychology, as in other disciplines, there are a plethora of different ways to conduct and analyze
experiments. From just a handful of choices, we reach such a large decision tree that researchers can
repeatedly try different paths until they chance upon a positive result [26]. Even without conscious
manipulation, these decision points pose a fundamental problem: what if the psychologist had chosen
an alternate—and perfectly reasonable—route through this garden of forking paths [27]? Would their
results and conclusions still stand?
In their replication of a contentious study [28] on the effect of menstrual cycle and relationship status
on women’s political preferences, Steegen et al. [1] identify both decisions taken and reasonable
alternatives.1 They name the Cartesian product of alternatives a multiverse, a set of parallel universes
each containing a slightly different study. Introducing the multiverse analysis, Steegen et al. re-run
the study as if inside each universe, finding that the alleged effect of relationship status and fertility is
highly sensitive to different choices, in particular the definition of “single”. Multiverse analyses have
subsequently been used to evaluate the robustness of claims across a variety of psychological and
neuroscientific settings (e.g. [29–33]).
1

E.g. outlier selection; variable discretization; and how to estimate menstrual onset.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

