Self-Supervised Aggregation of Diverse Experts for
Test-Agnostic Long-Tailed Recognition

1

Yifan Zhang1 Bryan Hooi1 Lanqing Hong2 Jiashi Feng3
National University of Singapore 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 ByteDance
yifan.zhang@u.nus.edu, jshfeng@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing long-tailed recognition methods, aiming to train class-balanced models
from long-tailed data, generally assume the models would be evaluated on the
uniform test class distribution. However, practical test class distributions often
violate this assumption (e.g., being either long-tailed or even inversely long-tailed),
which may lead existing methods to fail in real applications. In this paper, we study
a more practical yet challenging task, called test-agnostic long-tailed recognition,
where the training class distribution is long-tailed while the test class distribution
is agnostic and not necessarily uniform. In addition to the issue of class imbalance,
this task poses another challenge: the class distribution shift between the training
and test data is unknown. To tackle this task, we propose a novel approach,
called Self-supervised Aggregation of Diverse Experts, which consists of two
strategies: (i) a new skill-diverse expert learning strategy that trains multiple
experts from a single and stationary long-tailed dataset to separately handle different
class distributions; (ii) a novel test-time expert aggregation strategy that leverages
self-supervision to aggregate the learned multiple experts for handling unknown
test class distributions. We theoretically show that our self-supervised strategy
has a provable ability to simulate test-agnostic class distributions. Promising
empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on both vanilla and
test-agnostic long-tailed recognition. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/Vanint/SADE-AgnosticLT.

1

Introduction

Real-world visual recognition datasets typically exhibit a long-tailed distribution, where a few classes
contain numerous samples (called head classes), but the others are associated with only a few instances
(called tail classes) [24, 33]. Due to the class imbalance, the trained model is easily biased towards
head classes and perform poorly on tail classes [2, 58]. To tackle this issue, numerous studies have
explored long-tailed recognition for learning well-performing models from imbalanced data [20, 56].
Most existing long-tailed studies [3, 9, 10, 48, 52] assume the test class distribution is uniform, i.e.,
each class has an equal amount of test data. Therefore, they develop various techniques, e.g., class resampling [13, 18, 25, 55], cost-sensitive learning [11, 36, 41, 47] or ensemble learning [2, 13, 27, 53],
to re-balance the model performance on different classes for fitting the uniform class distribution.
However, this assumption does not always hold in real applications, where actual test data may follow
any kind of class distribution, being either uniform, long-tailed, or even inversely long-tailed to the
training data (cf. Figure 1(a)). For example, one may train a recognition model for autonomous
cars based on the training data collected from city areas, where pedestrians are majority classes and
stone obstacles are minority classes. However, when the model is deployed to mountain areas, the
pedestrians become the minority while the stones become the majority. In this case, the test class
distribution is inverse to the training one, and existing methods may perform poorly.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

