TREC: Transient Redundancy Elimination-based
Convolution
Jiawei Guan⋄ , Feng Zhang⋄ , Jiesong Liu⋄ , Hsin-Hsuan Sung⋆ ,
Ruofan Wu⋄ , Xiaoyong Du⋄ , Xipeng Shen⋆
⋄
Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering (MOE),
and School of Information, Renmin University of China
⋆
Computer Science Department, North Carolina State University
guanjw@ruc.edu.cn, fengzhang@ruc.edu.cn, liujiesong@ruc.edu.cn, hsung2@ncsu.edu,
ruofanwu@ruc.edu.cn, duyong@ruc.edu.cn, xshen5@ncsu.edu

Abstract
The intensive computations in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) pose challenges for resource-constrained devices; eliminating redundant computations from
convolution is essential. This paper gives a principled method to detect and avoid
transient redundancy, a type of redundancy existing in input data or activation maps
and hence changing across inferences. By introducing a new form of convolution
(TREC), this new method makes transient redundancy detection and avoidance an
inherent part of the CNN architecture, and the determination of the best configurations for redundancy elimination part of CNN backward propagation. We provide
a rigorous proof of the robustness and convergence of TREC-equipped CNNs.
TREC removes over 96% computations and achieves 3.51× average speedups on
microcontrollers with minimal (about 0.7%) accuracy loss.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are computation intensive, making their deployment on
resource-constrained devices (e.g., Microcontrollers equipped with 2MB memory) challenging.
Removing computation redundancy in convolutions is hence an important way to speed up CNN
inferences.
Depending on where the redundancy comes from, redundancy in CNN can be classified into lasting
redundancy and transient redundancy. Lasting redundancy arises from CNN parameters. As the
parameters typically stay unchanged after CNN is deployed for inference, such redundancy can be
detected and removed through offline methods (e.g., DNN pruning [9, 10, 13, 22, 23, 34, 35] and
quantization [15, 17, 26, 33]). Transient redundancy, on the other hand, arises from input data or
activation maps, manifesting as similar tiles within an image or an activation map. Unlike lasting
redundancy, transient redundancy has to be detected and removed in every inference, elusive to
offline methods.
Although transient redundancy has been observed in images [25] and videos [16, 36, 37, 38],
understanding to it is much less than to lasting redundancy. Prior studies have treated transient
redundancy in an ad-hoc manner. Deep Reuse [25], for instance, diverts, before a convolution, the
input images or activation maps from the DNN pipeline to a randomized (to avoid bias) online
clustering component to detect the contained redundancy, and then redirects the clustering results
back to the DNN. Such ad-hoc treatments work well sometimes on some data, but perform badly
in other times (e.g., over 5% accuracy fluctuations in different runs). The reason is the lack of
understanding to some fundamental aspects of transient redundancy. Examples include
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

