GraphQNTK: Quantum Neural Tangent Kernel for
Graph Data

Yehui Tang, Junchi Yan∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yehuitang, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and Graph Kernels (GKs) are two fundamental
tools used to analyze graph-structured data. Efforts have been recently made in developing a composite graph learning architecture combining the expressive power
of GNNs and the transparent trainability of GKs. However, learning efficiency on
these models should be carefully considered as the huge computation overhead.
Besides, their convolutional methods are often straightforward and introduce severe
loss of graph structure information. In this paper, we design a novel quantum graph
learning model to characterize the structural information while using quantum
parallelism to improve computing efficiency. Specifically, a quantum algorithm is
proposed to approximately estimate the neural tangent kernel of the underlying
graph neural network where a multi-head quantum attention mechanism is introduced to properly incorporate semantic similarity information of nodes into the
model. We empirically show that our method achieves competitive performance
on several graph classification benchmarks, and theoretical analysis is provided to
demonstrate the superiority of our quantum algorithm. Source code is available at
https://github.com/abel1231/graphQNTK.

1

Introduction

Fusing quantum computing and classic machine learning has become a promising subject of research.
Quantum-based algorithms have been proposed in recent years, from naive quantum non-parametric
machine learning [52, 36, 43, 32] to classic-quantum hybrid deep leaning [7, 10, 46, 37, 14]. Despite
that quantum machine learning (QML) has shown its potential in many machine learning tasks,
quantum computing for graph learning is still in its early stage [61]. Inspired by the two popular
classes of methods for learning on graph data, i.e., Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [20, 39, 21, 67]
and Graph Kernels (GKs) [23], several works attempt to build quantum graph learning architecture
that captures the structural information of graph data, such as Quantum Graph Neural Networks
(QGNNs) [64, 7, 11, 16, 1] and Quantum Graph Kernel Methods (QGKs) [56, 3, 25, 4]. A brief
review about quantum graph learning is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Some quantum subroutines for attribute encoding [5, 70] and structural encoding [64, 46] have been
developed to dissolve the characteristics of the graph into the quantum model. However, most present
quantum graph learning models are hybrid such that the expressive capability depends more on the
complexity of the classic modules [70]. It is difficult to characterize the structure information and
attribute information of the graph by the quantum components without the participation of classic
modules. Even worse, the frequent interactions between classical systems and quantum environments
generally incur additional overhead [55]. It is unclear whether the introduced quantum module
∗

Junchi Yan is the correspondence author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

