Incorporating Bias-aware Margins into Contrastive
Loss for Collaborative Filtering

An Zhang†‡ Wenchang Ma‡ Xiang Wang§∗ Tat-Seng Chua†‡
†
Sea-NExT Joint Lab
‡
National University of Singapore
§
University of Science and Technology of China
anzhang@u.nus.edu, e0724290@u.nus.edu, xiangwang1223@gmail.com
dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Collaborative filtering (CF) models easily suffer from popularity bias, which makes
recommendation deviate from users’ actual preferences. However, most current
debiasing strategies are prone to playing a trade-off game between head and tail
performance, thus inevitably degrading the overall recommendation accuracy. To
reduce the negative impact of popularity bias on CF models, we incorporate Biasaware margins into Contrastive loss and propose a simple yet effective BC Loss,
where the margin tailors quantitatively to the bias degree of each user-item interaction. We investigate the geometric interpretation of BC loss, then further visualize
and theoretically prove that it simultaneously learns better head and tail representations by encouraging the compactness of similar users/items and enlarging the
dispersion of dissimilar users/items. Over eight benchmark datasets, we use BC
loss to optimize two high-performing CF models. On various evaluation settings
(i.e., imbalanced/balanced, temporal split, fully-observed unbiased, tail/head test
evaluations), BC loss outperforms the state-of-the-art debiasing and non-debiasing
methods with remarkable improvements. Considering the theoretical guarantee
and empirical success of BC loss, we advocate using it not just as a debiasing
strategy, but also as a standard loss in recommender models. Codes are available at
https://github.com/anzhang314/BC-Loss.

1

Introduction

At the core of leading collaborative filtering (CF) models is the learning of high-quality representations
of users and items from historical interactions. However, most CF models easily suffer from the
popularity bias issue in the interaction data [1, 2, 3, 4]. Specifically, the training data distribution is
typically long-tailed, e.g., a few head items occupy most of the interactions, whereas the majority
of tail items are unpopular and receive little attention. The CF models built upon the imbalanced
data are prone to learn the popularity bias and even amplify it by over-recommending head items and
under-recommending tail items. As a result, the popularity bias causes the biased representations
with poor generalization ability, making recommendations deviate from users’ actual preferences.
Motivated by concerns of popularity bias, studies on debiasing have been conducted to lift the tail
performance. Unfortunately, most prevalent debiasing strategies focus on the trade-off between
head and tail evaluations (see Table 3), including post-processing re-ranking [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], balanced
training loss [10, 11, 12, 9], sample re-weighting [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18], and head bias removal
by causal inference [19, 20, 21, 22]. Worse still, many of them hold some assumptions that are
∗

Xiang Wang is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

