Confidence-based Reliable Learning
under Dual Noises
Peng Cui1 3 , Yang Yue1 , Zhijie Deng1 2⇤, Jun Zhu1⇤
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China
2
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 RealAI
xpeng.cui@gmail.com, yueyang22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zhijied@sjtu.edu.cn, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in a variety of
computer vision tasks, where massive labeled images are routinely required for
model optimization. Yet, the data collected from the open world are unavoidably
polluted by noise, which may significantly undermine the efficacy of the learned
models. Various attempts have been made to reliably train DNNs under data noise,
but they separately account for either the noise existing in the labels or that existing
in the images. A naive combination of the two lines of works would suffer from the
limitations in both sides, and miss the opportunities to handle the two kinds of noise
in parallel. This works provides a first, unified framework for reliable learning
under the joint (image, label)-noise. Technically, we develop a confidence-based
sample filter to progressively filter out noisy data without the need of pre-specifying
noise ratio. Then, we penalize the model uncertainty of the detected noisy data
instead of letting the model continue over-fitting the misleading information in
them. Experimental results on various challenging synthetic and real-world noisy
datasets verify that the proposed method can outperform competing baselines in
the aspect of classification performance.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have obtained great success in a wide spectrum of computer vision
applications [26, 41, 19, 18], especially when a large volume of carefully-annotated low-distortion
images are available. However, the images collected from the wild in real-world tasks are unavoidably
polluted by noise in the images themselves (e.g., image corruptions [20] and background noise [43])
or the associated labels [36], termed as image noise (x-noise) and label noise (y-noise) respectively.
Previous investigations show that the DNNs naively trained under y-noise [2, 52] or x-noise [11, 53]
suffer from detrimental over-fitting issues, thus exhibit poor generalization performance and serious
over-confidence.
There has been a large body of attempts towards dealing with data noise, but they mainly focus on
a limited setting, where noise only exists in either the label (i.e., noisy labels) [36, 1, 31, 8] or the
image [13, 27, 50]. It is non-trivial to extend them to exhaustively deal with dual noises (i.e., the
joint (x,y)-noise). Moreover, the techniques for handling x-noise suffer from non-trivial limitations.
For example, most image denoising methods work on well-preserved image texture [12], thus may
easily fail when facing images that are globally blurred (see Fig. 5 in Appendix); alternative image
Super-Resolution (SR) solutions are usually computationally expensive [46]. These issues raise the
requirement of a unified approach for reliable learning under dual noises.
⇤

The corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

