Get More at Once: Alternating Sparse Training with
Gradient Correction
Li Yang∗ , Jian Meng∗ , Jae-Sun Seo, Deliang Fan
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287
{lyang166,jmeng15,jseo28,dfan}@asu.edu

Abstract
Recently, a new trend of exploring training sparsity has emerged, which removes
parameters during training, leading to both training and inference efficiency improvement. This line of works primarily aims to obtain a single sparse model
under a pre-defined large sparsity ratio. It leads to a static/fixed sparse inference
model that is not capable of adjusting or re-configuring its computation complexity
(i.e., inference structure, latency) after training for real-world varying and dynamic
hardware resource availability. To enable such run-time or post-training network
morphing, the concept of ‘dynamic inference’ or ‘training-once-for-all’ has been
proposed to train a single network consisting of multiple sub-nets once, but each
sub-net could perform the same inference function with different computing complexity. However, the traditional dynamic inference training method requires a
joint training scheme with multi-objective optimization, which suffers from very
large training overhead. In this work, for the first time, we propose a novel alternating sparse training (AST) scheme to train multiple sparse sub-nets for dynamic
inference without extra training cost compared to the case of training a single
sparse model from scratch. Furthermore, to mitigate the interference of weight
update among sub-nets without losing the generalization of optimization, we propose gradient correction within the inner-group iterations to reduce their weight
update interference. We validate the proposed AST on multiple datasets against
state-of-the-art sparse training methods, which shows that AST achieves similar or
better accuracy, but only needs to train once to get multiple sparse sub-nets with
different sparsity ratios. More importantly, comparing with the traditional joint
training based dynamic inference training methodology, the large training overhead
is completely eliminated without affecting the accuracy of each sub-net. Code is
available at https://github.com/mengjian0502/AST.

1

Introduction

For Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), sparsification (i.e., pruning) has been widely explored in the last
decade aiming to reduce the computational and memory cost by removing unimportant parameters.
Early works of DNN pruning focused on exploring the post-training sparsity [10, 7, 11] to improve
the inference efficiency, which prunes a well-trained dense model followed by additional fine-tuning
to recover accuracy. Recently, exploring in-training sparsity has emerged as a promising technique
to improve the training efficiency by pruning parameters during training [3, 4, 9, 19, 14]. The
success of these in-training sparsification methods is mainly rewarded from the prune-and-regrow
technique, which periodically and aggressively eliminates the unimportant non-zero weights from the
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

