Neural Circuit Architectural Priors
for Embodied Control
Nikhil X. Bhattasali, Anthony M. Zador, Tatiana A. Engel
NeuroAI Program, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
{bhattas,zador,engel}@cshl.edu

Abstract
Artificial neural networks for motor control usually adopt generic architectures
like fully connected MLPs. While general, these tabula rasa architectures rely on
large amounts of experience to learn, are not easily transferable to new bodies, and
have internal dynamics that are difficult to interpret. In nature, animals are born
with highly structured connectivity in their nervous systems shaped by evolution;
this innate circuitry acts synergistically with learning mechanisms to provide
inductive biases that enable most animals to function well soon after birth and learn
efficiently. Convolutional networks inspired by visual circuitry have encoded useful
biases for vision. However, it is unknown the extent to which ANN architectures
inspired by neural circuitry can yield useful biases for other AI domains. In
this work, we ask what advantages biologically inspired ANN architecture can
provide in the domain of motor control. Specifically, we translate C. elegans
locomotion circuits into an ANN model controlling a simulated Swimmer agent.
On a locomotion task, our architecture achieves good initial performance and
asymptotic performance comparable with MLPs, while dramatically improving data
efficiency and requiring orders of magnitude fewer parameters. Our architecture is
interpretable and transfers to new body designs. An ablation analysis shows that
constrained excitation/inhibition is crucial for learning, while weight initialization
contributes to good initial performance. Our work demonstrates several advantages
of biologically inspired ANN architecture and encourages future work in more
complex embodied control.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks (ANNs) for motor control usually adopt generic architectures like fully
connected multi-layered perceptrons (MLPs) [Pierson and Gashler, 2017, Levine et al., 2016, Bin Peng
et al., 2020, Heess et al., 2016]. While general, these tabula rasa architectures rely on large amounts
of experience to learn. Data efficiency is especially desirable because, unlike computer vision and
natural language processing which have benefited greatly from available large datasets [Bommasani
et al., 2021], motor control requires interacting with an environment to gather experience, which is
time-consuming, laborious, and possibly unsafe [Kroemer et al., 2020]. Transfer is also a challenge,
as experience is usually body-specific, and an ANN trained to control one body is not easily adapted
to new bodies. In addition, architectures like MLPs are difficult to interpret, as their internal dynamics
are distributed across units and non-trivial to relate to agent behavior [Merel et al., 2019a].
In nature, animals are born with highly structured connectivity in their brains and nervous systems
that has been shaped over millennia by evolution [Zador, 2019]. In some cases, this innate circuitry
confers abilities with little or no learning; in others, it guides the learning process by providing
strong inductive biases [Lake et al., 2017]. These innate and learning mechanisms act synergistically,
enabling most animals to function well soon after birth, while continuing to acquire and improve skills
efficiently, e.g. a horse learning to walk with only a couple hours of experience. Moreover, despite
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

