On the SDEs and Scaling Rules
for Adaptive Gradient Algorithms

Sadhika Malladi∗

Kaifeng Lyu∗
Abhishek Panigrahi
Sanjeev Arora
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
{smalladi,klyu,ap34,arora}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Approximating Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) as a Stochastic Differential
Equation (SDE) has allowed researchers to enjoy the benefits of studying a continuous optimization trajectory while carefully preserving the stochasticity of SGD.
Analogous study of adaptive gradient methods, such as RMSprop and Adam, has
been challenging because there were no rigorously proven SDE approximations
for these methods. This paper derives the SDE approximations for RMSprop and
Adam, giving theoretical guarantees of their correctness as well as experimental
validation of their applicability to common large-scaling vision and language settings. A key practical result is the derivation of a square root scaling rule to adjust
the optimization hyperparameters of RMSprop and Adam when changing batch
size, and its empirical validation in deep learning settings.

1

Introduction

Distributed synchronous optimization environments have enabled very rapid training of models
(in terms of wall-clock time) by allowing a large batch size. Understanding large-batch stochastic
optimization is crucial to enjoying the speed-up of this setting. In this context, Krizhevsky (2014);
Goyal et al. (2017) empirically discovered the linear scaling rule (LSR) for Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD). It calls for scaling learning rate proportionately to the batch size while fixing the
number of epochs. It was recognized that the validity of this scaling rule stems from the benefits
to generalization due to noise from mini-batch gradient estimation. But naive analysis, as done
in Hoffer et al. (2017), suggested that the scaling rule for SGD ought to be square root instead of
linear. Subsequently, Jastrz˛ebski et al. (2017) pointed out that since the phenomenon involves varying
the LR even down to zero, the correct analysis should invoke a continuous view, namely a stochastic
differential equation (SDE). The SDE view helps identify the correct scaling of the noise and leads to
a derivation of the linear scaling rule (see Section 2.2).
However, extending the SDE approach—i.e., continuous-time approximations—to popular adaptive
optimization algorithms, like RMSprop (Tieleman and Hinton, 2012) and Adam (Kingma and Ba,
2015), has been challenging due to their use of coordinate-wise normalization. By ignoring gradient
noise, Ma et al. (2022) derived intuitive continuous approximations for full-batch RMSprop and
Adam; however, this deterministic view precludes a scaling rule.
Recent papers have suggested a square root scaling rule for adaptive algorithms: set the learning
rate proportionately to the square root of the batch size while fixing the number of epochs. Based
on perturbation theory, Granziol et al. (2022) proposed the square root scaling rule for RMSprop
and Adam but could only reason about optimization behavior near convergence, not along the entire
trajectory. A square root scaling rule was also empirically discovered for another adaptive gradient
∗

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

