Decoupled Context Processing for
Context Augmented Language Modeling

Zonglin Li ∗
Google Research, New York
lizonglin@google.com

Ruiqi Guo ∗
Google Research, New York
guorq@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research, New York
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
Language models can be augmented with a context retriever to incorporate knowledge from large external databases. By leveraging retrieved context, the neural network does not have to memorize the massive amount of world knowledge within its
internal parameters, leading to better parameter efficiency, interpretability and modularity. In this paper we examined a simple yet effective architecture for incorporating external context into language models based on decoupled Encoder-Decoder
architecture. We showed that such a simple architecture achieves competitive
results on auto-regressive language modeling and open domain question answering tasks. We also analyzed the behavior of the proposed model which performs
grounded context transfer. Finally we discussed the computational implications of
such retrieval augmented models.

1

Introduction

Transformers have proven to be powerful language models that capture an impressive amount of
world knowledge in its internal parameters and generalize to a variety of downstream tasks [39, 31].
Recently, there has been a lot of success in improving language model quality by increasing the
number of parameters in transformers, often on the order of hundreds of billion [10, 30, 38, 6].
However, the scaling of model size also contributes to the exponential rise of the computation costs,
both in terms of the number of accelerators needed and energy consumption [29].
To overcome the exponential increase in the number of parameters, one natural idea is to utilize
information retrieved from an external source such as a massive external database, therefore freeing
the neural network from having to memorize world knowledge. To this end, researchers proposed
multiple context augmented language model architectures [21, 15, 4, 44, 26]. Such architecture
typically has two components: a retriever that embeds the input sequence and retrieves relevant
context from external source through vector similarity search; a neural network that integrates both
the input and retrieved external context into the prediction of target sequence, formally:
P (y|x, C = Retrieve(x, D); θ) ≥ P (y|x, θ0 )

(1)

Here, C = {c} is a set of context retrieved from the external database D. θ0 is a self-contained
language model which predicts target sequence y based solely on the input x whereas θ corresponds
to the context augmented language model which incorporates both the input x and the retrieved
context C.
One of the challenges for such context augmented language model is the computational cost of
context retrieval and incorporation, especially when multiple pieces of context is present or the
context sequence is long. In this paper, we propose a computationally efficient architecture for
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

