Adaptive Multi-stage Density Ratio Estimation for
Learning Latent Space Energy-based Model

Zhisheng Xiao
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
zxiao@uchicago.edu

Tian Han
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ, 07030
than6@stevens.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the fundamental problem of learning energy-based model (EBM)
in the latent space of the generator model. Learning such prior model typically
requires running costly Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). Instead, we propose
to use noise contrastive estimation (NCE) to discriminatively learn the EBM
through density ratio estimation between the latent prior density and latent posterior
density. However, the NCE typically fails to accurately estimate such density ratio
given large gap between two densities. To effectively tackle this issue and learn
more expressive prior models, we develop the adaptive multi-stage density ratio
estimation which breaks the estimation into multiple stages and learn different
stages of density ratio sequentially and adaptively. The latent prior model can be
gradually learned using ratio estimated in previous stage so that the final latent
space EBM prior can be naturally formed by product of ratios in different stages.
The proposed method enables informative and much sharper prior than existing
baselines, and can be trained efficiently. Our experiments demonstrate strong
performances in image generation and reconstruction as well as anomaly detection.

1

Introduction

Deep generative model provides a powerful framework for representing complex data distributions
and have seen many successful applications in image and video synthesis [21, 43, 51], representation
learning [34] as well as unsupervised or semi-supervised learning [19, 37]. Such model, referred to
as generator model, usually consists of low-dimensional latent variables that follow non-informative
prior distribution, and a top-down network that maps such latent vector to the observed example. The
informative prior model in the latent space [36, 1] can be learned to further improve the expressive
power of the whole model. Specifically, we consider learning energy-based model (EBM) in the
latent space as our informative prior for the generator model.
Learning latent space EBM can be challenging and requires iterative Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) sampling step which is computationally expensive and sensitive to hyperparameters. In this
paper, we instead propose to use noise contrastive estimation (NCE) [12] for learning EBM prior
via density ratio estimation. The EBM is learned discriminatively by classifying the latent vector
sampled from the prior density and the latent sampled from posterior density. Instead of variational
learned inference [23, 41] which needs a separate inference network designed, we obtain the posterior
latent sample through short-run Langevin dynamics [33] to ensure more accurate inference. However,
the success of NCE depends on the closeness of prior density and posterior density [18]. Given large
gap between two densities, NCE typically fails to accurately estimate such density ratio which leads
to inaccurate EBM modeling.
To effectively tackle the inaccurate estimation issue and further learn more expressive prior model, we
develop the adaptive multi-stage density ratio estimation for latent space EBM training. The proposed
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

