Learning (Very) Simple Generative Models Is Hard

Sitan Chen
UC Berkeley
sitanc@berkeley.edu

Jerry Li
Microsoft Research
jerrl@microsoft.com

Yuanzhi Li
CMU
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the recent empirical successes of deep generative models, we study
the computational complexity of the following unsupervised learning problem. For
′
′
an unknown neural network F : Rd → Rd , let D be the distribution over Rd
given by pushing the standard Gaussian N (0, Idd ) through F . Given i.i.d. samples
from D, the goal is to output any distribution close to D in statistical distance.
We show under the statistical query (SQ) model that no polynomial-time algorithm
can solve this problem even when the output coordinates of F are one-hidden-layer
ReLU networks with log(d) neurons. Previously, the best lower bounds for this
problem simply followed from lower bounds for supervised learning and required
at least two hidden layers and poly(d) neurons [CGKM22, DV21].
The key ingredient in our proof is an ODE-based construction of a compactly
supported, piecewise-linear function f with polynomially-bounded slopes such that
the pushforward of N (0, 1) under f matches all low-degree moments of N (0, 1).

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep generative models such as variational autoencoders, generative adversarial networks, and normalizing flows [GPAM+ 14, KW13, RM15] have seen incredible success in modeling
real world data. These work by learning a parametric transformation (e.g. a neural network) of a
simple distribution, usually a standard normal random variable, into a complex and high-dimensional
one. The learned distributions have been shown to be shockingly effective at modeling real world
data. The success of these generative models begs the following question: when is it possible to learn
such a distribution? Not only is this a very natural question from a learning-theoretic perspective, but
understanding this may also lead to more direct methods to learn generative models for real data.
More formally, we consider the following problem. Let D be the unknown pushforward distribution
over Rd given by f (g), where g ∼ N (0, Id) is a standard normal Gaussian, and f is an unknown feedforward neural network with non-linear (typically ReLU) activations. Such distributions naturally
arise as the output of many common deep generative models in practice. The learner is given n
samples from D, and their goal is to output the description of some distribution which is close to D.
When f is a one-layer network (i.e. of the form f (g) = ReLU(W g)), there are efficient algorithms
for learning the distribution [WDS19, LLDD20]. However, this setting is unsatisfactory in many
ways, as one-layer networks lack much of the complex structure that makes these generative models
so appealing in practice. Indeed, when the neural network only has a single layer, the resulting
distribution is similar to a truncated Gaussian, and one can leverage techniques developed for learning
from truncated samples. Notably, this structure disappears even with two-layer neural networks. Even
in the two-layer case, despite significant interest, very little is known about how to learn D efficiently.
In fact, a recent line of work suggests that learning neural network pushforwards of Gaussians may
be an inherently difficult computational task. Recent results of [DV21, CGKM22] show hardness
of supervised learning from labeled Gaussian examples under cryptographic asssumptions, and the
latter also demonstrates hardness for all statistical query (SQ) algorithms (see Section 1.3 for a more
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

