An α-regret analysis of Adversarial Bilateral Trade

Yossi Azar
Department of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University, Israel
azar@tauex.tau.ac.il

Amos Fiat
Department of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University, Israel
fiat@tau.ac.il

Federico Fusco
Department of Computer, Control
and Management Engineering
Sapienza Università di Roma, Italy
fuscof@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract
We study sequential bilateral trade where sellers and buyers valuations are completely arbitrary (i.e., determined by an adversary). Sellers and buyers are strategic
agents with private valuations for the good and the goal is to design a mechanism
that maximizes efﬁciency (or gain from trade) while being incentive compatible,
individually rational and budget balanced. In this paper we consider gain from
trade which is harder to approximate than social welfare.
We consider a variety of feedback scenarios and distinguish the cases where the
mechanism posts one price and when it can post different prices for buyer and
seller. We show several surprising results about the separation between the different scenarios. In particular, we show that (a) it is impossible to achieve sublinear
α-regret for any α < 2, (b) but with full feedback sublinear 2-regret is achievable
(c) with a single price and partial feedback one cannot get sublinear α regret for
any constant α (d) nevertheless, posting two prices even with one-bit feedback
achieves sublinear 2-regret, and (e) there is a provable separation in the 2-regret
bounds between full and partial feedback.

1

Introduction

The bilateral trade problem arises when two rational agents, a seller and a buyer, wish to trade a good;
they both hold a private valuation for it, and their goal is to maximize their utility. The solution to
the problem consists in designing a mechanism that intermediates between the two parties to make
the trade happen. Ideally, the mechanism should maximize social welfare even though the agents
act strategically (incentive compatibility) and should guarantee non-negative utility to the agents
(individual rationality). Furthermore, we are interested in mechanisms for bilateral trade that do
not subsidize the agents (budget balance). Obvious mechanisms that satisfy incentive compatibility,
individual rationality, and budget balanced, are posted price mechanisms. Two common metrics are
used to measure the efﬁciency of a mechanism: social welfare subsequent to trade and gain from
trade (i.e., the increase in social welfare). Consider a mechanism that posts prices p (price for the
seller) and q (price for the buyer) to agents with valuations s and b, formally we have:
• Social Welfare: SW(p, q, s, b) = s + (b − s) · I{s ≤ p ≤ q ≤ b} 1
• Gain from trade: GFT(p, q, s, b) = (b − s) · I{s ≤ p ≤ q ≤ b}
1

We use I{Q} for the indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the predicated Q is true and zero otherwise.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

