FourierNets enable the design of highly non-local
optical encoders for computational imaging

Diptodip Deb1
Michael Broxton5,†

Zhenfei Jiao1,2
Misha B. Ahrens1,†

Ruth R. Sims1,3

Alex B. Chen1,4

Kaspar Podgorski1,†

Srinivas C. Turaga1,†

1
3

HHMI Janelia Research Campus, 2 Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, HUST
Institut de la Vision, Sorbonne Université, CNRS, 4 Harvard University, 5 Stanford University,
{debd,simsr,ahrensm,podgorskik,turagas}@janelia.hhmi.org
zfjiao@hust.edu.cn
abchen@g.harvard.edu
broxton@alumni.stanford.edu
†
equal contribution

Abstract
Differentiable simulations of optical systems can be combined with deep learningbased reconstruction networks to enable high performance computational imaging
via end-to-end (E2E) optimization of both the optical encoder and the deep decoder.
This has enabled imaging applications such as 3D localization microscopy, depth
estimation, and lensless photography via the optimization of local optical encoders.
More challenging computational imaging applications, such as 3D snapshot microscopy which compresses 3D volumes into single 2D images, require a highly
non-local optical encoder. We show that existing deep network decoders have
a locality bias which prevents the optimization of such highly non-local optical
encoders. We address this with a decoder based on a shallow neural network
architecture using global kernel Fourier convolutional neural networks (FourierNets). We show that FourierNets surpass existing deep network based decoders at
reconstructing photographs captured by the highly non-local DiffuserCam optical
encoder. Further, we show that FourierNets enable E2E optimization of highly
non-local optical encoders for 3D snapshot microscopy. By combining FourierNets with a large-scale multi-GPU differentiable optical simulation, we are able
to optimize non-local optical encoders 170× to 7372× larger than prior state of
the art, and demonstrate the potential for ROI-type specific optical encoding with a
programmable microscope.

1

Introduction

Modern computational optics relies on the end-to-end (E2E) optimization of the optical system
(optical encoder) and the computational image reconstruction algorithm (computational decoder).
This has been enabled by the development of differentiable physics-based simulations of optical
encoders, paired with deep network based decoders. This E2E approach has been successfully applied
to the estimation of depth from defocus [1, 2, 3, 4], lensless photography [5], and particle localization
microscopy [6, 7]. Despite this wide success, only the space of local optical encoders has been
explored in this fashion due to the computational expense of physics-based simulation of highly
non-local optical encoders [3]. This is particularly the case for 3D snapshot microscopy which is
well-known to require highly non-local optical encoders, and for which no E2E solutions have yet
been demonstrated.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

