M2N: Mesh Movement Networks for PDE Solvers
Wenbin Song ∗
ShanghaiTech University
songwb@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Mingrui Zhang ∗
Imperial College London
mingrui.zhang18@imperial.ac.uk

Joseph G. Wallwork
Imperial College London
j.wallwork16@imperial.ac.uk
Zheng Tian
ShanghaiTech University
zheng.tian.11@ucl.ac.uk

Junpeng Gao
ETH Zürich
jungao@student.ethz.ch
Fanglei Sun
ShanghaiTech University
sunfl@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Matthew D. Piggott
Imperial College London
m.d.piggott@imperial.ac.uk
Zuoqiang Shi
Tsinghua University
zqshi@tsinghua.edu.cn

Junqing Chen
Tsinghua University
jqchen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Xiang Chen †
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
xiangchen.ai@outlook.com

Jun Wang †
University College London
jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Numerical Partial Differential Equation (PDE) solvers often require discretizing
the physical domain by using a mesh. Mesh movement methods provide the
capability to improve the accuracy of the numerical solution without introducing
extra computational burden to the PDE solver, by increasing mesh resolution where
the solution is not well-resolved, whilst reducing unnecessary resolution elsewhere.
However, sophisticated mesh movement methods, such as the Monge-Ampère
method, generally require the solution of auxiliary equations. These solutions can
be extremely expensive to compute when the mesh needs to be adapted frequently.
In this paper, we propose to the best of our knowledge the first learning-based
end-to-end mesh movement framework for PDE solvers. Key requirements of
learning-based mesh movement methods are: alleviating mesh tangling, boundary
consistency, and generalization to mesh with different resolutions. To achieve
these goals, we introduce the neural spline model and the graph attention network
(GAT) into our models respectively. While the Neural-Spline based model provides
more flexibility for large mesh deformation, the GAT based model can handle
domains with more complicated shapes and is better at performing delicate local
deformation. We validate our methods on stationary and time-dependent, linear
and non-linear equations, as well as regularly and irregularly shaped domains.
Compared to the traditional Monge-Ampère method, our approach can greatly
accelerate the mesh adaptation process by three to four orders of magnitude, whilst
achieving comparable numerical error reduction.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Authors: Xiang Chen and Jun Wang.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

