GULP : a prediction-based metric between

representations

Enric Boix-Adserà
MIT
eboix@mit.edu

Hannah Lawrence
MIT
hanlaw@mit.edu

George Stepaniants
MIT
gstepan@mit.edu

Philippe Rigollet
MIT
rigollet@math.mit.edu

Abstract
Comparing the representations learned by different neural networks has recently
emerged as a key tool to understand various architectures and ultimately optimize
them. In this work, we introduce GULP, a family of distance measures between
representations that is explicitly motivated by downstream predictive tasks. By
construction, GULP provides uniform control over the difference in prediction
performance between two representations, with respect to regularized linear prediction tasks. Moreover, it satisfies several desirable structural properties, such
as the triangle inequality and invariance under orthogonal transformations, and
thus lends itself to data embedding and visualization. We extensively evaluate
GULP relative to other methods, and demonstrate that it correctly differentiates
between architecture families, converges over the course of training, and captures
generalization performance on downstream linear tasks.

1

Introduction

The spectacular success of deep neural networks (DNN) witnessed over the past decade has been
largely attributed to their ability to generate good representations of the data [BCV13] . But what
makes a representation good? Answering this question is a necessary step towards a principled
theory of DNN design. This fundamental question calls for a metric over representations as a basic
primitive. Indeed, embedding representations into a metric space enables comparison, modifications
and ultimately optimization of DNN architectures [LTQ+ 18]; see Figure 1.
In light of the practical impact of a meaningful metric over representations, this question has
recently garnered significant attention, leading to a myriad of propositions such as CCA, CKA, and
PROCRUSTES . Their relative pros and cons are currently the subject of a lively debate [DDS21,
DHN+ 22] whose resolution calls for a theoretically grounded notion of metric.
Our contributions. In this work, we define a new family of metrics1 , called GULP2 , over the space
of representations. Our construction rests on a functional notion of what makes two representations
similar: namely, that two representations are similar if and only if they are equally useful as inputs to
downstream, linear transfer learning tasks. This idea is partially inspired by feature-based transfer
learning, in which simple models adapt pretrained representations, such as Inceptionv3 [SVI+ 16],
1
More specifically, we define pseudo-metrics rather than metrics. However, these can be readily turned into a
metric using metric identification. This amounts to allowing equivalence classes of representations.
2
GULP is Uniform Linear Probing.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

