Direct Advantage Estimation

Hsiao-Ru Pan1∗ Nico Gürtler1 Alexander Neitz2† Bernhard Schölkopf1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
2
DeepMind

Abstract
The predominant approach in reinforcement learning is to assign credit to actions
based on the expected return. However, we show that the return may depend on the
policy in a way which could lead to excessive variance in value estimation and slow
down learning. Instead, we show that the advantage function can be interpreted as
causal effects and shares similar properties with causal representations. Based on
this insight, we propose Direct Advantage Estimation (DAE), a novel method that
can model the advantage function and estimate it directly from on-policy data while
simultaneously minimizing the variance of the return without requiring the (action)value function. We also relate our method to Temporal Difference methods by
showing how value functions can be seamlessly integrated into DAE. The proposed
method is easy to implement and can be readily adapted by modern actor-critic
methods. We evaluate DAE empirically on three discrete control domains and show
that it can outperform generalized advantage estimation (GAE), a strong baseline
for advantage estimation, on a majority of the environments when applied to policy
optimization.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) methods aim to maximize cumulative rewards in sequential decision
making problems [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. Through interactions with the environment, agents learn
to identify which actions lead to the highest return. One major difficulty of this problem is that,
typically, a vast amount of decision makings are involved in determining the rewards, making it
complex to identify which decisions are crucial to the outcomes. This is also known as the credit
assignment problem [Minsky, 1961]. A straightforward approach is to assign credit according to
the expected return, which is aligned with the RL objective[Sutton and Barto, 2018]. However, the
expected return accumulates all the future rewards and does not directly reflect the effect of an action.
Consider, for example, the environment illustrated in Figure 1. Since the transitions at each state
are independent of the actions chosen, the effect of any action should be immediate. The expected
return conditioned on any action, however, depends on the policy of all subsequent states. This
property could be undesirable because the expected return would vary significantly whenever the
policy changes during training, making it a difficult target to learn.
A natural question to ask is, then, how should we define the effect of an action? In this work, we take
inspiration from the causality literature, where the notion of causal effects is defined. We show that
the advantage function can be interpreted as the causal effect of an action on the expected return.
Additionally, we show that it shares similar properties with causal representations, which are expected
to improve generalization and transfer learning [Schölkopf et al., 2021].
We prove that the advantage function minimizes the variance of the return under a constraint, and
propose Direct Advantage Estimation (DAE), a method that can model and estimate the advantage
∗
†

Correspondence to: hpan@tuebingen.mpg.de
Work done while at MPI-IS.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

