Explicit Tradeoffs between
Adversarial and Natural Distributional Robustness
Mazda Moayeri
mmoayeri@umd.edu

Kiarash Banihashem
kiarash@umd.edu

Soheil Feizi
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland

Abstract
Several existing works study either adversarial or natural distributional robustness
of deep neural networks separately. In practice, however, models need to enjoy both
types of robustness to ensure reliability. In this work, we bridge this gap and show
that in fact, explicit tradeoffs exist between adversarial and natural distributional
robustness. We first consider a simple linear regression setting on Gaussian data
with disjoint sets of core and spurious features. In this setting, through theoretical
and empirical analysis, we show that (i) adversarial training with `1 and `2 norms
increases the model reliance on spurious features; (ii) For `1 adversarial training,
spurious reliance only occurs when the scale of the spurious features is larger
than that of the core features; (iii) adversarial training can have an unintended
consequence in reducing distributional robustness, specifically when spurious
correlations are changed in the new test domain. Next, we present extensive
empirical evidence, using a test suite of twenty adversarially trained models
evaluated on five benchmark datasets (ObjectNet, RIVAL10, Salient ImageNet-1M,
ImageNet-9, Waterbirds), that adversarially trained classifiers rely on backgrounds
more than their standardly trained counterparts, validating our theoretical results.
We also show that spurious correlations in training data (when preserved in the
test domain) can improve adversarial robustness, revealing that previous claims
that adversarial vulnerability is rooted in spurious correlations are incomplete.

1

Introduction

Despite continuously improving upon state of the art accuracy on various benchmarks, deep image
classifiers remain brittle to distribution shifts, suffering massive performance drops when evaluated
on non-i.i.d. data. For example, the accuracy of object detectors trained on ImageNet [12] reduces
by 40-45% on ObjectNet [5], where images are taken within households at various viewpoints and
rotations. The reliance of deep models on spurious features, which correlate with class labels but are
irrelevant to the true labeling function [30], is one cause of poor model robustness, as performance
degrades when spurious correlations are broken. Indeed, model reliance on spurious features like
texture [17] and background [69, 6] is well documented. Of greater concern, deep models in safety
critical applications such as detection of pneumonia [72] and COVID-19 [11] have been observed to
rely on hospital specific spurious markers, causing poor generalization to new hospitals.
Adversarial examples [63, 18] pose another troubling distribution shift, where imperceptible input
perturbations can cause model accuracy to drop to zero. Many works have been proposed to improve
the adversarial robustness of deep models [36, 74, 52, 59, 37, 10, 66, 55], including the widely
popular adversarial training, where inputs are augmented via adversarial attack during training
[40]. While spurious correlation robustness has also attracted lots of attention [2, 30, 39, 50], the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

