Stochastic Halpern Iteration with Variance Reduction
for Stochastic Monotone Inclusions
Xufeng Cai
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
xcai74@wisc.edu

Chaobing Song
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
songcb16@gmail.com

Cristóbal Guzmán
Institute for Mathematical and Computational Eng.
Facultad de Matemáticas and Escuela de Ingeniería
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
crguzmanp@mat.uc.cl

Jelena Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jelena@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study stochastic monotone inclusion problems, which widely appear in machine learning applications, including robust regression and adversarial learning.
We propose novel variants of stochastic Halpern iteration with recursive variance
reduction. In the cocoercive—and more generally Lipschitz-monotone—setup, our
algorithm attains ✏ norm of the operator with O( ✏13 ) stochastic operator evaluations, which significantly improves over state of the art O( ✏14 ) stochastic operator
evaluations required for existing monotone inclusion solvers applied to the same
problem classes. We further show how to couple one of the proposed variants of
stochastic Halpern iteration with a scheduled restart scheme to solve stochastic
monotone inclusion problems with O( log(1/✏)
) stochastic operator evaluations
✏2
under additional sharpness or strong monotonicity assumptions.

1

Introduction

Recent trends in machine learning (ML) involve the study of models whose solutions do not reduce to
optimization but rather to equilibrium conditions. Standard examples include generative adversarial
networks, adversarially robust training of ML models, and training of ML models under notions
of fairness. It turns out that several of these equilibrium conditions (including, but not limited to,
first-order stationary points, saddle-points, and Nash equilibria of minimax games) can be cast as
solutions to a monotone inclusion problem, which is defined as the problem of computing a zero of
a (maximal) monotone operator F : Rd ! Rd (see (MI) for a formal definition). In the context of
min-max optimization problems, monotone inclusion reduces to a stationarity condition, which for
unconstrained problems boils down to finding a point with small gradient norm.
Of particular interest to machine learning are stochastic versions of these problems, in which the
operator F is not readily available, but can only be accessed through a stochastic oracle Fb . Such are
the settings mentioned above, where the definitions of equilibria involve expectations over continuous
high-dimensional spaces. The corresponding problem, known as the stochastic monotone inclusion,
has not been thoroughly studied, particularly in the context of its stochastic oracle complexity.
Understanding stochastic oracle complexity of monotone inclusion in all standard settings with
Lipschitz operators, from the algorithmic aspect, is the main motivation of this work.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

