Accelerating Certified Robustness Training via
Knowledge Transfer

Pratik Vaishnavi
Stony Brook University
pvaishnavi@cs.stonybrook.edu

Kevin Eykholt
IBM Research
kheykholt@ibm.com

Amir Rahmati
Stony Brook University
amir@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Training deep neural network classifiers that are certifiably robust against adversarial attacks is critical to ensuring the security and reliability of AI-controlled
systems. Although numerous state-of-the-art certified training methods have been
developed, they are computationally expensive and scale poorly with respect to
both dataset and network complexity. Widespread usage of certified training is further hindered by the fact that periodic retraining is necessary to incorporate new
data and network improvements. In this paper, we propose Certified Robustness
Transfer (CRT), a general-purpose framework for reducing the computational overhead of any certifiably robust training method through knowledge transfer. Given a
robust teacher, our framework uses a novel training loss to transfer the teacher’s
robustness to the student. We provide theoretical and empirical validation of CRT.
Our experiments on CIFAR-10 show that CRT speeds up certified robustness training by 8× on average across three different architecture generations while achieving comparable robustness to state-of-the-art methods. We also show that CRT can
scale to large-scale datasets like ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are susceptible to adversarial evasion attacks [31, 9], that add a small
amount of carefully crafted imperceptible noise to an input to reliably trigger misclassification. As a
defense, numerous training methods have been proposed [25, 40, 35] to grant empirical robustness
to a DNN. But in the absence of any provable guarantees for this robustness, these defenses were
frequently broken [1, 32]. These failures have motivated the development of training methods
that grant certifiable/provable robustness to a classifier, hence safeguarding it against all attacks
(known or unknown) within a pre-determined threat model. Such methods are broadly categorized
as either deterministic or probabilistic [23]. Deterministic robustness training methods [12, 26, 33,
34, 28, 10, 41, 30] rely on computing provable bounds on the output neurons of a classifier for
a given perturbation budget in the input space. However, the deterministic robustness guarantees
provided by these methods come at a high computational cost. Probabilistic robustness training
methods address this limitation by providing highly probable (e.g., with 0.99 probability) robustness
guarantees at a greatly reduced computational cost. Within this category, randomized smoothingbased methods [19, 3, 29, 22, 20, 7, 37, 39, 16, 15] are considered the state-of-the-art for certifiable
robustness in the ℓ2 -space. Even so, these training methods remain an order of magnitude slower than
standard training. In commercial applications where constant model re-deployment occurs to provide
improvements (see Figure 1), re-training using computationally expensive methods is burdensome.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

