Graph Neural Networks are Dynamic Programmers

Andrew Dudzik∗
DeepMind
adudzik@deepmind.com

Petar Veličković∗
DeepMind
petarv@deepmind.com

Abstract
Recent advances in neural algorithmic reasoning with graph neural networks
(GNNs) are propped up by the notion of algorithmic alignment. Broadly, a neural
network will be better at learning to execute a reasoning task (in terms of sample complexity) if its individual components align well with the target algorithm.
Specifically, GNNs are claimed to align with dynamic programming (DP), a general problem-solving strategy which expresses many polynomial-time algorithms.
However, has this alignment truly been demonstrated and theoretically quantified?
Here we show, using methods from category theory and abstract algebra, that
there exists an intricate connection between GNNs and DP, going well beyond the
initial observations over individual algorithms such as Bellman-Ford. Exposing
this connection, we easily verify several prior findings in the literature, produce
better-grounded GNN architectures for edge-centric tasks, and demonstrate empirical results on the CLRS algorithmic reasoning benchmark. We hope our exposition
will serve as a foundation for building stronger algorithmically aligned GNNs.

1

Introduction

One of the principal pillars of neural algorithmic reasoning [27] is training neural networks that
execute algorithmic computation in a high-dimensional latent space. While this process is in itself
insightful, and can lead to stronger combinatorial optimisation systems [21], it is valuable in terms
of expanding the applicability of classical algorithms. Evidence of this value are emerging, with
pre-trained algorithmic reasoners utilised in implicit planning [11] and self-supervised learning [28].
A fundamental question in this space is: which architecture should be used to learn a particular
algorithm (or collection of algorithms [36])? Naturally, we seek architectures that have low sample
complexity, as they will allow us to create models that generalise better with fewer training examples.
The key theoretical advance towards achieving this aim has been made by [37]. Therein, the authors
formalise the notion of algorithmic alignment, which states that we should favour architectures
that align better to the algorithm, in the sense that we can separate them into modules, which
individually correspond to the computations of the target algorithm’s subroutines. It can be proved
that architectures with higher algorithmic alignment will have lower sample complexity in the NTK
regime [20]. Further, the theory of [37] predicts that graph neural networks (GNNs) algorithmically
align with dynamic programming [3, DP]. The authors demonstrate this by forming an analogy to the
Bellman-Ford algorithm [2].
Since DP is a very general class of problem-solving techniques that can be used to express many
classical algorithms, this finding has placed GNNs as the central methodology for neural algorithmic
execution [7]. However, it quickly became apparent that it is not enough to just train any GNN—for
many algorithmic tasks, careful attention is required. Several papers illustrated special cases of GNNs
that align with sequential algorithms [31], linearithmic sequence processing [16], physics simulations
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

