E XTRA -N EWTON: A First Approach to
Noise-Adaptive Accelerated Second-Order Methods

Kimon Antonakopoulos ∗
EPFL (LIONS)
kimon.antonakopoulos@epfl.ch

Ali Kavis∗
EPFL (LIONS)
ali.kavis@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher
EPFL (LIONS)
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
This work proposes a universal and adaptive second-order method for minimizing
√
second-order smooth, convex functions. Our algorithm achieves O(σ/ T ) convergence when the oracle feedback is stochastic with variance σ 2 , and improves
its convergence to O(1/T 3 ) with deterministic oracles, where T is the number of
iterations. Our method also interpolates these rates without knowing the nature of
the oracle apriori, which is enabled by a parameter-free adaptive step-size that is
oblivious to the knowledge of smoothness modulus, variance bounds and the diameter of the constrained set. To our knowledge, this is the first universal algorithm
with such global guarantees within the second-order optimization literature.

1

Introduction

Over the last few decades, first-order (convex) minimization methods have gained popularity for
modern machine learning and optimization problems due to their efficient per-iteration cost and
global convergence properties. The literature on first-order methods is rather dense and extensive
with a concrete, thorough understanding of the optimal global convergence behavior. Focusing on the
more relevant
settings of smooth, convex minimization, the lower bounds have been well-established;
√
O(σ/ T ) when the gradient feedback is noisy with variance σ 2 , and O(1/T 2 ) under deterministic
first-order oracles [51, 57]. Under slight variations of the aforementioned problem setting, there
exists an extensive amount of work that enjoys the latter, “accelerated” rate [55, 56, 52, 64, 68, 39, 2,
41, 66, 19, 18, 35, 31, 6, 44].
On the contrary to its first-order analogue, the literature on global convergence of second-order,
smooth methods is notably sparse with many open questions standing even in the simplest problem
formulations. Following the pioneering works of Bennett [11], Kantorovich [33], Newton’s method
and its variations [40, 46] are considered as the staple of second-order methods in optimization.
Although its powerful local convergence behavior has been repeatedly demonstrated [17, 38], studies
on its global behavior are relatively limited. Prior attempts at tackling global convergence mostly make
additional structural assumptions on the objective function [60, 47, 38] or assume extra regularity
conditions on the Hessian [34] beyond the simplest smooth and convex setting. Over the last decade,
we have witnessed important progress towards a more complete theory of globally-convergent secondorder methods (more on this shortly), and yet there remains many important questions unanswered,
which we will delve into in this paper.
To motivate the perspective in our technical endeavour, we take a small detour to introduce the idea of
universality, which we particularly characterize as adaptation to the level of noise in oracle feedback.
Enabled by the √
recent advances in online optimization, universal first-order algorithms essentially
attain the O(σ/ T + 1/T 2 ) convergence for convex minimization problems, interpolating between
stochastic and deterministic rates. There exist a plethora of algorithms that enjoy this rate under
∗

Alphabetical order, equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

