Retrospective Adversarial Replay for Continual
Learning
Lilly Kumari
University of Washington
lkumari@uw.edu

Shengjie Wang
ByteDance
shengjie.wang@bytedance.com

Tianyi Zhou
University of Maryland
zhou@umiacs.umd.edu

Jeff Bilmes
University of Washington
bilmes@uw.edu

Abstract
Continual learning is an emerging research challenge in machine learning that
addresses the problem where models quickly fit the most recently trained-on data
but suffer from catastrophic forgetting of previous data due to distribution shifts —
it does this by maintaining a small historical replay buffer in replay-based methods.
To avoid these problems, this paper proposes a method, “Retrospective Adversarial
Replay (RAR)”, that synthesizes adversarial samples near the forgetting boundary.
RAR perturbs a buffered sample towards its nearest neighbor drawn from the
current task in a latent representation space. By replaying such samples, we are
able to refine the boundary between previous and current tasks, hence combating
forgetting and reducing bias towards the current task. To mitigate the severity of
a small replay buffer, we develop a novel MixUp-based strategy to increase replay
variation by replaying mixed augmentations. Combined with RAR, this achieves
a holistic framework that helps to alleviate catastrophic forgetting. We show that
this excels on broadly-used benchmarks and outperforms other continual learning
baselines especially when only a small buffer is available. We conduct a thorough
ablation study over each key component as well as a hyperparameter sensitivity
analysis to demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of RAR.

1

Introduction

Traditional supervised machine learning methods often rely on the assumption that the data is drawn
i.i.d. from a stationary probability distribution. This assumption does not hold in many practical
scenarios where the learner must continuously learn online and adapt to new tasks without revisiting
previous tasks (and those tasks’ data). This has motivated research in Continual Learning (also
referred to as Lifelong Learning and Incremental Learning), where a machine learning model learns
from a stream of data coming from a succession of different tasks [29, 45, 66].
The primary challenge in continual learning (CL) is to alleviate the “catastrophic forgetting” of the
previously learnt tasks after learning new tasks [18, 39, 49]. This is mainly caused by a shift in
the distribution of inputs and labels over time. For example, as a model is updated using new-task
gradients, the hidden-layer representations, encoding information about previous tasks, become biased
towards these new tasks. This leads to a model confusing the former with current tasks, thus producing
incorrect predictions on older tasks. A widely studied strategy to alleviate forgetting is experience
replay (ER) [10, 49, 50], which repeatedly trains the model on buffered replay data from previous
tasks while learning the current task. However, the buffer in practice is often quite small [63], e.g., in
autonomous driving, where the incremental data is large-scale and essentially never-ending. A model
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

