Debiased Causal Tree: Heterogeneous Treatment
Effects Estimation with Unmeasured Confounding
Caizhi Tang1⇤

Huiyuan Wang2⇤

Feng Zhu1

Longfei Li1

1

Xinyu Li2

Qing Cui1

Jun Zhou1†

Ya-Lin Zhang1
Linbo Jiang1

Ant Group, 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
{caizhi.tcz,cuiqing.cq,lyn.zyl,zhufeng.zhu
longyao.llf,jun.zhoujun,xiaobo.jlb}@antgroup.com
{huiyuan.wang,xinyu.li}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Unmeasured confounding poses a significant threat to the validity of causal inference. Despite that various ad hoc methods are developed to remove confounding
effects, they are subject to certain fairly strong assumptions. In this work, we
consider the estimation of conditional causal effects in the presence of unmeasured confounding using observational data and historical controls. Under an
interpretable transportability condition, we prove the partial identifiability of conditional average treatment effect on the treated group (CATT). For tree-based models,
a new notion, confounding entropy, is proposed to measure the discrepancy introduced by unobserved confounders between the conditional outcome distribution of
the treated and control groups. The confounding entropy generalizes conventional
confounding bias, and can be estimated effectively using historical controls. We
develop a new method, debiased causal tree, whose splitting rule is to minimize
the empirical risk regularized by the confounding entropy. Notably, our method
integrates current observational data (for empirical risk) and their historical controls
(for confounding entropy) harmoniously. We highlight that, debiased causal tree
can not only estimate CATT well in the presence of unmeasured confounding, but
also is a robust estimator of conditional average treatment effect (CATE) against
the imbalance of the treated and control populations when all confounders are
observed. An extension of combining multiple debiased causal trees to further
reduce biases by gradient boosting is considered. The computational feasibility
and statistical power of our method are evidenced by simulations and a study of a
credit card balance dataset.

1

Introduction

Conditional average treatment effect (CATE), also known as heterogeneous treatment effect, can
characterize the causal effect of certain treatments on the outcome over the whole population as a
function of measured covariates. Another closely related concept, conditional average treatment
effect on the treated group (CATT), is more relevant when we focus on the effect of treatments for
the sub-population which is actually exposed to certain specific treatments; for instance, we are more
interested in the effect on children of taking anti-depressants during pregnancy for the people who
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

