Sparse2Dense: Learning to Densify 3D Features
for 3D Object Detection

Tianyu Wang1,2,3 , Xiaowei Hu3,∗, Zhengzhe Liu1 , Chi-Wing Fu1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
The Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wangty,zzliu,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, huxiaowei@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
LiDAR-produced point clouds are the major source for most state-of-the-art 3D
object detectors. Yet, small, distant, and incomplete objects with sparse or few
points are often hard to detect. We present Sparse2Dense, a new framework to
efficiently boost 3D detection performance by learning to densify point clouds in
latent space. Specifically, we first train a dense point 3D detector (DDet) with a
dense point cloud as input and design a sparse point 3D detector (SDet) with a
regular point cloud as input. Importantly, we formulate the lightweight plug-in
S2D module and the point cloud reconstruction module in SDet to densify 3D
features and train SDet to produce 3D features, following the dense 3D features in
DDet. So, in inference, SDet can simulate dense 3D features from regular (sparse)
point cloud inputs without requiring dense inputs. We evaluate our method on
the large-scale Waymo Open Dataset and the Waymo Domain Adaptation Dataset,
showing its high performance and efficiency over the state of the arts. The code is
available at https://github.com/stevewongv/Sparse2Dense.

1

Introduction

3D object detection is an important
task for supporting autonomous vehicles
to sense their surroundings. Previous
works [1–4] design various neural network
structures to improve the detection performance. Yet, it remains extremely challenging to detect small, distant, and incomplete objects, due to the point sparsity,
object occlusion, and inaccurate laser reflection. These issues hinder further improvements in the precision and robustness of 3D object detection.

( a ) Detection results of baseline

( b ) Our detection results

( c ) Sparse features visualization
from baseline

( d ) Our densified 3D features
visualization from S2D

To improve the detection performance,
some works attempt to leverage additional
information, e.g., images [5–9], image
segmentations [10, 11], and multi-frame
information [12, 13]. By fusing the information with the input point cloud in

Figure 1: Our approach is able to produce dense and
good-quality 3D features (d) from regular (raw) point
clouds, enabling better detection of small, distant, and
incomplete objects (b) vs. [1] (a,c). Red boxes are detection results and green boxes are the ground truths.

∗

Corresponding author (huxiaowei@pjlab.org.cn)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

