Two-Stream Network for Sign Language Recognition
and Translation
Yutong Chen1∗ Ronglai Zuo2∗ Fangyun Wei1∗ † Yu Wu1 Shujie Liu1 Brian Mak2
1
Microsoft Research Asia 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
chenytjudy@gmail.com {rzuo,mak}@cse.ust.hk
{fawe,yuwu1,shujliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Sign languages are visual languages using manual articulations and non-manual
elements to convey information. For sign language recognition and translation, the
majority of existing approaches directly encode RGB videos into hidden representations. RGB videos, however, are raw signals with substantial visual redundancy,
leading the encoder to overlook the key information for sign language understanding. To mitigate this problem and better incorporate domain knowledge, such as
handshape and body movement, we introduce a dual visual encoder containing
two separate streams to model both the raw videos and the keypoint sequences
generated by an off-the-shelf keypoint estimator. To make the two streams interact
with each other, we explore a variety of techniques, including bidirectional lateral
connection, sign pyramid network with auxiliary supervision, and frame-level selfdistillation. The resulting model is called TwoStream-SLR, which is competent for
sign language recognition (SLR). TwoStream-SLR is extended to a sign language
translation (SLT) model, TwoStream-SLT, by simply attaching an extra translation
network. Experimentally, our TwoStream-SLR and TwoStream-SLT achieve stateof-the-art performance on SLR and SLT tasks across a series of datasets including
Phoenix-2014, Phoenix-2014T, and CSL-Daily.

1

Introduction

Sign languages, which are the primary means of communication among the deaf and hard-of-hearing
people, have been studied for a long time [46, 45, 4]. In linguistic terms, sign languages are as rich
and complex as any spoken language [2] and their word-order typology may differ from the spoken
languages. Moreover, there are limited parallel data for sign-to-text, and the gap between the visual
modality and the language modality poses another challenge to developing a well-performing sign
language translation (SLT) system [6]. To mitigate the problem, SLT often requires an intermediate
representation between an input visual signal and the output text, which is a sequence of glosses1 , to
achieve satisfactory translation results. The process of generating gloss sequences from given sign
videos is termed as sign language recognition (SLR) [13], which does not have the word ordering
problem in SLT. Figure 1a illustrates the relationship between SLR [27, 56, 37, 11, 41, 14] and
SLT [8, 6, 31, 55, 10, 56]. In this paper, we work on both tasks.
The key to tackle SLR and SLT is to build a visual encoder to embed visual signals into hidden
representations. Inspired by the promising progress of action recognition [22, 48, 9, 51, 35, 3], a
majority of works [36, 20, 41, 11, 37, 5] explore to directly model RGB videos to understand sign
languages. However, a major problem with this kind of models is their robustness, and the models
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
1
Glosses are the word-for-word transcription of sign language where each gloss is a unique label for a sign.

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

