Challenging Common Assumptions in Convex
Reinforcement Learning

Mirco Mutti∗
Politecnico di Milano
Università di Bologna
mirco.mutti@polimi.it

Riccardo De Santi∗
ETH Zurich
rdesanti@ethz.ch

Piersilvio De Bartolomeis
ETH Zurich
pdebartol@ethz.ch

Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
The classic Reinforcement Learning (RL) formulation concerns the maximization
of a scalar reward function. More recently, convex RL has been introduced to
extend the RL formulation to all the objectives that are convex functions of the
state distribution induced by a policy. Notably, convex RL covers several relevant
applications that do not fall into the scalar formulation, including imitation learning,
risk-averse RL, and pure exploration. In classic RL, it is common to optimize an
infinite trials objective, which accounts for the state distribution instead of the
empirical state visitation frequencies, even though the actual number of trajectories
is always finite in practice. This is theoretically sound since the infinite trials
and finite trials objectives are equivalent and thus lead to the same optimal policy.
In this paper, we show that this hidden assumption does not hold in convex RL.
In particular, we prove that erroneously optimizing the infinite trials objective in
place of the actual finite trials one, as it is usually done, can lead to a significant
approximation error. Since the finite trials setting is the default in both simulated
and real-world RL, we believe shedding light on this issue will lead to better
approaches and methodologies for convex RL, impacting relevant research areas
such as imitation learning, risk-averse RL, and pure exploration among others.

1

Introduction

Standard Reinforcement Learning (RL) [50] is concerned with sequential decision-making problems
in which the utility can be expressed through a linear combination of scalar reward terms. The
coefficients of this linear combination are given by the state visitation distribution induced by the
agent’s policy. Thus, the objective function can be equivalently written as the inner product between
the mentioned state distribution and a reward vector. However, not all the relevant objectives can
be encoded through this linear representation [2]. Several works have thus extended the standard
RL formulation to address non-linear objectives of practical interest. These include imitation
learning [30, 42], or the problem of finding a policy that minimizes the distance between the induced
state distribution and the state distribution provided by experts’ interactions [1, 29, 32, 33, 22, 17],
risk-averse RL [20], in which the objective is sensitive to the tail behavior of the agent’s policy [52,
43, 51, 16, 15, 8, 61], pure exploration [27], where the goal is to find a policy that maximizes the
entropy of the induced state distribution [53, 33, 41, 40, 59, 24, 36, 47, 55, 39, 38], diverse skills
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

