Out-of-Distribution Detection with An Adaptive
Likelihood Ratio on Informative Hierarchical VAE
Yewen Li1∗ Chaojie Wang1∗† Xiaobo Xia2 Tongliang Liu2 Xin Miao3 Bo An1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 University of Sydney 3 Amazon

Abstract
Unsupervised out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is essential for the reliability
of machine learning. In the literature, existing work has shown that higher-level
semantics captured by hierarchical VAEs can be used to detect OOD instances.
However, we empirically show that, the inheirt “posterior collapse” of hierarchical
VAEs would seriously limit their capacity for OOD detection. Based on a thorough
analysis, we propose an informative hierarchical VAE to alleviate this issue through
enhancing the connections between the data sample and its multi-layer stochastic
latent representations during training. Furthermore, we propose a novel score
function for unsupervised OOD detection, referred to as Adaptive Likelihood Ratio,
which can selectively aggregate the semantic information on multiple hidden layers
of hierarchical VAEs, leading to a strong separability between in-distribution and
OOD samples. Experimental results demonstrate that our method can significantly
outperform existing state-of-the-art unsupervised OOD detection approaches.

1

Introduction

Despite achieving great success in real-world applications recently, existing machine learning (ML)
systems are still designed to be tested on the in-distribution dataset, whose statistics are similar
to those of the training set [1]. However, when applied to deal with the dataset consisting of outof-distribution (OOD) samples, whose statistics are extremely different from those of the training
set, these ML systems would produce a series of incorrect judgments [2, 3, 4]. Considering the
fact that OOD data is very common in real-world applications, pre-execution OOD detection is
increasingly attractive to make sure the reliability and safety of ML systems. Although several
supervised methods [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] have achieved great success in OOD
detection, the unsupervised ones are more practical since the category labels of in-distribution samples
are often missing in real-world applications, which brings more challenges for OOD detection and is
also the focus of this work.
Without labels, likelihood-based models could be a promising way for unsupervised OOD detection,
such as flow-based models [17], auto-regressive models [18, 19], and variational autoencoders
(VAEs) [20, 21, 22, 21, 23]. Unfortunately, some recent studies have shown that, in some cases,
these generative models tend to achieve higher likelihoods on certain types of OOD samples [1,
24, 25, 26, 27], which makes the OOD detection methods based on thresholding likelihood scores
problematic. To address this issue, based on the prior knowledge collected from OOD samples, some
improvements have been made for unsupervised OOD detection, i.e., Ren et al. [1] take additional
datasets as the OOD validation sets for choosing the best hyperparameters; Hendrycks et al. [28]
introduce an auxiliary dataset to teach the network to learn more expressive representations for
OOD detection; However, the behaviour of borrowing the prior knowledge of OOD data is usually
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding to: Chaojie Wang <chaojie.wang@ntu.edu.sg>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

