Ensemble of Averages: Improving Model Selection and
Boosting Performance in Domain Generalization

Devansh Arpit, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research, USA
devansharpit@gmail.com

Abstract
In Domain Generalization (DG) settings, models trained independently on a given
set of training domains have notoriously chaotic performance on distribution shifted
test domains, and stochasticity in optimization (e.g. seed) plays a big role. This
makes deep learning models unreliable in real world settings. We first show that this
chaotic behavior exists even along the training optimization trajectory of a single
model, and propose a simple model averaging protocol that both significantly boosts
domain generalization and diminishes the impact of stochasticity by improving
the rank correlation between the in-domain validation accuracy and out-domain
test accuracy, which is crucial for reliable early stopping. Taking advantage of
our observation, we show that instead of ensembling unaveraged models (that is
typical in practice), ensembling moving average models (EoA) from independent
runs further boosts performance. We theoretically explain the boost in performance
of ensembling and model averaging by adapting the well known Bias-Variance
trade-off to the domain generalization setting. On the DomainBed benchmark,
when using a pre-trained ResNet-50, this ensemble of averages achieves an average
of 68.0%, beating vanilla ERM (w/o averaging/ensembling) by ∼ 4%, and when
using a pre-trained RegNetY-16GF, achieves an average of 76.6%, beating vanilla
ERM by 6%. Our code is available at https://github.com/salesforce/
ensemble-of-averages.

1

Introduction

Domain generalization (DG, [5]) aims at learning predictors that generalize well on data sampled
from test distributions that are different from the training distribution. Currently, deep learning
models have been shown to be poor at this form of generalization [10], and excel primarily in the IID
setting [51].
While a number of algorithms have been proposed to mitigate this problem (cf [51] for a survey),
[18] demonstrate that models trained using empirical risk minimization (ERM, [43]) along with
proper model selection (i.e. early stopping using validation set), using a subset of data from all
the training domains, largely match or even outperform the performance of most existing domain
generalization algorithms. This suggests that model selection plays an important role in domain
generalization. Despite its importance, there has not been much investigation into the reliability of
model selection. As we demonstrate in Figure 1, the out-domain performance varies greatly along
the optimization trajectory of a model during training, even though the in-domain performance does
not. This instability therefore hurts the reliability of model selection, and can become a problem in
realistic settings where test domain data is unavailable, because it causes the rank correlation between
in-domain validation accuracy and out-domain test accuracy to be weak.
In this paper, we first investigate a simple protocol for model averaging that both boosts DG within
the ERM framework, and mitigates performance instability of deep models on out-domain data,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

