An Analysis of Ensemble Sampling
Chao Qin
Columbia University
cqin22@gsb.columbia.edu

Zheng Wen Xiuyuan Lu Benjamin Van Roy
DeepMind
{zhengwen,lxlu,benvanroy}@google.com

Abstract
Ensemble sampling serves as a practical approximation to Thompson sampling
when maintaining an exact posterior distribution over model parameters is computationally intractable. In this paper, we establish a regret bound that ensures
desirable behavior when ensemble sampling is applied to the linear bandit problem. This represents the first rigorous regret analysis of ensemble sampling and
is made possible by leveraging information-theoretic concepts and novel analytic
techniques that may prove useful beyond the scope of this paper.

1

Introduction

Thompson sampling (TS) is a popular heuristic for balancing between exploration and exploitation in
bandit learning. In its basic form, TS maintains a posterior distribution over model parameters. When
the prior distribution and likelihood function exhibit conjugacy properties, the posterior distribution
can be maintained through computationally tractable Bayesian inference. However, many practical
contexts call for more complex models for which exact Bayesian inference becomes computationally
intractable. For such contexts, ensemble sampling (ES) can serve as a practical approximation to TS
[Lu and Van Roy, 2017].
Instead of the posterior distribution, ES maintains an ensemble of statistically plausible models that
can be updated in an efficient incremental manner. The corresponding discrete distribution represents
an approximation to the posterior distribution. At the start of each timestep, a model is sampled
uniformly from the ensemble and an action is selected to optimize expected reward with respect to
the sampled model. Each model is initially sampled from the prior distribution and evolves through
an updating process that adapts to observations and random perturbations.
While a growing literature [Osband et al., 2016, Russo et al., 2018, Osband et al., 2018, Lu et al.,
2018, Osband et al., 2019, Dwaracherla et al., 2020, Osband et al., 2022] presents applications of
ES, there has been no rigorous theory that ensures desirable behavior similar to that enjoyed by TS.
A regret bound for ES applied to linear-Gaussian bandits is provided by Lu and Van Roy [2017],
but a flaw in the associated analysis has brought this result into question. Since the publication of
that paper, several researchers have tried to remedy the analysis or otherwise establish performance
guarantees for ES, but these efforts have gone without success.
We offer in this paper the first rigorous regret analysis of ES. Like Lu and Van Roy [2017], we
study ES applied to linear-Gaussian bandits. This serves as a simple sanity check for the approach.
We establish a Bayesian regret bound (Theorem 1) that consists of two terms. The first term is
identical to a Bayesian regret bound established for TS. The second term accounts for posterior
mismatch and can be made arbitrarily small by increasing the ensemble size. Our analysis leverages
information-theoretic concepts and novel analytic techniques that may prove useful beyond the scope
of this paper.
As a stepping stone in our analysis, we establish a general Bayesian regret bound that applies to any
learning algorithm for linear bandits (Theorem 2). In particular, this regret bound is based on the
Hellinger distance between the action-selection distribution specified by the learning algorithm and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

