PAC-Bayes Compression Bounds So Tight That They
Can Explain Generalization

Sanae Lotfi∗

Marc Finzi∗

Sanyam Kapoor∗

Micah Goldblum

Andres Potapczynski∗

Andrew Gordon Wilson

New York University

Abstract
While there has been progress in developing non-vacuous generalization bounds
for deep neural networks, these bounds tend to be uninformative about why deep
learning works. In this paper, we develop a compression approach based on quantizing neural network parameters in a linear subspace, profoundly improving on
previous results to provide state-of-the-art generalization bounds on a variety of
tasks, including transfer learning. We use these tight bounds to better understand
the role of model size, equivariance, and the implicit biases of optimization, for
generalization in deep learning. Notably, we find large models can be compressed
to a much greater extent than previously known, encapsulating Occam’s razor. We
also argue for data-independent bounds in explaining generalization.

1

Introduction

Despite many more parameters than the number of training datapoints, deep learning models generalize extremely well and can even fit random labels [72]. These observations are not explained
through classical statistical learning theory such as VC-dimension or Rademacher complexity which
focus on uniform convergence over the hypothesis class [53]. The PAC-Bayes framework, by contrast, provides a convenient way of constructing generalization bounds where the generalization gap
depends on the deep learning model found by training rather than the hypothesis set as a whole. Using this framework, many different potential explanations have been proposed drawing on properties
of a deep learning model that are induced by the training dataset, such as low spectral norm [57],
noise stability [2], flat minima [30], derandomization [55], robustness, and compression [2, 73].
In this work, we show that neural networks, when paired with structured training datasets, are substantially more compressible than previously known. Constructing tighter generalization bounds
than have been previously achieved, we show that this compression alone is sufficient to explain
many generalization properties of neural networks.
In particular:
1. We develop a new approach for training compressed neural networks that adapt the compressed size to the difficulty of the problem. We train in a random linear subspace of the
parameters [45] and perform learned quantization. Consequently, we achieve extremely
low compressed sizes for neural networks at a given accuracy level, which is essential for
our tight bounds. (See Section 4).
2. Using a prior encoding Occam’s razor and our compression scheme, we construct the
best generalization bounds to date on image datasets, both with data-dependent and data∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

