Amortized Projection Optimization for Sliced
Wasserstein Generative Models
Khai Nguyen
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
khainb@utexas.edu

Nhat Ho
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
minhnhat@utexas.edu

Abstract
Seeking informative projecting directions has been an important task in utilizing
sliced Wasserstein distance in applications. However, finding these directions
usually requires an iterative optimization procedure over the space of projecting
directions, which is computationally expensive. Moreover, the computational
issue is even more severe in deep learning applications, where computing the
distance between two mini-batch probability measures is repeated several times.
This nested loop has been one of the main challenges that prevent the usage of
sliced Wasserstein distances based on good projections in practice. To address this
challenge, we propose to utilize the learning-to-optimize technique or amortized
optimization to predict the informative direction of any given two mini-batch
probability measures. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that bridges
amortized optimization and sliced Wasserstein generative models. In particular,
we derive linear amortized models, generalized linear amortized models, and
non-linear amortized models which are corresponding to three types of novel minibatch losses, named amortized sliced Wasserstein. We demonstrate the favorable
performance of the proposed sliced losses in deep generative modeling on standard
benchmark datasets 1 .

1

Introduction

Generative modeling is one of the most important tasks in machine learning and data science. Leveraging the expressiveness of neural networks in parameterizing the model distribution, deep generative
models such as GANs [17], VAEs [23], and diffusion models [19, 54], achieve a significant quality of
sampling images. Despite differences in the way of modeling the model distribution, optimization objectives of training generative models can be written as minimizing a discrepancy D(·, ·) between data
distribution µ and the model distribution ⌫ with 2 , parameter space of neural networks weights,
namely, we solve for ˆ 2 arg min 2 D(µ, ⌫ ). For example, Kullback–Leibler divergence is used
in VAEs and diffusion models, Jensen–Shannon divergence appears in GANs, and f-divergences are
utilized in f-GANs [43]. Because of the complexity of the neural networks , closed-form optimal
solutions to these optimization problems are intractable. Therefore, gradient-based methods and their
stochastic versions are widely used in practice to approximate these solutions.
Recently, optimal transport-based losses, which we denote as D(·, ·), are utilized to train generative models due to their training stability, efficiency, and geometrically meaning. Examples of
these models include Wasserstein GAN [3] with the dual form of Wasserstein-1 distance [46], and
OT-GANs [14, 51] with the primal form of Wasserstein distance and with Sinkhorn divergence [8]
1
Code for the paper is published at https://github.com/UT-Austin-Data-Science-Group/
AmortizedSW.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

