Unsupervised Learning under Latent Label Shift

Manley Roberts˚

Pranav Mani˚
Saurabh Garg
Zachary C. Lipton
Carnegie Mellon University
{manleyroberts,zlipton}@cmu.edu; {pmani, sgarg2}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
What sorts of structure might enable a learner to discover classes from unlabeled data? Traditional approaches rely on feature-space similarity and heroic assumptions on the data. In this paper, we introduce unsupervised learning under
Latent Label Shift (LLS), where we have access to unlabeled data from multiple
domains such that the label marginals pd pyq can shift across domains but the class
conditionals ppx|yq do not. This work instantiates a new principle for identifying
classes: elements that shift together group together. For finite input spaces, we establish an isomorphism between LLS and topic modeling: inputs correspond to
words, domains to documents, and labels to topics. Addressing continuous data,
we prove that when each label’s support contains a separable region, analogous to
an anchor word, oracle access to ppd|xq suffices to identify pd pyq and pd py|xq up
to permutation. Thus motivated, we introduce a practical algorithm that leverages
domain-discriminative models as follows: (i) push examples through domain discriminator ppd|xq; (ii) discretize the data by clustering examples in ppd|xq space;
(iii) perform non-negative matrix factorization on the discrete data; (iv) combine
the recovered ppy|dq with the discriminator outputs ppd|xq to compute pd py|xq @d.
With semi-synthetic experiments, we show that our algorithm can leverage domain
information to improve upon competitive unsupervised classification methods. We
reveal a failure mode of standard unsupervised classification methods when dataspace similarity does not indicate true groupings, and show empirically that our
method better handles this case. Our results establish a deep connection between
distribution shift and topic modeling, opening promising lines for future work2 .

1

Introduction

Discovering systems of categories from unlabeled data is a fundamental but ill-posed challenge in
machine learning. Typical unsupervised learning methods group instances together based on featurespace similarity. Accordingly, given a collection of photographs of animals, a practitioner might hope
that, in some appropriate feature space, images of animals of the same species should be somehow
similar to each other. But why should we expect a clustering algorithm to recognize that dogs viewed
in sunlight and dogs viewed at night belong to the same category? Why should we expect that
butterflies and caterpillars should lie close together in feature space?
In this paper, we offer an alternative principle according to which we might identify a set of classes:
we exploit distribution shift across times and locations to reveal otherwise unrecognizable groupings
among examples. For example, if we noticed that whenever we found ourselves in a location where
butterflies are abundant, caterpillars were similarly abundant, and that whenever butterflies were
scarce, caterpillars had a similar drop in prevalence, we might conclude that the two were tied to the
same underlying concept, no matter how different they appear in feature space. In short, our principle
suggests that latent classes might be uncovered whenever instances that shift together group together.
˚
2

Equal contribution.
Code is available at https://github.com/acmi-lab/Latent-Label-Shift-DDFA.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

