On the Generalization Power of the Overfitted
Three-Layer Neural Tangent Kernel Model

Peizhong Ju
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
ju.171@osu.edu

Xiaojun Lin
School of ECE
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
linx@purdue.edu

Ness B. Shroff
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
shroff.11@osu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the generalization performance of overparameterized 3layer NTK models. We show that, for a specific set of ground-truth functions
(which we refer to as the “learnable set”), the test error of the overfitted 3-layer
NTK is upper bounded by an expression that decreases with the number of neurons of the two hidden layers. Different from 2-layer NTK where there exists
only one hidden-layer, the 3-layer NTK involves interactions between two hiddenlayers. Our upper bound reveals that, between the two hidden-layers, the test error
descends faster with respect to the number of neurons in the second hidden-layer
(the one closer to the output) than with respect to that in the first hidden-layer (the
one closer to the input). We also show that the learnable set of 3-layer NTK without bias is no smaller than that of 2-layer NTK models with various choices of
bias in the neurons. However, in terms of the actual generalization performance,
our results suggest that 3-layer NTK is much less sensitive to the choices of bias
than 2-layer NTK, especially when the input dimension is large.

1

Introduction

Neural tangent kernel (NTK) models (Jacot et al., 2018) have been recently studied as an important intermediate step to understanding the exceptional generalization power of overparameterized
deep neural networks (DNNs). Deep neural networks (DNNs) usually have so many parameters that
they can perfectly fit all train data, yet they still have good generalization performance (Zhang et al.,
2017; Advani et al., 2020). This seems contradicting to the classical wisdom of “bias-variancetradeoff” in the statistical machine learning methods (Bishop, 2006; Hastie et al., 2009; Stein, 1956;
James & Stein, 1992; LeCun et al., 1991; Tikhonov, 1943). To understand this distinct behavior of
DNNs, a recent line of work studies the so-called “double-descent” phenomenon, beginning with
overfitted linear models. These results on linear models suggest that the test error indeed decreases
again in the overparameterized region, as the model complexity increases beyond the number of samples (Belkin et al., 2018, 2019; Bartlett et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2019; Muthukumar et al., 2019;
Ju et al., 2020; Mei & Montanari, 2019). However, these studies use linear models with simple features such as Gaussian or Fourier features, and hence they fail to capture the non-linearity in neural
networks. In contrast, NTK models adopt features generated by non-linear activation functions (i.e.,
neurons of DNNs), and thus they can be viewed as an intermediate step between simple linear models and DNNs. Along this line, the work in Ju et al. (2021) studies 2-layer NTK models, and shows
that the 2-layer NTK model indeed exhibits better and different descent behavior in the overparameterized region, which might be closer to that of an actual neural network.
Motivated by Ju et al. (2021), it is of great interest to understand whether similar insights extend
to deeper NTK models. In particular, in this paper we study NTK models with 3 layers. Although
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

