A Projection-free Algorithm for Constrained
Stochastic Multi-level Composition Optimization

Tesi Xiao
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
texiao@ucdavis.edu

Krishnakumar Balasubramanian
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
kbala@ucdavis.edu

Saeed Ghadimi
Department of Management Sciences
University of Waterloo
sghadimi@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We propose a projection-free conditional gradient-type algorithm for smooth
stochastic multi-level composition optimization, where the objective function is a
nested composition of T functions and the constraint set is a closed convex set. Our
algorithm assumes access to noisy evaluations of the functions and their gradients,
through a stochastic first-order oracle satisfying certain standard unbiasedness and
second-moment assumptions. We show that the number of calls to the stochastic first-order oracle and the linear-minimization oracle required by the proposed
algorithm, to obtain an ϵ-stationary solution, are of order OT (ϵ−2 ) and OT (ϵ−3 )
respectively, where OT hides constants in T . Notably, the dependence of these
complexity bounds on ϵ and T are separate in the sense that changing one does not
impact the dependence of the bounds on the other. For the case of T = 1, we also
provide a high-probability convergence result that depends poly-logarithmically on
the inverse confidence level. Moreover, our algorithm is parameter-free and does
not require any (increasing) order of mini-batches to converge unlike the common
practice in the analysis of stochastic conditional gradient-type algorithms.

1

Introduction

We study projection-free algorithms for solving the following stochastic multi-level composition
optimization problem
min F (x) := f1 ◦ · · · ◦ fT (x),
(1)
x∈X

di

di−1

where fi : R → R
, i = 1, · · · , T (d0 = 1) are continuously differentiable functions, the
composite function F is bounded below by F ⋆ > −∞ and X ⊂ Rd is a closed convex set. We
assume that the exact function values and derivatives of fi ’s are not available. In particular, we
assume that fi (y) = Eξi [Gi (y, ξi )] for some random variable ξi . Our goal is to solve the above
optimization problem, given access to noisy evaluations of ∇fi ’s and fi ’s.
There are two main challenges to address in developing efficient projection-free algorithms for
solving (1). First, note that denoting the transpose of the Jacobian of fi by ∇fi , the gradient of the
objective function F (x) in (1), is given by ∇F (x) = ∇fT (yT )∇fT −1 (yT −1 ) · · · ∇f1 (y1 ), where
yi = fi+1 ◦ · · · ◦ fT (x) for 1 ≤ i < T , and yT = x. Because of the nested nature of the gradient
∇F (x), obtaining an unbiased gradient estimator in the stochastic first-order setting, with controlled
moments, becomes non-trivial. Using naive stochastic gradient estimators lead to oracle complexities
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

