Revisiting Sliced Wasserstein on Images: From
Vectorization to Convolution
Khai Nguyen
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
khainb@utexas.edu

Nhat Ho
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
minhnhat@utexas.edu

Abstract
The conventional sliced Wasserstein is defined between two probability measures
that have realizations as vectors. When comparing two probability measures
over images, practitioners first need to vectorize images and then project them
to one-dimensional space by using matrix multiplication between the sample
matrix and the projection matrix. After that, the sliced Wasserstein is evaluated by
averaging the two corresponding one-dimensional projected probability measures.
However, this approach has two limitations. The first limitation is that the spatial
structure of images is not captured efficiently by the vectorization step; therefore,
the later slicing process becomes harder to gather the discrepancy information.
The second limitation is memory inefficiency since each slicing direction is a
vector that has the same dimension as the images. To address these limitations,
we propose novel slicing methods for sliced Wasserstein between probability
measures over images that are based on the convolution operators. We derive
convolution sliced Wasserstein (CSW) and its variants via incorporating stride,
dilation, and non-linear activation function into the convolution operators. We
investigate the metricity of CSW as well as its sample complexity, its computational
complexity, and its connection to conventional sliced Wasserstein distances. Finally,
we demonstrate the favorable performance of CSW over the conventional sliced
Wasserstein in comparing probability measures over images and in training deep
generative modeling on images1 .

1

Introduction

Optimal transport and Wasserstein distance [59, 51] have become popular tools in machine learning
and data science. For example, optimal transport has been utilized in generative modeling tasks
to generate realistic images [2, 58], in domain adaptation applications to transfer knowledge from
source to target domains [9, 3], in clustering applications to capture the heterogeneity of data [21],
and in other applications [29, 62, 63]. Despite having appealing performance, Wasserstein distance
has been known to suffer from high computational complexity, namely, its computational complexity
is at the order of O(m3 log m) [49] when the probability measures have at most m supports. In
addition, Wasserstein distance also suffers from the curse of dimensionality, namely, its sample
complexity is at the order of O(n 1/d ) [15] where n is the sample size. A popular line of work to
improve the speed of computation and the sample complexity of the Wasserstein distance is by adding
an entropic regularization term to the Wasserstein distance [10]. This variant is known as entropic
regularized optimal transport (or equivalently entropic regularized Wasserstein). By using the entropic
version, we can approximate the value of Wasserstein distance with the computational complexities
1

Code for the paper is published at https://github.com/UT-Austin-Data-Science-Group/CSW.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

