On Divergence Measures for Bayesian Pseudocoresets

Balhae Kim1 , Jungwon Choi1 , Seanie Lee1 , Yoonho Lee2 , Jung-Woo Ha3 , Juho Lee1,4
KAIST1 , Stanford University2 , NAVER AI Lab3 , AITRICS4
{balhaekim, jungwon.choi, lsnfamily02}@kaist.ac.kr,
yoonho@stanford.edu, jungwoo.ha@navercorp.com, juholee@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
A Bayesian pseudocoreset is a small synthetic dataset for which the posterior
over parameters approximates that of the original dataset. While promising, the
scalability of Bayesian pseudocoresets is not yet validated in realistic problems
such as image classification with deep neural networks. On the other hand, dataset
distillation methods similarly construct a small dataset such that the optimization
using the synthetic dataset converges to a solution with performance competitive
with optimization using full data. Although dataset distillation has been empirically
verified in large-scale settings, the framework is restricted to point estimates, and
their adaptation to Bayesian inference has not been explored. This paper casts
two representative dataset distillation algorithms as approximations to methods for
constructing pseudocoresets by minimizing specific divergence measures: reverse
KL divergence and Wasserstein distance. Furthermore, we provide a unifying view
of such divergence measures in Bayesian pseudocoreset construction. Finally, we
propose a novel Bayesian pseudocoreset algorithm based on minimizing forward
KL divergence. Our empirical results demonstrate that the pseudocoresets constructed from these methods reflect the true posterior even in high-dimensional
Bayesian inference problems.

1

Introduction

One of the main ingredients for modern statistical machine learning is large-scale data, which
enables the learning of powerful and flexible models such as deep neural networks when handled
correctly [3, 32]. However, training a neural network on larger datasets usually requires many
nontrivial choices, ranging from architecture choice, hyperparameter optimization, and infrastructure
challenges [33]. Aside from requiring enormous computing resources for training, large-scale data
often contains sensitive information that must not be shared publicly [11]. This motivates the
construction of coresets [29, 14], a sparse subset of a large-scale dataset that summarizes essential
features of the original dataset. In the context of Bayesian inference, the posterior conditioned on an
essential coreset should be similar to the exact posterior conditioned on the full dataset.
Coreset construction becomes more difficult with high-dimensional data. A previous work [19]
shows that even the best coreset becomes suboptimal at large scales: the divergence between the
posterior conditioned on the optimal coreset and the exact posterior grows with the dimension of the
data. Motivated by this weakness of strict coresets, Manousakas et al. [19] proposes to construct a
Bayesian pseudocoreset: a synthetic dataset represented as a set of learnable parameters and trained
to minimize the divergence between the coreset posterior and the full-data posterior. Compared
to coresets, pseudocoresets scale much better with data dimension and achieve significantly lower
posterior approximation error. However, the KL divergence minimization in pseudocoreset learning
requires the construction of approximate posteriors on the fly during the learning process, making
this approach hard to apply to high-dimensional models such as deep neural networks.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

