APT-36K: A Large-scale Benchmark for Animal Pose
Estimation and Tracking

1

Yuxiang Yang1 , Junjie Yang1 , Yufei Xu2†, Jing Zhang2† , Long Lan3 , Dacheng Tao4,2
School of Electronics and Information, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
3
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
4
JD Explore Academy, Beijing 101111, China
yyx@hdu.edu.cn, 212040105@hdu.edu.cn, yuxu7116@uni.sydney.edu.au
jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au, long.lan@nudt.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Animal pose estimation and tracking (APT) is a fundamental task for detecting and tracking animal keypoints from a sequence of video frames. Previous
animal-related datasets focus either on animal tracking or single-frame animal
pose estimation, and never on both aspects. The lack of APT datasets hinders the
development and evaluation of video-based animal pose estimation and tracking
methods, limiting real-world applications, e.g., understanding animal behavior in
wildlife conservation. To fill this gap, we make the first step and propose APT36K, i.e., the first large-scale benchmark for animal pose estimation and tracking.
Specifically, APT-36K consists of 2,400 video clips collected and filtered from
30 animal species with 15 frames for each video, resulting in 36,000 frames in
total. After manual annotation and careful double-check, high-quality keypoint and
tracking annotations are provided for all the animal instances. Based on APT-36K,
we benchmark several representative models on the following three tracks: (1)
supervised animal pose estimation on a single frame under intra- and inter-domain
transfer learning settings, (2) inter-species domain generalization test for unseen
animals, and (3) animal pose estimation with animal tracking. Based on the experimental results, we gain some empirical insights and show that APT-36K provides a
valuable animal pose estimation and tracking benchmark, offering new challenges
and opportunities for future research. The code and dataset will be made publicly
available at https://github.com/pandorgan/APT-36K.

1

Introduction

Pose estimation aims to identify the categories and distinguish the locations of a series of body
keypoints from an image. As a fundamental task in computer vision, it is beneficial for many
vision tasks [28, 4, 3, 43] like behavior understanding, action recognition, etc. There has been
rapid progress in human pose estimation thanks to the availability of a large number of human
pose datasets [24, 21, 2]. However, fewer works focus on animal pose estimation, especially for
video-based animal pose estimation, although it is crucial in animal behavior understanding and
wildlife conservation.
Some efforts have been made to establish animal pose estimation datasets to facilitate research in
this area. Early works focus on the pose estimation of specific animal categories, e.g., the horse [26],
zebra [12], macaque [19], fly [29], and tiger [22] datasets collect and annotate the keypoints for some
†

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

