On Non-Linear operators for Geometric Deep
Learning

Grégoire Sergeant-Perthuis
Univ. Artois, UR 2462, Laboratoire de
Mathématiques de Lens (LML)
F-62300 Lens, France
& OURAGAN team, Inria Paris & IMJ-PRG
Paris, France.
gregoireserper@gmail.com
Joan Bruna
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York

Jakob Maier
INRIA, DI/ENS, PSL
Paris

Edouard Oyallon
MLIA - Machine Learning
and Information Access
Sorbonne Université, CNRS,
ISIR, F-75005 Paris, France

Abstract
This work studies operators mapping vector and scalar fields defined over a manifold M, and which commute with its group of diffeomorphisms Diff(M). We
prove that in the case of scalar fields Lpω (M, R), those operators correspond to
point-wise non-linearities, recovering and extending known results on Rd . In
the context of Neural Networks defined over M, it indicates that point-wise nonlinear operators are the only universal family that commutes with any group of
symmetries, and justifies their systematic use in combination with dedicated linear operators commuting with specific symmetries. In the case of vector fields
Lpω (M, T M), we show that those operators are solely the scalar multiplication. It
indicates that Diff(M) is too rich and that there is no universal class of non-linear
operators to motivate the design of Neural Networks over the symmetries of M.

1

Introduction

Given a physical domain M and measurements f : M → Y observed over it, one is often interested
in processing intrinsic information from f , i.e. consistent with the symmetries of the domain. Let
M denote an operator, it can be seen as a non-linear operator acting on measurements. In words,
if two measurements f , f˜ = g.f are related by a symmetry g of the domain, like a rigid motion
on an observed molecular compound, we would like our processed data M (f ) and M (f˜) to be
related by the same symmetry — thus that M (g.f ) = g.M (f ) or equivalently that M commutes
with the symmetry transformation of the domain. The study of operators that satisfy such symmetry
constraints has played a long and central role in the history of physics and mathematics, motivated
by the inherent symmetries of physical laws. More recently, such importance has also extended to
the design of machine learning systems, where symmetries improve the sample complexity [25, 3].
For instance, Convolutional Neural Networks build translation symmetry, whereas Graph Neural
Networks build permutation symmetry, amongst other examples coined under the ‘Geometric Deep
Learning’ umbrella [5, 4].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

