Chroma-VAE: Mitigating Shortcut Learning with
Generative Classifiers
Wanqian Yang

Polina Kirichenko

Micah Goldblum

Andrew Gordon Wilson

New York University
{wanqian, pk1822, goldblum}@nyu.edu, andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks are susceptible to shortcut learning, using simple features to
achieve low training loss without discovering essential semantic structure. Contrary
to prior belief, we show that generative models alone are not sufficient to prevent
shortcut learning, despite an incentive to recover a more comprehensive representation of the data than discriminative approaches. However, we observe that shortcuts
are preferentially encoded with minimal information, a fact that generative models
can exploit to mitigate shortcut learning. In particular, we propose Chroma-VAE,
a two-pronged approach where a VAE classifier is initially trained to isolate the
shortcut in a small latent subspace, allowing a secondary classifier to be trained
on the complementary, shortcut-free latent subspace. In addition to demonstrating
the efficacy of Chroma-VAE on benchmark and real-world shortcut learning tasks,
our work highlights the potential for manipulating the latent space of generative
classifiers to isolate or interpret specific correlations.

1

Introduction

As science fiction writer Robert Heinlein quipped in his 1973 novel Time Enough for Love, progress
is made not by “early risers”, but instead by “lazy men trying to find easier ways to do something”.
Indeed, we can accuse modern machine learning models of emulating the same behaviour. There are
notable examples of models that wind up learning the wrong things. For example, images of cows
standing on anything other than grass fields are commonly misclassified because the combination
of cows and grass fields is so prevalent in training data that the model simply learns to rely on the
background as a predictive signal [4]. A more concerning example involves predicting pneumonia
from chest X-ray scans. Hospitals from which training data is collected have differing rates of
diagnosis, a fact that the model easily exploits by learning to detect hospital-specific metal tokens in
the scans rather than signals relevant to pneumonia itself [52].
Deep neural networks can learn brittle, unintended signals under empirical risk minimization (ERM)
[11, 16, 13], a well-known phenomenon observed and studied by various communities. These signals
often possess two key attributes: (i) they are spuriously correlated with the label and are therefore
strongly predictive [6, 50, 31], despite having no meaningful semantic relationship with the label,
and (ii) they are learnt by the neural network as a result of its inductive biases [43, 10]. A recent
unifying effort by Geirhos et al. [10] coins the term shortcut to describe such a signal. Networks that
learn shortcuts fail to generalize to relevant or challenging distribution shifts.
Prior work has sought to alleviate this problem under various formalizations, most commonly in the
settings of group robustness [e.g. 39, 28, 7, 25, 20] or adversarial robustness [e.g. 5, 45]. In this paper,
we motivate a different approach to mitigate undesirable shortcuts, where we seek instead to learn a
shortcut-invariant representation of the data — that is, “everything but the shortcut”.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

