Multi-agent Performative Prediction with Greedy
Deployment and Consensus Seeking Agents

Qiang Li

Chung-Yiu Yau

Hoi-To Wai

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR of China
{liqiang, cyyau, htwai}@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We consider a scenario where multiple agents are learning a common decision
vector from data which can be influenced by the agents’ decisions. This leads to
the problem of multi-agent performative prediction (Multi-PfD). In this paper, we
formulate Multi-PfD as a decentralized optimization problem that minimizes a sum
of loss functions, where each loss function is based on a distribution influenced
by the local decision vector. We first prove the necessary and sufficient condition
for the Multi-PfD problem to admit a unique multi-agent performative stable
(Multi-PS) solution. We show that enforcing consensus leads to a laxer condition
for existence of Multi-PS solution with respect to the distributions’ sensitivities,
compared to the single agent case. Then, we study a decentralized extension to
the greedy deployment scheme [Mendler-Dünner et al., 2020], called the DSGD-GD
scheme. We show that DSGD-GD converges to the Multi-PS solution and analyze its
non-asymptotic convergence rate. Numerical results validate our analysis.

1

Introduction

Traditional learning/prediction problems are often formulated with the assumption that data follows a
static distribution, from which a decision vector is sought by solving a corresponding optimization
problem. While this assumption holds for ‘stationary’ tasks such as image classification, many real
world tasks are dynamical, involving data that could be influenced by decisions. In the latter case, the
predictions are said to be performative. Example scenarios include when users are strategic [Hardt
et al., 2016, Dong et al., 2018, Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2020] such as in training an E-mail spam
classifier, where users (including spammers) can adapt to the classifier’s rules to evade detection.
A common way to model performative prediction is via incorporating decision-dependent distribution
in formulating the learning problem [Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2008]. Since the pioneering work by
Perdomo et al. [2020], there is a growing literature in analyzing the performative prediction problem,
which studied the convergence of learning algorithms to stable point of performative prediction
[Mendler-Dünner et al., 2020, Drusvyatskiy and Xiao, 2020, Brown et al., 2022, Li and Wai, 2022,
Wood et al., 2021], algorithms to find stationary solution of performative risk [Izzo et al., 2021, 2022,
Miller et al., 2021, Ray et al., 2022], update timescales of agent [Zrnic et al., 2021], etc.
Most of the existing works are focused on the single agent (learner) setting. In this paper, we
concentrate on the multi-agent performative prediction (Multi-PfD) problem. Here, the agents are
consensus-seeking who seek a common decision vector that minimizes the sum of loss functions
through communications on a graph/network. Our setup pertains to the wide-spread applications of
consensus-type decentralized algorithms to machine learning which leverages the large amount of
data at cooperating agents, such as clinical data [Warnat-Herresthal et al., 2021], financial data [Li and
Wang, 2019], etc. In specific, adopting a consensus design can bring benefits such as better out-of36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

