Domain Generalization without Excess Empirical Risk

Ozan Sener
Apple

Vladlen Koltun
Apple

Abstract
Given data from diverse sets of distinct distributions, domain generalization aims
to learn models that generalize to unseen distributions. A common approach is
designing a data-driven surrogate penalty to capture generalization and minimize
the empirical risk jointly with the penalty. We argue that a significant failure mode
of this recipe is an excess risk due to an erroneous penalty or hardness in joint
optimization. We present an approach that eliminates this problem. Instead of
jointly minimizing empirical risk with the penalty, we minimize the penalty under
the constraint of optimality of the empirical risk. This change guarantees that the
domain generalization penalty cannot impair optimization of the empirical risk,
i.e., in-distribution performance. To solve the proposed optimization problem, we
demonstrate an exciting connection to rate-distortion theory and utilize its tools
to design an efficient method. Our approach can be applied to any penalty-based
domain generalization method, and we demonstrate its effectiveness by applying it
to three examplar methods from the literature, showing significant improvements.

1

Introduction

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is the workhorse of machine learning. In this setting, a learner
collects a set of data, assumed to be independent and identically sampled from a particular distribution
of interest. An empirical risk over these samples is later minimized, hoping that the resulting model
will generalize to future unseen data from the same distribution. Although ERM is ubiquitous, it is
brittle to minor shifts in the distribution, and the resulting models suffer a significant performance
drop when evaluated beyond their training distributions. Examples of such distribution shifts include
different hospitals for medical imaging [49], camera types for perception models [8], and time periods
for natural language models [20]. The problem of learning models which generalize under such
distribution shifts is studied in the literature under the rubric of domain generalization.
Given a collection of domains (data distributions), domain generalization aims to find models that
generalize to unseen domains. Although the domain generalization literature is rich, many model-free
methods follow a common recipe. A surrogate penalty that encapsulates generalization is designed
and a joint optimization problem of minimizing the empirical risk with the surrogate penalty is solved.
Typical such penalties are invariance to an adversarial domain classifier [17, 42], invariance of an
optimal predictor [5], and uniformity of risk [35]. Although these approaches are technically sound,
their effectiveness has been challenged by recent empirical benchmarks [23, 18].
Joint optimization of the empirical risk and penalty is a sound method since the error on the unseen
distribution can be bounded as the combination of an error on the training distributions (empirical
risk) and the gap between performance on training and unseen distributions (generalization gap).
Although domain generalization literature focuses mainly on controlling the generalization gap, we
hypothesize that this joint optimization can increase empirical risk, effectively hurting performance on
both training and unseen distributions. In other words, the lacking empirical performance of existing
algorithms might be because they fail to optimize the empirical risk (i.e., in-distribution performance)
even though they learn to control generalize gap. Consider the extensive evaluation conducted on the
WILDS benchmark [23]. ERM yields higher out-of-distribution performance than dedicated domain
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

