RNNs of RNNs:
Recursive Construction of Stable Assemblies of
Recurrent Neural Networks
Leo Kozachkov1,* , Michaela Ennis2,* , and Jean-Jacques Slotine1,3,4
1

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Division of Medical Sciences, Harvard University
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
4
Google AI
*
Equal contribution
{leokoz8,mennis,jjs}@mit.edu

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are widely used throughout neuroscience as
models of local neural activity. Many properties of single RNNs are well characterized theoretically, but experimental neuroscience has moved in the direction of
studying multiple interacting areas, and RNN theory needs to be likewise extended.
We take a constructive approach towards this problem, leveraging tools from nonlinear control theory and machine learning to characterize when combinations of
stable RNNs will themselves be stable. Importantly, we derive conditions which allow for massive feedback connections between interacting RNNs. We parameterize
these conditions for easy optimization using gradient-based techniques, and show
that stability-constrained ‘networks of networks’ can perform well on challenging
sequential-processing benchmark tasks. Altogether, our results provide a principled
approach towards understanding distributed, modular function in the brain.

1

Introduction

The combination and reuse of primitive “modules" has enabled a great deal of progress in computer
science, engineering, and biology. Modularity is particularly apparent in the structure of the brain,
as different parts are specialized for different functions [Kandel et al., 2000]. Accordingly, most
experimental studies throughout the history of neuroscience have focused on a single brain area in
association with a single behavior [Abbott and Svoboda, 2020]. Similarly, RNN models of brain
function have mostly been limited to a single RNN modeling a single area. However, neuroscience
is entering an age where recording from many different brain areas simultaneously during complex
behaviors is possible. As experimental neuroscience has shifted towards multi-area recordings,
computational techniques for analyzing, modeling, and interpreting these multi-area recordings have
blossomed [Michaels et al., 2020, Mashour et al., 2020, Abbott and Svoboda, 2020, Perich et al.,
2021, Semedo et al., 2019, Yang and Molano-Mazón, 2021, Machado et al., 2022]. Despite this,
RNN theory has lagged behind.
The theoretical question of RNN stability is crucial for understanding information propagation and
manipulation [Vogt et al., 2020, Engelken et al., 2020, Kozachkov et al., 2022a]. The conditions
under which single, autonomous RNNs are chaotic or stable are well-studied, in particular when
the RNN weights are randomly chosen and the number of neurons tends to infinity [Sompolinsky
et al., 1988, Engelken et al., 2020]. However, there is very little work addressing the theoretical
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

