On Measuring Excess Capacity in Neural Networks
Florian Graf
University of Salzburg
florian.graf@plus.ac.at

Sebastian Zeng
University of Salzburg
sebastian.zeng@plus.ac.at

Marc Niethammer
UNC Chapel Hill
mn@cs.unc.edu

Bastian Rieck
Institute for AI and Health
Helmholtz Munich
bastian@rieck.me

Roland Kwitt
University of Salzburg
roland.kwitt@plus.ac.at

Abstract
We study the excess capacity of deep networks in the context of supervised classification. That is, given a capacity measure of the underlying hypothesis class – in our
case, empirical Rademacher complexity – to what extent can we (a priori) constrain
this class while retaining an empirical error on a par with the unconstrained regime?
To assess excess capacity in modern architectures (such as residual networks), we
extend and unify prior Rademacher complexity bounds to accommodate function
composition and addition, as well as the structure of convolutions. The capacitydriving terms in our bounds are the Lipschitz constants of the layers and an (2, 1)
group norm distance to the initializations of the convolution weights. Experiments
on benchmark datasets of varying task difficulty indicate that (1) there is a substantial amount of excess capacity per task, and (2) capacity can be kept at a surprisingly
similar level across tasks. Overall, this suggests a notion of compressibility with
respect to weight norms, complementary to classic compression via weight pruning.
Source code is available at https://github.com/rkwitt/excess_capacity.

1

Introduction

Understanding the generalization behavior of deep networks in supervised classification is still a
largely open problem, despite a long history of theoretical advances. The observation that (overparametrized) models can easily fit—i.e., reach zero training error—to randomly permuted training
labels [45, 46] but, when trained on unpermuted labels, yield good generalization performance, has
fueled much of the progress in this area. Recent works range from relating generalization to weight
norms [3, 14, 26, 37, 38], measures of the distance to initializations [34], implicit regularization
induced by the optimization algorithm [8, 41], or model compression [2, 6, 42]. Other works study
connections to optimal transport [9], or generalization in the neural tangent kernel setting [1, 23].
When seeking to establish generalization guarantees within the classic uniform convergence regime,
bounding a capacity measure, such as the Rademacher complexity [4], of the hypothesis class is
the crucial step. While the resultant generalization bounds are typically vacuous and can exhibit
concerning behavior [36], the capacity bounds themselves offer invaluable insights through the
behavior of the bound-driving quantities, such as various types of weight norms or Lipschitz constants.
Particularly relevant to our work is the observation that the bound-driving quantities tend to increase
with task difficulty. Fig. 1 illustrates this behavior in terms of Lipschitz constants per layer and the distance of each layer’s weight to its initialization (measured via a group norm we develop in Section 3.1).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

