Masked Generative Adversarial Networks are
Data-Efficient Generation Learners
Jiaxing Huang1∗, Kaiwen Cui1∗, Dayan Guan1 , Aoran Xiao1 , Fangneng Zhan2 ,
Shijian Lu1†, Shengcai Liao3 , Eric Xing45
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
4
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{Jiaxing.Huang, Kaiwen.Cui, Dayan.Guan, Aoran.Xiao, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg
fzhan@mpi-inf.mpg.de, shengcai.liao@inceptioniai.org
epxing@cs.cmu.edu, Eric.Xing@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
This paper shows that masked generative adversarial networks (MaskedGAN)
are robust image generation learners with limited training data. The idea of
MaskedGAN is simple: it randomly masks out certain image information for
effective GAN training with limited data. We develop two masking strategies
that work along orthogonal dimensions of training images, including a shifted
spatial masking that masks the images in spatial dimensions with random shifts,
and a balanced spectral masking that masks certain image spectral bands with selfadaptive probabilities. The two masking strategies complement each other which
together encourage more challenging holistic learning from limited training data,
ultimately suppressing trivial solutions and failures in GAN training. Albeit simple, extensive experiments show that MaskedGAN achieves superior performance
consistently across different network architectures (e.g., CNNs including BigGAN
and StyleGAN-v2 and Transformers including TransGAN and GANformer) and
datasets (e.g., CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet, 100-shot, AFHQ, FFHQ and
Cityscapes).

1

Introduction

“What I cannot create, I do not understand.” —Richard Feynman. Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) [19] is such an unsupervised framework learning to understand and create: the discriminator
aims to understand “what are real and fake images” by binary discrimination while the generator
strives to produce realistic images according to discriminator’s feedback. In recent years, GANs
have achieved great success under the presence of large amounts of training data. When only limited
training data is available, they instead experience obviously increased generation failures [58, 31]. By
reversing the dictum, we get “What I do not understand, I can not create” [43], which might be the
perfect metaphor of such generation failures. Specifically, with limited training data, the discriminator
tends to achieve discrimination via certain less meaningful shortcuts by memorizing training data or
merely focusing on easy-to-discriminate image locations and spectra without holistic understanding
of images, ultimately leading to trivial solutions that fail to “create” realistic images [58, 31] as shown
in Fig. 1.
∗
†

indicates equal contribution.
corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

