Finding Naturally Occurring Physical
Backdoors in Image Datasets
Emily Wenger∗
University of Chicago

Roma Bhattacharjee∗†
Princeton University

Arjun Nitin Bhagoji
University of Chicago

Josephine Passananti
University of Chicago

Emilio Andere
University of Chicago

Haitao Zheng
University of Chicago

Ben Y. Zhao
University of Chicago

Abstract
Extensive literature on backdoor poison attacks has studied attacks and defenses
for backdoors using “digital trigger patterns.” In contrast, “physical backdoors”
use physical objects as triggers, have only recently been identified, and are qualitatively different enough to resist most defenses targeting digital trigger backdoors.
Research on physical backdoors is limited by access to large datasets containing
real images of physical objects co-located with misclassification targets. Building
these datasets is time- and labor-intensive.
This work seeks to address the challenge of accessibility for research on physical
backdoor attacks. We hypothesize that there may be naturally occurring physically co-located objects already present in popular datasets such as ImageNet.
Once identified, a careful relabeling of these data can transform them into training
samples for physical backdoor attacks. We propose a method to scalably identify these subsets of potential triggers in existing datasets, along with the specific
classes they can poison. We call these naturally occurring trigger-class subsets natural backdoor datasets. Our techniques successfully identify natural backdoors in
widely-available datasets, and produce models behaviorally equivalent to those
trained on manually curated datasets. We release our code to allow the research
community to create their own datasets for research on physical backdoor attacks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models for computer vision (CV) are known to be vulnerable to a variety of attacks [39, 2, 9, 35, 7, 44]. One powerful class of attacks is backdoor attacks [4, 9, 23, 48, 46, 43, 19],
where models trained on corrupted (poisoned) data produce specific, attacker-chosen misclassifications on images containing special “trigger” patterns.
The research community has identified two broad categories of backdoor attack triggers for CV models. Digital triggers are pixel patterns added to images, e.g. edited onto images after their creation.
Backdoors using digital triggers are well researched, and numerous defenses have been developed
against them [42, 3, 22, 18]. In contrast, physical triggers are real-world objects present in images
at their creation. Since they are not digitally added to images, they are not easily distinguishable
∗
†

Equal contribution, corresponding author: ewenger@uchicago.edu
Work done while at the University of Chicago

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

