Dual-discriminative Graph Neural Network for
Imbalanced Graph-level Anomaly Detection

Ge Zhang1 Zhenyu Yang1
Jia Wu
Jian Yang1 Xue Shan2 Hao Peng3 Jianlin Su4
Chuan Zhou5 Quan Z. Sheng1 Leman Akoglu6 Charu C. Aggarwal7
1
Macquarie University 2 University of Wollongong 3 Beihang University
4
Zhuiyi Technology 5 AMSS, Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Carnegie Mellon University 7 IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
{ge.zhang5, zhenyu.yang3}@students.mq.edu.au,
{jia.wu, jian.yang}@mq.edu.au, sxue@uow.edu.au,
penghao@buaa.edu.cn, bojonesu@wezhuiyi.com, zhouchuan@amss.ac.cn,
michael.sheng@mq.edu.au, lakoglu@andrew.cmu.edu, charu@us.ibm.com
1∗

Abstract
Graph-level anomaly detection aims to distinguish anomalous graphs in a graph
dataset from normal graphs. Anomalous graphs represent a very few but essential
patterns in the real world. The anomalous property of a graph may be referable to its
anomalous attributes of particular nodes and anomalous substructures that refer to
a subset of nodes and edges in the graph. In addition, due to the imbalance nature
of anomaly problem, anomalous information will be diluted by normal graphs
with overwhelming quantities. Various anomaly notions in the attributes and/or
substructures and the imbalance nature together make detecting anomalous graphs
a non-trivial task. In this paper, we propose a graph neural network for graph-level
anomaly detection, namely iGAD. Specifically, an anomalous graph attribute-aware
graph convolution and an anomalous graph substructure-aware deep Random
Walk Kernel (deep RWK) are welded into a graph neural network to achieve
the dual-discriminative ability on anomalous attributes and substructures. Deep
RWK in iGAD makes up for the deficiency of graph convolution in distinguishing
structural information caused by the simple neighborhood aggregation mechanism.
Further, we propose a Point Mutual Information (PMI)-based loss function to
target the problems caused by imbalance distributions. PMI-based loss function
enables iGAD to capture essential correlation between input graphs and their
anomalous/normal properties. We evaluate iGAD on four real-world graph datasets.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of iGAD on the graph-level
anomaly detection task.

1

Introduction

Graphs have been used as an indispensable tool to describe relational data, such as chemical compounds, transport networks, and social networks. For instance, in a graph that models a chemical
compound, nodes represent atoms and edges describe chemical bonds between atoms. Learning
graphs to understand the world has been drawing considerable attention in recent years [5, 14, 15, 51].
Given a graph dataset containing a set of graphs, graph-level anomaly detection aims to identify
graphs with anomalous information. Generally, these anomalous graphs with special characteristics
or functions are the minority in a graph dataset. For example, among all antibody molecules, only
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

