Feature-Proxy Transformer for Few-Shot
Segmentation

Jian-Wei Zhang1∗, Yifan Sun2 , Yi Yang3 , Wei Chen1†
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Baidu Research
3
CCAI, College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{zjw.cs,yangyics,chenvis}@zju.edu.cn, sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn
1

Abstract
Few-shot segmentation (FSS) aims at performing semantic segmentation on novel
classes given a few annotated support samples. With a rethink of recent advances,
we find that the current FSS framework has deviated far from the supervised segmentation framework: Given the deep features, FSS methods typically use an
intricate decoder to perform sophisticated pixel-wise matching, while the supervised segmentation methods use a simple linear classification head. Due to the
intricacy of the decoder and its matching pipeline, it is not easy to follow such
an FSS framework. This paper revives the straightforward framework of “feature extractor + linear classification head” and proposes a novel Feature-Proxy
Transformer (FPTrans) method, in which the “proxy” is the vector representing
a semantic class in the linear classification head. FPTrans has two keypoints for
learning discriminative features and representative proxies: 1) To better utilize the
limited support samples, the feature extractor makes the query interact with the
support features from bottom to top layers using a novel prompting strategy. 2) FPTrans uses multiple local background proxies (instead of a single one) because the
background is not homogeneous and may contain some novel foreground regions.
These two keypoints are easily integrated into the vision transformer backbone with
the prompting mechanism in the transformer. Given the learned features and proxies, FPTrans directly compares their cosine similarity for segmentation. Although
the framework is straightforward, we show that FPTrans achieves competitive FSS
accuracy on par with state-of-the-art decoder-based methods. 1

1

Introduction

Few-shot learning is of significant value for semantic segmentation. It is because the semantic
segmentation task requires pixel-wise annotation, which is notoriously cumbersome and expensive [10,
30, 28]. Therefore, learning from very few samples for semantic segmentation has attracted significant
research interest, yielding a popular topic, i.e., few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS). Formally,
FSS aims at performing semantic segmentation on novel classes given only a few (e.g., one or five)
densely-annotated samples (called support images) [5].
With a rethink of recent advances in FSS, we find current FSS methods usually require an intricate
decoder, deviating far from the plain supervised segmentation framework. More concretely, state-ofthe-art FSS methods adopt the “feature extractor + (intricate) decoder” framework (Fig. 1 (a), (b) and
∗

Work done during an internship at Baidu Research.
Corresponding author.
1
Code is available at https://github.com/Jarvis73/FPTrans.

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

