Multi-Sample Training for Neural Image Compression

Tongda Xu1,2 , Yan Wang1,2 ∗, Dailan He1 , Chenjian Gao1,3 , Han Gao1,4 ,
Kunzan Liu1,5 , Hongwei Qin1
1
2
SenseTime Research, Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University,
3
Beihang University, 4 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
5
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
{xutongda, wangyan}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{hedailan, gaochenjian, gaohan1, liukunzan, qinhongwei}@sensetime.com

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of lossy neural image compression (NIC). Current
state-of-the-art (sota) methods adopt uniform posterior to approximate quantization noise, and single-sample pathwise estimator to approximate the gradient
of evidence lower bound (ELBO). In this paper, we propose to train NIC with
multiple-sample importance weighted autoencoder (IWAE) target, which is tighter
than ELBO and converges to log likelihood as sample size increases. First, we
identify that the uniform posterior of NIC has special properties, which affect the
variance and bias of pathwise and score function estimators of the IWAE target.
Moreover, we provide insights on a commonly adopted trick in NIC from gradient
variance perspective. Based on those analysis, we further propose multiple-sample
NIC (MS-NIC), an enhanced IWAE target for NIC. Experimental results demonstrate that it improves sota NIC methods. Our MS-NIC is plug-and-play, and can
be easily extended to other neural compression tasks.

1

Introduction

Latent variable-based lossy neural image compression (NIC) has witnessed significant success. The
majority of NIC follows the framework proposed by Ballé et al. [2017]: For encoding, the original
image x is transformed into y by the encoder. Then y is scalar-quantized into integer ȳ, estimated
with an entropy model p(ȳ) and coded. For decoding, ȳ is transformed back by the decoder to obtain
reconstructed x̄. The optimization target of NIC is R-D cost: R + λD. R denotes the bitrate of ȳ, D
denotes the distortion between x and x̄, and λ denotes the hyper-parameter controlling their trade-off.
During training, the quantization ȳ = ⌊y⌉ is relaxed withQ
ỹ = y + ϵ to simulate the quantization
noise. And ϵ is fully factorized uniform noise ϵ ∼ p(ϵ) = U(− 12 , + 12 ).
Ballé et al. [2017] further recognises that such training framework is closely related to variational
inference. Indeed, the above process can be formulated as a graphic model x ← ỹ. During encoding,
x is transformed into variational parameter y by inference model (encoder), and ỹ is sampled from
variational posterior q(ỹ|x), which is a unit unifrom distribution centered in y. The prior likelihood
p(ỹ) is computed, and ỹ is transformed back by the generative model (decoder) to compute the
likelihood p(x|ỹ). Under such formulation, the prior is connected to the bitrate, the likelihood is
connected to the distortion, and the posterior likelihood is connected to the bits-back bitrate (See
Appendix. 2.3), which is 0 in NIC. Finally, the evidence lower bound (ELBO) is the negative R + λD
target (Eq. 1). Denote the transform function ỹ(ϵ; ϕ) = y +ϵ, and sampling ỹ ∼ q(ỹ|x) is equivalent
to transforming ϵ through ỹ(ϵ; ϕ). Then the gradient of ELBO is estimated via pathwise estimator
with single-sample Monte Carlo (Eq. 2). This is the same as SGVB-1 [Kingma and Welling, 2013].
∗

Yan Wang is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

