C O NT: Contrastive Neural Text Generation
Chenxin An1,2⇤, Jiangtao Feng2 , Kai Lv1 , Lingpeng Kong2,3 , Xipeng Qiu1 , Xuanjing Huang1,4
1
Fudan University, 2 Shark-NLP Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
The University of Hong Kong
4
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
{cxan20, klv21, xpqiu, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn
fengjiangtao@pjlab.org.cn, lpk@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Recently, contrastive learning attracts increasing interests in neural text generation
as a new solution to alleviate the exposure bias problem. It introduces a sequencelevel training signal which is crucial to generation tasks that always rely on autoregressive decoding. However, previous methods using contrastive learning in
neural text generation usually lead to inferior performance. In this paper, we analyse
the underlying reasons and propose a new Contrastive Neural Text generation
framework, C O NT. C O NT addresses bottlenecks that prevent contrastive learning
from being widely adopted in generation tasks from three aspects – the construction
of contrastive examples, the choice of the contrastive loss, and the strategy in
decoding. We validate C O NT on five generation tasks with ten benchmarks,
including machine translation, summarization, code comment generation, datato-text generation and commonsense generation. Experimental results show that
C O NT clearly outperforms the conventional training framework on all the ten
benchmarks with a convincing margin. Especially, C O NT surpasses previous the
most competitive contrastive learning method for text generation, by 1.50 BLEU
on machine translation and 1.77 ROUGE-1 on summarization, respectively. It
achieves new state-of-the-art on summarization, code comment generation (without
external data) and data-to-text generation. 2

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning has achieved great success in representation learning [6, 44, 45]. It also attracts
enormous interests in neural text generation recently. By creating positive and negative examples in
response to unseen (or erroneous) inputs [23], contrastive learning offers a new solution to alleviate
the exposure bias problem [3, 35] – an autoregressive model trained only using the ground truths
exhibits inferior generalization performance. Apart from that, contrastive learning also introduces a
sequence-level loss in addition to the conventional token-level language model loss with maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE). This is crucial to most conditional text generation tasks (e.g., machine
translation and summarization) which are evaluated on sequence-level metrics (e.g., BLEU [32]).
However, it is non-trivial to get contrastive learning working on neural text generation. If we simply
use from-batch positive-negative samples following simCLR [6], and adopt the InfoNCE loss [13, 45]
which ignores the difference between negative samples (§2.2; Naive CL), the improvement over
non-contrastive baselines on generation tasks is rather marginal. Previous work attempts to build
better contrastive samples by disturbing the ground truth [10, 23, 30] in the discrete space or the
continuous embedding space, but when it comes to text generation tasks, their performance gains are
still far from satisfactory.
⇤

2

This work was done during Chenxin An’s internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory
The code is available at https://github.com/Shark-NLP/CoNT

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

