Graphein - a Python Library for Geometric Deep
Learning and Network Analysis on Biomolecular
Structures and Interaction Networks
Arian R. Jamasb1,2∗, Ramon Viñas2 , Eric J. Ma3 , Charlie Harris1,2 , Kexin Huang4 ,
Dominic Hall1 , Pietro Lió2∗ , Tom L. Blundell1
1
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
2
Department of Computer Science & Technology, University of Cambridge
3
PyMC Labs
4
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University

Abstract
Geometric deep learning has broad applications in biology, a domain where
relational structure in data is often intrinsic to modelling the underlying phenomena.
Currently, efforts in both geometric deep learning and, more broadly, deep learning
applied to biomolecular tasks have been hampered by a scarcity of appropriate
datasets accessible to domain specialists and machine learning researchers alike.
To address this, we introduce Graphein as a turn-key tool for transforming raw
data from widely-used bioinformatics databases into machine learning-ready
datasets in a high-throughput and flexible manner. Graphein is a Python library for
constructing graph and surface-mesh representations of biomolecular structures,
such as proteins, nucleic acids and small molecules, and biological interaction
networks for computational analysis and machine learning. Graphein provides
utilities for data retrieval from widely-used bioinformatics databases for structural
data, including the Protein Data Bank, the AlphaFold Structure Database, chemical
data from ZINC and ChEMBL, and for biomolecular interaction networks from
STRINGdb, BioGrid, TRRUST and RegNetwork. The library interfaces with
popular geometric deep learning libraries: DGL, Jraph, PyTorch Geometric
and PyTorch3D though remains framework agnostic as it is built on top of the
PyData ecosystem to enable inter-operability with scientific computing tools and
libraries. Graphein is designed to be highly flexible, allowing the user to specify
each step of the data preparation, scalable to facilitate working with large protein
complexes and interaction graphs, and contains useful pre-processing tools for
preparing experimental files. Graphein facilitates network-based, graph-theoretic
and topological analyses of structural and interaction datasets in a high-throughput
manner. We envision that Graphein will facilitate developments in computational
biology, graph representation learning and drug discovery.
Availability and implementation: Graphein is written in Python. Source code,
example usage and tutorials, datasets, and documentation are made freely available
under the MIT License at the following URL: https://graphein.ai

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed: arj39@cam.ac.uk, pl219@cl.cam.ac.uk

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

