Few-Shot Continual Active Learning by a Robot

Ali Ayub
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON N2L3G1, Canada
a9ayub@uwaterloo.ca

Carter Fendley
Capital One
New York, NY 10017, USA
ccf5164@psu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we consider a challenging but realistic continual learning problem,
Few-Shot Continual Active Learning (FoCAL), where a CL agent is provided with
unlabeled data for a new or a previously learned task in each increment and the agent
only has limited labeling budget available. Towards this, we build on the continual
learning and active learning literature and develop a framework that can allow a CL
agent to continually learn new object classes from a few labeled training examples.
Our framework represents each object class using a uniform Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) and uses pseudo-rehearsal to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. The
framework also uses uncertainty measures on the Gaussian representations of
the previously learned classes to find the most informative samples to be labeled
in an increment. We evaluate our approach on the CORe-50 dataset and on a
real humanoid robot for the object classification task. The results show that our
approach not only produces state-of-the-art results on the dataset but also allows a
real robot to continually learn unseen objects in a real environment with limited
labeling supervision provided by its user1 .

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) [3, 4, 5, 6] has emerged as a popular area of research in recent years because
of its limitless real-world applications, such as domestic robots, autonomous cars, etc. Most continual
machine learning models [7, 8, 9, 10], however, are developed for constrained task-based continual
learning setups, where a CL model continually learns a sequence of tasks, one at a time, with all
the data of the current task labeled and available in an increment. Real world systems, particularly
autonomous robots, do not have the luxury of getting a large amount of labeled data for each task. In
contrast, robots operating in real-world environments mostly have to learn from supervision provided
by their users [11, 5, 12]. Human teachers, however, would be unwilling answer a large number
of questions or label a large amount of data for the robot. It would therefore be useful for robots
to self-supervise their learning, and ask the human teachers to label the most informative training
samples from the environment, in each increment. In this paper, we focus on this challenging problem,
termed as Few-Shot Continual Active Learning (FoCAL).
One of the main problems faced by continual machine learning models is catastrophic forgetting,
in which the CL model forgets the previous learned tasks when learning new knowledge. In recent
years, several works in CL have focused on mitigating the catastrophic forgetting problem [13, 3, 6].
Most of these works, however, are developed for the task-based continual learning setup, where the
model assumes that all the data for a task is available in an increment and it is fully labeled. These
constraints are costly and limit the real-world application of CL models on robots. Active learning has
emerged as an area of research in recent years, where machine learning models can choose the most
informative samples to be labeled from a large corpus of unlabeled data, thus reducing the labelling
1

A preliminary version [1, 2] of this work was presented at workshops in RoMan 2020 and ICRA 2021.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

