Visual correspondence-based explanations improve AI
robustness and human-AI team accuracy

Giang Nguyen ∗
nguyengiangbkhn@gmail.com

Mohammad Reza Taesiri ∗
mtaesiri@gmail.com

Anh Nguyen
anh.ng8@gmail.com
Auburn University

Abstract
Explaining artificial intelligence (AI) predictions is increasingly important and even
imperative in many high-stakes applications where humans are the ultimate decision
makers. In this work, we propose two novel architectures of self-interpretable image
classifiers that first explain, and then predict (as opposed to post-hoc explanations)
by harnessing the visual correspondences between a query image and exemplars.
Our models consistently improve (+1 to +4 points) on out-of-distribution (OOD)
datasets while performing marginally worse (-1 to -2 points) on in-distribution
tests than ResNet-50 and a k-nearest neighbor classifier (kNN). Via a large-scale,
human study on ImageNet and CUB, our correspondence-based explanations are
found to be more useful to users than kNN explanations. Our explanations help
users more accurately reject AI’s wrong decisions than all other tested methods.
Interestingly, for the first time, we show that it is possible to achieve complementary
human-AI team accuracy (i.e., that is higher than either AI-alone or human-alone),
in ImageNet and CUB image classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Comparing the input image with training-set exemplars is the backbone for many applications, such
as face identification [29], bird identification [17, 79], and image search [79]. This non-parametric
approach may improve classification accuracy on out-of-distribution (OOD) data [29, 75, 79, 57]
and enables a class of prototype-based explanations [17, 52, 53, 66, 41] that provide insights into the
decision making of Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems. Interestingly, prototype-based explanations
are more effective in improving human classification accuracy [55, 24, 42] than attribution maps—a
common eXplainable AI (XAI) technique in computer vision. Yet, it remains an open question how to
make prototype-based XAI classifiers (1) accurate on in-distribution and OOD data and (2) improve
human decisions. For example, in face identification, AIs can be confused by partially occluded,
never-seen faces and are unable to explain their decisions to users, causing numerous people falsely
arrested [5, 7, 3, 6] or wrongly denied unemployment benefits [1] by the law enforcement.
To address the above questions, we propose two interpretable [61], (i.e., first-explain-then-decide)
image classifiers that perform three common steps: (1) rank the training-set images based on their
distances to the input using image-level features; (2) re-rank the top-50 shortlisted candidates by their
∗

Equal contribution. Listing order is random. GN led the development of EMD-Corr and human studies on
Gorilla. MRT led the development of CHM-Corr, pilot studies on HuggingFace, and the analysis of human-study
data from Gorilla. AN advised the project. MRT’s work was done before he joined University of Alberta.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

