Generating Training Data with Language Models:
Towards Zero-Shot Language Understanding

Yu Meng, Jiaxin Huang, Yu Zhang, Jiawei Han
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yumeng5,jiaxinh3,yuz9,hanj}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Pretrained language models (PLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance
in various natural language processing tasks: Unidirectional PLMs (e.g., GPT) are
well known for their superior text generation capabilities; bidirectional PLMs (e.g.,
BERT) have been the prominent choice for natural language understanding (NLU)
tasks. While both types of models have achieved promising few-shot learning
performance, their potential for zero-shot learning has been underexplored. In this
paper, we present a simple approach that uses both types of PLMs for fully zero-shot
learning of NLU tasks without requiring any task-specific data: A unidirectional
PLM generates class-conditioned texts guided by prompts, which are used as
the training data for fine-tuning a bidirectional PLM. With quality training data
selected based on the generation probability and regularization techniques (label
smoothing and temporal ensembling) applied to the fine-tuning stage for better
generalization and stability, our approach demonstrates strong performance across
seven classification tasks of the GLUE benchmark (e.g., 72.3/73.8 on MNLI-m/mm
and 92.8 on SST-2), significantly outperforming zero-shot prompting methods and
achieving even comparable results to strong few-shot approaches using 32 training
samples per class1 .

1

Introduction

Pretrained language models (PLMs) [5, 8, 11, 19, 34, 40, 41] have achieved human-level performance
on natural language understanding (NLU) tasks [66, 67] when fine-tuned on a large amount of
task-specific training data. However, such a supervised fine-tuning paradigm is drastically different
from how humans perform these tasks: We barely need to see many task-specific training samples
to perform well. Recently, many studies have revealed the intriguing few-shot learning potential of
PLMs: By converting task descriptions to natural language prompts and injecting them into PLMs,
prompt-based approaches [5, 13, 55, 56, 59] leverage task-specific information for better training
data efficiency and have achieved remarkable few-shot results.
When prompt-based methods are applied to the zero-shot setting, however, the PLMs’ predictions
are much less accurate. For example, GPT-3’s zero-shot performance is much degraded relative to
its few-shot performance [5], especially on challenging tasks like natural language inference (NLI).
Without any task-specific samples, it is indeed challenging for PLMs to effectively interpret the
prompts that come in different formats and are unseen in the pretraining data. To familiarize PLMs
with various prompts for zero-shot generalization to unseen tasks, a recent study proposes instruction
tuning [70], which fine-tunes PLMs on a large collection of different tasks described by instructions.
Despite its strong performance, its success is grounded in the large number of cross-task annotated
datasets (e.g., train on many non-NLI tasks and transfer to NLI tasks) and the gigantic model size
(e.g., hundreds of billions of parameters), posing great challenges for training and using them.
1

Code can be found at https://github.com/yumeng5/SuperGen.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

