GET3D: A Generative Model of High Quality 3D
Textured Shapes Learned from Images

Jun Gao1,2,3
Kangxue Yin1

Tianchang Shen1,2,3
Daiqing Li1
NVIDIA1

Zian Wang1,2,3

Or Litany1
University of Toronto2

Zan Gojcic1

Wenzheng Chen1,2,3
Sanja Fidler1,2,3

Vector Institute3

{jung, frshen, zianw, wenzchen, kangxuey, daiqingl, olitany, zgojcic, sfidler}@nvidia.com

Abstract
As several industries are moving towards modeling massive 3D virtual worlds,
the need for content creation tools that can scale in terms of the quantity, quality,
and diversity of 3D content is becoming evident. In our work, we aim to train
performant 3D generative models that synthesize textured meshes that can be
directly consumed by 3D rendering engines, thus immediately usable in downstream applications. Prior works on 3D generative modeling either lack geometric
details, are limited in the mesh topology they can produce, typically do not support
textures, or utilize neural renderers in the synthesis process, which makes their
use in common 3D software non-trivial. In this work, we introduce GET3D,
a Generative model that directly generates Explicit Textured 3D meshes with
complex topology, rich geometric details, and high fidelity textures. We bridge
recent success in the differentiable surface modeling, differentiable rendering as
well as 2D Generative Adversarial Networks to train our model from 2D image
collections. GET3D is able to generate high-quality 3D textured meshes, ranging from cars, chairs, animals, motorbikes and human characters to buildings,
achieving significant improvements over previous methods. Our project page:
https://nv-tlabs.github.io/GET3D

1

Introduction

Diverse, high-quality 3D content is becoming increasingly important for several industries, including
gaming, robotics, architecture, and social platforms. However, manual creation of 3D assets is very
time-consuming and requires specific technical knowledge as well as artistic modeling skills. One
of the main challenges is thus scale – while one can find 3D models on 3D marketplaces such as
Turbosquid [4] or Sketchfab [3], creating many 3D models to, say, populate a game or a movie with a
crowd of characters that all look different still takes a significant amount of artist time.
To facilitate the content creation process and make it accessible to a variety of (novice) users,
generative 3D networks that can produce high-quality and diverse 3D assets have recently become
an active area of research [5, 13, 38, 41, 48, 59, 62, 55, 54, 60, 21]. However, to be practically
useful for current real-world applications, 3D generative models should ideally fulfill the following
requirements: (a) They should have the capacity to generate shapes with detailed geometry and
arbitrary topology, (b) The output should be a textured mesh, which is a primary representation used
by standard graphics software packages such as Blender [14] and Maya [1], and (c) We should be
able to leverage 2D images for supervision, as they are more widely available than explicit 3D shapes.
Prior work on 3D generative modeling has focused on subsets of the above requirements, but no
method to date fulfills all of them (Tab. 1). For example, methods that generate 3D point clouds [5,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

