Stability and Generalization Analysis of Gradient
Methods for Shallow Neural Networks
Yunwen Lei1∗ Rong Jin2 Yiming Ying3†
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
2
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
3
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, State University of New York at Albany, USA
yunwen@hkbu.edu.hk rongjinemail@gmail.com yying@albany.edu

1

Abstract
While significant theoretical progress has been achieved, unveiling the generalization mystery of overparameterized neural networks still remains largely elusive.
In this paper, we study the generalization behavior of shallow neural networks
(SNNs) by leveraging the concept of algorithmic stability. We consider gradient
descent (GD) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to train SNNs, for both of
which we develop consistent excess risk bounds by balancing the optimization
and generalization via early-stopping. As compared to existing analysis on GD,
our new analysis requires a relaxed overparameterization assumption and also
applies to SGD. The key for the improvement is a better estimation of the smallest
eigenvalues of the Hessian matrices of the empirical risks and the loss function
along the trajectories of GD and SGD by providing a refined estimation of their
iterates.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have achieved remarkable success in solving large-scale machine learning problems
in various application domains such as computer vision and natural language processing [33]. Firstorder methods such as gradient descent (GD) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) are mainstream
optimization algorithms for training neural networks due to their simplicity and efficiency [11, 33, 50].
Although the associated optimization problems are nonconvex and nonsmooth, GD/SGD can still
find a model with a very small or even zero training error [16, 20, 34, 39, 64, 69]. At the same time,
the models found by such first-order methods has demonstrated good generalization performance on
test data despite neural networks are often highly overparameterized in the sense that the number of
parameters is much larger than the size of training examples [1, 2, 5].
These surprising phenomena have triggered a surge of research activities in understanding the generalization ability of neural networks. Generalization analysis typically uses complexity measures such
as VC dimension, covering numbers or Rademacher complexities to develop capacity-dependent
bounds [8, 9, 25, 42, 48], which, however, may not explain well the generalization of overparameterized neural networks. Impressive alternatives have been proposed which include the compression
approach [4], the norm-based analysis [8, 25], the PAC-Bayes analysis [21] and the neural tangent
kernel (NTK) approach [5, 28]. In particular, the NTK approach shows that the overparameterization
pulls the dynamic of GD on neural networks close to its counterpart on a kernelized machine with
the least-square loss [5, 20], which shows how overparameterization can help both optimization and
generalization. However, this approach often requires a very high overparameterization to gain useful
results [6, 55, 60].
∗
†

The work was done when Yunwen was at the University of Birmingham
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

