A Coupled Design of Exploiting Record Similarity for
Practical Vertical Federated Learning

Zhaomin Wu, Qinbin Li, Bingsheng He
National University of Singapore
{zhaomin,qinbin,hebs}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Federated learning is a learning paradigm to enable collaborative learning across
different parties without revealing raw data. Notably, vertical federated learning
(VFL), where parties share the same set of samples but only hold partial features,
has a wide range of real-world applications. However, most existing studies in VFL
disregard the “record linkage” process. They design algorithms either assuming
the data from different parties can be exactly linked or simply linking each record
with its most similar neighboring record. These approaches may fail to capture
the key features from other less similar records. Moreover, such improper linkage
cannot be corrected by training since existing approaches provide no feedback
on linkage during training. In this paper, we design a novel coupled training
paradigm, FedSim, that integrates one-to-many linkage into the training process.
Besides enabling VFL in many real-world applications with fuzzy identifiers,
FedSim also achieves better performance in traditional VFL tasks. Moreover, we
theoretically analyze the additional privacy risk incurred by sharing similarities.
Our experiments on eight datasets with various similarity metrics show that FedSim
outperforms other state-of-the-art baselines. The codes of FedSim are available at
https://github.com/Xtra-Computing/FedSim.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a collaborative learning framework to train a model from distributed datasets
with privacy guarantees. A commonly existing and widely studied scenario of federated learning is
vertical federated learning [32, 62] (VFL), where multiple parties sharing the same set of samples
have different sets of features. We focus on the setting where only one party holds the labels like
most of the studies [33, 39, 60]. The party holding labels is named primary party; the parties without
labels are named secondary parties. In VFL, the features that exist on multiple parties are called
common features. The vector of common features in a data record is called the identifier of the record.
Existing studies [22, 27, 39, 40] formulate VFL as two separated processes: linkage and training. In
the linkage process, the datasets on different parties are linked according to the identifiers. In the
training process, these distributed but linked data records are trained by VFL algorithms. Specifically,
in the linkage process of existing studies, each data record is linked to a data record with the exactly
matched or the most similar identifier (i.e., one-to-one linkage). Nonetheless, according to our study
on all the completed projects in German Record Linkage Center [4] (GRLC), only 27.3% of the
record-linkage applications are linked on exact identifiers. The other projects rely on fuzzy identifiers
such as addresses, in which one-to-one linkage can seriously impair the accuracy of the VFL model
for the following two reasons.
First, only linking the records with top similarity (i.e., one-to-one linkage) does not necessarily
capture the key features, which can be demonstrated by two real-world applications. 1) Considering
the VFL for price prediction between a real estate company and a house leasing company linked by
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

