Is Sortition Both Representative and Fair?
Soroush Ebadian
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
soroush@cs.toronto.edu

Gregory Kehne
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
gkehne@g.harvard.edu

Evi Micha
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
emicha@cs.toronto.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Nisarg Shah
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Sortition is a form of democracy built on random selection of representatives. Two
of the key arguments in favor of sortition are that it provides representation (a
random panel reflects the composition of the population) and fairness (everyone
has a chance to participate). Uniformly random selection is perfectly fair, but
is it representative? Towards answering this question, we introduce the notion
of a representation metric on the space of individuals, and assume that the cost
of an individual for a panel is determined by the q-th closest representative; the
representation of a (random) panel is measured by the ratio between the (expected)
sum of costs of the optimal panel for the individuals and that of the given panel.
For k/2 < q  k ⌦(k), where k is the panel size, we show that uniform random
selection is indeed representative by establishing a constant lower bound on this
ratio. By contrast, for q  k/2, no random selection algorithm that is almost fair
can give such a guarantee. We therefore consider relaxed fairness guarantees and
develop a new random selection algorithm that sheds light on the tradeoff between
representation and fairness.

1

Introduction

Most people think of democracy as synonymous with elections. But that has not always been the
case: from the inception of democracy in ancient Athens until the American and French revolutions,
democracy had typically been associated with random selection of representatives [1], a paradigm
known as sortition.
These days, sortition is mainly practiced in the form of citizens’ assemblies — randomly selected
groups of people who deliberate on central questions, with the goal of generating recommendations
and informing policy. The impact and prevalence of citizens’ assemblies around the world have
motivated computational work on how to fairly and transparently select assembly members [2–
4]. But there are signs that sortition is becoming even more widely accepted, including its recent
institutionalization in Belgium, where permanent sortition-based bodies are now working alongside
the parliaments of the German-speaking region and the Brussels region. In light of this progress, it
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

