SAPA: Similarity-Aware Point Affiliation for
Feature Upsampling

Hao Lu

Wenze Liu Zixuan Ye Hongtao Fu Yuliang Liu
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan 430074, China
{hlu,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

Zhiguo Cao∗

Abstract
We introduce point affiliation into feature upsampling, a notion that describes
the affiliation of each upsampled point to a semantic cluster formed by local decoder feature points with semantic similarity. By rethinking point affiliation, we
present a generic formulation for generating upsampling kernels. The kernels
encourage not only semantic smoothness but also boundary sharpness in the upsampled feature maps. Such properties are particularly useful for some dense
prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation. The key idea of our formulation is to generate similarity-aware kernels by comparing the similarity between
each encoder feature point and the spatially associated local region of decoder
features. In this way, the encoder feature point can function as a cue to inform
the semantic cluster of upsampled feature points. To embody the formulation, we
further instantiate a lightweight upsampling operator, termed Similarity-Aware
Point Affiliation (SAPA), and investigate its variants. SAPA invites consistent
performance improvements on a number of dense prediction tasks, including semantic segmentation, object detection, depth estimation, and image matting. Code
is available at: https://github.com/poppinace/sapa

1

Introduction

We introduce the notion of point affiliation into feature upsampling. Point affiliation defines a relation
between each upsampled point and a semantic cluster2 to which the point should belong. It highlights
the spatial arrangement of upsampled points at the semantic level. Considering an example shown
in Fig. 1 w.r.t. ×2 upsampling in semantic segmentation, the orange point of low resolution will
correspond to four upsampled points of high resolution, in which the red and yellow ones should
be assigned the ‘picture’ cluster and the ‘wall’ cluster, respectively. Designating point affiliation is
difficult and sometimes can be erroneous, however.
In ×2 upsampling, nearest neighbor (NN) interpolation directly copies four identical points from the
low-res one, which assigns the same semantic cluster to the four points. On regions in need of details,
the four points probably do not share the same cluster but are forced to share. Bilinear interpolation
assigns point affiliation with distance priors. Yet, when tackling points of different semantic clusters,
it not only cannot inform clear point affiliation, but also blurs the boundary between different semantic
clusters. Recent dynamic upsampling operators have similar issues. CARAFE [1, 2] judges the
affiliation of an upsampled point with content-aware kernels. Certain semantic clusters will receive
larger weights than the rest and therefore dominate the affiliation of upsampled points. However, the
affiliation near boundaries or on regions full of details can still be ambiguous. As shown in Fig. 2, the
∗
2

Corresponding author.
A semantic cluster is formed by local decoder feature points with the similar semantic meaning.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

