Factorized-FL: Personalized Federated Learning with
Parameter Factorization & Similarity Matching
Wonyong Jeong
Graduate School of AI
KAIST, Seoul, South Korea
wyjeong@kaist.ac.kr

Sung Ju Hwang
Graduate School of AI
KAIST, Seoul, South Korea
sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In real-world federated learning scenarios, participants could have their own personalized labels incompatible with those from other clients, due to using different label
permutations or tackling completely different tasks or domains. However, most
existing FL approaches cannot effectively tackle such extremely heterogeneous
scenarios since they often assume that (1) all participants use a synchronized set of
labels, and (2) they train on the same tasks from the same domain. In this work, to
tackle these challenges, we introduce Factorized-FL, which allows to effectively
tackle label- and task-heterogeneous federated learning settings by factorizing the
model parameters into a pair of rank-1 vectors, where one captures the common
knowledge across different labels and tasks and the other captures knowledge
specific to the task for each local model. Moreover, based on the distance in the
client-specific vector space, Factorized-FL performs a selective aggregation
scheme to utilize only the knowledge from the relevant participants for each client.
We extensively validate our method on both label- and domain-heterogeneous settings, on which it outperforms the state-of-the-art personalized federated learning
methods. The code is available at https://github.com/wyjeong/Factorized-FL.

1

Introduction

Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) aims to utilize the aggregated knowledge from other clients
while learning a client-specific model that is specialized for its own task and data distribution, rather
than learning a universal, global model for tackling all local tasks [1, 16, 5, 28]. While various
personalized federated learning approaches have shown success in alleviating the data heterogeneity
problem, yet, they are also limited as they follow the common assumptions of the standard federated
learning setting, that (1) all participants use a synchronized set of labels, and (2) all clients tackle the
same task from the same domain.
In many real-world scenarios, the first assumption may not hold since the labels for the same task
could be differently annotated depending on the user environment, i.e. language or nationality
(Figure 2 Left). In other words, when working with the same set of semantic classes, the labels across
multiple clients could be completely different. For example, the same “Car" class may be given the
label “Vehicle" or “Auto".
The second assumption severely limits the pool of devices or institutions that can participate in the
collaborative learning process. However, clients working on different tasks and domains may have
similar classes, or a common underlying knowledge, that may be helpful for the local models being
trained at other clients (Figure 2 Right). Thus, it would be helpful if we can allow the local models
with heterogeneous tasks and domains to communicate the common knowledge across them.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

