The Mechanism of Prediction Head in Non-contrastive
Self-supervised Learning

Zixin Wen
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
zixinw@andrew.cmu.edu

Yuanzhi Li
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
The surprising discovery of the BYOL method shows the negative samples can be
replaced by adding a prediction head to the neural network. It is mysterious why
even when there exist trivial collapsed global optimal solutions, neural networks
trained by (stochastic) gradient descent can still learn competitive representations.
In this work, we present our empirical and theoretical discoveries on non-contrastive
self-supervised learning. Empirically, we find that when the prediction head is
initialized as an identity matrix with only its off-diagonal entries being trainable, the
network can learn competitive representations even though the trivial optima still
exist in the training objective. Theoretically, we characterized the substitution effect
and acceleration effect of the trainable, but identity-initialized prediction head. The
substitution effect happens when learning the stronger features in some neurons
can substitute for learning these features in other neurons through updating the
prediction head. And the acceleration effect happens when the substituted features
can accelerate the learning of other weaker features to prevent them from being
ignored. These two effects enable the neural networks to learn diversified features
rather than focus only on learning the strongest features, which is likely the cause
of the dimensional collapse phenomenon. To the best of our knowledge, this is
also the first end-to-end optimization guarantee for non-contrastive methods using
nonlinear neural networks with a trainable prediction head and normalization.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning is about learning representations of real-world vision or language data
without human supervision, and contrastive learning [62, 43, 41, 24, 20, 34] is one of the most
successful self-supervised learning approaches. It has been known that the behavior of contrastive
learning depends critically on the minimization of the negative term, which corresponds to contrasting
the representations of negative pairs, i.e., pairs of different data points. However, the surprising
finding of the Bootstrap Your Own Latent (BYOL) method by Grill et al. [37] initiated the research of
non-contrastive self-supervised learning, which refers to contrastive learning methods without using
the negative pairs. BYOL achieved state-of-the-art results in various computer vision benchmarks and
there are plenty of follow-up works [39, 26, 21, 17, 33, 87, 44, 61] in this direction.
On a high level, in non-contrastive self-supervised learning, one wishes to learn a network φ such that
φ(x) aligns in direction with φ(x0 ), where x and x0 are called the positive pair, generated by random
augmentations from the same sample. Without the negative samples, collapsed global optima exist in
the training objectives. The complete collapse is when φ(·) is a constant vector whose variance is
zero. Another trivial solutions called dimensional collapse by [44] is when all the coordinates φi (·)
are exactly aligned. Nevertheless, adding a trainable prediction head on top of (one branch of) φ(x)
magically avoids learning such solutions, even though the prediction head can possibly learn the
identity mapping and render itself useless. A more formal introduction will be given in Section 2.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

