Contextual Squeeze-and-Excitation for Efficient
Few-Shot Image Classification

Massimiliano Patacchiola
University of Cambridge
mp2008@cam.ac.uk

John Bronskill
University of Cambridge
jfb54@cam.ac.uk

Aliaksandra Shysheya
University of Cambridge
as2975@cam.ac.uk

Katja Hofmann
Microsoft Research
kahofman@microsoft.com

Sebastian Nowozin∗
nowozin@gmail.com

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent years have seen a growth in user-centric applications that require effective
knowledge transfer across tasks in the low-data regime. An example is personalization, where a pretrained system is adapted by learning on small amounts of labeled
data belonging to a specific user. This setting requires high accuracy under low
computational complexity, therefore the Pareto frontier of accuracy vs. adaptation
cost plays a crucial role. In this paper we push this Pareto frontier in the few-shot
image classification setting with a key contribution: a new adaptive block called
Contextual Squeeze-and-Excitation (CaSE) that adjusts a pretrained neural network
on a new task to significantly improve performance with a single forward pass of
the user data (context). We use meta-trained CaSE blocks to conditionally adapt
the body of a network and a fine-tuning routine to adapt a linear head, defining a
method called UpperCaSE. UpperCaSE achieves a new state-of-the-art accuracy
relative to meta-learners on the 26 datasets of VTAB+MD and on a challenging
real-world personalization benchmark (ORBIT), narrowing the gap with leading
fine-tuning methods with the benefit of orders of magnitude lower adaptation cost.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the growth of industrial applications based on recommendation systems (Bennett
et al., 2007), speech recognition (Xiong et al., 2018), and personalization (Massiceti et al., 2021) has
sparked an interest in machine learning techniques that are able to adapt a model on small amounts of
data belonging to a specific user. A key factor in many of these applications is the Pareto frontier
of accuracy vs. computational complexity (cost to adapt). For example, in a real-time classification
task on a phone, a pretrained model must be personalized by exploiting small amounts of data on the
user’s device (context). In these applications the goal is twofold: maximize the classification accuracy
on unseen data (target) while avoiding any latency and excessive use of computational resources.
Methods developed to face these challenges in the few-shot classification setting can be grouped in
two categories: meta-learning and fine-tuning. Meta-learning is based on the idea of learning-how-tolearn by improving the algorithm itself (Schmidhuber, 1987; Hospedales et al., 2020). Meta-learners
are trained across multiple tasks to ingest a labeled context set, adapt the model, and predict the class
membership of an unlabeled target point. Fine-tuning methods adjust the parameters of a pretrained
neural network on the task at hand by iterative gradient-updates (Chen et al., 2019; Triantafillou et al.,
2019; Tian et al., 2020; Kolesnikov et al., 2020; Dumoulin et al., 2021).
∗

Work done while the author was at Microsoft Research – Cambridge (UK)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

