MATE: Benchmarking Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning in Distributed Target Coverage Control
Xuehai Pan1,2,5
xuehaipan@pku.edu.cn

Mickel Liu1,2,5
mickelliu@stu.pku.edu.cn

Fangwei Zhong3,5,†
zfw@pku.edu.cn

Yaodong Yang3,4,5,†
yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn

Song-Chun Zhu3,4,5,6
sczhu@bigai.ai

Yizhou Wang1,2,4
yizhou.wang@pku.edu.cn

1

School of Computer Science, Peking University
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University
5
Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BIGAI)
6
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2

Abstract
We introduce the Multi-Agent Tracking Environment (MATE), a novel multi-agent
environment simulates the target coverage control problems in the real world.
MATE hosts an asymmetric cooperative-competitive game consisting of two
groups of learning agents—“cameras” and “targets”—with opposing interests.
Speciﬁcally, “cameras”, a group of directional sensors, are mandated to actively
control the directional perception area to maximize the coverage rate of targets.
On the other side, “targets” are mobile agents that aim to transport cargo between
multiple randomly assigned warehouses while minimizing the exposure to the
camera sensor networks. To showcase the practicality of MATE, we benchmark
the multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms from different aspects,
including cooperation, communication, scalability, robustness, and asymmetric
self-play. We start by reporting results for cooperative tasks using MARL
algorithms (MAPPO, IPPO, QMIX, MADDPG) and the results after augmenting
with multi-agent communication protocols (TarMAC, I2C). We then evaluate the
effectiveness of the popular self-play techniques (PSRO, ﬁctitious self-play) in an
asymmetric zero-sum competitive game. This process of co-evolution between
cameras and targets helps to realize a less exploitable camera network. We also
observe the emergence of different roles of the target agents while incorporating
I2C into target-target communication. MATE is written purely in Python and
integrated with OpenAI Gym API to enhance user-friendliness. Our project is
released at https://github.com/UnrealTracking/mate.

1

Introduction

The target coverage problem studies the active control of the perception area of a group of agents to
track the targets of interest, e.g., wireless sensor networks [1], surveillance camera networks [2, 3],
and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) networks [4]. It has much real-life signiﬁcance and received
wide applications relating to social well-being, security, and entertainment. For example, smart
camera networks can be used for anti-poaching [5, 6], anti-smuggling [7], border security [8]
and—for more recreational uses—person-following [9, 10, 11] in ﬁlming and ball-tracking [12]
in sports events, etc. However, it remains an open challenge to cooperatively control the cameras
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
†

Equal Advising.

