ConfLab: A Data Collection Concept, Dataset, and
Benchmark for Machine Analysis of Free-Standing
Social Interactions in the Wild
Chirag Raman1∗

Jose Vargas-Quiros1∗
Ekin Gedik1

Stephanie Tan1∗

Ashraful Islam2

Hayley Hung1

1

Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
{c.a.raman, j.d.vargasquiros, s.tan-1, e.gedik, h.hung}@tudelft.nl
2
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, New York, USA
islama6@rpi.edu

Abstract
Recording the dynamics of unscripted human interactions in the wild is challenging
due to the delicate trade-offs between several factors: participant privacy, ecological
validity, data fidelity, and logistical overheads. To address these, following a
datasets for the community by the community ethos, we propose the Conference
Living Lab (ConfLab): a new concept for multimodal multisensor data collection of
in-the-wild free-standing social conversations. For the first instantiation of ConfLab
described here, we organized a real-life professional networking event at a major
international conference. Involving 48 conference attendees, the dataset captures
a diverse mix of status, acquaintance, and networking motivations. Our capture
setup improves upon the data fidelity of prior in-the-wild datasets while retaining
privacy sensitivity: 8 videos (1920 × 1080, 60 fps) from a non-invasive overhead
view, and custom wearable sensors with onboard recording of body motion (full
9-axis IMU), privacy-preserving low-frequency audio (1250 Hz), and Bluetoothbased proximity. Additionally, we developed custom solutions for distributed
hardware synchronization at acquisition, and time-efficient continuous annotation
of body keypoints and actions at high sampling rates. Our benchmarks showcase
some of the open research tasks related to in-the-wild privacy-preserving social
data analysis: keypoints detection from overhead camera views, skeleton-based
no-audio speaker detection, and F-formation detection.

1

Introduction

A crucial challenge towards developing artificial socially intelligent systems is understanding how
real-life situational contexts affect social human behavior [1]. Social-science findings indeed show
that the dynamics of how we conduct daily interactions vary significantly depending on the social
situation [2–4]. Unfortunately, such dynamics are not adequately captured by many data collection
setups where role-played or scripted scenarios are typical [5].
In this paper we address the problem of collecting a privacy-sensitive dataset of unscripted social
dynamics of real-life relationships where encounters can influence someone’s daily life. We argue
that doing so requires recording these exchanges in the natural ecology, requiring an approach
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

