Deliberated Domain Bridging for Domain Adaptive
Semantic Segmentation

Lin Chen1,2∗ Zhixiang Wei1∗ Xin Jin3∗ Huaian Chen1† Miao Zheng2 Kai Chen2 Yi Jin1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Eastern Institute for Advanced Study
{chlin, zhixiangwei}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jinxin@eias.ac.cn, anchen@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhengmiao, chenkai}@pjlab.org.cn, jinyi08@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), directly adapting from the source to
the target domain usually suffers significant discrepancies and leads to insufficient
alignment. Thus, many UDA works attempt to vanish the domain gap gradually and
softly via various intermediate spaces, dubbed domain bridging (DB). However,
for dense prediction tasks such as domain adaptive semantic segmentation (DASS),
existing solutions have mostly relied on rough style transfer and how to elegantly
bridge domains is still under-explored. In this work, we resort to data mixing to
establish a deliberated domain bridging (DDB) for DASS, through which the joint
distributions of source and target domains are aligned and interacted with each in
the intermediate space. At the heart of DDB lies a dual-path domain bridging step
for generating two intermediate domains using the coarse-wise and the fine-wise
data mixing techniques, alongside a cross-path knowledge distillation step for
taking two complementary models trained on generated intermediate samples as
‘teachers’ to develop a superior ‘student’ in a multi-teacher distillation manner.
These two optimization steps work in an alternating way and reinforce each other
to give rise to DDB with strong adaptation power. Extensive experiments on
adaptive segmentation tasks with different settings demonstrate that our DDB
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/xiaoachen98/DDB.git.

1

Introduction

When training deep models on one domain but applying it to other unseen domains, its performance
typically drops seriously due to the domain shift/discrepancy issue [45, 44, 69, 55]. Since annotating
data in the new scenario to re-train model to mitigate performance degradation is too expensive and
time consuming, extensive researches have resorted to unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [41,
15, 34, 3], which aims to transfer knowledge from labeled source domain to unlabeled target domain.
Generally, existing UDA methods typically reduce the domain discrepancy by leveraging information
statistics metrics [10, 27, 29, 33, 35, 46, 66] or adversarial training [15, 30, 34, 49, 54, 58, 3]. Both
of these branches directly adapt the knowledge learned from the source domain to the target domain.
However, excessive/continuous domain discrepancies tend to limit the efficiency of these methods for
knowledge transfer, causing non-optimal performance, especially on dense prediction tasks such as
semantic segmentation.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Correspoding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

