Versatile Multi-stage Graph Neural Network for
Circuit Representation

Shuwen Yang
School of Intelligence Science and Technology
Peking University
swyang@pku.edu.cn
Dong Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
lidong106@huawei.com

Zhihao Yang
School of Software and Microelectronics
Peking University
zhihaoyang@stu.pku.edu.cn
Yingxue Zhang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
yingxue.zhang@huawei.com

Zhanguang Zhang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
zhanguang.zhang@huawei.com
Guojie Song∗
School of Intelligence Science and Technology
Peking University
gjsong@pku.edu.cn

Jianye HAO∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
haojianye@huawei.com

Abstract
Due to the rapid growth in the scale of circuits and the desire for knowledge
transfer from old designs to new ones, deep learning technologies have been widely
exploited in Electronic Design Automation (EDA) to assist circuit design. In chip
design cycles, we might encounter heterogeneous and diverse information sources,
including the two most informative ones: the netlist and the design layout. However,
handling each information source independently is sub-optimal. In this paper, we
propose a novel way to integrate the multiple information sources under a unified
heterogeneous graph named Circuit Graph, where topological and geometrical
information is well integrated. Then, we propose Circuit GNN to fully utilize the
features of vertices, edges as well as heterogeneous information during the message
passing process. It is the first attempt to design a versatile circuit representation
that is compatible across multiple EDA tasks and stages. Experiments on the two
most representative prediction tasks in EDA show that our solution reaches stateof-the-art performance in both logic synthesis and global placement chip design
stages. Besides, it achieves a 10x speed-up on congestion prediction compared to
the state-of-the-art model.

1

Introduction

Integrated circuits (ICs) are extensively used in modern electronic products like computers, smartphones, and cars. Electronic Design Automation (EDA) includes a set of tools for circuit design
in different development stages especially logic synthesis stage and placement stage (Fig.1). As
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

