Pre-Trained Image Encoder for Generalizable Visual
Reinforcement Learning

Zhecheng Yuan1 , Zhengrong Xue2 , Bo Yuan3 , Xueqian Wang1 ,
Yi Wu1,4 , Yang Gao1,4 , Huazhe Xu1,4
1

Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Qianyuan Institute of Sciences 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
yuanzc20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuhuazhe12@gmail.com
3

Abstract
Learning generalizable policies that can adapt to unseen environments remains
challenging in visual Reinforcement Learning (RL). Existing approaches try to
acquire a robust representation via diversifying the appearances of in-domain
observations for better generalization. Limited by the specific observations of
the environment, these methods ignore the possibility of exploring diverse realworld image datasets. In this paper, we investigate how a visual RL agent would
benefit from the off-the-shelf visual representations. Surprisingly, we find that
the early layers in an ImageNet pre-trained ResNet model could provide rather
generalizable representations for visual RL. Hence, we propose Pre-trained Image
Encoder for Generalizable visual reinforcement learning (PIE-G), a simple yet
effective framework that can generalize to the unseen visual scenarios in a zeroshot manner. Extensive experiments are conducted on DMControl Generalization
Benchmark, DMControl Manipulation Tasks, Drawer World, and CARLA to verify
the effectiveness of PIE-G. Empirical evidence suggests PIE-G improves sample
efficiency and significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods in terms
of generalization performance. In particular, PIE-G boasts a 55% generalization
performance gain on average in the challenging video background setting. Project
Page: https://sites.google.com/view/pie-g/home.

1

Introduction

Visual Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved significant success in learning complex behaviors
directly from image observations [48, 35, 37]. Despite the progress, RL agents are often plagued
by the overfitting problem [67], especially in high-dimensional observation space. Previous studies
show that it is difficult for the visual agents to generalize to unseen scenarios [8, 40], which severely
limits their deployment in real-world applications.
In general, visual RL methods rely on their encoders to learn a visual representation to perceive
the world. Recent studies have found that data augmentation [65] leads to more generalizable
representations so that the agents can adapt to the unseen environments with different visual appearances [58, 74]. However, most of those approaches only augment the observations of the training
environments [37, 39, 68], which is unable to provide enough diversity for generalization over large
domain gaps. Furthermore, naively applying data augmentation may damage the robustness of learned
representations and decrease training sample efficiency [28, 83].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

