Sample Constrained Treatment Effect Estimation
Raghavendra Addanki
Adobe Research
raddanki@adobe.com

David Arbour
Adobe Research
darbour26@gmail.com

Cameron Musco
University of Massachusetts Amherst
cmusco@cs.umass.edu

Tung Mai
Adobe Research
tumai@adobe.com

Anup Rao
Adobe Research
anuprao@adobe.com

Abstract
Treatment effect estimation is a fundamental problem in causal inference. We
focus on designing efficient randomized controlled trials, to accurately estimate the
effect of some treatment on a population of n individuals. In particular, we study
sample-constrained treatment effect estimation, where we must select a subset of
s ⌧ n individuals from the population to experiment on. This subset must be
further partitioned into treatment and control groups. Algorithms for partitioning
the entire population into treatment and control groups, or for choosing a single
representative subset, have been well-studied. The key challenge in our setting is
jointly choosing a representative subset and a partition for that set.
We focus on both individual and average treatment effect estimation, under a linear
effects model. We give provably efficient experimental designs and corresponding
estimators, by identifying connections to discrepancy minimization and leveragescore-based sampling used in randomized numerical linear algebra. Our theoretical
results obtain a smooth transition to known guarantees when s equals the population
size. We also empirically demonstrate the performance of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Experimentation has long been held as a gold standard for inferring causal effects since one can
explicitly enforce independence between treatment assignment and other variables which influence
the outcome of interest. We consider the potential outcomes framework [37, 40], where each
individual is associated with a control and treatment value (also called the potential outcomes) and
based on the treatment assignment, we can observe only one of these values. Efficient designs of
experimentation for estimating individual treatment effects which measure the difference between
treatment and control values for each individual, and the average treatment effect which measures
the average individual treatment effect has been well-studied [35]. In the absence of assumptions
on the functional form of the potential outcomes, the minimax optimal approach for conducting an
experiment is to assign individuals to treatment or control completely at random, without consideration
of baseline covariates (features) [25]. However, by considering covariates for each individual, and
using additional assumptions of smoothness, substantial gains can be made in terms of the variance
of the treatment effect estimate via alternative assignment procedures. The most common approach
attempts to minimize imbalance, i.e., the difference between the baseline covariates in the treatment
and control groups [6, 25, 35].
While experimental designs that minimize imbalance increase the power of an experiment for a given
pool of subjects, there are many practical applications where the experimenter wishes to minimize
Author ordering is alphabetical.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

