Learning Neural Acoustic Fields

Andrew Luo
Carnegie Mellon University

Yilun Du
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Michael J. Tarr
Carnegie Mellon University
Antonio Torralba
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL
Chuang Gan
UMass Amherst and MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Our environment is filled with rich and dynamic acoustic information. When
we walk into a cathedral, the reverberations as much as appearance inform us of
the sanctuary’s wide open space. Similarly, as an object moves around us, we
expect the sound emitted to also exhibit this movement. While recent advances in
learned implicit functions have led to increasingly higher quality representations of
the visual world, there have not been commensurate advances in learning spatial
auditory representations. To address this gap, we introduce Neural Acoustic Fields
(NAFs), an implicit representation that captures how sounds propagate in a physical
scene. By modeling acoustic propagation in a scene as a linear time-invariant
system, NAFs learn to continuously map all emitter and listener location pairs to a
neural impulse response function that can then be applied to arbitrary sounds. We
demonstrate NAFs on both synthetic and real data, and show that the continuous
nature of NAFs enables us to render spatial acoustics for a listener at arbitrary
locations. We further show that the representation learned by NAFs can help
improve visual learning with sparse views. Finally we show that a representation
informative of scene structure emerges during the learning of NAFs. Project site:
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/afluo/Neural_Acoustic_Fields

1

Introduction

The sound of the ball leaving the bat, as much as its visible trajectory, tells us whether the hit is likely
to be a home run or not. Our experience of the world around us is rich and multimodal, depending on
integrated input from multiple sensory modalities. In particular, spatial acoustic cues provide us with
a sense of the direction and distance of a sound source without needing visual confirmation, allow
us to estimate the properties of a surrounding environment, and are critical to subjective realism in
gaming and virtual simulations.
Recent progress in implicit neural representations has enabled the construction of continuous, differentiable representations of the visual world directly from raw image observations [Sitzmann et al.,
2019, Mildenhall et al., 2020, Niemeyer et al., 2020, Yariv et al., 2020]. However, our perception of
the physical world is informed not only by our visual observations, but also by the spatial acoustic
cues present in the environment. As a preliminary step in learning the acoustic properties of scenes,
we explore an implicit model that represents the underlying impulse response of audio reverberations.
As shown in Figure 1, our model can model the spatial propagation of sound in a physical scene.
Past work has explored capturing the underlying acoustics of a scene [Raghuvanshi and Snyder, 2014,
2018, Chaitanya et al., 2020]. These models, however, require handcrafted parameterizations which,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

