Precise Regret Bounds for Log-loss via a Truncated
Bayesian Algorithm
Changlong Wu1

Mohsen Heidari1,2 Ananth Grama1 Wojciech Szpankowski1
CSoI, Purdue University 2 Indiana University
wuchangl@hawaii.edu, {mheidari,ayg,szpan}@purdue.edu
1

Abstract
We study sequential general online regression, known also as sequential probability
assignments, under logarithmic loss when compared against a broad class of
experts. We obtain tight, often matching, lower and upper bounds for sequential
minimax regret, which is defined as the excess loss incurred by the predictor over
the best expert in the class. After proving a general upper bound we consider some
specific classes of experts from Lipschitz class to bounded Hessian class and derive
matching lower and upper bounds with provably optimal constants. Our bounds
work for a wide range of values of the data dimension and the number of rounds.
To derive lower bounds, we use tools from information theory (e.g., Shtarkov sum),
and for upper bounds we resort to new “smooth truncated covering” of the class
of experts. This allows us to find constructive proofs by applying a simple and
novel truncated Bayesian algorithm. Our proofs are substantially simpler than the
existing ones and yet provide tighter (and often optimal) bounds.

1

Introduction

In online learning and sequential probability assignments arising in information theory, portfolio
optimization, and machine learning, the training algorithm consumes d dimensional data in rounds
t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T } and predicts the label ŷt based on data received and labels observed so far. After
prediction, the true label yt is revealed and the loss ℓ(yt , ŷt ) is incurred. The (pointwise) regret is
defined as the (excess) loss incurred by the algorithm over a class of experts, also called the hypothesis
class.
More precisely, in each round t ≥ 1 the learner obtains a d dimensional input/ feature vector xt ∈ Rd .
In addition to xt , the learner may use the past observations (xr , yr ), r < t to make a prediction ŷt
of true label. Therefore, the prediction can be written as ŷt = ϕt (y t−1 , xt ), where y t−1 represents
the labels in the past t − 1 rounds, xt represents the input vectors in t rounds, and ϕt represents the
strategy of the learner to obtain its prediction based on the past and current observations. Once a
prediction is made, nature reveals the true label yt and the learner incurs loss ℓ : Ŷ × Y → R, where
Ŷ and Y are the prediction and true label domains respectively. Hereafter, we assume throughout
Ŷ = [0, 1], Y = {0, 1} with logarithmic loss
ℓ(ŷt , yt ) = −yt log(ŷt ) − (1 − yt ) log(1 − ŷt ).
(1)
In regret analysis, we are interested in comparing the accumulated loss of the learner with that of the
best strategy within a predefined class of predictors (experts) denoted by H. More precisely, H is
a collection of predicting functions h : Rd 7→ Ŷ with input being xt at time t. Therefore, given a
learner ϕt , t > 0 and (yt , xt )Tt=1 after T rounds the pointwise regret is defined as
T

T

T

R(ϕ , y , H|x ) =

T
X
t=1

ℓ(ŷt , yt ) − inf

h∈H

T
X

ℓ(h(xt ), yt ),

t=1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

