Bidirectional Learning for Offline Infinite-width
Model-based Optimization

Can (Sam) Chen1∗, Yingxue Zhang2 , Jie Fu3 , Xue Liu1 , Mark Coates1
1

McGill University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
can.chen@mail.mcgill.ca, yingxue.zhang@huawei.com,
fujie@baai.ac.cn, xueliu@cs.mcgill.ca, mark.coates@mcgill.ca

Abstract
In offline model-based optimization, we strive to maximize a black-box objective
function by only leveraging a static dataset of designs and their scores. This problem setting arises in numerous fields including the design of materials, robots, DNA
sequences, and proteins. Recent approaches train a deep neural network (DNN) on
the static dataset to act as a proxy function, and then perform gradient ascent on
the existing designs to obtain potentially high-scoring designs. This methodology
frequently suffers from the out-of-distribution problem where the proxy function
often returns poor designs. To mitigate this problem, we propose BiDirectional
learning for offline Infinite-width model-based optimization (BDI). BDI consists
of two mappings: the forward mapping leverages the static dataset to predict the
scores of the high-scoring designs, and the backward mapping leverages the highscoring designs to predict the scores of the static dataset. The backward mapping,
neglected in previous work, can distill more information from the static dataset
into the high-scoring designs, which effectively mitigates the out-of-distribution
problem. For a finite-width DNN model, the loss function of the backward mapping
is intractable and only has an approximate form, which leads to a significant deterioration of the design quality. We thus adopt an infinite-width DNN model, and
propose to employ the corresponding neural tangent kernel to yield a closed-form
loss for more accurate design updates. Experiments on various tasks verify the
effectiveness of BDI. The code is available here.

1

Introduction

Designing a new object or entity with desired properties is a fundamental problem in science and
engineering [1]. From material design [2] to protein design [3, 4], many works rely on interactive
access with the unknown objective function to propose new designs. However, in real-world scenarios,
evaluation of the objective function is often expensive or dangerous [2–6], and thus it is more
reasonable to assume that we only have access to a static (offline) dataset of designs and their scores.
This setting is called offline model-based optimization. We aim to find a design to maximize the
unknown objective function by only leveraging the static dataset.
A common approach to solve this problem is to train a deep neural network (DNN) model on the
static dataset to act as a proxy function parameterized as fθ (·). Then the new designs are obtained by
performing gradient ascent on the existing designs with respect to fθ (·). This approach is attractive
because it can leverage the gradient information of the DNN model to obtain improved designs.
Unfortunately, the trained DNN model is only valid near the training distribution and performs poorly
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

