Hierarchical Agglomerative Graph Clustering
in Poly-Logarithmic Depth

Laxman Dhulipala
University of Maryland and
Google Research
laxman@umd.edu

David Eisenstat
Google Research
eisen@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Jakub Ł ˛
acki
Google Research
jlacki@google.com

Jessica Shi
MIT CSAIL
jeshi@mit.edu

Abstract
Obtaining scalable algorithms for hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) is
of significant interest due to the massive size of real-world datasets. At the same
time, efficiently parallelizing HAC is difficult due to the seemingly sequential nature
of the algorithm. In this paper, we address this issue and present ParHAC, the first
efficient parallel HAC algorithm with sublinear depth for the widely-used averagelinkage function. In particular, we provide a (1 + )-approximation algorithm
for this problem on m edge graphs using Õ(m) work and poly-logarithmic depth.
Moreover, we show that obtaining similar bounds for exact average-linkage HAC
is not possible under standard complexity-theoretic assumptions.
We complement our theoretical results with a comprehensive study of the ParHAC
algorithm in terms of its scalability, performance, and quality, and compare
with several state-of-the-art sequential and parallel baselines. On a broad set
of large publicly-available real-world datasets, we find that ParHAC obtains a
50.1x speedup on average over the best sequential baseline, while achieving quality
similar to the exact HAC algorithm. We also show that ParHAC can cluster one of
the largest publicly available graph datasets with 124 billion edges in a little over
three hours using a commodity multicore machine.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering (HAC) [49, 51, 72] is a fundamental and widely-used clustering method with numerous applications in unsupervised learning, community detection, and biology.
Given n input points, the HAC algorithm starts by forming a separate cluster for each input point,
and proceeds in n − 1 steps. Each step replaces the two most similar clusters by its union. The
exact notion of similarity between two clusters is specified by a configurable linkage function. This
function is typically given all pairwise similarities between points from the two clusters. Some
of the most popular choices are average-linkage (the arithmetic mean of all similarities), singlelinkage (the maximum similarity), and complete-linkage (the minimum similarity). Among these,
average-linkage is of particular importance, as it is known to find high-quality clusters in real-world
applications [25, 55, 56, 65].1
1

We note that HAC can also be defined in terms of input points and dissimilarities between the points. We
discuss and compare both settings in Section 1.2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

