Polynomial time guarantees
for the Burer-Monteiro method
Ankur Moitra
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
moitra@mit.edu

Diego Cifuentes
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
diego.cifuentes@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
The Burer-Monteiro method is one of the most widely used techniques for solving
large-scale semidefinite programs (SDP). The basic idea is to solve a nonconvex
program in Y , where Y is an n × p matrix such that X = Y Y T. We show that
this method can solve SDPs in polynomial time in a smoothed analysis setting.
More precisely, we consider an SDP whose domain satisfies some compactness and
smoothness assumptions,
p and slightly perturb the cost matrix and the constraints.
We show that if p ≳ 2(1+η)m, where m is the number of constraints and
η > 0 is any fixed constant, then the Burer-Monteiro method can solve SDPs to
any desired accuracy in polynomial time, in the setting of smooth analysis. The
bound on p approaches the celebrated Barvinok-Pataki bound in the limit as η goes
to zero, beneath which it the nonconvex program can be suboptimal. Our main
technical contribution, which is key for our tight bound on p, is to connect spurious
approximately critical points of the nonconvex program to tubular neighborhoods
of certain algebraic varieties, and then estimate the volume of such tubes.

1

Introduction

Let Sn be the set of n×n symmetric matrices. Given matrices A1 , . . . , Am , C ∈ Sn and a vector
b ∈ Rm , consider the semidefinite program (SDP):
min C • X

X∈Sn

s.t.

A(X) = b,

X ⪰ 0,

(SDP)

where A : Sn → Rm , X 7→ (A1 •X, . . . , Am •X) is a linear map and the notation X ⪰ 0 in indicates
that X is a positive semidefinite (PSD) matrix. Also consider the least squares SDP
min ∥A(X) − b∥2

X∈Sn

s.t.

X ⪰ 0,

(SDPls)

Though interior point methods solve (SDP) and (SDPls) in polynomial time, they often have memory
problems for large values of n. The Burer-Monteiro method [11, 12] is one of the most widely used
procedures for large scale problems. Several papers have worked in understanding the practical
success of this method, e.g., [9, 10, 12]. Although various results have been shown, they all fall short
of showing that one can reach an approximately optimal solution of (SDP)/(SDPls) in polynomial
time. This paper provides the first polynomial time guarantees for the Burer-Monteiro method.
The Burer-Monteiro method consists in writing X = Y Y T for some Y ∈ Rn×p , and solving a
nonconvex optimization problem in terms of Y . For (SDP) we get the problem
min C • Y Y T ,

Y ∈M

M := {Y ∈ Rn×p : A(Y Y T ) = b},

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(BM)

