Unravelling the Performance of Physics-informed
Graph Neural Networks for Dynamical Systems
Abishek Thangamuthu, Gunjan Kumar
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
New Delhi 110016, India
Ravinder Bhattoo
Department of Civil Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
New Delhi 110016, India

Suresh Bishnoi
School of Interdisciplinary Research
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
New Delhi 110016, India

N M Anoop Krishnan, Sayan Ranu
Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
New Delhi 110016, India
{krishnan,sayanranu}@iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Recently, graph neural networks have been gaining a lot of attention to simulate
dynamical systems due to their inductive nature leading to zero-shot generalizability. Similarly, physics-informed inductive biases in deep-learning frameworks have
been shown to give superior performance in learning the dynamics of physical
systems. There is a growing volume of literature that attempts to combine these two
approaches. Here, we evaluate the performance of thirteen different graph neural
networks, namely, Hamiltonian and Lagrangian graph neural networks, graph
neural ODE, and their variants with explicit constraints and different architectures.
We briefly explain the theoretical formulation highlighting the similarities and
differences in the inductive biases and graph architecture of these systems. We
evaluate these models on spring, pendulum, gravitational, and 3D deformable solid
systems to compare the performance in terms of rollout error, conserved quantities
such as energy and momentum, and generalizability to unseen system sizes. Our
study demonstrates that G NNs with additional inductive biases, such as explicit
constraints and decoupling of kinetic and potential energies, exhibit significantly
enhanced performance. Further, all the physics-informed G NNs exhibit zero-shot
generalizability to system sizes an order of magnitude larger than the training
system, thus providing a promising route to simulate large-scale realistic systems.

1

Introduction and Related Works

Understanding the time evolution or “dynamics” of physical systems is a long-standing problem of
interest with both fundamental and practical relevance in areas of physics, engineering, mathematics,
and biology [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Traditionally, the dynamics of physical systems are expressed in
terms of differential equations with respect to their state variables, such as the position (x(t)) or
velocity (ẋ(t)) [1, 3]. Note that the state variables are actual observable quantities and define the
configurational state of a system at any point of time t. The differential equation is then solved with
the initial and boundary conditions to predict the future states of the system. While this conventional
approach is highly efficient and requires little data to predict the dynamics, in many cases the exact
differential equation may be unknown. Further, the formulation of the differential equations might
require the knowledge of abstract quantities such as the energy, or force distribution of the system,
which are not directly measurable in most cases [7].
To this extent, neural networks or MLPs present as efficient function approximators, that can learn
the dynamics directly from the state or trajectory [2, 8]. The learned dynamics can then be used to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Datasets and Benchmarks Track.

