Equivariant Graph Hierarchy-Based Neural Networks

Jiaqi Han1∗, Wenbing Huang2,3†, Tingyang Xu4 , Yu Rong4†
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
4
Tencent AI Lab
alexhan99max@gmail.com, hwenbing@126.com
xuty007@gmail.com, yu.rong@hotmail.com
1

Abstract
Equivariant Graph neural Networks (EGNs) are powerful in characterizing the
dynamics of multi-body physical systems. Existing EGNs conduct flat message
passing, which, yet, is unable to capture the spatial/dynamical hierarchy for complex systems particularly, limiting substructure discovery and global information
fusion. In this paper, we propose Equivariant Hierarchy-based Graph Networks
(EGHNs) which consist of the three key components: generalized Equivariant
Matrix Message Passing (EMMP) , E-Pool and E-UnPool. In particular, EMMP
is able to improve the expressivity of conventional equivariant message passing,
E-Pool assigns the quantities of the low-level nodes into high-level clusters, while
E-UnPool leverages the high-level information to update the dynamics of the lowlevel nodes. As their names imply, both E-Pool and E-UnPool are guaranteed to
be E(n)-equivariant to meet the physical symmetry. Considerable experimental
evaluations verify the effectiveness of our EGHN on several applications including
multi-object dynamics simulation, motion capture, and protein dynamics modeling.

1

Introduction

Understanding the multi-body physical systems
is vital to numerous scientific problems, from
microscopically how a protein with thousands
of atoms acts and folds in the human body to
macroscopically how celestial bodies influence
each other’s movement. While this is exactly
an important form of expert intelligence, researchers have paid attention to teaching a machine to discover the physical rules from the
observational systems through end-to-end trainable neural networks. Specifically, it is natural
to use Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which
is able to model the relations between different Figure 1: The folding dynamics of proteins in the
bodies into a graph and the inter-body interac- cartoon format.
tion as the message passing thereon [1, 16, 25, 26, 21].
More recently, Equivariant GNNs (EGNs) [29, 8, 7, 27, 12] have become a crucial kind of tool for
representing multi-body systems. One desirable property is that their outputs are equivariant with
∗
†

This work is done when Jiaqi Han works as an intern in Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding authors: Wenbing Huang and Yu Rong.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

