MSDS: A Large-Scale Chinese Signature and Token
Digit String Dataset for Handwriting Verification

Peirong Zhang
South China University of Technology
eeprzhang@mail.scut.edu.cn

Jiajia Jiang
South China University of Technology
eejiajia_jiang@mail.scut.edu.cn

Yuliang Liu
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
ylliu@hust.edu.cn

Lianwen Jin∗
South China University of Technology
eelwjin@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Although online handwriting verification has made great progress recently, the
verification performances are still far behind the real usage owing to the small scale
of the datasets as well as the limited biometric mediums. Therefore, this paper
proposes a new handwriting verification benchmark dataset named Multimodal Signature and Digit String (MSDS), which consists of two subsets: MSDS-ChS (Chinese Signatures) and MSDS-TDS (Token Digit Strings), contributed by 402 users,
with 20 genuine samples and 20 skilled forgeries per user per subset. MSDS-ChS
consists of handwritten Chinese signatures, which, to the best of our knowledge, is
the largest publicly available Chinese signature dataset for handwriting verification,
at least eight times larger than existing online datasets. Meanwhile, MSDS-TDS
consists of handwritten Token Digit Strings, i.e, the actual phone numbers of users,
which have not been explored yet. Extensive experiments with different baselines
are respectively conducted for MSDS-ChS and MSDS-TDS. Surprisingly, verification performances of state-of-the-art methods on MSDS-TDS are generally better
than those on MSDS-ChS, which indicates that the handwritten Token Digit String
could be a more effective biometric than handwritten Chinese signature. This is
a promising discovery that could inspire us to explore new biometric traits. The
MSDS dataset is available at https://github.com/HCIILAB/MSDS.

1

Introduction

Handwritten signature is a biometric measure that has been profoundly exploited in identity verification and related studies have rapidly progressed in recent years [4]. Signature verification is to
authenticate a tested signature by comparing it to the template of its stated authorship. Owing to the
large intra-writer variance in human handwriting (Figure 1), a signature verification system is easily
attacked by skilled forgeries from malicious forgers. Therefore, handwritten signature verification
is still challenging. According to the manner of data acquisition, signatures can be categorized into
online and offline modalities [4]. Online signatures are recorded by electronic devices with temporal,
positional, and pressure information and are stored as time series, whereas offline signatures are
acquired from static signature images by photographing or scanning.
So far, considerable research has been conducted on signature verification, such as Dynamic Time
Warping (DTW) [43, 19, 31, 35, 2, 28], Hidden Markov Models (HMM) [9, 8, 26, 6] for online
verification and hand-crafted features [32, 5, 32, 14, 17, 1, 20], deep features [10, 23, 22, 48] for
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

