VLMbench: A Compositional Benchmark for
Vision-and-Language Manipulation

Kaizhi Zheng
University of California, Santa Cruz
kzheng31@ucsc.edu

Xiaotong Chen
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
cxt@umich.edu

Odest Chadwicke Jenkins
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
ocj@umich.edu

Xin Eric Wang
University of California, Santa Cruz
xwang366@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Benefiting from language flexibility and compositionality, humans naturally intend to use language to command an embodied agent for complex tasks such
as navigation and object manipulation. In this work, we aim to fill the blank
of the last mile of embodied agents—object manipulation by following human
guidance, e.g., “move the red mug next to the box while keeping it upright.” To
this end, we introduce an Automatic Manipulation Solver (AMSolver) system
and build a Vision-and-Language Manipulation benchmark (VLMbench) based
on it, containing various language instructions on categorized robotic manipulation tasks. Specifically, modular rule-based task templates are created to automatically generate robot demonstrations with language instructions, consisting
of diverse object shapes and appearances, action types, and motion constraints.
We also develop a keypoint-based model 6D-CLIPort to deal with multi-view
observations and language input and output a sequence of 6 degrees of freedom (DoF) actions. We hope the new simulator and benchmark will facilitate future research on language-guided robotic manipulation. Project website:
https://sites.google.com/ucsc.edu/vlmbench/home.

1

Introduction

“Can you help me to clean the disks in the sink?" — humans communicate with each other using
language to issue tasks and specify the requirements. Although recent progress in embodied AI
pushes intelligent robotic systems to reality closer than at any other time before, it is still an open
question how the agent learns to manipulate objects following language instructions. Therefore, we
introduce the Vision-and-Language Manipulation (VLM) task, where the agent must follow language
instructions to do robotic manipulation. Recent benchmarks were developed to evaluate robotic
manipulation tasks with language guidance and visual input [11, 1, 36]. However, the collected task
demonstrations are not modular and can hardly scale because they lack (1) adaptation to novel objects
and (2) categorization for modular and flexible composition to complex tasks. Additionally, the
lack of variations in language also leads to biases in visual reasoning learning. To deal with these
problems, we expect an inclusive, modular, and scalable benchmark to evaluate embodied agents for
various language-guided manipulation tasks.
An ideal VLM benchmark should have at least three characteristics: The first one is scalability.
Such a benchmark should automatically generate various physics-realistic 6 degrees of freedom
(DoF) interactions with affordable objects and expand new tasks effortlessly. The second is task
categorization, which exploits commonality concerning robot motion between semantic tasks and is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

