FiLM-Ensemble: Probabilistic Deep Learning via
Feature-wise Linear Modulation
Mehmet Ozgur Turkoglu
ETH Zurich
Bernd Bischl
LMU Munich

Alexander Becker
ETH Zurich

Rodrigo Caye Daudt
ETH Zurich

Hüseyin Anil Gündüz
LMU Munich

Stefano D’Aronco
ETH Zurich

Mina Rezaei
LMU Munich

Jan Dirk Wegner
ETH Zurich &
University of Zurich

Konrad Schindler
ETH Zurich

Abstract
The ability to estimate epistemic uncertainty is often crucial when deploying machine learning in the real world, but modern methods often produce overconfident,
uncalibrated uncertainty predictions. A common approach to quantify epistemic
uncertainty, usable across a wide class of prediction models, is to train a model
ensemble. In a naïve implementation, the ensemble approach has high computational cost and high memory demand. This challenges in particular modern
deep learning, where even a single deep network is already demanding in terms
of compute and memory, and has given rise to a number of attempts to emulate
the model ensemble without actually instantiating separate ensemble members.
We introduce FiLM-Ensemble, a deep, implicit ensemble method based on the
concept of Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM). That technique was originally
developed for multi-task learning, with the aim of decoupling different tasks. We
show that the idea can be extended to uncertainty quantification: by modulating
the network activations of a single deep network with FiLM, one obtains a model
ensemble with high diversity, and consequently well-calibrated estimates of epistemic uncertainty, with low computational overhead in comparison. Empirically,
FiLM-Ensemble outperforms other implicit ensemble methods, and it comes very
close to the upper bound of an explicit ensemble of networks (sometimes even
beating it), at a fraction of the memory cost.

1

Introduction

A key component for reliable and trustworthy machine learning are algorithms that output not only
accurate predictions of the target variables, but also well-calibrated estimates of their uncertainty [Gal
and Ghahramani, 2016]. The overall uncertainty of a predictor is usually decomposed into two parts
[Der Kiureghian and Ditlevsen, 2009]. Aleatoric uncertainty is inherent in the data, for instance due
to class overlap or sensor noise. On the contrary, epistemic uncertainty characterises the uncertainty
of the model weights, due to a lack of knowledge about parts of the input space that are insufficiently
represented in the training set. Uncertainty caused by distributional shifts between the training and
test data is sometimes conceived as a third source of uncertainty [Malinin and Gales, 2018], but in
practice often modelled as part of epistemic uncertainty.
Measuring epistemic uncertainty for complex models such as deep neural networks is not trivial: by
definition one cannot derive it from the training data, since it concerns the behavior of the model
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

