OnePose++: Keypoint-Free One-Shot Object Pose
Estimation without CAD Models
Xingyi He1∗

1

Zhejiang University

Jiaming Sun2∗
Hujun Bao1
2

Yuang Wang1
Di Huang3
1†
Xiaowei Zhou

Image Derivative Inc.

3

The University of Sydney

Abstract
We propose a new method for object pose estimation without CAD models. The
previous feature-matching-based method OnePose [48] has shown promising results under a one-shot setting which eliminates the need for CAD models or
object-specific training. However, OnePose relies on detecting repeatable image keypoints and is thus prone to failure on low-textured objects. We propose
a keypoint-free pose estimation pipeline to remove the need for repeatable keypoint detection. Built upon the detector-free feature matching method LoFTR
[47], we devise a new keypoint-free SfM method to reconstruct a semi-dense
point-cloud model for the object. Given a query image for object pose estimation, a 2D-3D matching network directly establishes 2D-3D correspondences
between the query image and the reconstructed point-cloud model without first
detecting keypoints in the image. Experiments show that the proposed pipeline
outperforms existing one-shot CAD-model-free methods by a large margin and is
comparable to CAD-model-based methods on LINEMOD even for low-textured
objects. We also collect a new dataset composed of 80 sequences of 40 lowtextured objects to facilitate future research on one-shot object pose estimation.
The supplementary material, code and dataset are available on the project page:
https://zju3dv.github.io/onepose_plus_plus/.

1

Introduction

Object pose estimation is crucial for immersive human-object interactions in augmented reality
(AR). The AR scenario demands the pose estimation of arbitrary household objects in our daily
lives. However, most existing methods [39, 29, 38, 55, 2, 4, 37] either rely on high-fidelity object
CAD models or require training a separate network for each object category. The instance- or
category-specific nature of these methods limits their applicability in real-world applications.
To alleviate the need for CAD models or category-specific training, OnePose [48] proposes a new
setting of one-shot object pose estimation. It assumes that only a video sequence with annotated
object poses is available for each object and aims for its pose estimation in arbitrary environments.
This setting eliminates the requirements for CAD models and the separated pose estimator training
for each object, and thus is more widely applicable for AR applications. OnePose adopts the featurematching-based visual localization pipeline for this problem setting. It reconstructs sparse object
point clouds with SfM [44] and establishes 2D-3D correspondences between keypoints in the query
image and the point cloud model to estimate the object pose. Being dependent on detecting repeatable
∗
The first two authors contributed equally. The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State
Key Lab of CAD&CG and the ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision.
†
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

