When Combinatorial Thompson Sampling meets
Approximation Regret

Pierre Perrault
Idemia
pierre.perrault@idemia.com

Abstract
We study the Combinatorial Thompson Sampling policy (CTS) for combinatorial
multi-armed bandit problems (CMAB), within an approximation regret setting.
Although CTS has attracted a lot of interest, it has a drawback that other usual
CMAB policies do not have when considering non-exact oracles: for some oracles,
CTS has a poor approximation regret (scaling linearly with the time horizon T )
[Wang and Chen, 2018]. A study is then necessary to discriminate the oracles on
which CTS could learn. This study was started by Kong et al. [2021]: they gave the
first approximation regret analysis
 of CTS for the greedy oracle, obtaining an upper
bound of order O log(T )/∆2 , where ∆ is some minimal reward gap. In this
paper, our objective is to push this study further than the simple case of the greedy
oracle. We provide the first O(log(T )/∆) approximation regret upper bound for
CTS , obtained under a specific condition on the approximation oracle, allowing a
reduction to the exact oracle analysis. We thus term this condition REDUCE 2 EXACT,
and observe that it is satisfied in many concrete examples. Moreover, it can be
extended to the probabilistically triggered arms setting, thus capturing even more
problems, such as online influence maximization.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandits (MAB) [Robbins, 1952, Berry and Fristedt, 1985, Lai and Robbins,
1985] are decision-making problems in which an agent acts sequentially in an uncertain environment.
At each round t ∈ N∗ , the agent must select one arm from a fixed set of n arms, denoted by
[n] , {1, . . . , n}, using a policy, based on the feedback from the previous rounds. Then it gets
as feedback an outcome Xi,t ∈ R — a random variable sampled from PXi , independently from
previous rounds — where i is the selected arm and PXi is a probability distribution — unknown to
the agent — of mean µ∗i . The goal for the agent is to maximize the cumulative reward over a total of
T rounds (T is the time horizon and may be unknown). The performance metric of a policy is its
regret RT , which is the expectation of the difference over T rounds between the cumulative reward
of the policy that always picked the arm with the highest expected reward and the cumulative reward
of the learning policy. MAB models the so called dilemma between exploration and exploitation, i.e.,
whether to continue exploring arms to obtain more information (and thus strengthen the confidence
in the estimates of the distributions PXi ), or to use the information gathered by playing the best arm
according to the observations so far.
In this paper, we study stochastic combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB), with semi-bandit
feedback, a.k.a. stochastic semi-bandit (still abbreviated as CMAB in this paper), an extension of
MAB where the agent plays an action (also called super-arm) At ∈ A ⊂ P([n]) at each round t,
where A is fixed and called action space. The feedback includes the outcomes of all base arms in

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

