KERPLE: Kernelized Relative Positional Embedding
for Length Extrapolation

Ta-Chung Chi∗
Carnegie Mellon University
tachungc@andrew.cmu.edu

Ting-Han Fan∗
Princeton University
tinghanf@princeton.edu

Peter J. Ramadge
Princeton University
ramadge@princeton.edu

Alexander I. Rudnicky
Carnegie Mellon University
air@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Relative positional embeddings (RPE) have received considerable attention since
RPEs effectively model the relative distance among tokens and enable length extrapolation. We propose KERPLE, a framework that generalizes relative position
embedding for extrapolation by kernelizing positional differences. We achieve this
goal using conditionally positive definite (CPD) kernels, a class of functions known
for generalizing distance metrics. To maintain the inner product interpretation of
self-attention, we show that a CPD kernel can be transformed into a PD kernel by
adding a constant offset. This offset is implicitly absorbed in the Softmax normalization during self-attention. The diversity of CPD kernels allows us to derive various
RPEs that enable length extrapolation in a principled way. Experiments demonstrate that the logarithmic variant achieves excellent extrapolation performance
on three large language modeling datasets. Our implementation and pretrained
checkpoints are released at https://github.com/chijames/KERPLE.git.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based models have excelled in various natural language processing tasks such as chatbot [Roller et al., 2021], code completion [Chen et al., 2021a], and paper abstract summarization [Zhang et al., 2020]. These sequence modeling tasks often require the model to operate well on
significantly longer text sequences than the fixed maximum length L used at training time. Training
(or retraining) the model using a substantially larger value of L is often infeasible since the transformer training cost is O(L2 ). Hence, one desires a transformer that continues to perform well on
longer sequences than those used during training; i.e., perform length extrapolation at inference time.
Most transformer designs do not have this property [Press et al., 2022]. While recent work on absolute
positional embeddings demonstrated the extrapolation ability [Kiyono et al., 2021, Likhomanenko
et al., 2021], it is believed that relative positional embeddings are more robust to input length change
[Likhomanenko et al., 2021], for example, ALiBi [Press et al., 2022] and T5 [Raffel et al., 2020].
Hence, we are motivated to study the inner workings of relative positional embeddings.
Relative positional embeddings (RPE) encode the idea of shift-invariance: for any shift p, (m + p) −
(n + p) = m − n. It is often added directly to the self-attention matrix before Softmax normalization
[Chen et al., 2021b]. Inspired by shift-invariance and the ability of a kernel to define a similarity
function, there have been studies on shift-invariant kernels for RPE [Wennberg and Henter, 2021]
with a focus on Gaussian kernel. However, in our preliminary experiments, the Gaussian kernel
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

