Submodular Maximization in Clean Linear Time
Wenxin Li
The Ohio State University
li.7328@osu.edu

Moran Feldman
University of Haifa
moranfe@cs.haifa.ac.il

Ehsan Kazemi
Google
ehsankazemi@google.com

Amin Karbasi
Yale University, Google Research
amin.karbasi@yale.edu.

Abstract
In this paper, we provide the first deterministic algorithm that achieves 1/2approximation for monotone submodular maximization subject to a knapsack constraint, while making a number of queries that scales only linearly with the size of
the ground set n. Moreover, our result automatically paves the way for developing
a linear-time deterministic algorithm that achieves the tight 1 − 1/e approximation guarantee for monotone submodular maximization under a cardinality (size)
constraint. To complement our positive results, we also show strong informationtheoretic lower bounds. More specifically, we show that when the maximum cardinality allowed for a solution is constant, no deterministic or randomized algorithm making a sub-linear number of function evaluations can guarantee any constant approximation ratio. Furthermore, when the constraint allows the selection
of a constant fraction of the ground set, we show that any algorithm making fewer
than Ω(n/ log(n)) function evaluations cannot perform better than an algorithm
that simply outputs a uniformly random subset of the ground set of the right size.
We extend our results to the general case of maximizing a monotone submodular function subject to the intersection of a p-set system and multiple knapsack
constraints. Finally, we evaluate the performance of our algorithms on multiple
real-life applications, including movie recommendation, location summarization,
Twitter text summarization, and video summarization.

1

Introduction

In the era of big data, one of the main challenges that we daily face is to make an informed decision
while taking into account all the relevant information. The study of how to make such near-optimal
decisions from a massive pool of possibilities is at the heart of combinatorial optimization. It is
well-known that without further structures, finding a near-optimal solution for a combinatorial optimization problem is notoriously hard, similar to finding a global minimum of a general non-convex
function. Nevertheless, the problems of practical interest, such as the ones we encounter in machine
learning applications, are often much more well-behaved which makes them amenable to (exact or
approximate) optimization techniques.
One celebrated combinatorial structure is submodularity, also known as diminishing returns, stating
that the added value of an element (e.g., image, sensor, etc.) to a context (data set of images, sensor
network, etc.) decreases as the context in which it is considered grows. Submodular functions have
attracted significant interest from the machine learning community, and have led to the development
of algorithms with near-optimal solutions for a wide range of applications, including outbreak detection [52], graph cuts in computer vision [40], image and video summarization [22, 32, 59, 70],
active learning [19, 27, 28], compressed sensing and structured sparsity [3, 16], fairness in machine
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

