Learning Enhanced Representations for Tabular Data
via Neighborhood Propagation

Kounianhua Du† , Weinan Zhang‡ , Ruiwen Zhou† , Yangkun Wang† , Xilong Zhao† , Jiarui Jin†
Department of Computer Science
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{774581965, wnzhang, skyriver, espylacopa, zhaoxilong, jinjiarui97}@sjtu.edu.cn
Quan Gan, Zheng Zhang, David Wipf
Amazon
{quagan, zhaz, daviwipf}@amazon.com

Abstract
Prediction over tabular data is an essential and fundamental problem in many
important downstream tasks. However, existing methods either treat a data instance
of the table independently as input or do not jointly utilize multi-row features and
labels to directly change and enhance target data representations. In this paper, we
propose to 1) construct a hypergraph from relevant data instance retrieval to model
the cross-row and cross-column patterns of those instances, and 2) perform message
Propagation to Enhance the target data instance representations for Tabular prediction tasks. Specifically, our tailored message propagation step benefits from both
the fusion of label and features during propagation, as well as locality-aware highorder feature interactions. Experiments on two important tabular data prediction
tasks validate the superiority of the proposed PET model relative to other baselines.
Additionally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the model components and the
feature enhancement ability of PET via various ablation studies and visualizations.
The code is available at https://github.com/KounianhuaDu/PET.

1

Introduction

Prediction over tabular data is a fundamental and essential problem in many data science applications
including recommender systems (Bobadilla et al., 2013; Ying et al., 2018), online advertising
(Richardson et al., 2007; Zhou et al., 2018), fraud detection (Bolton and Hand, 2002), question
answering (Chen et al., 2020), etc. Most existing methods seek to capture the patterns of feature
interactions within an instance independently using tree models (Chen and Guestrin, 2016) or deep
networks (Guo et al., 2017).
Recently, as shown by Papernot and McDaniel (2018), feeding in neighbors of the target as input
can improve the robustness of data representations and help the model generalize better to out-ofdistribution samples. Some retrieval based methods (Pi et al., 2020; Qin et al., 2020, 2021) then
seek to utilize multiple neighboring data instances of the target for label prediction. These methods
take the auxiliary instances as extra inputs but do not consider that such auxiliary information could
enhance the target representation. Other existing graph-based methods on tabular data (You et al.,
2020; Wu et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2021b) aim to learn robust representations with locality structure, as
Verma and Zhang (2019) proved the stabilization and generalization ability of graph neural networks.
†
‡

Work done during internship at Amazon Web Services Shanghai AI Lab.
Weinan Zhang is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

