Neural Approximation of Graph Topological Features

Tengfei Ma
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
tengfei.ma1@ibm.com

Zuoyu Yan
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology
Peking University
yanzuoyu3@pku.edu.cn
Liangcai Gao
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology
Peking University
glc@pku.edu.cn
Yusu Wang
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California
yusuwang@ucsd.edu

Zhi Tang
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology
Peking University
tangzhi@pku.edu.cn
Chao Chen∗
Department of Biomedical Informatics
Stony Brook University
chao.chen.1@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Topological features based on persistent homology can capture high-order structural information which can then be used to augment graph neural network methods.
However, computing extended persistent homology summaries remains slow for
large and dense graphs and can be a serious bottleneck for the learning pipeline.
Inspired by recent success in neural algorithmic reasoning, we propose a novel
graph neural network to estimate extended persistence diagrams (EPDs) on graphs
efficiently. Our model is built on algorithmic insights, and benefits from better
supervision and closer alignment with the EPD computation algorithm. We validate our method with convincing empirical results on approximating EPDs and
downstream graph representation learning tasks. Our method is also efficient; on
large and dense graphs, we accelerate the computation by nearly 100 times.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely used in various domains with graph-structured
data [45, 27, 22, 42, 6]. Much effort has been made to understand and to improve graph representation
power [47, 30, 3, 28]. An intuitive solution is to explicitly inject high order information, such as
graph topological/structural information, into the GNN models [51, 26]. To this end, persistent
homology [15, 14], which captures topological structures (e.g., connected components and loops)
and encodes them in a summary called persistence diagram (PD), have attracted the attention of
researchers. Indeed, persistence has already been injected to machine learning pipelines for various
graph learning tasks [55, 56, 16, 4, 8, 50]. In particular, it has been found helpful to use the so-called
extended persistence diagrams (EPDs) [10], which contain richer information than the standard PDs.
Despite the usefulness of PDs and EPDs, their computation remains a bottleneck in graph learning.
In situations such as node classification [56] or link prediction [50], one has to compute EPDs on
vicinity graphs (local subgraph motifs) generated around all the nodes or all possible edges in the
input graph. This can be computationally prohibitive for large and dense graphs. Take the Amazon
∗

Correspondence to Chao Chen, Yusu Wang, and Liangcai Gao

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

