CAGroup3D: Class-Aware Grouping for 3D Object
Detection on Point Clouds
Haiyang Wang1,6,7∗, Lihe Ding2∗, Shaocong Dong2 , Shaoshuai Shi3†,
Aoxue Li4 , Jianan Li2 , Zhenguo Li4 , Liwei Wang1,5†
1
Center for Data Science, Peking University 2 Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
5
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and
Technology, Peking University 6 Peng Cheng Laboratory 7 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu)
{wanghaiyang@stu, wanglw@cls}.pku.edu.cn, {dean.dinglihe, shaocong}@bit.edu.cn
sshi@mpi-inf.mpg.de, lijianan15@gmail.com {liaoxue2, Li.Zhenguo}@huawei.com

Abstract
We present a novel two-stage fully sparse convolutional 3D object detection framework, named CAGroup3D. Our proposed method first generates some high-quality
3D proposals by leveraging the class-aware local group strategy on the object
surface voxels with the same semantic predictions, which considers semantic
consistency and diverse locality abandoned in previous bottom-up approaches.
Then, to recover the features of missed voxels due to incorrect voxel-wise segmentation, we build a fully sparse convolutional RoI pooling module to directly
aggregate fine-grained spatial information from backbone for further proposal
refinement. It is memory-and-computation efficient and can better encode the
geometry-specific features of each 3D proposal. Our model achieves state-of-theart 3D detection performance with remarkable gains of +3.6% on ScanNet V2
and +2.6% on SUN RGB-D in term of mAP@0.25. Code will be available at
https://github.com/Haiyang-W/CAGroup3D.

1

Introduction

As a crucial step towards understanding 3D visual world, 3D object detection aims to estimate the
oriented 3D bounding boxes and semantic labels of objects in real 3D scenes. It has been studied for
a long time in both academia and industry since it benefits various downstream applications, such as
autonomous driving [2, 36], robotics [55, 37] and augmented reality [1, 3]. In this paper, we focus on
detecting 3D objects from unordered, sparse and irregular point clouds. Those natural characteristics
make it more challenging to directly extend well-studied 2D techniques to 3D detection.
Unlike 3D object detection from autonomous driving scenarios that only considers bird’s eye view
(BEV) boxes [30, 50, 19, 11, 32, 31], most of existing 3D indoor object detectors [27, 38, 22, 5, 52]
typically handle this task through a bottom-up scheme, which extracts the point-wise features from
input point clouds, and then groups the points into their respective instances to generate a set of
proposals. However, the above grouping algorithms are usually carried out in a class-agnostic manner,
which abandons semantic consistency within the same group and also ignores diverse locality among
different categories. For example, VoteNet [27] learns the point-wise center offsets and aggregates the
points that vote to similar semantic-irrelevant local region. Though impressive, as shown in Figure
1, these methods may fail in cluttered indoor scenes where various objects are close but belong to
different categories. Also, the object sizes are diverse for different categories, so that a class-agnostic
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

