Pure Transformers are Powerful Graph Learners
Jinwoo Kim1∗ Tien Dat Nguyen1 Seonwoo Min2 Sungjun Cho2
Moontae Lee2,3 Honglak Lee2† Seunghoon Hong1,2†
1
KAIST 2 LG AI Research 3 University of Illinois Chicago

Abstract
We show that standard Transformers without graph-specific modifications can lead
to promising results in graph learning both in theory and practice. Given a graph, we
simply treat all nodes and edges as independent tokens, augment them with token
embeddings, and feed them to a Transformer. With an appropriate choice of token
embeddings, we prove that this approach is theoretically at least as expressive as an
invariant graph network (2-IGN) composed of equivariant linear layers, which is
already more expressive than all message-passing Graph Neural Networks (GNN).
When trained on a large-scale graph dataset (PCQM4Mv2), our method coined
Tokenized Graph Transformer (TokenGT) achieves significantly better results
compared to GNN baselines and competitive results compared to Transformer
variants with sophisticated graph-specific inductive bias. Our implementation is
available at https://github.com/jw9730/tokengt.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Transformer [68] has served as a versatile architecture in a broad class of machine
learning problems, such as natural language processing [17, 7], computer vision [18], and reinforcement learning [9], to name a few. It is because the fully-attentional structure of Transformer is general
and powerful enough to take, process, and relate inputs and outputs of arbitrary structures, eliminating
a need for data- and task-specific inductive bias to be baked into the network architecture. Combined
with large-scale training, it opens up a new chapter for building a versatile model that can solve a wide
range of problems involving diverse data modalities and even a mixture of modalities [31, 30, 57].
In graph learning domain, inspired by the breakthroughs, multiple works tried combining selfattention into graph neural network (GNN) architecture where message passing was previously
dominant [50]. As global self-attention across nodes cannot reflect the graph structure, however, these
methods introduce graph-specific architectural modifications. This includes restricting self-attention
to local neighborhoods [69, 51, 19], using global self-attention in conjunction with message-passing
GNN [58, 43, 34], and injecting edge information into global self-attention via attention bias [72,
78, 29, 54]. Despite decent performance, such modifications can be a limiting constraint in terms of
versatility, especially considering future integration to multi-task and multi-modal general-purpose
attentional architectures [31]. In addition, deviating from pure self-attention, these methods may
inherit the issues of message-passing such as oversmoothing [40, 8, 52], and become incompatible
with useful engineering techniques e.g., linear attention [65] developed for standard self-attention.
Instead, we explore the opposite direction of applying a standard Transformer directly for graphs. For
this, we treat all nodes and edges as independent tokens, augment them with appropriate token-wise
embeddings, and feed the tokens as input to the standard Transformer. The model operates identically
to Transformers used in language and vision; each node or edge is treated as a token, identical to the
words in a sentence or patches of an image [68, 18]. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that this simple
approach yields a powerful graph learner both in theory and practice.
∗
†

Work done during an internship at LG AI Research.
Equal corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

