Tikhonov Regularization is Optimal Transport Robust
under Martingale Constraints

Jiajin Li

Sirui Lin
José Blanchet
Stanford University
{jiajinli, siruilin, jose.blanchet}@stanford.edu
Viet Anh Nguyen
Chinese University of Hong Kong
nguyen@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Distributionally robust optimization has been shown to offer a principled way to
regularize learning models. In this paper, we find that Tikhonov regularization is
distributionally robust in an optimal transport sense (i.e., if an adversary chooses
distributions in a suitable optimal transport neighborhood of the empirical measure),
provided that suitable martingale constraints are also imposed. Further, we introduce a relaxation of the martingale constraints which not only provides a unified
viewpoint to a class of existing robust methods but also leads to new regularization
tools. To realize these novel tools, tractable computational algorithms are proposed.
As a byproduct, the strong duality theorem proved in this paper can be potentially
applied to other problems of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Regularization is an important tool in machine learning which is used in, for instance, reducing
overfitting [23]. Recently, ideas from distributionally robust optimization (DRO) have led to a fresh
viewpoint on regularization precisely in connection to overfitting; see, e.g., [7, 2, 20, 10, 29, 24, 25, 5]
and the references therein.
In these references it is shown that many standard regularization-based estimators arise as the solution
of a min-max game in which one wishes to minimize a loss over a class of parameters against
an adversary that maximizes the out-of-distribution impact of any given parameter choice, that
is, the adversary perturbs the empirical distribution in a certain way. The choice of adversarial
distributions or perturbations in DRO is often non-parametric thus providing reassurance that the
decision is reasonably robust to a wide range of out-of-distribution perturbations. For example,
one such non-parametric choice is given by employing optimal transport costs [31] to construct a
so-called distributional uncertainty set (e.g. a Wasserstein ball around the empirical distribution) for
the adversary to choose. [27] shows that optimal transport-based DRO (OT-DRO) is closely related
to adversarial robustness in the sense of steepest gradient loss contamination. This can be further
explained by OT-DRO’s hidden connection with generalized Lipschitz regularization [7]. Thus,
understanding if a well-known regularization technique is actually distributionally robust and in what
sense, allows us to understand its out-of-distribution benefits and potentially introduce improvements.
In this paper, we introduce a novel set of regularization techniques which incorporate martingale
constraints into the OT-DRO framework. Our starting point is the conventional OT-DRO formulation.
The conventional OT-DRO formulation can generally be interpreted as perturbing each data point
in such a way that the average size perturbation is less than a given budget. In addition to this
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

