Double Check Your State Before Trusting It:
Confidence-Aware Bidirectional Offline Model-Based
Imagination

1

Jiafei Lyu1 , Xiu Li1∗, Zongqing Lu2∗
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
School of Computer Science, Peking University
lvjf20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The learned policy of model-free offline reinforcement learning (RL) methods is
often constrained to stay within the support of datasets to avoid possible dangerous
out-of-distribution actions or states, making it challenging to handle out-of-support
region. Model-based RL methods offer a richer dataset and benefit generalization
by generating imaginary trajectories with either trained forward or reverse dynamics
model. However, the imagined transitions may be inaccurate, thus downgrading
the performance of the underlying offline RL method. In this paper, we propose
to augment the offline dataset by using trained bidirectional dynamics models and
rollout policies with double check. We introduce conservatism by trusting samples
that the forward model and backward model agree on. Our method, confidenceaware bidirectional offline model-based imagination, generates reliable samples
and can be combined with any model-free offline RL method. Experimental results
on the D4RL benchmarks demonstrate that our method significantly boosts the
performance of existing model-free offline RL algorithms and achieves competitive
or better scores against baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (offline RL), also known as batch RL [34], aims at learning from a
static dataset that was previously gathered by an unknown behavioral policy. Offline RL is deemed
to be promising [16, 14] as online learning requires the agent to continuously interact with the
environment, which however may be costly, time-consuming, or even dangerous. The progress in
offline RL will undoubtedly scale RL methods to being widely applied in real-world applications,
considering the impressive success in computer vision or natural language processing by adopting
large-scale offline datasets [9, 6].
Prior off-policy online RL methods [17, 21, 48] are known to fail on fixed offline datasets, even on
expert demonstrations [14], due to extrapolation errors [16]. In the offline setting, the agent can
overgeneralize from the static dataset, resulting in arbitrarily wrong estimates upon out-of-distribution
(OOD) state-action pairs and dangerous action execution. To address this issue, recent model-free
offline RL algorithms compel the learned policy to stay close to the behavioral policy [16, 31, 72], or
incorporate some penalties into the critic [50, 32, 29]. However, such approaches often suffer from
loss of generalization capability [73, 69], since they purposely avoid OOD states or actions.
Model-based offline RL methods, instead, enrich the logged dataset by generating synthetic samples
with the trained forward or reverse (backward) dynamics model [26, 75, 69, 74]. These methods
∗

Corresponding Authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

