Joint Entropy Search for Multi-Objective Bayesian
Optimization

Ben Tu†

Axel Gandy† Nikolas Kantas† Behrang Shafei‡
†
Imperial College London
‡
BASF SE
ben.tu16@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Many real-world problems can be phrased as a multi-objective optimization problem, where the goal is to identify the best set of compromises between the competing objectives. Multi-objective Bayesian optimization (BO) is a sample efficient
strategy that can be deployed to solve these vector-valued optimization problems
where access is limited to a number of noisy objective function evaluations. In
this paper, we propose a novel information-theoretic acquisition function for BO
called Joint Entropy Search (JES), which considers the joint information gain for
the optimal set of inputs and outputs. We present several analytical approximations
to the JES acquisition function and also introduce an extension to the batch setting.
We showcase the effectiveness of this new approach on a range of synthetic and
real-world problems in terms of the hypervolume and its weighted variants.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) has demonstrated a lot of success in solving black-box optimization
problems in various domains such as machine learning [76, 77, 91], chemistry [27, 35], robotics
[7, 14] and clinical trials [63, 79]. The procedure works by maintaining a probabilistic model of the
observed data in order to guide the optimization procedure into regions of interest. Specifically, at
each iteration the black-box function is evaluated at one or more input locations that maximizes
an acquisition function on the model. Implicitly, this function strikes a balance between exploring
new areas and exploiting areas that have been shown to be promising. In this work, we consider the
more general problem, where the black-box function of interest is vector-valued. This increases
the difficulty of the problem because there are now many directions in which the objectives can be
improved, in contrast to the single-objective setting where there is only one. Informally, the end goal
of multi-objective optimization is to identify a collection of points that describe the best trade-offs
between the different objectives.
There are several ways to define an acquisition function for multi-objective BO. A popular
strategy is random scalarization [51, 64], which works by transforming the multi-objective problem
into a distribution of single-objective problems. These approaches are appealing because they enable
the use of standard single-objective acquisition functions. A weakness of this approach is that it
relies on random sampling to encourage exploration and therefore the performance of this method
might suffer early on when the scale of the objectives is unknown or when either the input space or
the objective space is high-dimensional [21, 64]. Another popular class of multi-objective acquisition
functions are improvement-based. These strategies focus on improving a performance metric over
sets, for example the hypervolume indicator [18, 19, 26, 93] or the R2 indicator [24]. The main
drawback of these approaches is that the performance of these methods can be biased towards a
single performance metric, which can be inadequate to assess the multi-objective aspects of the
problem [98]. There are also many other multi-objective acquisition functions discussed in the litera36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

