Refining Low-Resource Unsupervised Translation by
Language Disentanglement of Multilingual Model

Xuan-Phi Nguyen1,3 , Shafiq Joty1,2 , Wu Kui3 , Ai Ti Aw3
1
Nanyang Technological University
2
Salesforce Research
3
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR
Singapore
{nguyenxu002@e.ntu,srjoty@ntu}.edu.sg
{wuk,aaiti}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Numerous recent work on unsupervised machine translation (UMT) implies that
competent unsupervised translations of low-resource and unrelated languages,
such as Nepali or Sinhala, are only possible if the model is trained in a massive
multilingual environment, where these low-resource languages are mixed with
high-resource counterparts. Nonetheless, while the high-resource languages greatly
help kick-start the target low-resource translation tasks, the language discrepancy
between them may hinder their further improvement. In this work, we propose a
simple refinement procedure to separate languages from a pre-trained multilingual
UMT model for it to focus on only the target low-resource task. Our method
achieves the state of the art in the fully unsupervised translation tasks of English
to Nepali, Sinhala, Gujarati, Latvian, Estonian and Kazakh, with BLEU score
gains of 3.5, 3.5, 3.3, 4.1, 4.2, and 3.3, respectively. Our codebase is available at
github.com/nxphi47/refine_unsup_multilingual_mt.

1

Introduction

Fully unsupervised machine translation (UMT), where absolutely only unlabeled monolingual corpora
are used in the entire model training process, has gained significant traction in recent years. Early
success in UMT has been built on the foundation of cross-lingual initialization and iterative backtranslation [11, 13, 6, 25, 18]. While achieving outstanding performance on empirically high-resource
languages, such as German and French, these UMT methods fail to produce any meaningful translation
(near zero BLEU scores) when adopted in low-resource cases, like the FLoRes Nepali and Sinhala
unsupervised translation tasks [10]. Arguably, such low-resource languages need UMT the most.
Liu et al. [17] discovered that low-resource UMT models benefit significantly when they are initialized
with a multilingual generative model (mBART), which is pre-trained on massive monolingual corpora
from 25 languages (CC25). Not only does this multilingual pre-training set contain data of the
low-resource languages of interest (e.g., Nepali), it also comprises sentences from related languages
(e.g., Hindi), which presumably boosts the performance of their low-resource siblings. Tran et al.
[26] and Nguyen et al. [19] later propose ways to mine pseudo-parallel data from multiple directions
to improve low-resource UMT. On the other hand, Conneau et al. [7] find the curse of multilinguality,
which states that performance of a multilingual model with a fixed model capacity tends to decline
after a point as the number of languages in the training data increases. Thus, adding more languages
may hinder further improvement in low-resource UMT, which is intuitively due to incompatibility
between the linguistic structures of different languages. Furthermore, these models have to tell
languages apart by using only a single-token language specifier prepended into the input sequence,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

