Finite-Time Last-Iterate Convergence for Learning
in Multi-Player Games

Yang Cai
Yale University
yang.cai@yale.edu

Argyris Oikonomou
Yale University
argyris.oikonomou@yale.edu

Weiqiang Zheng
Yale University
weiqiang.zheng@yale.edu

Abstract
We study the question of last-iterate convergence rate of the extragradient
algorithm by [Kor76] and the optimistic gradient algorithm by [Pop80] in multiplayer games. We show that both algorithms with constant step-size have
last-iterate convergence rate of O( √1 ) to a Nash equilibrium in terms of
T
the gap function in smooth monotone games, where each player’s action
set is an arbitrary convex set. Previous results only study the unconstrained
setting, where each player’s action set is the entire Euclidean space. Our
results address an open question raised in several recent works [HIMM19,
GPD20, GPDO20], which ask for last-iterate convergence rate of either the
extragradient or the optimistic gradient algorithm in the constrained setting.
Our convergence rates for both algorithms are tight and match the lower
bounds by [GPD20, GPDO20]. At the core of our results lies a new notion
– the tangent residual, which we use to measure the proximity to a Nash
equilibrium. We use the tangent residual (or a modification of the tangent
residual) as the the potential function in our analysis of the extragradient
algorithm (or the optimistic gradient algorithm).

1

Introduction

We consider learning in monotone games, a class of multi-player games introduced by [Ros65]
that include many well studied games, e.g., two-player zero-sum games, convex-concave
games, λ-cocoercive games [LZMJ20], zero-sum polymatrix games [BF87, DP09, CD11], and
zero-sum socially-concave games [EDMN09]. We focus on the following question: Can we
obtain last-iterate convergence rate to a Nash equilibrium in monotone games when all players
act according to a simple learning algorithm?
We adopt the multi-player online learning model as introduced in [CBL06], where players
interact with each other repeatedly. At every time step t, every player i ∈ {1, . . . , N } chooses
(i )

an action zt from her action set Z (i) , which we assume to be a closed convex set in Rni . We
(i )

say the game is unconstrained if Z (i) = Rni for each player i. Player i’s loss function ℓt (·) is
determined based on the underlying game and the actions of the other players in round t.
(i )

(i )

Player i receives the loss ℓt (zt ) as well as some additional feedback that informs her how
to improve her decisions in the future. In this paper, we assume that each player receives the
(i )

(i )

gradient feedback, i.e., player i receives the vector ∇ℓt (zt ). We make an additional mild
assumption that the game is smooth, i.e., all players’ gradients are Lipschitz. Smoothness is
a natural assumption that is satisfied in most applications and is also made in the majority
of works concerning monotone games.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

