Single Model Uncertainty Estimation via Stochastic
Data Centering

Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan∗
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
jjayaram@llnl.gov
Vivek Narayanaswamy
Arizona State University
vnaray29@asu.edu

Rushil Anirudh∗
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
anirudh1@llnl.gov
Peer-Timo Bremer
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
bremer5@llnl.gov

Abstract
We are interested in estimating the uncertainties of deep neural networks, which
play an important role in many scientific and engineering problems. In this paper,
we present a striking new finding that an ensemble of neural networks with the same
weight initialization, trained on datasets that are shifted by a constant bias gives
rise to slightly inconsistent trained models, where the differences in predictions
are a strong indicator of epistemic uncertainties. Using the neural tangent kernel
(NTK), we demonstrate that this phenomena occurs in part because the NTK is
not shift-invariant. Since this is achieved via a trivial input transformation, we
show that this behavior can therefore be approximated by training a single neural
network – using a technique that we call ∆−UQ – that estimates uncertainty around
prediction by marginalizing out the effect of the biases during inference. We show
that ∆−UQ ’s uncertainty estimates are superior to many of the current methods
on a variety of benchmarks– outlier rejection, calibration under distribution shift,
and sequential design optimization of black box functions. Code for ∆−UQ can
be accessed at github.com/LLNL/DeltaUQ

1

Introduction

Accurately estimating uncertainties in a deep neural network (DNN) is an active area of research due
to its implications in a wide range of scientific and engineering problems. Broadly, there are two
kinds of uncertainties that are often considered – (a) aleatoric: uncertainties in the data generating
process that are typically irreducible, and (b) epistemic: uncertainties of the model that can be
reduced by observing more data, which is the focus of our work. Some of the popular techniques
for the latter include Bayesian methods [1–4] that use a prior on the network weights, Monte Carlo
approximations such as MC Dropout [5] that approximate sampling from the posterior, and empirical
methods such as Deep Ensembles (DEns) [6]. In particular, DEns trains an ensemble of neural
networks with different initializations, such that the uncertainty estimate on a test sample is given by
the inconsistency between predictions from the member models. In practice, DEns has been found to
often outperform other related methods [7, 6, 8], but it comes at the cost of training several DNNs to
obtain reliable uncertainties (typically 10 − 20), which is a severe computational bottleneck when it
comes to modern DNNs especially on large scale datasets. In light of this, there is increased interest
in developing single model estimators that can still produce high quality uncertainties. There has been
some promising work in this direction in the recent past, specific to deep classifiers [8] or regression
models [9], and has been shown to perform comparably to DEns in some use-cases.
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

