Generalization for Multiclass Classification with
Overparameterized Linear Models
Vignesh Subramanian
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA-94720, USA
vignesh.subramanian@eecs.berkeley.edu
Rahul Arya
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA-94720, USA
rahularya@berkeley.edu
Anant Sahai
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA-94720, USA
sahai@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Via an overparameterized linear model with Gaussian features, we provide conditions for good generalization for multiclass classification of minimum-norm
interpolating solutions in an asymptotic setting where both the number of underlying features and the number of classes scale with the number of training points.
The survival/contamination analysis framework for understanding the behavior
of overparameterized learning problems is adapted to this setting, revealing that
multiclass classification qualitatively behaves like binary classification in that, as
long as there are not too many classes (made precise in the paper), it is possible
to generalize well even in some settings where the corresponding regression tasks
would not generalize. Besides various technical challenges, it turns out that the key
difference from the binary classification setting is that there are relatively fewer
positive training examples of each class in the multiclass setting as the number of
classes increases, making the multiclass problem “harder” than the binary one.

1

Introduction

Multiclass classification on standardized datasets is where the current deep-learning revolution really
made the community take notice with previously unattainable levels of performance. Contemporary
systems have demonstrated tremendous success at these tasks, typically using gigantic models with
parameters that vastly exceed the (also large) number of data points used to train these models. In
defiance of traditional statistical wisdom regarding overfitting, these big models can be trained to
achieve zero training error even with noisy labels, but still generalize well in practice [84, 28].
To better understand this empirical phenomenon, one line of work uses appropriate high-dimensional
linear models for regression problems to show how benign fitting of noise in training data is possible
[31, 52, 4, 9, 55]. Essentially, the model must have enough "non-preferred" degrees of freedom to be
able to absorb the training noise without contaminating predictions by too much. Simultaneously,
there has to be enough of a preference for degrees of freedom that can capture the true pattern to
enable it to survive the learning procedure and be well represented in the final learned model.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

