On Margins and Generalisation for Voting Classifiers
Felix Biggs
Department of Computer Science
University College London and Inria
London
contact@felixbiggs.com

Valentina Zantedeschi
ServiceNow Research,
University College London and Inria
London
vzantedeschi@gmail.com

Benjamin Guedj
Department of Computer Science
University College London and Inria
London
b.guedj@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the generalisation properties of majority voting on finite ensembles of
classifiers, proving margin-based generalisation bounds via the PAC-Bayes theory.
These provide state-of-the-art guarantees on a number of classification tasks. Our
central results leverage the Dirichlet posteriors studied recently by Zantedeschi
et al. (2021) for training voting classifiers; in contrast to that work our bounds apply
to non-randomised votes via the use of margins. Our contributions add perspective
to the debate on the “margins theory” proposed by Schapire et al. (1998) for the
generalisation of ensemble classifiers.

1

Introduction

Weighted ensemble methods are among the most widely-used and effective algorithms known in
machine learning. Variants of boosting (Freund and Schapire, 1997; Chen and Guestrin, 2016) are
state-of-the-art in a wide variety of tasks (Shwartz-Ziv and Armon, 2022; Nielsen, 2016) and methods
such as random forest (Breiman, 2001) are among the most commonly-used in machine learning
competitions (see, e.g., Bell and Koren, 2007; Uriot et al., 2021), valued both for their excellent
results and interpretability. Even when these algorithms do not directly produce the best learners for a
task, the best performance in competitions is often obtained by an ensemble of “strong learners”—the
output of a collection of different algorithms trained on the data—contrasted to the weak learners
usually considered in the ensemble learning literature.
Among the oldest ideas to explain the performance of ensemble classifiers, and machine learning
methods in general, is the concept of margins. First introduced to analyse the Perceptron algorithm (Novikoff, 1962), margins relate closely to the idea of confidence in predictions in ensemble
learning, with a large margin implying that a considerable weighted fraction of voters chose the same
answer. This was first leveraged to obtain early margin-based generalisation bounds for ensembles
by Schapire et al. (1998), in an attempt to understand the excellent generalisation of boosting, a
surprising result given classical Vapnik-Chervonenkis theory. This “margins theory” was explored
further in a number of works (Wang et al., 2008; Gao and Zhou, 2013; Grønlund et al., 2020) and is
among the leading explanations for the success of such methods and boosting in particular.
The same thread of margin bounds for ensemble methods has also been taken up in parallel in
PAC-Bayes theory by Langford and Seeger (2001); Biggs and Guedj (2022b). PAC-Bayes provides
a natural framework both for deriving margin bounds, and for considering ensemble methods in
general, particularly majority votes where the largest-weighted ensemble prediction is taken. Within
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

