Cost-Sensitive Self-Training for Optimizing
Non-Decomposable Metrics
Harsh Rangwani∗1 , Shrinivas Ramasubramanian∗1 , Sho Takemori∗2 , Takashi Kato2 ,
Yuhei Umeda2 , and R. Venkatesh Babu1
1

Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India
2
Fujitsu Limited, Kanagawa, Japan
harshr@iisc.ac.in, shrinivas.ramasubramanian@gmail.com,
takemori.sho@fujitsu.com, kato.takashi_01@fujitsu.com,
umeda.yuhei@fujitsu.com, venky@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Self-training based semi-supervised learning algorithms have enabled the learning
of highly accurate deep neural networks, using only a fraction of labeled data.
However, the majority of work on self-training has focused on the objective of
improving accuracy whereas practical machine learning systems can have complex goals (e.g. maximizing the minimum of recall across classes etc.) that are
non-decomposable in nature. In this work, we introduce the Cost-Sensitive SelfTraining (CSST) framework which generalizes the self-training-based methods for
optimizing non-decomposable metrics. We prove that our framework can better
optimize the desired non-decomposable metric utilizing unlabeled data, under
similar data distribution assumptions made for the analysis of self-training. Using
the proposed CSST framework we obtain practical self-training methods (for both
vision and NLP tasks) for optimizing different non-decomposable metrics using
deep neural networks. Our results demonstrate that CSST achieves an improvement
over the state-of-the-art in majority of the cases across datasets and objectives.

1

Introduction

In recent years, semi-supervised learning algorithms are increasingly being used for training deep
neural networks [3, 9, 31, 37]. These algorithms lead to accurate models by leveraging the unlabeled
data in addition to the limited labeled data present. For example, it’s possible to obtain a model with
minimal accuracy degradation (≤ 1%) using 5% of labeled data with semi-supervised algorithms
compared to supervised models trained using 100% labeled data [31]. Hence, the development of
these algorithms has resulted in a vast reduction in the requirement for expensive labeled data.
Self-training is one of the major paradigms for semi-supervised learning. It involves obtaining targets
(e.g. pseudo-labels) from a network from the unlabeled data, and using them to train the network
further. The modern self-training methods also utilize additional regularizers that enforce prediction
consistency across input transformations (e.g., adversarial perturbations [18], augmentations [36, 31],
etc.) , enabling them to achieve high performance using only a tiny fraction of labeled data. Currently,
the enhanced variants of self-training with consistency regularization [40, 25] are among the state-ofthe-art (SOTA) methods for semi-supervised learning.
∗

Equal Contribution. Code: https://github.com/val-iisc/CostSensitiveSelfTraining

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

