Non-identifiability and the Blessings of
Misspecification in Models of Molecular Fitness
Eli N. Weinstein⇤ †
Columbia University
ew2760@columbia.edu

Alan N. Amin⇤
Harvard Medical School
alanamin@g.harvard.edu

Jonathan Frazer
Harvard Medical School and
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG)
jonathan.frazer@crg.eu

Debora S. Marks
Harvard Medical School and
Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT
debbie@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
Understanding the consequences of mutation for molecular fitness and function
is a fundamental problem in biology. Recently, generative probabilistic models
have emerged as a powerful tool for estimating fitness from evolutionary sequence
data, with accuracy sufficient to predict both laboratory measurements of function
and disease risk in humans, and to design novel functional proteins. Existing
techniques rest on an assumed relationship between density estimation and fitness
estimation, a relationship that we interrogate in this article. We prove that fitness is
not identifiable from observational sequence data alone, placing fundamental limits
on our ability to disentangle fitness landscapes from phylogenetic history. We show
on real datasets that perfect density estimation in the limit of infinite data would,
with high confidence, result in poor fitness estimation; current models perform
accurate fitness estimation because of, not despite, misspecification. Our results
challenge the conventional wisdom that bigger models trained on bigger datasets
will inevitably lead to better fitness estimation, and suggest novel estimation
strategies going forward.

1

Introduction

The past decades have witnessed a tremendous increase in the scale of genome sequence data available
from across life. Recently, methods for estimating molecular fitness using generative sequence models
have seen widespread success at translating this evolutionary data into predictions of the functional
consequences of mutation. Such models have been shown to accurately predict the outcomes of
experimental assays of protein function [23, 44, 36], and have been applied to infer 3D structures
of RNA and protein [35, 56] and to design novel proteins [50, 47, 33]. The models have also been
used to predict whether human mutations are pathogenic, directly informing the diagnosis of genetic
disease [19]. In this paper, we investigate how and why generative sequence models fit to evolutionary
sequence data are successful at estimating molecular fitness, and how they might be improved and
generalized going forward.
Existing approaches to fitness estimation with generative sequence models rest on an assumed relationship between density estimation and fitness estimation. Given a dataset of sequences X1 , . . . , XN ,
assumed to be drawn i.i.d. from some underlying distribution p0 , fitness models proceed by (1)
⇤
†

These authors contributed equally.
Work done while at Harvard Medical School.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

