Surprising Instabilities in Training Deep Networks and
a Theoretical Analysis

Yuxin Sun1 Dong Lao2 Ganesh Sundaramoorthi3 Anthony Yezzi1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 UCLA, 3 Raytheon Technologies
{syuxin3,ayezzi}@gatech.edu, lao@cs.ucla.edu, ganesh.sundaramoorthi@rtx.com

Abstract
We discover restrained numerical instabilities in current training practices of deep
networks with stochastic gradient descent (SGD). We show numerical error (on
the order of the smallest floating point bit) induced from floating point arithmetic
in training deep nets can be amplified significantly and result in significant test
accuracy variance, comparable to the test accuracy variance due to stochasticity
in SGD. We show how this is likely traced to instabilities of the optimization
dynamics that are restrained, i.e., localized over iterations and regions of the weight
tensor space. We do this by presenting a theoretical framework using numerical
analysis of partial differential equations (PDE), and analyzing the gradient descent
PDE of a simplified convolutional neural network (CNN). We show that it is stable
only under certain conditions on the learning rate and weight decay. We reproduce
the localized instabilities in the PDE for the simplified network, which arise when
the conditions are violated.

1

Introduction

Deep learning is now standard practice in a number of application areas including computer vision and
natural language processing. However, the practice has out-paced the theory. Theoretical advances in
deep learning could improve practice, and could also speed the adoption of the technology in e.g., a
number of safety critical application areas.
In this paper, we discover a phenomena of restrained instabilities in current deep learning training
optimization. Numerical instabilities are present but are restrained so that there is not full global
divergence, but these restrained instabilities still cause tiny numerical finite precision errors to amplify,
which leads to significant variance in the test accuracy. We introduce a theoretical framework using
tools from numerical partial differential equations (PDE) to provide insight into the phenomena and
analytically show how such restrained instabilities can arise as a function of learning rate and weight
decay for a simplified CNN model. This study is a step toward a theory for principally choosing
learning rates in deep network training from the perspective of numerical conditioning.
In deep learning practice, it is well known that large learning rates can cause divergence and small
learning rates can be slow and cause the optimization to be stuck at high training error [1], [2].
Learning rates and schedules are often chosen heuristically to address this trade-off. On the other
hand, in numerical PDEs, there is a mature theory for choosing the learning rate [3] or step size for
discrete schemes for solving PDEs. There are known conditions on the step size (e.g., the CourantFriedrichs-Lewy (CFL) condition [4]) to ensure that the resulting scheme is stable and converges.
These methods would thus be natural to study learning rate schemes for training deep networks with
SGD, which in the continuum limit is a PDE. However, to the best of our knowledge, numerical
PDEs have not been applied to this domain. This might be for two reasons. First, the complicated
structure of deep networks with many layers and non-linearities makes it difficult to apply these
analytic techniques. Second, the stochastic element of SGD complicates applying these techniques,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

