Exploring the Latent Space of Autoencoders with
Interventional Assays

Felix Leeb∗†

Stefan Bauer †

Michel Besserve †

Bernhard Schölkopf †

Abstract
Autoencoders exhibit impressive abilities to embed the data manifold into a lowdimensional latent space, making them a staple of representation learning methods.
However, without explicit supervision, which is often unavailable, the representation is usually uninterpretable, making analysis and principled progress challenging.
We propose a framework, called latent responses, which exploits the locally contractive behavior exhibited by variational autoencoders to explore the learned manifold.
More specifically, we develop tools to probe the representation using interventions
in the latent space to quantify the relationships between latent variables. We extend
the notion of disentanglement to take the learned generative process into account
and consequently avoid the limitations of existing metrics that may rely on spurious correlations. Our analyses underscore the importance of studying the causal
structure of the representation to improve performance on downstream tasks such
as generation, interpolation, and inference of the factors of variation.

1

Introduction

Autoencoders (AEs) [1, 2] and its modern variants like the widely used variational autoencoders
(VAEs) [3], are a powerful paradigm for self-supervised representation learning for generative
modeling [4], compression [5], anomaly detection [6] or natural language processing [7]. Since
autoencoders can learn low dimensional representations without requiring labeled data, they are
particularly useful for computer vision tasks where samples can be very high dimensional making
processing, transmitting, and search prohibitively expensive. Here VAEs have shown impressive
results, often achieving state-of-the-art results compared to other paradigms [8, 9, 10, 11].
The striking performance coupled with the relatively flexible approach has prompted an explosion
of variants to learn a representation with some structure that is particularly conducive to a given
task [12, 13, 14]. In addition to a meaningful lower-dimensional representations of our world [15],
the focus may be to improve generalization [16, 17, 18], increase interpretability by disentangling the
underlying mechanisms [19, 20, 21, 22], or even to enable causal reasoning [23, 24].
In designing ever more intricate training objectives to learn more specialized structures as part of
complicated model pipelines, it becomes increasingly important to gain a better understanding of
what the representation actually looks like to more quickly identify and resolve any weaknesses of
a proposed method. Here the manifold learning community provides a principled formulation to
analyze and control the geometry of the data manifold learned by the representation [25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33]. Developing tools to better understand the structure of the representation is not
only useful as a diagnostic to identify avenues for improving modelling and sampling [34, 35], but it
also has crucial importance for fairness [36, 37] and safety [18, 38, 39].
Our focus here is on taking advantage of common properties of autoencoders to gain a deeper
understanding of the structure of the representation. We summarize our contributions as follows:
∗
†

Email: fleeb@tuebingen.mpg.de
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

