On the Stability and Scalability of Node Perturbation
Learning
Naoki Hiratani
Harvard; Gatsby Unit, UCL
Cambridge, MA, USA
n.hiratani@gmail.com

Yash Mehta
Janelia; Gatsby Unit, UCL
Ashburn, VA, USA
mehtay@janelia.hhmi.org

Timothy P. Lillicrap
Deepmind
London, UK
countzero@google.com

Peter E. Latham
Gatsby Unit, UCL
London, UK
pel@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
To survive, animals must adapt synaptic weights based on external stimuli and
rewards. And they must do so using local, biologically plausible, learning rules – a
highly nontrivial constraint. One possible approach is to perturb neural activity (or
use intrinsic, ongoing noise to perturb it), determine whether performance increases
or decreases, and use that information to adjust the weights. This algorithm – known
as node perturbation – has been shown to work on simple problems, but little is
known about either its stability or its scalability with respect to network size. We
investigate these issues both analytically, in deep linear networks, and numerically,
in deep nonlinear ones. We show analytically that in deep linear networks with
one hidden layer, both learning time and performance depend very weakly on
hidden layer size. However, unlike stochastic gradient descent, when there is model
mismatch between the student and teacher networks, node perturbation is always
unstable. The instability is triggered by weight diffusion, which eventually leads to
very large weights. This instability can be suppressed by weight normalization, at
the cost of bias in the learning rule. We confirm numerically that a similar instability,
and to a lesser extent scalability, exist in deep nonlinear networks trained on both
a motor control task and image classification tasks. Our study highlights the
limitations and potential of node perturbation as a biologically plausible learning
rule in the brain.

1

Introduction

The immense success of deep learning in recent years has revived interest in the backpropagation
algorithm (known simply as “backprop”) as a learning mechanism in the brain [1, 2]. Although
in its pure form this algorithm is incompatible with biological constraints (most notably, the fact
that synapses do not know the weights of other synapses in the brain), many biologically plausible
approximations have been proposed [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. However, it remains unclear how robust these
approximate learning rules are, or how they perform on large neural networks [10], partially because
we do not have a clear analytical understanding of them.
In the node perturbation (NP) algorithm, synaptic weights are updated according to how the error
changes when a small perturbation is added to each node of a neural network [11, 4, 12]. If a
perturbation improves performance, the weights are modified so that the perturbation is consolidated,
and vice versa (see §3). This algorithm has two advantages over more standard biologically plausible
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

