Differentially Private Covariance Revisited

Wei Dong, Yuting Liang, Ke Yi
{wdongac,yliangbs,yike}@cse.ust.hk
Department of Computer Science
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we present two new algorithms for covariance estimation under
concentrated differential
? (zCDP). The first algorithm achieves a Frobenius
? ? privacy
error of Õpd1{4 tr{ n ` d{nq, where tr is the trace of the covariance matrix.
?
By taking tr “ 1, this also implies a worst-case error bound of Õpd1{4 { nq, which
r 2{3 q.
improves the standard Gaussian mechanism’s Õpd{nq for the regime d ą Ωpn
Our second algorithm offers a tail-sensitive bound that could be much better
on skewed data. The corresponding algorithms are also simple and efficient.
Experimental results show that they offer significant improvements over prior
work.

1

Introduction

Consider a dataset represented by a matrix X P Rdˆn , where each column Xi , i “ 1, . . . , n
corresponds to an individual’s information. As standard in the literature, we assume that all the Xi ’s
live in Bd , the d-dimensional ℓ2 -unit ball centered at the origin.
ř In this paper, we revisit the problem
of estimating the (empirical) covariance matrix ΣpXq :“ n1 i Xi XiT “ n1 XXT under differential
privacy (DP), a fundamental problem in high-dimensional data analytics and machine learning that
requires little motivation. We often write ΣpXq as Σ when the context is clear. As with most prior
r ´ Σ}F to measure the error of the estimated covariance Σ.
r To
work, we use the Frobenius norm }Σ
better focus, in the introduction we state all results under concentrated different privacy (zCDP) [10];
extensions of our results to pure-DP are given in Appendix I.
1.1

A Trace-sensitive Algorithm

For any symmetric matrix A, we use PrAs and ΛrAs to denote its matrices of eigenvectors and
eigenvalues, respectively, such that A “ PrAsΛrAsPrAsT ; we use λi rAs to denote its ith largest
eigenvalue. When A “ Σ “ ΣpXq, we simply write P “ PrΣs, Λ “ ΛrΣs, λi “ λi rΣs, so that
Λ “ diagpλ1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , λd q and Σ “ PΛPT . Let P “ rP1 P2 ¨ ¨ ¨ Pd s, where Pi is ř
the orthonormal
basis vector corresponding to λi . Rudimentary linear algebra yields λk “ n1 i pPkT Xi q2 for
ř
1 ď k ď d and ||Xi ||22 “ k pPkT Xi q2 for 1 ď i ď n. Thus, it follows that
trrΣs “ trrΛs “

ÿ
k

λk “

ÿ1ÿ
k

n

i

pPkT Xi q2 “

1 ÿÿ T
1ÿ
pPk Xi q2 “
||Xi ||22 .
n i k
n i

That is, 0 ď trrΛs ď 1 is the average ℓ2 norm (squared) of the Xi ’s, and we simply write it as tr.
Recall that it is assumed that all the Xi ’s live in Bd . In practice, this is enforced by assuming an
upper bound B on the norms and scaling down all Xi by B. As one often uses a conservatively
large B, typical values of tr can be much smaller than 1, so a trace-sensitive algorithm would be
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

