Neural Lyapunov Control of Unknown Nonlinear
Systems with Stability Guarantees

Ruikun Zhou
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Waterloo
ruikun.zhou@uwaterloo.ca

Thanin Quartz
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Waterloo
tquartz@uwaterloo.ca

Hans De Sterck
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Waterloo
hans.desterck@uwaterloo.ca

Jun Liu
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Waterloo
j.liu@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Learning for control of dynamical systems with formal guarantees remains a challenging task. This paper proposes a learning framework to simultaneously stabilize
an unknown nonlinear system with a neural controller and learn a neural Lyapunov
function to certify a region of attraction (ROA) for the closed-loop system. The
algorithmic structure consists of two neural networks and a satisfiability modulo
theories (SMT) solver. The first neural network is responsible for learning the
unknown dynamics. The second neural network aims to identify a valid Lyapunov
function and a provably stabilizing nonlinear controller. The SMT solver then verifies that the candidate Lyapunov function indeed satisfies the Lyapunov conditions.
We provide theoretical guarantees of the proposed learning framework in terms
of the closed-loop stability for the unknown nonlinear system. We illustrate the
effectiveness of the approach with a set of numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Finding the region of attraction (ROA) of an asymptotically stable equilibrium point for a nonlinear
dynamical system remains one of the most challenging tasks, especially for systems with uncertainty
[26]. Even though the well-known Lyapunov theorems which use the level sets of a Lyapunov
function to estimate the ROA were proposed more than a century ago, there is no general approach
to finding a valid Lyapunov function for general nonlinear systems with provable guarantees [22].
Thanks to the development of learning-based methods, several data-driven approaches have recently
shown their effectiveness in identifying unknown (or partly known) systems [8, 30]. However, how
to simultaneously find Lyapunov functions and nonlinear controllers for systems with unknown
dynamics is still an open and active problem in control and robotics applications [20].
By exploiting the expressiveness of neural networks to tackle the complex nonlinearities of dynamical
systems, we propose a learning framework for simultaneously learning control functions and neural
Lyapunov functions. We build upon the framework in [5], but address the more challenging problem
of stabilizing a nonlinear system with unknown dynamics with formal stability guarantees. In addition,
we complement the computational framework in [5], by proving the existence of a neural network
satisfying the Lyapunov conditions, except on an arbitrarily small neighborhood of the origin, which
offers a theoretical basis for the learning framework here and in [5].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

