What Can Transformers Learn In-Context?
A Case Study of Simple Function Classes

Shivam Garg∗

Dimitris Tsipras∗

Percy Liang

Gregory Valiant

Stanford University
{shivamg, tsipras, pliang, gvaliant}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In-context learning refers to the ability of a model to condition on a prompt sequence consisting of in-context examples (input-output pairs from some task)
along with a new query input, and generate the corresponding output. Crucially,
in-context learning happens only at inference time without any parameter updates
to the model. While large language models such as GPT-3 exhibit some ability to
perform in-context learning, it is unclear what the relationship is between tasks
on which this succeeds and what is present in the training data. To make progress
towards understanding in-context learning, we consider the well-defined problem
of training a model to in-context learn a function class (e.g., linear functions):
given data derived from some functions in the class, can we train a model to incontext learn “most” functions from this class? We show empirically that standard
Transformers can be trained from scratch to perform in-context learning of linear
functions—that is, the trained model is able to learn unseen linear functions from
in-context examples with performance comparable to the optimal least squares estimator. In fact, in-context learning is possible even under two forms of distribution
shift: (i) between the training data of the model and inference-time prompts; (ii) between the in-context examples and the query input during inference. We also show
that we can train Transformers to in-context learn more complex function classes—
i.e., sparse linear functions, two-layer neural networks, and decision trees—with
performance that matches or exceeds task-specific learning algorithms.1

1

Introduction

Large language models such as GPT-3 [10] are able to perform in-context learning: given a prompt
containing examples from a task (input-output pairs) and a new query input, the language model
can generate the corresponding output. For example, these models are able to produce English
translations of French words after being prompted on a few such translations, e.g.:
maison → house, chat → cat, chien → dog .
|
{z
} |{z }
prompt

completion

This capability is quite intriguing as it allows models to adapt to a wide range of downstream tasks
on-the-fly—without the need to update the model after training [10, 35, 55, 8]. However, it is unclear
to what extent these models are able to learn new tasks from in-context examples alone as opposed to
indexing into a vast set of known tasks from the training data (e.g., see Min et al. [41]). 2
∗

Equal contribution.
Our code and models are available at https://github.com/dtsip/in-context-learning.
2
The term “in-context learning” may also refer to a more general notion of learning from a prompt [48]. In this
work, we focus on the standard notion which refers to learning a task/function given in-context examples [10].
1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

