Sparse Structure Search for Delta Tuning

Shengding Hu1∗, Zhen Zhang1∗ , Ning Ding1 , Yadao Wang3 ,
Yasheng Wang3 , Zhiyuan Liu1,2,4†, Maosong Sun1,2,4
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
2
Institute Guo Qiang, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
4
International Innovation Center of Tsinghua University, Shanghai, China
{hsd20, zhen-zha19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Adapting large pre-trained models (PTMs) through fine-tuning imposes prohibitive
computational and storage burdens. Recent studies of delta tuning (DT), i.e.,
parameter-efficient tuning, find that only optimizing a small portion of parameters
conditioned on PTMs could yield on-par performance compared to conventional
fine-tuning. Generally, DT methods exquisitely design delta modules (DT modules)
which could be applied to arbitrary fine-grained positions inside PTMs. However,
the effectiveness of these fine-grained positions largely relies on sophisticated
manual designation, thereby usually producing sub-optimal results. In contrast
to the manual designation, we explore constructing DT modules in an automatic
manner. We automatically Search for the Sparse Structure of Delta Tuning
(S3 Delta). Based on a unified framework of various DT methods, S3 Delta conducts
the differentiable DT structure search through bi-level optimization and proposes
shifted global sigmoid method to explicitly control the number of trainable parameters. Extensive experiments show that S3 Delta surpasses manual and random
structures with less trainable parameters. The searched structures preserve more
than 99% fine-tuning performance with 0.01% trainable parameters. Moreover, the
advantage of S3 Delta is amplified with extremely low trainable parameters budgets
(0.0009%∼0.01%). The searched structures are transferable and explainable,
providing suggestions and guidance for the future design of DT methods. Our
codes are publicly available at https://github.com/thunlp/S3Delta.

1

Introduction

Increasingly large pre-trained models (PTMs) [6, 27, 30, 31, 12] building upon Transformers [36]
have been emerging and achieving state-of-the-art results on a variety of downstream tasks. Despite
the blessing of effectiveness, these big models also bring the curse of prohibitive costs on computation
and storage during the adaptation because of the gradient computation of the whole model and the
giant size of the fine-tuned checkpoint.
To alleviate such costs, studies of delta tuning (DT) [7], also known as parameter-efficient tuning [15,
28, 42, 16, 25, 9, 20, 18], have been developed, which only train a small portion of PTMs and
keep the vast majority of parameters frozen. Studies have verified that delta tuning could achieve
competitive performance compared to conventional fine-tuning with very few trainable parameters,
resulting in considerable savings in model adaptation costs. Generally, these approaches manually
design delta modules (DT modules) to complete model adaptation. For example, adapter-based
∗
†

Equal contribution, ordered alphabetically.
Corresponding authors: Z.Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

