Multi-dataset Training of Transformers for Robust
Action Recognition

1

Junwei Liang1∗, Enwei Zhang2 , Jun Zhang2 , Chunhua Shen3
AI Thrust, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
3
Zhejiang University
Email: junweiliang@hkust-gz.edu.cn, miyozhang@tencent.com,
bobbyjzhang@tencent.com, chunhua@me.com

Abstract
We study the task of robust feature representations, aiming to generalize well on
multiple datasets for action recognition. We build our method on Transformers for
its efficacy. Although we have witnessed great progress for video action recognition
in the past decade, it remains challenging yet valuable how to train a single model
that can perform well across multiple datasets. Here, we propose a novel multidataset training paradigm, MultiTrain, with the design of two new loss terms,
namely informative loss and projection loss, aiming to learn robust representations
for action recognition. In particular, the informative loss maximizes the expressiveness of the feature embedding while the projection loss for each dataset mines the
intrinsic relations between classes across datasets. We verify the effectiveness of our
method on five challenging datasets, Kinetics-400, Kinetics-700, Moments-in-Time,
Activitynet and Something-something-v2 datasets. Extensive experimental results
show that our method can consistently improve state-of-the-art performance. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/JunweiLiang/MultiTrain

1

Introduction

Human vision can recognize video actions efficiently despite the variations of scenes and domains.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [48, 49, 6, 44, 19, 36] effectively exploit the power of modern
computational devices and employ spatial-temporal filters to recognize actions, which considerably
outperform traditional models such as oriented filtering in space-time (HOG3D) [30]. However, due
to the high variations in space-time, the state-of-the-art accuracy of action recognition is still far from
being satisfactory, compared with the success of 2D CNNs in image recognition [24].
Recently, vision transformers such as ViT [15], and MViT [17] that are based on the self-attention [52]
mechanism were proposed to tackle the problems of image and video recognition, and achieved
impressive performance. Instead of modeling pixels as CNNs, transformers apply attentions on top
of visual tokens. The inductive bias of translation invariance in CNNs makes it require less training
data than attention-based transformers in general. In contrast, transformer has the advantage that
it can better leverage ‘big data’, leading to improved accuracy than CNNs. We have witnessed a
rapid growth in video datasets [28] in recent years, which would make up for the shortcomings of
data-hungry transformers. The video data has not only grown in quantity from hundreds to millions of
videos [42], but also evolved from simple actions such as handshaking to complicated daily activities
from the Kinetics-700 dataset [7]. Meanwhile, transformers combined with low-level convolutional
operations have been proposed [17] to further improve the efficiency and accuracy.
∗

Corresponding author. This work was partially done when JL was with Tencent.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

