Distributed Learning of Conditional Quantiles in the
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space

Heng Lian
City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
and
Department of Mathematics, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
henglian@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
We study distributed learning of nonparametric conditional quantiles with Tikhonov
regularization in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). Although distributed
parametric quantile regression has been investigated in several existing works,
the current nonparametric quantile setting poses different challenges and is still
unexplored. The difficulty lies in the illusive explicit bias-variance decomposition
in the quantile RKHS setting as in the regularized least squares regression. For the
simple divide-and-conquer approach that partitions the data set into multiple parts
and then takes an arithmetic average of the individual outputs, we establish the risk
bounds using a novel second-order empirical process for quantile risk.

1

Introduction

Distributed learning has attracted significant attention recently with the increasing popularity of
distributed systems and distributed data. Although the algorithmic aspects have gone far beyond
the simple data parallelism paradigm that uses a simple divide-and-conquer strategy to carry out
computations on each part of the data separately and then combine them in a finalizing step, the
theoretical verification has lagged behind even though nowadays there are a lot of cases for which
learning rates have been established, including Zhang et al. (2013, 2015); Rosenblatt and Nadler
(2015); Balcan et al. (2015); Chang et al. (2017); Lee et al. (2017); Lin et al. (2017); Jordan et al.
(2018); Volgushev et al. (2019); Lian and Fan (2018). It has been shown repeatedly for various
models that the divide-and-conquer method can achieve the same learning rate as the standard
estimator (assuming the whole data set is available on a single machine and it is computationally
feasible to compute this central estimator based on the entire sample), as long as the number of
partitions/machines is not too large.
In this work, we investigate the theoretical underpinning of the divide-and-conquer strategy for
distributed learning of nonparametric quantile regression models in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
(RKHS). Under this framework, the distributed learning rate for kernel ridge regression with a least
squares loss has been established in several works (Lin et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2017; Chang et al.,
2017). The quantile regression proposed by Koenker and Bassett Jr (1978) is an important class of
models that can focus on the tail of the response distribution and is more robust the than least squares
regression. However, the rate for nonparametric distributed learning other than least squares loss
in the RKHS has not been established. The difficulty is that the nonparametric quantile estimator
in the RKHS does not have an explicit form, which makes the decomposition of the mean squared
error into bias and variance illusive, while such a decomposition is the key to establishing the rates in
the divide-and-conquer method. Previously, the quantile regression estimator in the RKHS studied
in Li et al. (2007); Steinwart and Christmann (2011) based on standard empirical process theory
does not make it possible to decompose the error into bias and variance and thus is not adaptable to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

