Privacy of Noisy Stochastic Gradient Descent:
More Iterations without More Privacy Loss

Jason M. Altschuler
MIT
jasonalt@mit.edu

Kunal Talwar
Apple
ktalwar@apple.com

Abstract
A central issue in machine learning is how to train models on sensitive user data.
Industry has widely adopted a simple algorithm: Stochastic Gradient Descent with
noise (a.k.a. Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics). However, foundational
theoretical questions about this algorithm’s privacy loss remain open—even in
the seemingly simple setting of smooth convex losses over a bounded domain.
Our main result resolves these questions: for a large range of parameters, we
characterize the differential privacy up to a constant. This result reveals that all
previous analyses for this setting have the wrong qualitative behavior. Specifically,
while previous privacy analyses increase ad infinitum in the number of iterations,
we show that after a small burn-in period, running SGD longer leaks no further
privacy. Our analysis departs from previous approaches based on fast mixing,
instead using techniques based on optimal transport (namely, Privacy Amplification
by Iteration) and the Sampled Gaussian Mechanism (namely, Privacy Amplification
by Sampling). Our techniques readily extend to other settings.

1

Introduction

Convex optimization is a fundamental task in machine learning. When models are learnt on sensitive
data, privacy becomes a major concern—motivating a large body of work on differentially private
convex optimization [3, 4, 5, 8, 13, 19, 21, 30]. In practice, the most common approach for training
private models is N OISY-SGD, i.e., Stochastic Gradient Descent with noise added each iteration. This
algorithm is simple and natural, has optimal utility bounds [3, 4], and is implemented in mainstream
machine learning platforms such as Tensorflow (TF Privacy) [1], PyTorch (Opacus) [35], and JAX [6].
Yet, despite the simplicity and ubiquity of this N OISY-SGD algorithm, we do not understand basic
questions about its privacy loss1 —i.e., how sensitive the output of N OISY-SGD is with respect to the
training data. Specifically:
Question 1.1. What is the privacy loss of N OISY-SGD as a function of the number of iterations?
Even in the seemingly simple setting of smooth convex losses over a bounded domain, this fundamental question has remained wide open. In fact, even more basic questions are open:
Question 1.2. Does the privacy loss of N OISY-SGD increase ad infinitum in the number of iterations?
The purpose of this paper is to understand these fundamental theoretical questions. Specifically, we
resolve Questions 1.1 and 1.2 by characterizing the privacy loss of N OISY-SGD up to a constant
factor in this (and other) settings for a large range of parameters. Below, we first provide context by
describing previous analyses in §1.1, and then describe our result in §1.2 and techniques in §1.3.
1

The Supplementary Material contains a full version of this paper with proofs and more discussion.
Throughout, we follow the literature by writing “privacy loss” to refer to the differential privacy parameters.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

