TPU-KNN
K Nearest Neighbor Search at Peak FLOP/s
Felix Chern ⇤
Google Research
fchern@google.com
Ruiqi Guo
Google Research
guorq@google.com

Blake Hechtman ⇤
Google Core ML
blakehechtman@google.com

Andy Davis ⇤
Google Core ML
andydavis@google.com

David Majnemer
Google Core ML
majnemer@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
This paper presents a novel nearest neighbor search algorithm achieving TPU
(Google Tensor Processing Unit) peak performance, outperforming state-of-theart GPU algorithms with similar level of recall. The design of the proposed
algorithm is motivated by an accurate accelerator performance model that takes into
account both the memory and instruction bottlenecks. Our algorithm comes with
an analytical guarantee of recall in expectation and does not require maintaining
sophisticated index data structure or tuning, making it suitable for applications
with frequent updates. Our work is available in the open-source package of Jax and
Tensorflow on TPU.

1

Introduction

The K-nearest neighbor (K-NN) search problem has a wide range of applications in machine learning
and information retrieval systems, including image search (Jia et al., 2021; Babenko and Lempitsky,
2016), semantic textual retrieval (Liu et al., 2009; Cer et al., 2018), anomaly detection (Gu et al.,
2019; Omar et al., 2013), recommendation systems (Sarwar et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2019), as well as
serving as a component for a downstream tasks (Borgeaud et al., 2021; Guu et al., 2020; Lindgren
et al., 2021; Shazeer et al., 2017). Given a query, the objective of K-NN is to identify K closest
datapoints from a database of finite number of data points in a vector space. The main challenge of
designing a good K-NN algorithm is to compute accurate K-NN results while being computationally
efficient.
Solving the K-NN problem on accelerators has emerging interests from both the academia and the
industry (Johnson et al., 2021; Shanbhag et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2020). Many accelerators can
deliver hundreds of Tera Floating Point Operations Per Seconds (TFLOPS) vital to the neighbor
distance computation. However, utilizing accelerators in K-NN problems is not straightforward;
multiple issues in data locality, memory bandwidth, and multiple types of hardware parallelism need
to be carefully considered to achieve high utilization. In this paper we extend the roofline performance
model (Williams et al., 2009) to quantify the hardware characteristics accurately. As a result, we
designed a K-NN algorithm to reach peak performance by the precise modeling of the accelerators,
and our TPU implementation aligned with our predicted performance.
The main contributions of this work are:
⇤

Equal contributions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

