GREED: A Neural Framework for Learning Graph
Distance Functions
Rishabh Ranjan, Siddharth Grover
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, IIT Delhi, India
{rishabh.ranjan.cs118, siddharth.grover.cs118}@cse.iitd.ac.in
Sourav Medya
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois, Chicago, USA
medya@uic.edu

Venkat Chakravarthy, Yogish Sabharwal
IBM Research
Delhi, India
{vechakra, ysabharwal}@in.ibm.com

Sayan Ranu
Department of Computer Science & Engineering and Yardi School of AI (Jointly), IIT Delhi, India
sayanranu@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Among various distance functions for graphs, graph and subgraph edit distances
(G ED and S ED respectively) are two of the most popular and expressive measures. Unfortunately, exact computations for both are NP-hard. To overcome this
computational bottleneck, neural approaches to learn and predict edit distance in
polynomial time have received much interest. While considerable progress has
been made, there exist limitations that need to be addressed. First, the efficacy of
an approximate distance function lies not only in its approximation accuracy, but
also in the preservation of its properties. To elaborate, although G ED is a metric, its
neural approximations do not provide such a guarantee. This prohibits their usage
in higher order tasks that rely on metric distance functions, such as clustering or
indexing. Second, several existing frameworks for G ED do not extend to S ED due
to S ED being asymmetric. In this work, we design a novel siamese graph neural
network called G REED, which through a carefully crafted inductive bias, learns
G ED and S ED in a property-preserving manner. Through extensive experiments
across 10 real graph datasets containing up to 7 million edges, we establish that
G REED is not only more accurate than the state of the art, but also up to 3 orders of
magnitude faster. Even more significantly, due to preserving the triangle inequality,
the generated embeddings are indexable and consequently, even in a CPU-only
environment, G REED is up to 50 times faster than GPU-powered baselines for
graph / subgraph retrieval.

1

Introduction and Related Work

A distance function on any dataset, including graphs, is a fundamental operator. Among several
distance measures on graphs, edit distance is one of the most powerful and popular mechanisms [30,
51, 49, 20]. Edit distance can be posed in two forms: graph edit distance (G ED) and subgraph edit
distance (S ED). Given two graphs G1 and G2 , G ED(G1 , G2 ) returns the minimum cost of edits needed
to convert G1 to G2 , i.e., for G1 to become isomorphic to G2 . An edit can be the addition or deletion of
edges and nodes, or the replacement of edge or node labels, with an associated cost. In S ED(G1 , G2 ),
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

