Amortized Proximal Optimization

Juhan Bae∗ 1,2 , Paul Vicol∗ 1,2 , Jeff Z. HaoChen3 , Roger Grosse1,2
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Stanford University
{jbae, pvicol, rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu
jhaochen@stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose a framework for online meta-optimization of parameters that govern
optimization, called Amortized Proximal Optimization (APO). We first interpret
various existing neural network optimizers as approximate stochastic proximal
point methods which trade off the current-batch loss with proximity terms in both
function space and weight space. The idea behind APO is to amortize the minimization of the proximal point objective by meta-learning the parameters of an
update rule. We show how APO can be used to adapt a learning rate or a structured
preconditioning matrix. Under appropriate assumptions, APO can recover existing
optimizers such as natural gradient descent and KFAC. It enjoys low computational
overhead and avoids expensive and numerically sensitive operations required by
some second-order optimizers, such as matrix inverses. We empirically test APO
for online adaptation of learning rates and structured preconditioning matrices
for regression, image reconstruction, image classification, and natural language
translation tasks. Empirically, the learning rate schedules found by APO generally
outperform optimal fixed learning rates and are competitive with manually tuned
decay schedules. Using APO to adapt a structured preconditioning matrix generally results in optimization performance competitive with second-order methods.
Moreover, the absence of matrix inversion provides numerical stability, making it
effective for low-precision training.

1

Introduction

Many optimization algorithms widely used in machine learning can be seen as approximations to
an idealized algorithm called the proximal point method (PPM). When training neural networks,
the stochastic PPM iteratively minimizes a loss function JB : Rm → R on a mini-batch B, plus a
proximity term that penalizes the discrepancy from the current iterate:
θ (t+1) ← arg min JB(t) (u) + λD(u, θ (t) ),

(1)

u∈Rm

where D(·, ·) measures the discrepancy between two vectors and λ > 0 is a hyperparameter that controls the strength of the proximity term. The proximity term discourages the update from excessively
changing the parameters, hence preventing aggressive updates. Moreover, the stochastic PPM has
good convergence properties [4]. While minimizing Eq. 1 exactly is usually impractical (or at least
uneconomical), solving it approximately (by taking first or second-order Taylor series approximations
to the loss or the proximity term) has motivated important and widely used optimization algorithms
such as natural gradient descent [1] and mirror descent [7]. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [69]
itself can be seen as an approximate PPM where the loss term is linearized and the discrepancy
function is squared Euclidean distance.
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

