Audio-Driven Co-Speech Gesture Video Generation

Xian Liu1 , Qianyi Wu2 , Hang Zhou1 , Yuanqi Du3 , Wayne Wu4 , Dahua Lin1,4 , Ziwei Liu5
1
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Monash University
3
Cornell University 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Co-speech gesture is crucial for human-machine interaction and digital entertainment. While previous works mostly map speech audio to human skeletons
(e.g., 2D keypoints), directly generating speakers’ gestures in the image domain
remains unsolved. In this work, we formally define and study this challenging
problem of audio-driven co-speech gesture video generation, i.e., using a unified
framework to generate speaker image sequence driven by speech audio. Our key
insight is that the co-speech gestures can be decomposed into common motion
patterns and subtle rhythmic dynamics. To this end, we propose a novel framework,
Audio-driveN Gesture vIdeo gEneration (ANGIE), to effectively capture the
reusable co-speech gesture patterns as well as fine-grained rhythmic movements.
To achieve high-fidelity image sequence generation, we leverage an unsupervised
motion representation instead of a structural human body prior (e.g., 2D skeletons).
Specifically, 1) we propose a vector quantized motion extractor (VQ-Motion
Extractor) to summarize common co-speech gesture patterns from implicit motion
representation to codebooks. 2) Moreover, a co-speech gesture GPT with motion
refinement (Co-Speech GPT) is devised to complement the subtle prosodic motion
details. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework renders realistic
and vivid co-speech gesture video. Demo video and more resources can be found
in: https://alvinliu0.github.io/projects/ANGIE

1

Introduction

During daily conversation among humans, speakers naturally emit co-speech gestures to complement
the verbal channels and express their thoughts [17, 35, 56]. Such non-verbal behaviors ease speech
comprehension [10, 58] and bridge the communicator’s gap for better credibility [7, 54]. Therefore,
equipping the social robot with conversation skills constitutes a crucial step to human-machine
interaction. To achieve it, researchers delve into the task of co-speech gesture generation [21, 39, 62],
where audio-coherent human gesture sequences are synthesized in the form of structural human
representation (e.g., skeletons). However, such representation contains no appearance information of
the target speaker, which is crucial for human perception. As demonstrated in audio-driven talking
head synthesis [34, 65], generating real-world subjects in the image domain is highly desirable. To
this end, we explore the problem of audio-driven co-speech gesture video generation, i.e., using a
unified framework to generate speaker image sequence driven by speech audio (illustrated in Fig. 1).
Conventional methods require exhaustive human efforts to pre-define the speech-gesture pairs and
connection rules for coherent result [11, 12]. With the development of deep learning, neural networks
are leveraged to learn the mapping from encoded audio feature to human skeletons in a data-driven
manner [21, 39, 62]. Notably, one category of approaches relies on small-scale MoCap datasets
in co-speech setting [16, 18, 48], which contributes to specific models with limited capacity and
robustness. To capture more general speech-gesture correlations, another category of methods builds
large training corpus by exploiting off-the-shelf pose estimators [9, 15] to label enormous online
videos as pseudo ground truth [21, 63]. However, the inaccurate pose annotations induce error
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

