Boosting Out-of-distribution Detection with
Typical Features

Yao Zhu1,2 ∗ Yuefeng Chen2 Chuanlong Xie3 Xiaodan Li2 Rong Zhang2
Hui Xue2 Xiang Tian1,5 † Bolun Zheng4,5 Yaowu Chen1,6
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 Beijing Normal University, 4 Hangzhou Dianzi University
5
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Network Multimedia Technologies
6
Zhejiang University Embedded System Engineering Research Center, Ministry of Education of China

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a critical task for ensuring the reliability
and safety of deep neural networks in real-world scenarios. Different from most
previous OOD detection methods that focus on designing OOD scores or introducing diverse outlier examples to retrain the model, we delve into the obstacle
factors in OOD detection from the perspective of typicality and regard the feature’s
high-probability region of the deep model as the feature’s typical set. We propose
to rectify the feature into its typical set and calculate the OOD score with the typical
features to achieve reliable uncertainty estimation. The feature rectification can be
conducted as a plug-and-play module with various OOD scores. We evaluate the
superiority of our method on both the commonly used benchmark (CIFAR) and the
more challenging high-resolution benchmark with large label space (ImageNet).
Notably, our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods by up to 5.11% in the
average FPR95 on the ImageNet benchmark 3 .

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been widely applied in various fields. Apart from the success of deep
models, predictive uncertainty is essential in safety-critical real-world scenarios such as autonomous
driving [1, 2], medical [3], financial [4], etc. When encountering some examples that the deep model
has not been exposed to during training, we hope the model raises an alert and hands them over
to humans for safe handling. Such a challenge is usually referred to as out-of-distribution (OOD)
detection and has gained significant research attention recently [5–8].
Most of the existing research [5–7, 9–12] worked on designing suitable OOD scores for the pretrained neural network, hoping to assign higher scores to the in-distribution (ID) examples and lower
scores to the out-of-distribution (OOD) examples. However, these methods overlook the obstacle
factors in OOD detection caused by the model’s internal mechanisms. In this paper, we rethink the
OOD detection from a perspective of feature typicality. We observed that the distribution of the deep
features of the training dataset on different channels is approximately consistent with the Gaussian
distribution (See examples in Appendix J). Accordingly, we divide these features into typical features
(fall in the high-probability region) and extreme features (fall in the low-probability region). Extreme
features rarely appear in training and attract less attention from the classifier than the typical features.
We hypothesize the classifier can model the typical features better than the extreme features, and the
extreme features may lead to ambiguity and imprecise uncertainty estimation. Given the potential
∗

Yao Zhu is with the Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, 310013. (E-mail: ee_zhuy@zju.edu.cn).
Corresponding authors: Xiang Tian, Bolun Zheng. (E-mail: tianx@zju.edu.cn, blzheng@hdu.edu.cn)
3
The code will be available at this https URL

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

