Expected Improvement for Contextual Bandits

Hung Tran-The∗
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute
Deakin University

Sunil Gupta
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute
Deakin University

Santu Sana
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute
Deakin University
Long Tran-Thanh
University of Warwick, UK

Tuan Truong
FPT Software AI Center

Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute
Deakin University

Abstract
The expected improvement (EI) is a popular technique to handle the tradeoff
between exploration and exploitation under uncertainty. This technique has been
widely used in Bayesian optimization but it is not applicable for the contextual
bandit problem which is a generalization of the standard bandit and Bayesian
optimization. In this paper, we initiate and study the EI technique for contextual
bandits from both theoretical and practical perspectives. We propose two novel
EI based algorithms, one when the reward function is assumed to be linear and
the other for more general reward functions. With linear reward functions, we
demonstrate that our algorithm achieves a√near-optimal regret. Notably, our regret
improves that of LinTS [3] by a factor d while avoiding to solve a NP-hard
problem at each iteration as in LinUCB [1]. For more general reward functions
which √
are modeled by deep neural networks, we prove that our algorithm achieves
a Õ(d˜ T ) regret, where d˜ is the effective dimension of a neural tangent kernel
(NTK) matrix, and T is the number of iterations. Our experiments on various
benchmark datasets show that both proposed algorithms work well and consistently
outperform existing approaches, especially in high dimensions.

1

Introduction

The contextual bandit problem is an important field in machine learning ([9, 23]) to optimize the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation in sequential decision making, and has been extensively
studied in real-world applications such as personalized recommendation [24], advertising [18], robotic
control [25], and healthcare [19]. At each round, the agent observes a feature vector (the “context")
for each of the K arms, pulls one of them, and in return receives a scalar reward. The goal is to
maximize the cumulative reward, or minimize regret (see our definition in Section 2), in a total of T
rounds. To do so, the agent must find a trade-off between exploration and exploitation.
There are two standard techniques to solve the trade-off in contextual bandits. The first technique uses
the optimism in face of uncertainty which chooses promising actions by maximizing upper-confidence
bounds (UCB), and the second one using Thompson Sampling (TS) whose basic idea is to estimate
a posterior distribution on the reward, and sample an arm that maximises a random reward drawn
∗

Correspondence to Hung Tran-The <hung.tranthe@deakin.edu.au>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

