Simple and Optimal Greedy Online Contention
Resolution Schemes
Vasilis Livanos
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
livanos3@illinois.edu

Abstract
Real-world problems such as ad allocation and matching have been extensively
studied under the lens of combinatorial optimization. In several applications,
uncertainty in the input appears naturally and this has led to the study of online
stochastic optimization models for such problems. For the offline case, these
constrained combinatorial optimization problems have been extensively studied,
and Contention Resolution Schemes (CRSs), introduced by Chekuri, Vondrák,
and Zenklusen, have emerged in recent years as a general framework to obtaining
a solution. The idea behind a CRS is to first obtain a fractional solution to a
(continuous) relaxation of the objective and then round the fractional solution to
an integral one. When the order of rounding is controlled by an adversary, Online
Contention Resolution Schemes (OCRSs) can be used instead, and have been
successfully applied in settings such as prophet inequalities and stochastic probing.
In this work, we focus on greedy OCRSs, which provide guarantees against the
strongest possible adversary, an almighty adversary. Intuitively, a greedy OCRS
has to make all its decisions before the online process starts. We present simple
1/e - selectable greedy OCRSs for the single-item setting, partition matroids and
transversal matroids, which improve upon the previous state-of-the-art greedy
OCRSs of [FSZ16] for these constraints. We also show that our greedy OCRSs are
optimal, even for the simple single-item case.

1

Introduction

In recent years, problems in Bayesian and stochastic online optimization have attracted significant
interest, especially in the field of machine learning. In this setting, we are usually asked to make
decisions in an online manner, based on the information available to us so far, and our objective is to
minimize our “regret”, which is captured by a loss function and describes how much better we could
have done if we had all the information available a priori.
In several applications, in which our decision relies also on hidden information, such as deciding
whether a user will click an ad they are presented with [AAD+ 20, XSC+ 19, BSSX20, BGMS21]
or whether a kidney donor is a good match for another patient [BFT13, DS15], our online decision
problem naturally becomes stochastic. The inherent uncertainty of such applications makes the study
of stochastic optimization all the more significant, and demonstrating algorithms with reasonable
competitive ratios when one has knowledge of the underlying distributions illustrates the importance
of learning distributions in AI.
One can consider a simpler setting in which our decision at each time step is a binary choice. In
one such formulation, elements arrive in an online manner and we have to select a subset of them,
subject to certain combinatorial constraints. The simplest example of such a constraint is when we
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

