Conservative Dual Policy Optimization for Efficient
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning

Shenao Zhang
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
shenao@gatech.edu

Abstract
Provably efficient Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) based on optimism or posterior sampling (PSRL) is ensured to attain the global optimality
asymptotically by introducing the complexity measure of the model. However, the
complexity might grow exponentially for the simplest nonlinear models, where
global convergence is impossible within finite iterations. When the model suffers a
large generalization error, which is quantitatively measured by the model complexity, the uncertainty can be large. The sampled model that current policy is greedily
optimized upon will thus be unsettled, resulting in aggressive policy updates and
over-exploration. In this work, we propose Conservative Dual Policy Optimization
(CDPO) that involves a Referential Update and a Conservative Update. The policy
is first optimized under a reference model, which imitates the mechanism of PSRL
while offering more stability. A conservative range of randomness is guaranteed by
maximizing the expectation of model value. Without harmful sampling procedures,
CDPO can still achieve the same regret as PSRL. More importantly, CDPO enjoys
monotonic policy improvement and global optimality simultaneously. Empirical
results also validate the exploration efficiency of CDPO.

1

Introduction

Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) involves acquiring a model by interacting with the
environment and learning to make the optimal decision using the model [55, 32]. MBRL is appealing
due to its significantly reduced sample complexity compared to its model-free counterparts. However,
greedy model exploitation that assumes the model is sufficiently accurate lacks guarantees for global
optimality. The policies can be suboptimal and get stuck at local maxima even in simple tasks [10].
As such, several provably-efficient MBRL algorithms have been proposed. Based on the principle
of optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) [56, 49, 10], OFU-RL achieves the global optimality
by ensuring that the optimistically biased value is close to the real value in the long run. Based
on Thompson Sampling [62], Posterior Sampling RL (PSRL) [57, 42, 43] explores by greedily
optimizing the policy in an MDP which is sampled from the posterior distribution over MDPs.
Beyond finite MDPs, to obtain a general bound that permits sample efficiency in various cases, we
√
need to introduce additional complexity measure. For example, [49, 43] provide an e
O( dE T ) regret
for both OFU and PSRL with eluder dimension dE capturing how effectively the model generalizes.
However, it is recently shown [13, 33] that the eluder dimension for even the simplest nonlinear
models cannot be polynomially bounded. The effectiveness of the algorithms will thus be crippled.
The underlying reasons for such ineffectiveness are the aggressive policy updates and the overexploration issue. Specifically, when a nonlinear model is used to fit complex transition functions,
its generalizability will be poor compared to simple linear problems. If a random model is selected
from the large hypothesis, e.g., optimistically chosen or sampled from the posterior, it is “unsettled".
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

