Disentangling Causal Effects from Sets of
Interventions in the Presence of Unobserved
Confounders
Olivier Jeunen⇤
Amazon
Edinburgh, UK

Ciarán M. Gilligan-Lee
Spotify & UCL
London, UK

Rishabh Mehrotra⇤
Sharechat
London, UK

Mounia Lalmas
Spotify
London, UK

Abstract
The ability to answer causal questions is crucial in many domains, as causal inference allows one to understand the impact of interventions. In many applications,
only a single intervention is possible at a given time. However, in some important
areas, multiple interventions are concurrently applied. Disentangling the effects
of single interventions from jointly applied interventions is a challenging task—
especially as simultaneously applied interventions can interact. This problem is
made harder still by unobserved confounders, which influence both treatments
and outcome. We address this challenge by aiming to learn the effect of a singleintervention from both observational data and sets of interventions. We prove
that this is not generally possible, but provide identification proofs demonstrating
that it can be achieved under non-linear continuous structural causal models with
additive, multivariate Gaussian noise—even when unobserved confounders are
present. Importantly, we show how to incorporate observed covariates and learn
heterogeneous treatment effects. Based on the identifiability proofs, we provide an
algorithm that learns the causal model parameters by pooling data from different
regimes and jointly maximizing the combined likelihood. The effectiveness of our
method is empirically demonstrated on both synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

The ability to answer causal questions is crucial in science, medicine, economics, and beyond,
see [Gilligan-Lee, 2020] for a high-level overview. This is because causal inference allows one to
understand the impact of interventions.2 In many applications, only a single intervention is possible at
a given time, or interventions are applied one after another in a sequential manner. However, in some
important areas, multiple interventions are concurrently applied. For instance, in medicine, patients
that possess many commodities may have to be simultaneously treated with multiple prescriptions; in
computational advertising, people may be targeted by multiple concurrent campaigns; and in dietetics,
the nutritional content of meals can be considered a joint intervention from which we wish to learn
the effects of individual nutritional components.
Disentangling the effects of single interventions from jointly applied interventions is a challenging
task—especially as simultaneously applied interventions can interact, leading to consequences not
seen when considering single interventions separately. This problem is made harder still by the possible presence of unobserved confounders, which influence both treatments and outcome. This paper
addresses this challenge, by aiming to learn the effect of a single-intervention from both observational
⇤

Work done while author was at Spotify.
Causal inference also allows one to ask and answer counterfactual questions, see [Perov et al., 2020] and
[Vlontzos et al., 2022].
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

