Teacher Forcing Recovers Reward
Functions for Text Generation
Yongchang Hao† , Yuxin Liu† , Lili Mou†‡
Dept. Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
University of Alberta, Canada
‡
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Amii
{yongcha1,yliu17}@ualberta.ca, doublepower.mou@gmail.com

†

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been widely used in text generation to alleviate
the exposure bias issue or to utilize non-parallel datasets. The reward function plays
an important role in making RL training successful. However, previous reward
functions are typically task-specific and sparse, restricting the use of RL. In our
work, we propose a task-agnostic approach that derives a step-wise reward function
directly from a model trained with teacher forcing. We additionally propose a
simple modification to stabilize the RL training on non-parallel datasets with our
induced reward function. Empirical results show that our method outperforms selftraining and reward regression methods on several text generation tasks, confirming
the effectiveness of our reward function.1

1

Introduction

Teacher forcing [7] is the common training method for text generation models. Although this
practice has been widely applied [7, 13, 58], there are two main issues: 1) Teacher-forcing training
is data-hungry because parallel datasets are usually expensive to obtain. On the other hand, there
are numerous unlabeled, non-parallel datasets available. This poses an urge to efficiently exploit
non-parallel data. 2) Teacher forcing introduces a discrepancy between training and inference because
the model learns to predict the next word based on the partial groundtruth reference during training,
whereas in inference the model predicts the next word based on its self-generated previous words.
This undesired discrepancy is known as exposure bias [44, 6, 28, 59].
To address the first problem, a straightforward method is to generate pseudo-parallel sentences
for data augmentation, such as self-training [2], sequence-level knowledge distillation [23], and
back-translation [49]. However, the exposure bias remains in such cases.
To address the second problem, the model should be trained on self-generated sentences. Common
solutions are often based on reinforcement learning (RL). In text generation, however, there does not
exist a naturally defined reward function for RL. Researchers have proposed various heuristic scores
as the reward, such as BLEU [38] for translation and ROUGE [31] for summarization. These reward
functions are task-specific and not generalizable to other tasks. Further, these rewards require parallel
data, failing to address the first problem above; they are typically sparse (only non-zero at the end of
a sentence), making RL training difficult.
The goal of this paper is to address these two problems in one framework with a learned, dense reward
function. Our approach has two steps: we first train a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model on the
parallel dataset and induce a reward function from the model. Then, we apply RL on non-parallel
data based on our induced reward function.
1

Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/MANGA-UOFA/LMReward

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

