Intermediate Prototype Mining Transformer for
Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation

Yuanwei Liu1∗

Nian Liu2∗
Xiwen Yao1
Junwei Han1†
Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
1

{liuyuanwei9809, liunian228, yaoxiwen517, junweihan2010}@gmail.com

Abstract
Few-shot semantic segmentation aims to segment the target objects in query under
the condition of a few annotated support images. Most previous works strive
to mine more effective category information from the support to match with the
corresponding objects in query. However, they all ignored the category information
gap between query and support images. If the objects in them show large intraclass diversity, forcibly migrating the category information from the support to
the query is ineffective. To solve this problem, we are the first to introduce an
intermediate prototype for mining both deterministic category information from the
support and adaptive category knowledge from the query. Specifically, we design
an Intermediate Prototype Mining Transformer (IPMT) to learn the prototype in
an iterative way. In each IPMT layer, we propagate the object information in both
support and query features to the prototype and then use it to activate the query
feature map. By conducting this process iteratively, both the intermediate prototype
and the query feature can be progressively improved. At last, the final query feature
is used to yield precise segmentation prediction. Extensive experiments on both
PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i datasets clearly verify the effectiveness of our IPMT
and show that it outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.
Code is available at https://github.com/LIUYUANWEI98/IPMT

1

Introduction

Recent great progress on computer vision rely heavily on a large amount of annotated data, the
collecting of which is a time-consuming and labor-intensive work. To solve this problem, few-shot
learning is proposed to learn a model that can be generalized to novel categories with only a few
annotated images. This setting is also closer to human learning habits which can learn knowledge
from scarce annotated examples and identify new categories quickly.
In this paper, we focus on the few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) task which aims to segment
novel objects in the query image with a few annotated support samples. Currently, a lot of works have
been proposed for FSS and many of them are based on prototype learning. These methods [39, 28, 12]
extract prototypes from the support set to represent the category information and then match them
with the query features in a matching network to perform segmentation. Other graph-based methods
[38, 30, 35] and transformer-based methods [19, 40] share the similar high-level idea to convey the
category information from the support set to the query image.
However, these methods all rely heavily on the category information extracted from the support
set. Although it provides deterministic category information guidance, there may exist inherent
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

