NUWA-Infinity: Autoregressive over Autoregressive
Generation for Infinite Visual Synthesis

Jian Liang1∗ Chenfei Wu2∗ Xiaowei Hu3 Zhe Gan3 Jianfeng Wang3
Lijuan Wang3 Zicheng Liu3 Yuejian Fang1† Nan Duan2†
1
Peking University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Microsoft Azure AI
{j.liang@stu,fangyj@ss}.pku.edu.cn
{chewu,xiaowei.hu,zhe.gan,jianfw,lijuanw,zliu,nanduan}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Infinite visual synthesis aims to generate high-resolution images, long-duration
videos, and even visual generation of infinite size. Some recent work tried to
solve this task by first dividing data into processable patches and then training the
models on them without considering the dependencies between patches. However,
since they fail to model global dependencies between patches, the quality and
consistency of the generation can be limited. To address this issue, we propose
NUWA-Infinity, a patch-level “render-and-optimize” strategy for infinite visual
synthesis. Given a large image or a long video, NUWA-Infinity first splits it into
non-overlapping patches and uses the ordered patch chain as a complete training
instance, a rendering model autoregressively predicts each patch based on its
contexts. Once a patch is predicted, it is optimized immediately and its hidden
states are saved as contexts for the next “render-and-optimize” process. This brings
two advantages: (i) The autoregressive rendering process with information transfer
between contexts provides an implicit global probabilistic distribution modeling;
(ii) The timely optimization process alleviates the optimization stress of the model
and helps convergence. Based on the above designs, NUWA-Infinity shows a
strong synthesis ability on high-resolution images and long-duration videos. The
homepage link is https://nuwa-infinity.microsoft.com.

1

Introduction

The field of deep visual synthesis has witnessed great advances in recent years, with a notable
trend of generating images from low to high resolutions. Specifically, many works have shifted from
generating images with resolution of 256×256 [25, 36, 10, 37] to 512×512 [7] and 1024×1024 [24],
or even infinite ones of 256 × ∞ [29] and 512 × ∞ [17, 2]. The same trend is witnessed in the
video field as well, as the number of supported frames is increased from 25 [35] and 48 [4] to even
infinity [18]. By increasing the spatial resolution and the number of temporal frames to infinity, these
models have shown great visual quality with both high fidelity and creativity.
To support “infinity”, most works follow the divide and conquer strategy to first divide a large image
into several processable patches and then train them in a separate way. GAN-based models [32, 29] attempt to divide large images into several patches and optimize each of them from global or coordinate
latents separately. Since different regions have no explicit dependency, these models struggle to merge
different patches during inference and can easily lead to inconsistent results. To address this issue,
auto-regressive models [8, 2] incorporate a sliding window to make connections between different
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

