Reinforcement Learning in a Birth and Death Process:
Breaking the Dependence on the State Space

Jonatha Anselmi
jonatha.anselmi@inria.fr
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France.
Bruno Gaujal
bruno.gaujal@inria.fr
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France.
Louis Sébastien Rebuffi
louis-sebastien.rebuffi@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France.

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the regret of undiscounted reinforcement learning in MDPs
with a birth and death structure. Specifically, we consider a controlled queue with
impatient jobs and the main objective is to optimize a trade-off between energy
consumption and user-perceived performance. Within this setting, the diameter D
of the MDP is Ω(S S ), where S is the number of states. Therefore,
the existing
√
lower and upper bounds on the regret at time T , of order O( DSAT ) for MDPs
with S states and A actions, may suggest that reinforcement learning is inefficient
here. In our main result however, we exploit the structure of our MDPs to show that
the regret of a slightly-tweaked version
of the classical learning algorithm U CRL 2
√
is in fact upper bounded by Õ( E2 AT ) where E2 is related to the weighted
second moment of the stationary measure of a reference policy. Importantly, E2 is
bounded independently of S. Thus, our bound is asymptotically independent of
the number of states and of the diameter. This result is based on a careful study of
the number of visits performed by the learning algorithm to the states of the MDP,
which is highly non-uniform.

1

Introduction

In the context of undiscounted reinforcement learning in Markov decision processes (MDPs), it has
been shown in the seminal work [11] that√the total regret of any learning algorithm with respect to an
optimal policy is lower bounded by Ω( DSAT ), where S is the number of states, A the number
of actions, T the time horizon and D the diameter of the MDP. Roughly speaking, the diameter is
the mean time to move from any state s to any other state s′ within an appropriate policy. In the
literature, several efforts have been dedicated to approach this
√ lower bound. As√a result, learning
Õ(DS
algorithms
have
been
developed
with
a
total
regret
of
AT ) in [11], Õ(D SAT ) in [3] and
√
even Õ( DSAT ) according to [21, 25]. These results may give a sense of optimality since the
lower bound is attained up to some universal constant. However, lower bounds are based on the
minimax approach, which relies on the worst possible MDP with given D, A and S. This means
that when a reinforcement learning algorithm is used on a given MDP, one can expect a much better
performance.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

