Robustness to Unbounded Smoothness of Generalized
SignSGD
Michael Crawshaw⇤
Mingrui Liu⇤
Francesco Orabona⇤
George Mason University
George Mason University
Boston University
mcrawsha@gmu.edu
mingruil@gmu.edu
francesco@orabona.com
Wei Zhang⇤
Zhenxun Zhuang⇤
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Meta Platforms, Inc.
weiz@us.ibm.com
oldboymls@gmail.com

Abstract
Traditional analyses in non-convex optimization typically rely on the smoothness
assumption, namely requiring the gradients to be Lipschitz. However, recent
evidence shows that this smoothness condition does not capture the properties of
some deep learning objective functions, including the ones involving Recurrent
Neural Networks and LSTMs. Instead, they satisfy a much more relaxed condition,
with potentially unbounded smoothness. Under this relaxed assumption, it has been
theoretically and empirically shown that the gradient-clipped SGD has an advantage
over the vanilla one. In this paper, we show that clipping is not indispensable for
Adam-type algorithms in tackling such scenarios: we theoretically prove that a
generalized SignSGD algorithm can obtain similar convergence rates as SGD with
clipping but does not need explicit clipping at all. This family of algorithms on
one end recovers SignSGD and on the other end closely resembles the popular
Adam algorithm. Our analysis underlines the critical role that momentum plays
in analyzing SignSGD-type and Adam-type algorithms: it not only reduces the
effects of noise, thus removing the need for large mini-batch in previous analyses of
SignSGD-type algorithms, but it also substantially reduces the effects of unbounded
smoothness and gradient norms. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the
first one showing the benefit of Adam-type algorithms compared with non-adaptive
gradient algorithms such as gradient descent in the unbounded smoothness setting.
We also compare these algorithms with popular optimizers on a set of deep learning
tasks, observing that we can match the performance of Adam while beating others.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a surge in non-convex machine learning models, with a focus on deep
neural networks [27]. DNNs have achieved tremendous progress in a variety of tasks, including
computer vision [26, 18, 23], natural language processing [11, 50], and a lot more. Despite their huge
empirical success, the theoretical analyses of non-convex optimization [21] prove to be fundamentally
more challenging than the established convex optimization theory [4]. Among the numerous literature,
many of them assume smoothness of the objective function, namely requiring the gradients to be
Lipschitz. Under this scenario, past works have succeeded in proving the convergence rates for a
number of algorithms, e.g., Stochastic Gradient Descent [14], AdaGrad [52, 30], and STORM [9, 7].
Nevertheless, it was recently observed that the smoothness assumption does not capture the training
of LSTMs [20]: the Hessian can grow with the size of the gradients [56]. Inspired by this, Zhang et
*Authors in alphabetical order.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

