Sequence Model Imitation Learning
with Unobserved Contexts
Gokul Swamy
Carnegie Mellon University
gswamy@cmu.edu

Sanjiban Choudhury
Cornell University
sanjibanc@cornell.edu

J. Andrew Bagnell
Aurora Innovation and Carnegie Mellon University
dbagnell@ri.cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
We consider imitation learning problems where the learner’s ability to mimic
the expert increases throughout the course of an episode as more information
is revealed. One example of this is when the expert has access to privileged
information: while the learner might not be able to accurately reproduce expert
behavior early on in an episode, by considering the entire history of states and
actions, they might be able to eventually identify the hidden context and act as
the expert would. We prove that on-policy imitation learning algorithms (with or
without access to a queryable expert) are better equipped to handle these sorts of
asymptotically realizable problems than off-policy methods. This is because onpolicy algorithms provably learn to recover from their initially suboptimal actions,
while off-policy methods treat their suboptimal past actions as though they came
from the expert. This often manifests as a latching behavior: a naive repetition of
past actions. We conduct experiments in a toy bandit domain that show that there
exist sharp phase transitions of whether off-policy approaches are able to match
expert performance asymptotically, in contrast to the uniformly good performance
of on-policy approaches. We demonstrate that on several continuous control tasks,
on-policy approaches are able to use history to identify the context while off-policy
approaches actually perform worse when given access to history.

1

Introduction

An unstated assumption in much of the work in imitation learning (IL) is that the learner and the
expert have access to the same state information. With powerful enough statistical models, this
assumption places us in the realizable setting – i.e. the imitator can actually behave like the expert.
In practice however, an expert might have more information than the learner does. For example,
an expert policy might be trained in simulation with privileged access to state before being used to
supervise a learner policy that only has access to a subset of features. This recipe has enjoyed success
in domains from motion planning with obstacles [Choudhury et al., 2018], to autonomous driving
[Chen et al., 2019], to legged locomotion [Lee et al., 2020, Kumar et al., 2021].
Recent theoretical work has established “no-go” results for successfully imitating an expert that has
access to more information [Zhang et al., 2020, Kumor et al., 2021]. The core of their arguments
is that without seeing some feature that influences expert behavior but is not echoed elsewhere
in the state, the learner might not be able to properly ground the expert actions in the observed
state. In causal inference terms, this hidden information acts as an unobserved confounder which
prevents identification of the desired causal estimand (the expert action). Despite these results,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

