Self-Aware Personalized Federated Learning
Huili Chen, Jie Ding, Eric Tramel, Shuang Wu, Anit Kumar Sahu, Salman Avestimehr, Tao Zhang
Alexa AI, Amazon
{chehuili,jiedi,eritrame,wushuan,anitsah,avestime,taozhng}@amazon.com

Abstract
In the context of personalized federated learning (FL), the critical challenge is to
balance local model improvement and global model tuning when the personal and
global objectives may not be exactly aligned. Inspired by Bayesian hierarchical
models, we develop a self-aware personalized FL method where each client can
automatically balance the training of its local personal model and the global
model that implicitly contributes to other clients’ training. Such a balance is
derived from the inter-client and intra-client uncertainty quantification. A larger
inter-client variation implies more personalization is needed. Correspondingly,
our method uses uncertainty-driven local training steps and aggregation rule
instead of conventional local fine-tuning and sample size-based aggregation. With
experimental studies on synthetic data, Amazon Alexa audio data, and public
datasets such as MNIST, FEMNIST and Sent140, we show that our proposed
method can achieve significantly improved personalization performance compared
with the existing counterparts.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) (Konevcny et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017) is transforming machine learning (ML) ecosystems from “centralized in-the-cloud” to “distributed across-clients,” to potentially
leverage the computation and data resources of billions of edge devices (Lim et al., 2020), without
raw data leaving the devices. As a distributed ML framework, FL aims to train a global model that
aggregates gradients or model updates from the participating edge devices. Recent research in FL
has significantly extended its original scope to address the emerging concern of personalization, a
broad term that often refers to an FL system that accommodates client-specific data distributions of
interest (Ding et al., 2022).
In particular, each client in a personalized FL system holds data that can be potentially non-identically
and independently distributed (non-IID). For example, smart edge devices at different houses may
collect audio data (Purington et al., 2017) of heterogeneous nature due to, e.g., accents, background
noises, and house structures. Each device hopes to improve its on-device model through personalized
FL without transmitting sensitive data.
While the practical benefits of personalization have been widely acknowledged, its theoretical
understanding remains unclear. Existing works on personalized FL often derive algorithms based on
a pre-specified optimization formulation, but explanations regarding the formulation or its tuning
parameters rarely go beyond heuristic statements.
In this work, we take a different approach. Instead of specifying an optimization problem to solve,
we start with a toy example and develop insights into the nature of personalization from a statistical
uncertainty perspective. We aim to answer the following critical questions regarding personalized FL.
(Q1) The lower-bound baselines of personalized FL can be obtained in two cases, i.e., each client
performs local training without FL, or all clients participate in conventional FL training. However,
the upper-bound for the client is unclear.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

