A General Framework for Auditing Differentially
Private Machine Learning
Fred Lu
Booz Allen Hamilton
Maya Fuchs
Booz Allen Hamilton
Edward Raff
Booz Allen Hamilton

Joseph Munoz
Booz Allen Hamilton

Tyler LeBlond
Booz Allen Hamilton

Elliott Zaresky-Williams
Booz Allen Hamilton

Francis Ferraro
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Brian Testa⇤
Air Force Research Laboratory

Abstract
We present a framework to statistically audit the privacy guarantee conferred by a
differentially private machine learner in practice. While previous works have taken
steps toward evaluating privacy loss through poisoning attacks or membership
inference, they have been tailored to specific models or have demonstrated low
statistical power. Our work develops a general methodology to empirically evaluate
the privacy of differentially private machine learning implementations, combining
improved privacy search and verification methods with a toolkit of influence-based
poisoning attacks. We demonstrate significantly improved auditing power over
previous approaches on a variety of models including logistic regression, Naive
Bayes, and random forest. Our method can be used to detect privacy violations due
to implementation errors or misuse. When violations are not present, it can aid in
understanding the amount of information that can be leaked from a given dataset,
algorithm, and privacy specification.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) is increasingly deployed in contexts where the privacy of the data used to
build the model is of concern. ML models are capable of ingesting enormous quantities of data
in order to determine meaningful predictive patterns. When such models are built on potentially
sensitive inputs such as healthcare [1] or financial data [2], it becomes important to determine to
what extent information from the training dataset can be inferred from the model. Such information
can be of personal interest when the identity of a data contributor may be compromised based on
involvement in the data collection process [3, 4], but it can also lead to regulatory concern about
whether a model trained on private data should itself be considered private [5].
Differentially private (DP) machine learning is a theoretically rigorous approach that provides a worstcase privacy guarantee for ML algorithms [6]. Specifically, it provides a mathematical guarantee
that the distribution of possible output models based on the input dataset is not significantly altered
whether an individual data point is included in the training set or not. This is accomplished by
randomizing the output model in a specific manner so that the distributions of the model trained
⇤

Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited. PA #: AFRL-2022-3247

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

