A theory of learning with constrained
weight-distribution

Weishun Zhong
Harvard and MIT
wszhong@mit.edu
Daniel D Lee
Cornell Tech
ddl46@cornell.edu

Ben Sorscher
Stanford University
bsorsch@stanford.edu
Haim Sompolinsky
Harvard and Hebrew University
hsompolinsky@mcb.harvard.edu

Abstract
A central question in computational neuroscience is how structure determines
function in neural networks. Recent large-scale connectomic studies have started
to provide a wealth of structural information such as the distribution of excitatory/inhibitory cell and synapse types as well as the distribution of synaptic weights
in the brains of different species. The emerging high-quality large structural
datasets raise the question of what general functional principles can be gleaned
from them. Motivated by this question, we developed a statistical mechanical
theory of learning in neural networks that incorporates structural information as
constraints. We derived an analytical solution for the memory capacity of the
perceptron, a basic feedforward model of supervised learning, with constraint on
the distribution of its weights. Interestingly, the theory predicts that the reduction
in capacity due to the constrained weight-distribution is related to the Wasserstein
distance between the cumulative distribution function of the constrained weights
and that of the standard normal distribution. To test the theoretical predictions,
we use optimal transport theory and information geometry to develop an SGDbased algorithm to find weights that simultaneously learn the input-output task and
satisfy the distribution constraint. We show that training in our algorithm can be
interpreted as geodesic flows in the Wasserstein space of probability distributions.
We further developed a statistical mechanical theory for teacher-student perceptron
rule learning and ask for the best way for the student to incorporate prior knowledge of the rule (i.e., the teacher). Our theory shows that it is beneficial for the
learner to adopt different prior weight distributions during learning, and shows that
distribution-constrained learning outperforms unconstrained and sign-constrained
learning. Our theory and algorithm provide novel strategies for incorporating prior
knowledge about weights into learning, and reveal a powerful connection between
structure and function in neural networks.

1

Introduction

Learning and memory are thought to take place at the microscopic level by modifications of synaptic
connections. Unlike learning in artificial neural networks, synaptic plasticity in the brain operates
under structural biological constraints. Theoretical efforts to incorporate some of these constraints
have focused largely on the degree of connectivity [17, 35] and the constraints on the sign of the
synapses (Excitatory vs. Inhibitory) [4, 16], but few include additional features of synaptic weight
distributions observed in the brain [11]. More generally, recent large-scale connectomic studies
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

