A Differentiable Semantic Metric Approximation in
Probabilistic Embedding for Cross-Modal Retrieval

Hao Li1
18th.leolee@gmail.com

Jingkuan Song1∗
jingkuan.song@gmail.com

Pengpeng Zeng1
is.pengpengzeng@gmail.com
1

Lianli Gao1
lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn

Haonan Zhang1
zchiowal@gmail.com

Gongfu Li2
gongfuli@tencent.com

Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Tencent Wechat Group, Shenzhen, China.

Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval aims to build correspondence between multiple modalities by
learning a common representation space. Typically, an image can match multiple
texts semantically and vice versa, which significantly increases the difficulty of
this task. To address this problem, probabilistic embedding is proposed to quantify
these many-to-many relationships. However, existing datasets (e.g., MS-COCO)
and metrics (e.g., Recall@K) cannot fully represent these diversity correspondences
due to non-exhaustive annotations. Based on this observation, we utilize semantic
correlation computed by CIDEr to find the potential correspondences. Then we
present an effective metric, named Average Semantic Precision (ASP), which can
measure the ranking precision of semantic correlation for retrieval sets. Additionally, we introduce a novel and concise objective, coined Differentiable ASP
Approximation (DAA). Concretely, DAA can optimize ASP directly by making the
ranking function of ASP differentiable through a sigmoid function. To verify the
effectiveness of our approach, extensive experiments are conducted on MS-COCO,
CUB Captions, and Flickr30K, which are commonly used in cross-modal retrieval.
The results show that our approach obtains superior performance over the stateof-the-art approaches on all metrics. The code and trained models are released at
https://github.com/leolee99/2022-NeurIPS-DAA.

1

Introduction

Vision-language approaches have demonstrated success in various multimodal tasks, such as video
question answering [57], image captioning [56], and text-to-image generation [51]. As one of the
most fundamental multimodal tasks, image-text retrieval is in great demand due to the explosive
increase of multimedia data in social activities. Given an image or a text as a query, it aims to
retrieve the most relevant items in the database of other modalities. Although significant progress has
been made [21, 12, 43, 37, 55, 26, 25], this task remains challenging since the heterogeneity across
different modalities. To tackle this problem, most existing methods map the query and retrieval items
from distinct modalities into a common embedding space, which allows computing the similarity
between different modalities.
Deep neural networks have achieved great success in various applications [58, 53]. In cross-modal
retrieval, a line of methods [21, 39, 12] extracts representations of images and texts by constructing a
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

