Anytime-Valid Inference For Multinomial Count Data

Michael Lindon
Netflix
michael.s.lindon@gmail.com

Alan Malek
alan.malek@gmail.com

Abstract
Many experiments compare count outcomes among treatment groups. Examples
include the number of successful signups in conversion rate experiments or the
number of errors produced by software versions in canary tests. Observations
typically arrive in a sequence and practitioners wish to continuously monitor
their experiments, sequentially testing hypotheses while maintaining Type I error probabilities under optional stopping and continuation. These goals are frequently complicated in practice by non-stationary time dynamics. We provide
practical solutions through sequential tests of multinomial hypotheses, hypotheses
about many inhomogeneous Bernoulli processes and hypotheses about many timeinhomogeneous Poisson counting processes. For estimation, we further provide
confidence sequences for multinomial probability vectors, all contrasts among
probabilities of inhomogeneous Bernoulli processes and all contrasts among intensities of time-inhomogeneous Poisson counting processes. Together, these provide
an “anytime-valid” inference framework for a wide variety of experiments dealing
with count outcomes, which we illustrate with several industry applications.

1

Introduction

Many experiments compare count outcomes among treatment groups (arms). For example, in online
conversion experiments we seek the treatment group that achieves the greatest number of conversions
(signups, purchases etc...). In software experiments, we seek the software version that produces
the fewest number of errors [Lindon et al., 2022a, Kuo and Yang, 1996]. These experiments are
frequently complicated in practice by time-variability over the course of the experiment caused by
uncontrollable external factors. The Bernoulli success probability of conversion is often time-varying
due to uncontrollable product changes and market conditions. The instantaneous rate of software
errors is time-varying due to time-varying usage patterns of the software application among users.
Fortunately, the time-variability is often common to all arms of the experiment. Therefore, the count
outcomes among arms should be in some sense comparable under the null hypothesis that all arms
behave equally.
In testing these hypotheses, it is desirable if a statistical test can both (i) detect large treatment effects
early, and (ii) detect small treatment effects eventually. If there is a large negative effect then it is
important to end the experiment as soon as possible to reduce risk to the experimental units and/or
company. However, it is also important to detect small negative effects, as these can accumulate over
time. Classical fixed-n tests cannot satisfy both of these objectives, as there is only one opportunity
to perform the test. Performing the test earlier achieves objective (i), but doesn’t achieve objective
(ii) as it may be underpowered. Performing the test later achieves objective (ii), but doesn’t achieve
objective (i) and treatments may affect experimental units negatively for lengthy amounts of time.
For this reason we provide sequential tests that allow experiments to be continuously monitored. We
have included a discussion of fixed-n testing vs sequential testing and corresponding literature review
in the appendix.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

