Self-Consistent Dynamical Field Theory of Kernel
Evolution in Wide Neural Networks
Blake Bordelon & Cengiz Pehlevan
John Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Center for Brain Science
Harvard University
Cambridge MA, 02138
blake_bordelon@g.harvard.edu, cpehlevan@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
We analyze feature learning in infinite-width neural networks trained with gradient
flow through a self-consistent dynamical field theory. We construct a collection
of deterministic dynamical order parameters which are inner-product kernels for
hidden unit activations and gradients in each layer at pairs of time points, providing
a reduced description of network activity through training. These kernel order
parameters collectively define the hidden layer activation distribution, the evolution
of the neural tangent kernel, and consequently output predictions. We show that the
field theory derivation recovers the recursive stochastic process of infinite-width
feature learning networks obtained from Yang & Hu with Tensor Programs [1].
For deep linear networks, these kernels satisfy a set of algebraic matrix equations.
For nonlinear networks, we provide an alternating sampling procedure to selfconsistently solve for the kernel order parameters. We provide comparisons of the
self-consistent solution to various approximation schemes including the static NTK
approximation, gradient independence assumption, and leading order perturbation
theory, showing that each of these approximations can break down in regimes
where general self-consistent solutions still provide an accurate description. Lastly,
we provide experiments in more realistic settings which demonstrate that the loss
and kernel dynamics of CNNs at fixed feature learning strength is preserved across
different widths on a CIFAR classification task.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has emerged as a successful paradigm for solving challenging machine learning and
computational problems across a variety of domains [2, 3]. However, theoretical understanding
of the training and generalization of modern deep learning methods lags behind current practice.
Ideally, a theory of deep learning would be analytically tractable, efficiently computable, capable
of predicting network performance and internal features that the network learns, and interpretable
through a reduced description involving desirably initialization-independent quantities.
Several recent theoretical advances have fruitfully considered the idealization of wide neural networks,
where the number of hidden units in each layer is taken to be large. Under certain parameterization,
Bayesian neural networks and gradient descent trained networks converge to gaussian processes
(NNGPs) [4–6] and neural tangent kernel (NTK) machines [7–9] in their respective infinite-width
limits. These limits provide both analytic tractability as well as detailed training and generalization
analysis [10–17]. However, in this limit, with these parameterizations, data representations are fixed
and do not adapt to data, termed the lazy regime of NN training, to contrast it from the rich regime
where NNs significantly alter their internal features while fitting the data [18, 19]. The fact that the
representation of data is fixed renders these kernel-based theories incapable of explaining feature
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

