CoupAlign: Coupling Word-Pixel with Sentence-Mask
Alignments for Referring Image Segmentation

Zicheng Zhang1∗ Yi Zhu2∗ Jianzhuang Liu2

Xiaodan Liang3

Ke Wei1†

1

2

Xi’an Jiaotong University
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
3
Sun Yat-sen University

zzc1999@stu.xjtu.edu.cn {zhuyi36,liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com
xdliang328@gmail.com wei.ke@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Referring image segmentation aims at localizing all pixels of the visual objects
described by a natural language sentence. Previous works learn to straightforwardly
align the sentence embedding and pixel-level embedding for highlighting the
referred objects, but ignore the semantic consistency of pixels within the same
object, leading to incomplete masks and localization errors in predictions. To
tackle this problem, we propose CoupAlign, a simple yet effective multi-level
visual-semantic alignment method, to couple sentence-mask alignment with wordpixel alignment to enforce object mask constraint for achieving more accurate
localization and segmentation. Specifically, the Word-Pixel Alignment (WPA)
module performs early fusion of linguistic and pixel-level features in intermediate
layers of the vision and language encoders. Based on the word-pixel aligned
embedding, a set of mask proposals are generated to hypothesize possible objects.
Then in the Sentence-Mask Alignment (SMA) module, the masks are weighted
by the sentence embedding to localize the referred object, and finally projected
back to aggregate the pixels for the target. To further enhance the learning of the
two alignment modules, an auxiliary loss is designed to contrast the foreground
and background pixels. By hierarchically aligning pixels and masks with linguistic
features, our CoupAlign captures the pixel coherence at both visual and semantic
levels, thus generating more accurate predictions. Extensive experiments on popular
datasets (e.g., RefCOCO and G-Ref) show that our method achieves consistent
improvements over state-of-the-art methods, e.g., about 2% oIoU increase on the
validation and testing set of RefCOCO. Especially, CoupAlign has remarkable
ability in distinguishing the target from multiple objects of the same class. Code
will be available at https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/
research/cv/CoupAlign.

1

Introduction

Taking an image and a natural language sentence as input, a referring image segmentation (RIS)
model is required to predict a mask for the object described by the sentence. Beyond semantic
segmentation which assigns each pixel in an image with a label from a fixed word set, referring image
segmentation needs to localize the object pixels indicated by the language expression, which is of
arbitrary length and involves an open-world vocabulary, such as object names, attributes, positions,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

