EZNAS: Evolving Zero-Cost Proxies For Neural
Architecture Scoring

Yash Akhauri1

J. Pablo Muñoz2 Nilesh Jain2 Ravi Iyer2
Cornell University 2 Intel Labs
ya255@cornell.edu
{pablo.munoz,nilesh.jain,ravishanker.iyer}@intel.com
1

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has significantly improved productivity in
the design and deployment of neural networks (NN). As NAS typically evaluates
multiple models by training them partially or completely, the improved productivity
comes at the cost of significant carbon footprint. To alleviate this expensive training
routine, zero-shot/cost proxies analyze an NN at initialization to generate a score,
which correlates highly with its true accuracy. Zero-cost proxies are currently
designed by experts conducting multiple cycles of empirical testing on possible
algorithms, datasets, and neural architecture design spaces. This experimentation
lowers productivity and is an unsustainable approach towards zero-cost proxy
design as deep learning use-cases diversify in nature. Additionally, existing zerocost proxies fail to generalize across neural architecture design spaces. In this
paper, we propose a genetic programming framework to automate the discovery
of zero-cost proxies for neural architecture scoring. Our methodology efficiently
discovers an interpretable and generalizable zero-cost proxy that gives state of
the art score-accuracy correlation on all datasets and search spaces of NASBench201 and Network Design Spaces (NDS). We believe that this research indicates a
promising direction towards automatically discovering zero-cost proxies that can
work across network architecture design spaces, datasets, and tasks.

1

Introduction

The manual trial-and-error method of designing neural network architectures and assessing whether
it meets performance and accuracy requirements is not scalable to complex neural architecture design
spaces and hardware deployment scenarios. Neural Architecture Search is intended to address this
problem of iterative and expensive design by automating the search of neural network architectures.
Enabling such automation requires accurate and efficient prediction of the accuracy of candidate
neural network architectures. The process of predicting the accuracy often involves partial or complete
training of many neural network architectures in the search space. Such methods are infeasible for
very large architecture design spaces, as considerable sampling and training of neural networks
would be required to sufficiently describe the entire design space. Popular NAS techniques often
involve generating and training neural network architectures and using this accuracy to train accuracy
predictors to serve as feedback in the search algorithm. This architecture generation and feedback
methodology can be leveraged by algorithms such as reinforcement learning (Luo et al. [2019]) and
evolutionary algorithms (Real et al. [2019]). One-shot methods (Cai et al. [2019, 2020], Xie et al.
[2020], Yang et al. [2020], Liu et al. [2019]) maintain a super-network, from which sub-networks are
sampled. The weights are shared between the sub-networks which reduces NAS cost as there are
lesser parameters to train.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

