R E FACTOR GNN S: Revisiting Factorisation-based
Models from a Message-Passing Perspective

Yihong Chenàá

Pushkar Mishraá
Luca Franceschiâ∗
Pasquale Minerviniàæ*
à
àá
Pontus Stenetorp
Sebastian Riedel
à
UCL Centre for Artificial Intelligence, London, United Kingdom
á
Meta AI, London, United Kingdom
â
Amazon Web Services, Berlin, Germany
æ
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
{yihong.chen, p.stenetorp, s.riedel}@cs.ucl.ac.uk
pushkarmishra@meta.com franuluc@amazon.de p.minervini@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Factorisation-based Models (FMs), such as DistMult, have enjoyed enduring success for Knowledge Graph Completion (KGC) tasks, often outperforming Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs). However, unlike GNNs, FMs struggle to incorporate
node features and generalise to unseen nodes in inductive settings. Our work
bridges the gap between FMs and GNNs by proposing R E FACTOR GNN S. This
new architecture draws upon both modelling paradigms, which previously were
largely thought of as disjoint. Concretely, using a message-passing formalism,
we show how FMs can be cast as GNNs by reformulating the gradient descent
procedure as message-passing operations, which forms the basis of our R E FACTOR
GNN S. Across a multitude of well-established KGC benchmarks, our R E FACTOR
GNN S achieve comparable transductive performance to FMs, and state-of-the-art
inductive performance while using an order of magnitude fewer parameters.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning on graphs has attracted significant attention due to the abundance of graph-structured data and developments in graph learning algorithms. Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) have shown state-of-the-art performance for many graph-related problems, such as
node classification [16] and graph classification [7]. Their main advantage is that they can easily be
applied in an inductive setting: generalising to new nodes and graphs without re-training. However,
despite many attempts at applying GNNs for multi-relational link prediction tasks such as Knowledge
Graph Completion [26], there are still few positive results compared to factorisation-based models (FMs) [45, 39]. As it stands, GNNs either – after resolving reproducibility concerns – deliver
significantly lower performance [23, 36] or yield negligible performance gains at the cost of highly
sophisticated architecture designs [43]. A notable exception is NBFNet [49], but even here improvements come at the price of high computational inference costs compared to FMs. Furthermore, it is
unclear how NBFNet could incorporate node features, which – as we will see in this work – leads
to remarkably lower performance in an inductive setting. On the other hand FMs, despite being a
simpler architecture, have been found to be very accurate for knowledge graph completion when
coupled with appropriate training strategies [30] and training objectives [17, 2]. However, they also
come with shortcomings in that they, unlike GNNs, can not be applied in an inductive setting.
∗

Work done while at UCL.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

