Reinforcement Learning with a Terminator

Guy Tennenholtz ∗ †
guytenn@gmail.com
Uri Shalit ∗

Nadav Merlis ∗

Gal Chechik † ‡

Lior Shani ∗

Shie Mannor ∗ †

Assaf Hallak †

Gal Dalal †

Abstract
We present the problem of reinforcement learning with exogenous termination.
We define the Termination Markov Decision Process (TerMDP), an extension
of the MDP framework, in which episodes may be interrupted by an external
non-Markovian observer. This formulation accounts for numerous real-world
situations, such as a human interrupting an autonomous driving agent for reasons
of discomfort. We learn the parameters of the TerMDP and leverage the structure
of the estimation problem to provide state-wise confidence bounds. We use these
to construct a provably-efficient algorithm, which accounts for termination, and
bound its regret. Motivated by our theoretical analysis, we design and implement a
scalable approach, which combines optimism (w.r.t. termination) and a dynamic
discount factor, incorporating the termination probability. We deploy our method
on high-dimensional driving and MinAtar benchmarks. Additionally, we test
our approach on human data in a driving setting. Our results demonstrate fast
convergence and significant improvement over various baseline approaches.

1

Introduction

The field of reinforcement learning (RL) involves an agent interacting with an environment, maximizing a cumulative reward [Puterman, 2014]. As RL becomes more instrumental in real-world
applications [Lazic et al., 2018, Kiran et al., 2021, Mandhane et al., 2022], exogenous inputs beyond
the prespecified reward pose a new challenge. Particularly, an external authority (e.g., a human
operator) may decide to terminate the agent’s operation when it detects undesirable behavior. In this
work, we generalize the basic RL framework to accommodate such external feedback.
We propose a generalization of the standard Markov Decision Process (MDP), in which external
termination can occur due to a non-Markovian observer. When terminated, the agent stops interacting
with the environment and cannot collect additional rewards. This setup describes various real-world
scenarios, including: passengers in autonomous vehicles [Le Vine et al., 2015, Zhu et al., 2020],
users in recommender systems [Wang et al., 2009], employees terminating their contracts (churn
management) [Sisodia et al., 2017], and operators in factories; particularly, datacenter cooling systems,
or other safety-critical systems, which require constant monitoring and rare, though critical, human
takeovers [Modares et al., 2015]. In these tasks, human preferences, incentives, and constraints play
a central role, and designing a reward function to capture them may be highly complex. Instead, we
propose to let the agent itself learn these latent human utilities by leveraging the termination events.
We introduce the Termination Markov Decision Process (TerMDP), depicted in Figure 1. We consider
a terminator, observing the agent, which aggregates penalties w.r.t. a predetermined, state-actiondependent, yet unknown, cost function. As the agent progresses, unfavorable states accumulate costs
∗

Technion, Israel institute of technology
Nvidia Research, Israel
‡
Bar Ilan University, Israel
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

