Make Some Noise: Reliable and Efficient Single-Step
Adversarial Training

Pau de Jorge ∗
University of Oxford
NAVER LABS Europe

Adel Bibi
University of Oxford

Philip H. S. Torr
University of Oxford

Riccardo Volpi
NAVER LABS Europe

Grégory Rogez
NAVER LABS Europe

Amartya Sanyal
ETH Zürich
ETH AI Center

Puneet K. Dokania
University of Oxford
Five AI Ltd.

Abstract
Recently, Wong et al. [35] showed that adversarial training with single-step FGSM
leads to a characteristic failure mode named Catastrophic Overfitting (CO), in
which a model becomes suddenly vulnerable to multi-step attacks. Experimentally
they showed that simply adding a random perturbation prior to FGSM (RS-FGSM)
could prevent CO. However, Andriushchenko and Flammarion [1] observed that
RS-FGSM still leads to CO for larger perturbations, and proposed a computationally
expensive regularizer (GradAlign) to avoid it. In this work, we methodically revisit
the role of noise and clipping in single-step adversarial training. Contrary to
previous intuitions, we find that using a stronger noise around the clean sample
combined with not clipping is highly effective in avoiding CO for large perturbation
radii. We then propose Noise-FGSM (N-FGSM) that, while providing the benefits
of single-step adversarial training, does not suffer from CO. Empirical analyses
on a large suite of experiments show that N-FGSM is able to match or surpass the
performance of previous state-of-the-art GradAlign, while achieving 3× speed-up.
Code can be found in https://github.com/pdejorge/N-FGSM

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance on a variety of tasks [12, 27, 7].
However, it is well known that they are vulnerable to small worst-case perturbations around the input
data – commonly referred to as adversarial examples [31]. The existence of such adversarial examples
poses a security threat to deploying models in sensitive environments [2, 4]. This has motivated a large
body of work towards improving the adversarial robustness of neural networks [11, 22, 32, 25, 5].
The most popular family of methods for learning robust neural networks is based on the concept
of adversarial training [11, 20]. In a nutshell, adversarial training can be posed as a min-max
problem where instead of minimizing some loss over a dataset of clean samples, we augment the
inputs with worst-case perturbations that are generated online during training. However, obtaining
such perturbations is NP-hard [34] and hence, different adversarial attacks have been suggested
that approximate them. In their seminal work, Goodfellow et al. [11] proposed the Fast Gradient
Sign Method (FGSM), that generates adversarial attacks by performing a gradient ascent step on the
loss function. Yet, while FGSM-based adversarial training provides robustness against single-step
FGSM adversaries, Tramèr et al. [32] showed that these models are still vulnerable to multi-step
attacks, namely those allowed to perform multiple gradient ascent steps. Given their better (robust)
∗

Correspondence to pau@robots.ox.ac.uk

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

