Toward Efficient Robust Training against
Union of ℓp Threat Models

Gaurang Sriramanan, Maharshi Gor, Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
{gaurangs,mgor,sfeizi}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
The overwhelming vulnerability of deep neural networks to carefully crafted perturbations
known as adversarial attacks has led to the development of various training techniques to
produce robust models. While the primary focus of existing approaches has been directed
toward addressing the worst-case performance achieved under a single-threat model, it is
imperative that safety-critical systems are robust with respect to multiple threat models
simultaneously. Existing approaches that address worst-case performance under the union of
such threat models (e.g., ℓ∞ , ℓ2 , ℓ1 ) either utilize adversarial training methods that require
multi-step attacks which are computationally expensive in practice, or rely upon fine-tuning
of pre-trained models that are robust with respect to a single-threat model. In this work,
we show that by carefully choosing the objective function used for robust training, it is
possible to achieve similar, or even improved worst-case performance over a union of threat
models while utilizing only single-step attacks during the training, thereby achieving a
significant reduction in computational resources necessary for training. Furthermore, prior
work showed that adversarial training against the ℓ1 threat model is relatively difficult, to
the extent that even multi-step adversarially trained models were shown to be prone to
gradient-masking and catastrophic over-fitting. However, our proposed method—when
applied on the ℓ1 threat model specifically—enables us to obtain the first ℓ1 robust model
trained solely with single-step adversarial attacks. Finally, to demonstrate the merits of our
approach, we utilize a modern set of attack evaluations to better estimate the worst-case
performance under the considered union of threat models.

1

Introduction

Recent years have demonstrated the success of deep learning in solving machine learning tasks
spanning across various domains—computer vision, natural language texts, speech, etc. In addition,
it has even exceeded the human level performance for certain tasks [He et al., 2016, 2015]. However,
despite their successes, these systems exhibit severe vulnerabilities: Deep learning models are very
susceptible to imperceptible perturbations in the input at test time [Szegedy et al., 2013]. Such humanimperceptible noise, known as adversarial attacks, can be used to induce networks to confidently
predict incorrect labels, and can thus have disastrous implication in safety critical applications such as
autonomous navigation and identity verification. To make models robust against such vulnerabilities
at test time, a paradigm of adversarial robust training of machine learning models has been developed
in recent years [Goodfellow et al., 2015, Madry et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2019].
These adversarial training procedures have primarily been used to train models robust to a single
threat model—perturbations constrained within an ℓp -ball of εp radius for some p. For instance, the
predominant threat model of interest that has been extensively studied in existing literature corresponds to the ℓ∞ threat model (mostly ε∞ = 8/255). However, human-imperceptible adversarial
perturbations can be sourced from multiple threat-models; hence in practice, it is pertinent to ensure
that networks are robust against perturbations from a union of threat models simultaneously. More so,
it has been observed that robust training procedures for a chosen threat model are not effective against
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

