Embracing Consistency: A One-Stage Approach for
Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding
∗

Yang Jin1 , Yongzhi Li2 , Zehuan Yuan2 , Yadong Mu1,3
1
Peking University 2 ByteDance 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
jiny@stu.pku.edu.cn, liyongzhi.ailab@bytedance.com,
yuanzehuan@bytedance.com, myd@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Spatio-Temporal video grounding (STVG) focuses on retrieving the spatiotemporal tube of a specific object depicted by a free-form textual expression. Existing approaches mainly treat this complicated task as a parallel frame-grounding
problem and thus suffer from two types of inconsistency drawbacks: feature
alignment inconsistency and prediction inconsistency. In this paper, we present
an end-to-end one-stage framework, termed Spatio-Temporal Consistency-Aware
Transformer (STCAT), to alleviate these issues. Specially, we introduce a novel
multi-modal template as the global objective to address this task, which explicitly
constricts the grounding region and associates the predictions among all video
frames. Moreover, to generate the above template under sufficient video-textual
perception, an encoder-decoder architecture is proposed for effective global context modeling. Thanks to these critical designs, STCAT enjoys more consistent
cross-modal feature alignment and tube prediction without reliance on any pretrained object detectors. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms
previous state-of-the-arts with clear margins on two challenging video benchmarks
(VidSTG and HC-STVG), illustrating the superiority of the proposed framework to
better understanding the association between vision and natural language. Code is
publicly available at https://github.com/jy0205/STCAT.

1

Introduction

Visual grounding is a prominent and fundamental task in the multi-modal understanding field. It aims
to localize a region from the visual content specified by a given natural language query. As a bridge
to connect vision and language, this topic has drawn increasing research attention over the past few
years [13, 11, 45, 17, 16]. Early works mostly focused on static images and have achieved remarkable
progress, while visual grounding in videos has not been adequately explored yet. Recently, spatiotemporal video grounding (STVG) was introduced in [48], which is a compound task, requiring both
spatial and temporal localization. Formally, given an untrimmed video and a textual description of an
object, this task aims at producing a spatio-temporal tube (i.e., a sequence of bounding boxes) for the
queried target object (See Figure 1). Compared with previous grounding tasks in images, STVG is
substantially more challenging as it delivers high demands for distinguishing subtle spatio-temporal
status of instance in videos based on the query sentence. Thus, how to effectively align the textual
semantics and time-varying visual appearance is especially critical for settling this task.
The majority of current approaches [38, 34, 4, 48, 47] streamline the spatio-temporal video grounding
as a two-stage pipeline, where the object proposals or tubelets are firstly generated by a pre-trained
object detector (e.g., Faster RCNN [25]) and then all the candidates are ranked according to the
similarity with the query. However, this simple design leads to an inevitable deficiency: the grounding
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

