Online Deep Equilibrium Learning for
Regularization by Denoising

Jiaming Liu∗
Washington University in St. Louis
jiaming.liu@wustl.edu

Xiaojian Xu∗
Washington University in St. Louis
xiaojianxu@wustl.edu

Weijie Gan
Washington University in St. Louis
weijie.gan@wustl.edu

Shirin Shoushtari
Washington University in St. Louis
s.shirin@wustl.edu

Ulugbek S. Kamilov
Washington University in St. Louis
kamilov@wustl.edu

Abstract
Plug-and-Play Priors (PnP) and Regularization by Denoising (RED) are widelyused frameworks for solving imaging inverse problems by computing fixed-points
of operators combining physical measurement models and learned image priors.
While traditional PnP/RED formulations have focused on priors specified using
image denoisers, there is a growing interest in learning PnP/RED priors that are
end-to-end optimal. The recent Deep Equilibrium Models (DEQ) framework has
enabled memory-efficient end-to-end learning of PnP/RED priors by implicitly
differentiating through the fixed-point equations without storing intermediate activation values. However, the dependence of the computational/memory complexity
of the measurement models in PnP/RED on the total number of measurements
leaves DEQ impractical for many imaging applications. We propose ODER as
a new strategy for improving the efficiency of DEQ through stochastic approximations of the measurement models. We theoretically analyze ODER giving
insights into its ability to approximate the traditional DEQ approach for solving
inverse problems. Our numerical results suggest the potential improvements in
training/testing complexity due to ODER on three distinct imaging applications.

1

Introduction

There has been considerable recent interest in using deep learning (DL) in the context of imaging
inverse problems [1–8]. Instead of explicitly defining a regularizer, the traditional DL approach is
based on training a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture, such as U-Net [9], to invert the
measurement operator by exploiting the natural redundancies in the imaging data [10–14]. Plug-andPlay Priors (PnP) [15] and Regularization by Denoising (RED) [16] are two well-known alternative
approaches to the traditional DL that enable the integration of pre-trained CNN denoisers, such as
DnCNN [17] or DRUNet [18], as image priors within iterative algorithms. When equipped with
advanced CNN denoisers, PnP/RED provide excellent performance by exploiting both the implicit
prior, characterized by a denoiser, and the measurement model [19–27]. Deep Unfolding (DU) is a
related approach that interprets the iterations of an image recovery algorithm as layers of a neural
∗

These authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

