Meta-Reinforcement Learning with
Self-Modifying Networks

Mathieu Chalvidal
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute
Universite de Toulouse, France
mathieu_chalvid@brown.edu

Thomas Serre
Carney Institute for Brain Science
Brown University, U.S.
thomas_serre@brown.edu

Rufin VanRullen
Centre de Recherche Cerveau & Cognition
CNRS, Universite de Toulouse, France
rufin.vanrullen@cnrs.fr

Abstract
Deep Reinforcement Learning has demonstrated the potential of neural networks
tuned with gradient descent for solving complex tasks in well-delimited environments. However, these neural systems are slow learners producing specialized
agents with no mechanism to continue learning beyond their training curriculum.
On the contrary, biological synaptic plasticity is persistent and manifold, and
has been hypothesized to play a key role in executive functions such as working
memory and cognitive flexibility, potentially supporting more efficient and generic
learning abilities. Inspired by this, we propose to build networks with dynamic
weights, able to continually perform self-reflexive modification as a function of
their current synaptic state and action-reward feedback, rather than a fixed network
configuration. The resulting model, MetODS (for Meta-Optimized Dynamical
Synapses) is a broadly applicable meta-reinforcement learning system able to learn
efficient and powerful control rules in the agent policy space. A single layer with
dynamic synapses can perform one-shot learning, generalizes navigation principles
to unseen environments and manifests a strong ability to learn adaptive motor
policies.

1

Introduction

The algorithmic shift from hand-designed to learned features characterizing modern Deep Learning
has been transformative for Reinforcement Learning (RL), allowing to solve complex problems
ranging from video games [1, 2] to multiplayer contests [3] or motor control [4, 5]. Yet, "deep" RL
has mostly produced specialized agents unable to cope with rapid contextual changes or tasks with
novel or compositional structure [6–8]. The vast majority of models have relied on gradient-based
optimization to learn static network parameters adjusted during a predefined curriculum, arguably
preventing the emergence of online adaptivity. A potential solution to this challenge is to meta-learn
[9–11] computational mechanisms able to rapidly capture a task structure and automatically operate
complex feedback control: Meta-Reinforcement Learning constitutes a promising direction to build
more adaptive artificial systems [12] and identify key neuroscience mechanisms that endow humans
with their versatile learning abilities [13].
In this work, we draw inspiration from biological fast synaptic plasticity, hypothesized to orchestrate
flexible cognitive functions according to context-dependent rules [14–17]. By tuning neuronal
selectivity at fast time scales – from fast neural signaling (milliseconds) to experience-based learning
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

