Hypothesis Testing for Differentially Private Linear
Regression
Daniel Alabi ∗1 and Salil Vadhan †2
1

Department of Computer Science and Data Science Institute, Columbia University
2
Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences

Abstract
In this work, we design differentially private hypothesis tests for the following
problems in the general linear model: testing a linear relationship and testing
for the presence of mixtures. The majority of our hypothesis tests are based
on differentially private versions of the F -statistic for the general linear model
framework, which are uniformly most powerful unbiased in the non-private setting.
We also present another test for testing mixtures, based on the differentially private
nonparametric tests of Couch, Kazan, Shi, Bray, and Groce (CCS 2019), which is
especially suited for the small dataset regime. We show that the differentially private
F -statistic converges to the asymptotic distribution of its non-private counterpart.
As a corollary, the statistical power of the differentially private F -statistic converges
to the statistical power of the non-private F -statistic. Through a suite of Monte
Carlo based experiments, we show that our tests achieve desired significance levels
and have a high power that approaches the power of the non-private tests as we
increase sample sizes or the privacy-loss parameter. We also show when our tests
outperform existing methods in the literature.

1

Introduction

Linear regression is one of the most fundamental statistical techniques available to social scientists
and economists (especially econometricians) [43, 20]. A graduate student successfully completes
her classes: what is the effect on her future earnings? A country implements tough penalties for
concealed carry permit violations: what is the effect on gun-related deaths? A school district cuts the
size of the average class size for high school classes: what is the effect on the standardized test scores
of the minority students?
All three questions are about the (unknown) effect of changing one (independent) variable X on
another variable Y . Under reasonable assumptions, the relationship between X and Y can be modeled
as a linear regression testing problem. One of the goals of performing regression analysis is for use in
decision-making via point estimation (i.e., getting a single predicted value for the dependent variable).
To increase the confidence of decision-makers and analysts in such estimates, it is often important to
also release accompanying uncertainty estimates for the point estimates [18, 19, 6].
In this work, we aim to provide differentially private linear regression uncertainty quantification
via the use of hypothesis tests. Given the realistic possibility of reconstruction, membership, and
inference attacks [46, 25], we can rely on Differential Privacy (DP), a rigorous approach to quantifying
∗

Email: alabid@cs.columbia.edu. D.A. was supported by a Fellowship from Meta AI and Cooperative
Agreement CB20ADR0160001 with the Census Bureau. Work done while a Ph.D. student at Harvard University.
†
Email: salil_vadhan@harvard.edu. S.V. was supported by Cooperative Agreement CB20ADR0160001
and a Simons Investigator Award.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

