Generative Neural Articulated Radiance Fields
Alexander W. Bergman∗
Stanford University
awb@stanford.edu

Petr Kellnhofer∗
TU Delft
p.kellnhofer@tudelft.nl

Wang Yifan∗
Stanford University
yifan.wang@stanford.edu

Eric R. Chan∗
Stanford University
erchan@stanford.edu

David B. Lindell
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
lindell@cs.toronto.edu

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University
gordonwz@stanford.edu

computationalimaging.org/publications/gnarf/

Abstract
Unsupervised learning of 3D-aware generative adversarial networks (GANs) using only
collections of single-view 2D photographs has very recently made much progress. These
3D GANs, however, have not been demonstrated for human bodies and the generated
radiance fields of existing frameworks are not directly editable, limiting their applicability
in downstream tasks. We propose a solution to these challenges by developing a 3D GAN
framework that learns to generate radiance fields of human bodies or faces in a canonical
pose and warp them using an explicit deformation field into a desired body pose or facial
expression. Using our framework, we demonstrate the first high-quality radiance field
generation results for human bodies. Moreover, we show that our deformation-aware
training procedure significantly improves the quality of generated bodies or faces when
editing their poses or facial expressions compared to a 3D GAN that is not trained with
explicit deformations.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning of 3D-aware generative adversarial networks (GANs) using large-scale datasets
of unstructured single-view images is an emerging research area. Such 3D GANs have recently
been demonstrated to enable photorealistic and multi-view consistent generation of radiance fields
representing human faces [1–7]. These approaches, however, have not been shown to work with
human bodies, partly because learning the body pose distribution is much more challenging given the
significantly higher diversity in articulations compared to facial expressions.
Yet, generative 3D models of photorealistic humans have significant utility in a wide range of
applications, including visual effects, computer vision, and virtual or augmented reality. In these
scenarios, it is critical that the generated people are editable to support interactive applications, which
is not necessarily the case for existing 3D GANs. While variations of linear blend skinning [8]
have been adopted to articulate radiance fields for single-scene scenarios [9–21], it is unclear how to
efficiently apply such deformation methods to generative models.
With our work, dubbed generative neural articulated radiance fields or GNARF, we propose solutions
to both of these challenges. Firstly, we demonstrate generation of high-quality 3D (i.e., multi-view
consistent and geometry aware) human bodies using a GAN that is trained in an unsupervised manner
on datasets containing single-view images. To this end, we adopt the recently proposed tri-plane
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

