ShuffleMixer: An Efficient ConvNet for Image
Super-Resolution

Long Sun, Jinshan Pan∗ , Jinhui Tang∗
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{cs.longsun, jspan, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Lightweight and efficiency are critical drivers for the practical application of image
super-resolution (SR) algorithms. We propose a simple and effective approach,
ShuffleMixer, for lightweight image super-resolution that explores large convolution and channel split-shuffle operation. In contrast to previous SR models that simply stack multiple small kernel convolutions or complex operators to learn representations, we explore a large kernel ConvNet for mobile-friendly SR design. Specifically, we develop a large depth-wise convolution and two projection layers based
on channel splitting and shuffling as the basic component to mix features efficiently.
Since the contexts of natural images are strongly locally correlated, using large
depth-wise convolutions only is insufficient to reconstruct fine details. To overcome
this problem while maintaining the efficiency of the proposed module, we introduce Fused-MBConvs into the proposed network to model the local connectivity of
different features. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed ShuffleMixer
is about 3× smaller than the state-of-the-art efficient SR methods, e.g. CARN, in
terms of model parameters and FLOPs while achieving competitive performance.
The code is available at https://github.com/sunny2109/ShuffleMixer.

1

Introduction

Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to recover a high-resolution image from a low-resolution
one. This is a classical problem that has attracted lots of attention recently due to the rapid development of high-definition devices, such as Ultra-High Definition Television, Samsung Galaxy S22
Ultra, iPhone 13 Pro Max, and HUAWEI P50 Pro, and so on. Thus, it is of great interest to develop
an efficient and effective method to estimate high-resolution images to be better displayed on these
devices.
Recently, convolutional neural network (CNN) based SR models [8, 9, 1, 16, 25, 45] have achieved
impressive reconstruction performance. However, these networks hierarchically extract local features,
which highly rely on stacking deeper or more complex models to enlarge the receptive fields for
performance improvements. As a result, the required computational budget makes these heavy SR
models challenging to deploy on resource-constrained mobile devices in practical applications [44].
To alleviate heavy SR models, various methods have been proposed to reduce model complexity
or speed up runtime, including efficient operation design [32, 28, 36, 9, 16, 1, 33, 43, 23, 27],
neural architecture search [6, 35], knowledge distillation [12, 13], and structural re-parameterization
methodology [7, 23, 44]. These methods are mainly based on improved small spatial convolutions or
advanced training strategies, and large kernel convolutions are rarely explored. Moreover, they mostly
focus on one of the efficiency indicators and do not perform well in real resource-constrained tasks.
Thus, the demand for a better trade-off between complexity, latency, and SR quality is imperative.
∗

Jinshan Pan and Jinhui Tang are the corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

