Knowledge Distillation Improves Graph Structure
Augmentation for Graph Neural Networks

Lirong Wu 1,2 , Haitao Lin 1,2 , Yufei Huang 1,2 , and Stan Z. Li 1†
1
AI Lab, School of Engineering, Westlake University
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{wulirong,linhaitao,huangyufei,stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph (structure) augmentation aims to perturb the graph structure through heuristic
or probabilistic rules, enabling the nodes to capture richer contextual information
and thus improving generalization performance. While there have been a few
graph structure augmentation methods proposed recently, none of them are aware
of a potential negative augmentation problem, which may be caused by overly
severe distribution shifts between the original and augmented graphs. In this paper,
we take an important graph property, namely graph homophily, to analyze the
distribution shifts between the two graphs and thus measure the severity of an
augmentation algorithm suffering from negative augmentation. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel Knowledge Distillation for Graph Augmentation (KDGA)
framework, which helps to reduce the potential negative effects of distribution
shifts, i.e., negative augmentation problem. Specifically, KDGA extracts the knowledge of any GNN teacher model trained on the augmented graphs and injects it
into a partially parameter-shared student model that is tested on the original graph.
As a simple but efficient framework, KDGA is applicable to a variety of existing
graph augmentation methods and can significantly improve the performance of
various GNN architectures. For three popular graph augmentation methods, namely
GAUG, MH-Aug, and GraphAug, the experimental results show that the learned
student models outperform their vanilla implementations by an average accuracy
of 4.6% (GAUG), 4.2% (MH-Aug), and 4.6% (GraphAug) on eight graph datasets.
Codes are available at: https://github.com/LirongWu/KDGA.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, including social networks, chemical molecules, and citation networks, data can be naturally modeled as graphs. Recently, the emerging Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) [4, 13, 48, 47, 22, 24, 28, 29] have demonstrated their powerful capability due to their superior performance in various graph-related tasks, including link prediction [59], node classification
[21, 50], and graph classification [7]. Despite their great success, GNNs usually suffer from weak
generalization due to its heavy reliance on the quantity of annotated labels and the quality of the graph
structure. To boost generalization capabilities, a natural solution is to increase the amount of training
data by creating plausible variations of existing data, which have been widely adopted in fields such
as computer vision [33, 30, 9, 39, 25, 31, 26, 27] and natural language processing [46, 1, 36, 5, 34].
The data augmentation on graphs can be mainly divided into two branches: node feature augmentation
and graph structure augmentation. While the former has been well studied by directly extending
existing approaches for image and text data to graph data [56, 19, 15], comparatively little work has
been done to study graph structure augmentation [35, 2, 62, 32]. Following the nomenclature of
existing works [62, 32], we directly abbreviate graph (structure) augmentation to graph augmentation
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

