Myriad: a real-world testbed to bridge
trajectory optimization and deep learning
Nikolaus H. R. Howe
Mila, Université de Montréal
niki.howe@mila.quebec

Simon Dufort-Labbé
Mila, Université de Montréal

Nitarshan Rajkumar
University of Cambridge⇤

Pierre-Luc Bacon
Mila, Université de Montréal, Facebook CIFAR AI, IVADO

Abstract
We present Myriad, a testbed written in JAX which enables machine learning
researchers to benchmark imitation learning and reinforcement learning algorithms
against trajectory optimization-based methods in real-world environments. Myriad
contains 17 optimal control problems presented in continuous time which span
medicine, ecology, epidemiology, and engineering. As such, Myriad strives to serve
as a stepping stone towards application of modern machine learning techniques
for impactful real-world tasks. The repository also provides machine learning
practitioners access to trajectory optimization techniques, not only for standalone
use, but also for integration within a typical automatic differentiation workflow.
Indeed, the combination of classical control theory and deep learning in a fully
GPU-compatible package unlocks potential for new algorithms to arise. We present
one such novel approach for use in optimal control tasks. Trained in a fully end-toend fashion, our model leverages an implicit planning module over neural ordinary
differential equations, enabling simultaneous learning and planning with unknown
environment dynamics. All environments, optimizers and tools are available in the
software package at https://github.com/nikihowe/myriad.

1

Introduction

The rapid progress of machine learning (ML) algorithms is made clear by the yearly improvement we
see on standard ML benchmarks (Deng et al., 2009; Todorov et al., 2012; Bellemare et al., 2013).
Inevitably, the popularity of a given testbed creates a positive feedback effect, encouraging researchers
to develop algorithms that achieve good performance on that set of tasks (Kerner, 2020; Henderson
et al., 2018). We believe it is crucial that our algorithms be well-suited for positive-impact, real-world
applications. As such, we must be able to train and test them on real-world-relevant tasks.
To this end, we present Myriad, a real-world testbed for optimal control methods such as imitation
learning and reinforcement learning (RL). Myriad differs from previous testbeds in several key
aspects. First and most importantly, all tasks are inspired by real-world problems, with applications
in medicine, ecology, epidemiology, and engineering. Second, Myriad is, to our knowledge, the first
repository that enables deep learning methods to be combined seamlessly with traditional trajectory
optimization techniques. Figure 1 shows a visualization of applying a one such trajectory optimization
technique on an environment implemented in Myriad. Third, the system dynamics in Myriad are
continuous in time and space, offering several advantages over discretized environments. On the one
hand, these algorithms are adaptable to changing sampling frequencies, or even irregularly spaced
⇤

Work done while at Mila, Université de Montréal.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

