Markovian Interference in Experiments

Vivek Farias
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
vivekf@mit.edu
Tianyi Peng
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
tianyi@mit.edu

Andrew A. Li
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
aali1@cmu.edu
Andrew Zheng
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
atz@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider experiments in dynamical systems where interventions on some
experimental units impact other units through a limiting constraint (such as
a limited supply of products). Despite outsize practical importance, the best
estimators for this ‘Markovian’ interference problem are largely heuristic
in nature, and their bias is not well understood. We formalize the problem
of inference in such experiments as one of policy evaluation. Off-policy
estimators, while unbiased, apparently incur a large penalty in variance
relative to state-of-the-art heuristics. We introduce an on-policy estimator:
the Differences-In-Q’s (DQ) estimator. We show that the DQ estimator can
in general have exponentially smaller variance than off-policy evaluation. At
the same time, its bias is second order in the impact of the intervention. This
yields a striking bias-variance tradeoff so that the DQ estimator effectively
dominates state-of-the-art alternatives. From a theoretical perspective, we
introduce three separate novel techniques that are of independent interest
in the theory of Reinforcement Learning (RL). Our empirical evaluation
includes a set of experiments on a city-scale ride-hailing simulator.

1.

Introduction

Experimentation is a broadly deployed learning tool in online commerce that is, in principle,
simple: apply the treatment in question at random (e.g. an A/B test), and ‘naively’ infer the
treatment effect by differencing the average outcomes under treatment and control. About a
decade ago, Blake and Coey [8] pointed out a challenge in such experimentation on Ebay:
“Consider the example of testing a new search engine ranking algorithm which steers test
buyers towards a particular class of items for sale. If test users buy up those items, the
supply available to the control users declines.”
The above violation of the so-called Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA [12]),
has been viewed as problematic in the context of online platforms at least as early as Reiley’s
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

