Efficient Knowledge Distillation from Model
Checkpoints

Chaofei Wang∗, Qisen Yang∗ , Rui Huang, Shiji Song, Gao Huang†
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
wangcf18, yangqs19, hr20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
shijis, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is an effective approach to learn compact models (students)
with the supervision of large and strong models (teachers). As empirically there
exists a strong correlation between the performance of teacher and student models,
it is commonly believed that a high performing teacher is preferred. Consequently,
practitioners tend to use a well trained network or an ensemble of them as the
teacher. In this paper, we observe that an intermediate model, i.e., a checkpoint
in the middle of the training procedure, often serves as a better teacher compared to the fully converged model, although the former has much lower accuracy.
More surprisingly, a weak snapshot ensemble of several intermediate models from
a same training trajectory can outperform a strong ensemble of independently
trained and fully converged models, when they are used as teachers. We show
that this phenomenon can be partially explained by the information bottleneck
principle: the feature representations of intermediate models can have higher mutual information regarding the input, and thus contain more “dark knowledge”
for effective distillation. We further propose an optimal intermediate teacher selection algorithm based on maximizing the total task-related mutual information.
Experiments verify its effectiveness and applicability. Our code is available at
https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/CheckpointKD.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation (KD) [1, 2] has been proved to be an effective technique to promote the
performance of a low-capacity model by transferring “dark knowledge” from a large teacher model.
Empirically, there usually exists a strong correlation between the performance of the teacher model
and the student model. For this reason, it is a standard practice to use a well trained network or an
ensemble of multiple well trained networks as the teacher [3, 4, 5], and some researches are attempted
to improve distillation performance via boosting the ensemble performance [6, 7]. The underlying
assumption is that high performing teachers lead to better student models.
However, this viewpoint has been challenged by some recent works [8, 9, 10, 11, 12], in which
it has been observed that a large model capacity gap between the teacher and student may have a
negative effect for knowledge transfer. To address this issue, researchers have proposed to employ an
intermediate-size network [8] or an assistant network [9] to improve the distillation performance in
such scenarios. In [10], a "tolerant" teacher model is designed by using a softened loss function. In
[11], Park et al. proposed to learn student-friendly teacher by plugging in student branches during the
training procedure. Nevertheless, there is no clear theoretical explanation for the gap between teacher
and student, and the search for a substitute teacher is not straightforward.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

