Benefits of Additive Noise
in Composing Classes with Bounded Capacity
Alireza Fathollah Pour
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University
fathola@mcmaster.ca

Hassan Ashtiani
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University
zokaeiam@mcmaster.ca

Abstract
We observe that given two (compatible) classes of functions F and H with small
capacity as measured by their uniform covering numbers, the capacity of the
composition class H F can become prohibitively large or even unbounded. We
then show that adding a small amount of Gaussian noise to the output of F before
composing it with H can effectively control the capacity of H F, offering a
general recipe for modular design. To prove our results, we define new notions of
uniform covering number of random functions with respect to the total variation
and Wasserstein distances. We instantiate our results for the case of multi-layer
sigmoid neural networks. Preliminary empirical results on MNIST dataset indicate
that the amount of noise required to improve over existing uniform bounds can
be numerically negligible (i.e., element-wise i.i.d. Gaussian noise with standard
deviation 10 240 ).12

1

Introduction

Let F be a class of functions from X to Y, and H a class of functions from Y to Z. Assuming
that F and H have bounded “capacity”, can we bound the capacity of their composition, i.e.,
H F = {h f | f 2 F, h 2 H}? Here, by capacity we mean learning-theoretic quantities such
as VC dimension, fat-shattering dimension, and (uniform) covering numbers associated with these
classes (see Vapnik (1999); Anthony et al. (1999); Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David (2014); Mohri et al.
(2018) for an introduction). Being able to control the capacity of composition of function classes
is useful, as it offers a modular approach to design sophisticated classes (and therefore learning
algorithms) out of simpler ones. To be concrete, we want to know if the uniform covering number
(as defined in the next section) of H F can be “effectively” bounded as a function of the uniform
covering numbers of F and H.

The answer to the above questions is true when F is a set of binary valued functions (i.e., Y = {0, 1}
in the above). More generally, the capacity of the composition class (as measured by the uniform
covering number) can be bounded as long as |Y| is relatively small (see Proposition 7). But what if Y
is an infinite set, such as the natural case of Y = [0, 1]? Unfortunately, in this case the capacity of
H F (as measured by the covering number) can become unbounded (or excessively large) even
when both F and H have bounded (or small) capacities; see Propositions 8 and 9.

Given the above observation, we ask whether there is a general and systematic way to control the
capacity of the composition of bounded-capacity classes. More specifically, we are interested in
the case where the domain sets are multi-dimensional real-valued vectors (e.g., X ⇢ Rd , Y ⇢ Rp ,
Z ⇢ Rq ). The canonical examples of such classes are those associated with neural networks.
1
2

For the full version of this paper see Pour and Ashtiani (2022).
The source codes are available at https://github.com/fathollahpour/composition_noise

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

