Learning Neural Set Functions Under the
Optimal Subset Oracle

Zijing Ou1,2 , Tingyang Xu1 , Qinliang Su3 , Yingzhen Li2 , Peilin Zhao1 , Yatao Bian1∗
1
Tencent AI Lab, China
2
Imperial College London, United Kingdom
3
Sun Yat-sen University, China
z.ou22@imperial.ac.uk {tingyangxu,masonzhao}@tencent.com
suqliang@mail.sysu.edu.cn yingzhen.li@imperial.ac.uk yatao.bian@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning neural set functions becomes increasingly important in many applications
like product recommendation and compound selection in AI-aided drug discovery.
The majority of existing works study methodologies of set function learning under
the function value oracle, which, however, requires expensive supervision signals.
This renders it impractical for applications with only weak supervisions under the
Optimal Subset (OS) oracle, the study of which is surprisingly overlooked. In this
work, we present a principled yet practical maximum likelihood learning framework, termed as EquiVSet,1 that simultaneously meets the following desiderata of
learning neural set functions under the OS oracle: i) permutation invariance of the
set mass function being modeled; ii) permission of varying ground set; iii) minimum prior; and iv) scalability. The main components of our framework involve:
an energy-based treatment of the set mass function, DeepSet-style architectures
to handle permutation invariance, mean-field variational inference, and its amortized variants. Thanks to the elegant combination of these advanced architectures,
empirical studies on three real-world applications (including Amazon product recommendation, set anomaly detection and compound selection for virtual screening)
demonstrate that EquiVSet outperforms the baselines by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Many real-world applications involve prediction of set-value outputs, such as recommender systems
which output a set of products to customers, anomaly detection that predicts the outliers from the
majority of data (Zhang et al., 2020), and compound selection for virtual screening in drug discovery
aims at extracting the most effective compounds from a given compound database (Gimeno et al.,
2019). All of these applications implicitly learn a set function (Rezatofighi et al., 2017; Zaheer et al.,
2017) that measures the utility of a given set input, such that the most desirable set output has the
highest (or lowest w.l.o.g) utility value.
More formally, consider a recommender system: given a set of product candidates V , it is expected
to recommend a subset of products S ∗ ⊆ V to the user, which would satisfy the user most, i.e.,
offering the maximum utility to the user. We assume the underlying process of determining S ∗ can
be modelled by a utility function Fθ (S; V ) parameterized by θ, and the following criteria:
S ∗ = argmax Fθ (S; V ).
S∈2V
∗
1

Correspondence to: Yatao Bian.
Code is available at: https://github.com/SubsetSelection/EquiVSet.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(1)

