Better SGD using Second-order Momentum

Hoang Tran
Boston University
tranhp@bu.edu

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
ashok@cutkosky.com

Abstract
We develop a new algorithm for non-convex stochastic optimization that finds
an ϵ-critical point in the optimal O(ϵ−3 ) stochastic gradient and Hessian-vector
product computations. Our algorithm uses Hessian-vector products to “correct” a
bias term in the momentum of SGD with momentum. This leads to better gradient
estimates in a manner analogous to variance reduction methods. In contrast to prior
work, we do not require excessively large batch sizes, and are able to provide an
adaptive algorithm whose convergence rate automatically improves with decreasing
variance in the gradient estimates. We validate our results on a variety of large-scale
deep learning architectures and benchmarks tasks.

1

Introduction

In the last couple of decades, first-order algorithms such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) or
Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014] have emerged as the main workhorse for modern Machine Learning
(ML) tasks. They achieve good empirical results while being easy to implement and requiring
relatively few computational resources. When the objective function is convex, SGD’s convergence is
well-understood [Zinkevich, 2003]. However, the results are much less favorable for the non-convex
setting in which modern deep learning models operate. In fact, the problem of optimizing non-convex
function is NP-hard in general, so instead analysis often focuses on finding a critical point - that is, a
point at which the gradient of the loss is zero. SGD is well-known to find an ϵ-approximate critical
point in at most O(ϵ−4 ) total stochastic gradient evaluations [Ghadimi and Lan, 2013]. In an effort to
improve upon SGD, many different algorithms and heuristics have been proposed, including various
advanced learning rate schedules [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2016, Goyal et al., 2017, Xie et al., 2020],
or per-coordinate learning rates and adaptive algorithms [Duchi et al., 2011, McMahan and Streeter,
2010, Kingma and Ba, 2014, Reddi et al., 2018]. All of these methods have enjoyed practical success,
but none of their convergence rates has shown any asymptotic benefit over the O(ϵ−4 ) rate of SGD,
which is to be expected because this rate is in fact optimal in the worst-case for first-order methods
operating on smooth losses [Arjevani et al., 2019]. Thus, in order to make improved algorithms, we
need additional assumptions. In this work, we consider the case in which our algorithm is not a pure
first-order method, but has some limited access to second-order information.
Second-order algorithms such as Newton’s method are among the most powerful methods in optimization theory. Instead of using a linear approximation for the objective via the gradient, Newton’s
method employs a quadratic approximation using both the gradient and the Hessian. This quadratic
approximation hugs the curvature of the error surface and allows each iteration to make much faster
progress. Unfortunately, second-order algorithms are also much more complex and expensive to
implement. The cost of forming the Hessian matrix is O(d2 ) and the cost of a Newton step is typically
O(d3 ), thus rendering such algorithms largely impractical for large-scale learning problems [Bottou
and Bousquet, 2007].
The good news is we may not have to explicitly compute the Hessian matrix to be able to take
advantages of the nice properties of second-order methods. In particular, it is possible to compute
a Hessian-vector product, that is a vector of the form ∇2 F (x)v for arbitrary x and v, in roughly
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

