Lower Bounds and Nearly Optimal Algorithms in
Distributed Learning with Communication
Compression

Xinmeng Huang1∗
1

Yiming Chen2,3∗

University of Pennsylvania
3
MetaCarbon

2

Wotao Yin2

Kun Yuan2,4

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Peking University

4

xinmengh@sas.upenn.edu
yiming@metacarbon.vip
{wotao.yin, kun.yuan}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Recent advances in distributed optimization and learning have shown that communication compression is one of the most effective means of reducing communication.
While there have been many results for convergence rates with compressed communication, a lower bound is still missing.
Analyses of algorithms with communication compression have identified two abstract properties that guarantee convergence: the unbiased property or the contractive property. They can be applied either unidirectionally (compressing messages
from worker to server) or bidirectionally. In the smooth and non-convex stochastic
regime, this paper establishes a lower bound for distributed algorithms whether
using unbiased or contractive compressors in unidirection or bidirection. To close
the gap between this lower bound and the best existing upper bound, we further
propose an algorithm, NEOLITHIC, that almost reaches our lower bound (except
for a logarithm factor) under mild conditions. Our results also show that using
contractive compressors in bidirection can yield iterative methods that converge as
fast as those using unbiased compressors unidirectionally. We report experimental
results that validate our findings.

1

Introduction

Large-scale optimization is a critical step in many machine learning applications. Millions or even
billions of data samples contribute to the excellent performance in tasks such as robotics, computer
vision, natural language processing, healthcare, and so on. However, such a scale of data samples
and model parameters leads to enormous communication that hampers the scalability of distributed
machine-learning training systems. We urgently need communication-reduction strategies. State-ofthe-art strategies include model and gradient compression [4, 12, 56], decentralized communication
[39, 9, 19], lazy communication [73, 57, 33, 18], and beyond. This article will focus on the former.
The most common method of distributed training is Parallel SGD (P-SGD) [15]. In P-SGD, the
stochastic gradients that workers transmit to a server cause significant communication overhead in
large-scale machine learning. To reduce this overhead, many recent works propose to compress the
messages sent unidirectionally from worker to server [5, 28, 4] or compress the messages between
them bidirectionally [62, 70]. The method of compression is either sparsification or quantization
[5, 28, 4] or their combination [28, 14]. The literature [58, 55, 62, 70] reveals that bidirectional
compression can save more communication, but leads to slower convergence rates.
∗

Equal Contribution. Corresponding Author: Kun Yuan

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

