Fused Orthogonal Alternating Least Squares for
Tensor Clustering

Jiacheng Wang
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
jiachengwang@uchicago.edu

Dan Nicolae
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
nicolae@statistics.uchicago.edu

Abstract
We introduce a multi-mode tensor clustering method that implements a fused version of the alternating least squares algorithm (Fused-Orth-ALS) for simultaneous
tensor factorization and clustering. The statistical convergence rates of recovery
and clustering are established when the data are a noise contaminated tensor with a
latent low rank CP decomposition structure. Specifically, we show that a modified
alternating least squares algorithm can provably recover the true latent low rank
factorization structure when the data form an asymmetric tensor with perturbation.
Clustering consistency is also established. Finally, we illustrate the accuracy and
computational efficient implementation of the Fused-Orth-ALS algorithm by using
both simulations and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Tensors, or multidimensional arrays, have played an essential role in a wide range of scientific and
business applications, including neuroscience [9, 16], social networks [18, 4] and recommendation
systems [3, 28]. As higher order tensors have been extensively used as a framework for storing and
organizing massive data, the associated need to develop methods for tensor multi-mode clustering has
sharply increased. Several methods have been proposed for matrix biclustering for columns and rows
simultaneously [6, 5, 7, 22]. However, those methods cannot be directly applied to tensors due to the
complex higher order generalizations of the matrix singular value decomposition (SVD) and principal
component analysis (PCA). Motivated by the methodology gap between low and high dimensional
arrays, we investigate here the multi-mode clustering problem for tensors.
We propose the Fused Orthogonal Alternating Least Squares (Fused-Orth-ALS) algorithm for uncovering co-clustering structures in high order tensors. Clustering along a specific mode is equivalent
to clustering the slice matrices for that mode as shown in Figure 1. The core idea is to model true
cluster means as having a rank-1 matrix basis. The method is designed to systematically investigate
and achieve the following. First, under mild assumptions on the tensor decomposition structure, our
approach encourages smoothness in the decomposed components, leading to clustering performance
with higher accuracy. Second, orthogonality is pursued for the decomposed components, avoiding
the problem of local-minima convergence of the classical ALS tensor decomposition algorithm,
preventing multiple recoveries of the same factors, and achieving faster convergence rates compared
to popular tensor decomposition methods. Third, theoretical guarantees are provided for the recovery
and clustering consistency with even a single tensor sample, which is difficult to achieve in vector or
matrix clustering. The results in synthetic and real data demonstrate the robustness of our approach
under mild model misspecification and assumption violations, and the effectiveness under high
dimensional settings for extracting underlying clustering structures. Even though we focus on order
three tensors, it is straightforward to derive analogous results for higher order tensors.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

