FR: Folded Rationalization with a Unified Encoder
Wei Liu1 Haozhao Wang1∗ Jun Wang2∗ Ruixuan Li1∗ Chao Yue1 Yuankai Zhang1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
iWudao Tech
1
{idc_lw, hz_wang, rxli, yuechao, yuankai_zhang}@hust.edu.cn
2
jwang@iwudao.tech

1

Abstract
Conventional works generally employ a two-phase model in which a generator
selects the most important pieces, followed by a predictor that makes predictions
based on the selected pieces. However, such a two-phase model may incur the
degeneration problem where the predictor overfits to the noise generated by a
not yet well-trained generator and in turn, leads the generator to converge to a
sub-optimal model that tends to select senseless pieces. To tackle this challenge,
we propose Folded Rationalization (FR) that folds the two phases of the rationale
model into one from the perspective of text semantic extraction. The key idea
of FR is to employ a unified encoder between the generator and predictor, based
on which FR can facilitate a better predictor by access to valuable information
blocked by the generator in the traditional two-phase model and thus bring a
better generator. Empirically, we show that FR improves the F1 score by up
to 10.3% as compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/jugechengzi/FR.

1

Introduction

There are growing concerns over the interpretability of NLP models, especially when language
models are being rapidly applied on various critical fields (Lipton, 2016; Du et al., 2019; Xiang
et al., 2019; Miller, 2019; Sun et al., 2021). Rationalization, using a cooperative game between a
generator and a predictor in which the generator selects distinguishable and human-intelligible pieces
of the inputting text (i.e., rationale) to the followed predictor that maximizes the predictive accuracy,
has become one of the mainstream approaches to improve the interpretability of NLP models. The
standard rationalization method named RNP (Lei et al., 2016) organizes the generator and predictor
with a two-phase framework (see Figure 2(a)). However, as illustrated in Table 1, such a two-phase
model suffers from the degeneration problem where the predictor may overfit to meaningless but
distinguishable rationales generated by the not yet well-trained generator (Yu et al., 2019), leading
the generator to converge to the sub-optimal model that tends to select these uninformative rationales.
Many approaches have been proposed to address the degeneration issue. The basic idea of these
approaches is to regularize the predictor using supplementary modules that make use of the full text
such that the predictor does not rely entirely on the rationale provided by the generator. For example,
as shown in the Figure 2, 3PLAYER (Yu et al., 2019) adopts an extra predictor to squeeze informative
parts from the unselected text pieces into the rationale; DMR (Huang et al., 2021) additionally aligns
with prediction distribution and feature distribution of of the full text; A2R (Yu et al., 2021) combines
binary selection with soft selection in which every token in the inputting text is partly contained.
∗

Corresponding authors. This paper is a collaboration between Intelligent and Distributed Computing
Laboratory, Huazhong University of Science and Technology and iWudao Tech.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

