Momentum Aggregation for Private Non-convex
ERM
Hoang Tran
Boston University
tranhp@bu.edu

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
ashok@cutkosky.com

Abstract
We introduce new algorithms and convergence guarantees for privacy-preserving
non-convex Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) on smooth d-dimensional objectives. We develop an improved sensitivity analysis of stochastic gradient descent on
smooth objectives that exploits the recurrence of examples in different epochs. By
combining this new approach with recent analysis of momentum with private aggregation techniques, we provide
private algorithm that finds
 δ)-differential
 an (,

N 7/3 4/3
d1/3
a gradient of norm Õ (N )2/3 in O
gradient evaluations, improving
d2/3
 1/4

√
the previous best gradient bound of Õ d
.
N

1

Introduction

In recent years, statistical machine learning models have been deployed in many domains such as
health care, education, criminal justice, or social studies [Chen et al., 2021, He et al., 2019, Jiang
et al., 2017]. However, the release of statistical estimates based on these sensitive data comes with
the risk of leaking personal information of individuals in the original dataset. One naive solution
for this problem is to remove all the identifying information such as names, races, or social security
numbers. Unfortunately, this is usually not enough to preserve privacy. It has been shown in various
works that an adversary can take advantages of structural properties of the rest of the dataset to
reconstruct information about certain individuals [Backstrom et al., 2007, Dinur and Nissim, 2003].
Thus, we would need a stronger privacy-preserving mechanism. Over the past couple of decades,
differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006] has emerged as the dominant privacy notion for machine
learning problems.
Definition 1 (Differential Privacy [Dwork and Roth, 2014]). A randomized algorithm M : X N 7→ Rd
satisfies (, δ)− differential privacy ((, δ)-DP) if for any two data sets D, D0 ∈ X N differing by at
most one element and any event E ⊆ Rd , it holds that:
P [M (D) ∈ E] ≤ exp()P [M (D0 ) ∈ E] + δ
Roughly speaking, differential privacy guarantees that the outputs of two neighboring datasets
(datasets that differ in at most one datapoint) are almost the same with high probability, thus
preventing the adversary from identifying any individual’s data.
In this paper, we are interested in designing (, δ)−private algorithms for non-convex empirical risk
minimization (ERM) problems. In ERM problems, given N i.i.d samples x1 , ..., xN ∈ X from some
unknown distribution P , the goal is to find w ∈ Rd such that w minimizes the empirical loss defined
as follows:
N

F (w) ,

1 X
f (w, xi )
N i=1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

