A Benchmark for Compositional Visual Reasoning

Aimen Zerroug1,2,3 , Mohit Vaishnav1,2,3 , Julien Colin2 , Sebastian Musslick2 , Thomas Serre1,2
1

2

Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute, Université de Toulouse, France
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Dept. of Cognitive Linguistic & Psychological Sciences
Brown University, Providence, RI 02912
3
Centre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition, CNRS, Université de Toulouse, France
{aimen_zerroug, mohit_vaishnav, julien_colin,
sebastian_musslick, thomas_serre}@brown.edu

Abstract
A fundamental component of human vision is our ability to parse complex visual
scenes and judge the relations between their constituent objects. AI benchmarks
for visual reasoning have driven rapid progress in recent years with state-of-the-art
systems now reaching human accuracy on some of these benchmarks. Yet, there
remains a major gap between humans and AI systems in terms of the sample
efficiency with which they learn new visual reasoning tasks. Humans’ remarkable
efficiency at learning has been at least partially attributed to their ability to harness
compositionality – allowing them to efficiently take advantage of previously gained
knowledge when learning new tasks. Here, we introduce a novel visual reasoning
benchmark, Compositional Visual Relations (CVR), to drive progress towards the
development of more data-efficient learning algorithms. We take inspiration from
fluid intelligence and non-verbal reasoning tests and describe a novel method for
creating compositions of abstract rules and generating image datasets corresponding to these rules at scale. Our proposed benchmark includes measures of sample
efficiency, generalization, compositionality, and transfer across task rules. We
systematically evaluate modern neural architectures and find that convolutional
architectures surpass transformer-based architectures across all performance measures in most data regimes. However, all computational models are much less data
efficient than humans, even after learning informative visual representations using
self-supervision. Overall, we hope our challenge will spur interest in developing
neural architectures that can learn to harness compositionality for more efficient
learning.

1

Introduction

Visual reasoning is a complex ability requiring a high level of abstraction over high dimensional
sensory input. It highlights human’s capacity to manipulate concepts and relations as symbols
extracted from visual input. The efficiency with which humans learn new visual concepts and
relations, as exemplified by fluid intelligence and non-verbal reasoning tests, is equally fascinating. In
the pursuit of human-level artificial intelligence, a growing body of research is attempting to emulate
this skill in machines, and deep neural networks are at the forefront of the field.
Deep learning approaches are prime candidates as models of human intelligence due to their success
at learning from data while relying on simple design principles. However, these architectures are
imperfect models of human intelligence, as shown by their lack of sample efficiency, the inability to
generalize to unfamiliar situations [13] and the lack of robustness [14]. Their ability to perform well
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

