Weak-shot Semantic Segmentation
via Dual Similarity Transfer

Junjie Chen1 , Li Niu1∗, Siyuan Zhou1 , Jianlou Si2 , Chen Qian2 , Liqing Zhang1∗
1
The MoE Key Lab of AI, CSE department, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
SenseTime Research, SenseTime
{chen.bys, ustcnewly, ssluvble}@sjtu.edu.cn
{sijianlou,qianchen}@sensetime.com, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is an important and prevalent task, but severely suffers from
the high cost of pixel-level annotations when extending to more classes in wider
applications. To this end, we focus on the problem named weak-shot semantic
segmentation, where the novel classes are learnt from cheaper image-level labels
with the support of base classes having off-the-shelf pixel-level labels. To tackle
this problem, we propose SimFormer, which performs dual similarity transfer upon
MaskFormer. Specifically, MaskFormer disentangles the semantic segmentation
task into two sub-tasks: proposal classification and proposal segmentation for each
proposal. Proposal segmentation allows proposal-pixel similarity transfer from
base classes to novel classes, which enables the mask learning of novel classes. We
also learn pixel-pixel similarity from base classes and distill such class-agnostic
semantic similarity to the semantic masks of novel classes, which regularizes
the segmentation model with pixel-level semantic relationship across images. In
addition, we propose a complementary loss to facilitate the learning of novel
classes. Comprehensive experiments on the challenging COCO-Stuff-10K and
ADE20K datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Codes are available
at https://github.com/bcmi/SimFormer-Weak-Shot-Semantic-Segmentation.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation [27, 6, 45, 47] is a fundamental and active task in computer vision, which
aims to produce class label for each pixel in image. Training modern semantic segmentation models
usually requires pixel-level labels for each class in each image, and thus costly datasets have been
constructed for learning. As a practical task, there is a growing requirement to segment more classes
in wider applications. However, annotating dense pixel-level mask is too expensive to cover the
continuously increasing classes, which dramatically limits the applications of semantic segmentation.
In practice, we have some already annotated semantic segmentation datasets, e.g., COCO-80 [25].
These costly datasets focus on certain classes (e.g., the 80 classes in [25]), and ignore other uninterested classes (e.g., other classes beyond the 80 classes in [25]). Over time, there may be demand
to segment more classes, e.g., extending to COCO-171 [3]. We refer to the off-the-shelf classes
having already annotated masks as base classes, and those newly covered classes as novel classes. As
illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), one sample in COCO-80 focuses on segmenting cat, bed, etc, but ignores
the lamp. Existing scenario for expansion in [3] is to annotate the dense pixel-level masks for novel
classes again (i.e., annotating the mask for lamp in Fig. 1 (a)), which is too expensive to scale up. To
this end, we focus on a cheaper yet effective scenario in this paper, where we only need to annotate
image-level labels for the novel classes.
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

