AgraSSt: Approximate Graph Stein Statistics
for Interpretable Assessment of
Implicit Graph Generators

Wenkai Xu
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
wenkai.xu@stats.ox.ac.uk

Gesine Reinert
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
and Alan Turing Institute
reinert@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose and analyse a novel statistical procedure, coined AgraSSt, to assess
the quality of graph generators which may not be available in explicit forms. In
particular, AgraSSt can be used to determine whether a learned graph generating process is capable of generating graphs which resemble a given input graph.
Inspired by Stein operators for random graphs, the key idea of AgraSSt is the
construction of a kernel discrepancy based on an operator obtained from the graph
generator. AgraSSt can provide interpretable criticisms for a graph generator training procedure and help identify reliable sample batches for downstream tasks. We
give theoretical guarantees for a broad class of random graph models. Moreover,
we provide empirical results on both synthetic input graphs with known graph
generation procedures, and real-world input graphs that the state-of-the-art (deep)
generative models for graphs are trained on.

1

Introduction

Generative models for graphs have received increasing attention in the statistics and machine learning
communities. Recently, deep neural networks have been utilised to learn rich representations from
graph structures and generate graphs [Dai et al., 2020, Li et al., 2018, Liao et al., 2019, You et al.,
2018]. However, due to the often opaque deep learning procedures, these deep generative models are
usually implicit, which hinders theoretical analysis to assess how close the generated samples are in
their distributional properties to the graph distribution they are meant to be sampled from.
Learning instead parametric models from an explicit pre-specified probability distribution class would
allow to use the learned parameters for model assessment. However, parametric models may only
capture a fraction of the graph features and have restricted modelling power. Parameter estimation can
be inconsistent [Shalizi and Rinaldo, 2013] even for well-specified models, and may lead to wrong
conclusions in model assessments. Using instead deep generative models for graphs may surpass
some of these issues by learning rich graph representations, but methods to assess the quality of such
implicit graph generators are lacking. In principle, nonparametric hypothesis tests can be useful to
assess complex models, such as kernel-based tests procedures that utilise functions in a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) [Berlinet and Thomas, 2004]. When the models are described in the
form of explicit probabilities, goodness-of-fit tests [Chwialkowski et al., 2016, Liu et al., 2016] may
apply; however, goodness-of-fit testing procedures are generally not applicable for implicit models.
Instead, if a large set of samples from the target distribution is observed, one may generate samples
from the implicit model and perform a two-sample test such as a maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)
test [Gretton et al., 2007] for model assessment [Jitkrittum et al., 2017, Xu and Matsuda, 2020, 2021].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

