GenerSpeech: Towards Style Transfer for
Generalizable Out-Of-Domain Text-to-Speech

Rongjie Huang∗
Zhejiang University
rongjiehuang@zju.edu.cn

Yi Ren∗
Sea AI Lab
renyi@sea.com

Jinglin Liu
Zhejiang University
jinglinliu@zju.edu.cn

Zhou Zhao†
Zhejiang University
zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn

Chenye Cui
Zhejiang University
chenyecui@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Style transfer for out-of-domain (OOD) speech synthesis aims to generate speech
samples with unseen style (e.g., speaker identity, emotion, and prosody) derived
from an acoustic reference, while facing the following challenges: 1) The highly
dynamic style features in expressive voice are difficult to model and transfer; and
2) the TTS models should be robust enough to handle diverse OOD conditions
that differ from the source data. This paper proposes GenerSpeech, a text-tospeech model towards high-fidelity zero-shot style transfer of OOD custom voice.
GenerSpeech decomposes the speech variation into the style-agnostic and stylespecific parts by introducing two components: 1) a multi-level style adaptor to
efficiently model a large range of style conditions, including global speaker and
emotion characteristics, and the local (utterance, phoneme, and word-level) finegrained prosodic representations; and 2) a generalizable content adaptor with
Mix-Style Layer Normalization to eliminate style information in the linguistic
content representation and thus improve model generalization. Our evaluations on
zero-shot style transfer demonstrate that GenerSpeech surpasses the state-of-the-art
models in terms of audio quality and style similarity. The extension studies to
adaptive style transfer further show that GenerSpeech performs robustly in the
few-shot data setting. 3

1

Introduction

Text-to-speech [39, 37, 20, 13] aims to generate almost human-like audios using text, which attracts
broad interest in the machine learning community. These TTS models have been extended to more
complex scenarios, including multiple speakers, emotions, and styles for expressive and diverse voice
generation [14, 30, 4]. A growing number of applications [51, 11, 50, 52], such as voice assistant
services and long-form reading, have been actively developed and deployed to real-world speech
platforms.
Increasing demand for personalized speech generation challenges TTS models especially in unseen
scenarios regarding domain shifts. Unlike typically controllable speech synthesis, style transfer for
generalizable out-of-domain (OOD) text-to-speech aims to generate high-quality speech samples
with unseen styles (e.g., timbre, emotion, and prosody) derived from an acoustic reference (i.e.,
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author
3
Audio samples are available at https://GenerSpeech.github.io/

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

