Approximate Euclidean lengths and distances beyond
Johnson-Lindenstrauss

Aleksandros Sobczyk
IBM Research and ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
obc@zurich.ibm.com

Mathieu Luisier
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
mluisier@iis.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
A classical result of Johnson and Lindenstrauss states that a set of n high dimensional data points can be projected down to O(log n/2 ) dimensions such that the
square of their pairwise distances is preserved up to a small distortion  ∈ (0, 1).
It has been proved that the JL lemma is optimal for the general case, therefore,
improvements can only be explored for special cases. This work aims to improve
the −2 dependency based on techniques inspired by the Hutch++ Algorithm [34],
which reduces −2 to −1 for the related problem of implicit matrix trace estimation.
We first present an algorithm to estimate the Euclidean lengths of the rows of a
matrix. We prove for it element-wise probabilistic bounds that are at least as good
as standard JL approximations in the worst-case, but are asymptotically better
for matrices with decaying spectrum. Moreover, for any matrix, regardless of its
spectrum, the algorithm achieves -accuracy for the total, Frobenius norm-wise
relative error using only O(−1 ) queries. This is a quadratic improvement over the
norm-wise error of standard JL approximations. We also show how these results
can be extended to estimate (i) the Euclidean distances between data points and (ii)
the statistical leverage scores of tall-and-skinny data matrices, which are ubiquitous
for many applications, with analogous theoretical improvements. Proof-of-concept
numerical experiments are presented to validate the theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

The Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) lemma [29] is a fundamental concept in dimensionality reduction
and data science. Given a set of n high dimensional data points X = {x1 , ..., xn }, where each
xi ∈ Rd , the goal is to find a projection f : Rd → Rk that maps the vectors to a much smaller
dimension k  d such that the geometry of the original set is approximately preserved. Specifically,
the projection should preserve the pairwise distances up to a small distortion  ∈ (0, 1), that is
(1 − )kxi − xj k2 ≤ kf (xi ) − f (xj )k2 ≤ (1 + )kxi − xj k2 ,

(1)

for all i, j ∈ [n]. If f satisfies this property, then it is called an -isometry. Johnson and Lindenstrauss
proved that, given , such an f can be found in randomized polynomial time and that the projected
dimension is no larger than O(log n/2 ). In the last decades the JL lemma has made an impact in
many areas, including Graph Algorithms [6, 42], Machine Learning [5, 11, 16, 24], Numerical Linear
Algebra [14, 33, 40, 44] and Optimization [20, 22, 38].
In the existing literature, a common approach to approximate the metric is to first find a map
that preserves Euclidean lengths instead of distances. The approximate isometry property is then
achieved by applying this map to all the pairwise difference vectors, since the Euclidean distance
between x and y is equal to the length of x − y; cf. [18, 29]. In this work we follow the same
methodology. We first study the problem of approximating the Euclidean lengths of the rows of an
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

