Rethinking and Improving Robustness of
Convolutional Neural Networks: a Shapley
Value-based Approach in Frequency Domain
Yiting Chen, Qibing Ren, Junchi Yan∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{sjtucyt, renqibing, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The existence of adversarial examples poses concerns for the robustness of
convolutional neural networks (CNN), for which a popular hypothesis is about
the frequency bias phenomenon: CNNs rely more on high-frequency components
(HFC) for classification than humans, which causes the brittleness of CNNs.
However, most previous works manually select and roughly divide the image
frequency spectrum and conduct qualitative analysis. In this work, we introduce
Shapley value, a metric of cooperative game theory, into the frequency domain
and propose to quantify the positive (negative) impact of every frequency
component of data on CNNs. Based on the Shapley value, we quantify the impact
in a fine-grained way and show intriguing instance disparity. Statistically, we
investigate adversarial training(AT) and the adversarial attack in the frequency
domain. The observations motivate us to perform an in-depth analysis and lead
to multiple novel hypotheses about i) the cause of adversarial robustness of the
AT model; ii) the fairness problem of AT between different classes in the same
dataset; iii) the attack bias on different frequency components. Finally, we propose
a Shapley-value guided data augmentation technique for improving the robustness.
Experimental results on image classification benchmarks show its effectiveness.
The code for this paper is at https://github.com/Ytchen981/CSA

1

Introduction

Though convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown their great generalization power in various
vision tasks, the existence of adversarial examples [37, 16, 24] show that CNNs are prone to be
affected by adversarial noises that are imperceptible to humans. As inspecting the impact of frequency
components, i.e. signals of a certain frequency in the frequency domain, one popular hypothesis
about the brittleness of CNNs is that CNNs can exploit high frequency components (HFCs) that are
not perceivable to humans [41, 42, 1, 21]. Based on this hypothesis, a line of works propose to utilize
HFC filtering to improve the attack or defense methods [13, 22, 51]. However, towards the above
frequency bias phenomenon, most works [41, 42, 21] intuitively divide the image frequency spectrum
into two parts as low frequency components (LFCs) and HFCs then evaluate the contribution of
each part based on the performance of models on the dataset, overlooking the possible disparity
in sample-level and frequent component-level. Moreover, current works [17, 32] reveal that some
successful adversarial attacks also depend on LFCs, which reveals the limitation of previous works:
i) overlooking the contribution of each individual frequency component in LFCs and HFCs; ii) only
do qualitative dataset-level analysis.
∗

Junchi Yan is the correspondence author, who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

