Inverse Design for Fluid-Structure Interactions
using Graph Network Simulators

Kelsey R. Allen ∗
DeepMind, UK

Tatiana Lopez Guevara ∗
DeepMind, UK

Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez
DeepMind, UK

Peter Battaglia
DeepMind, UK

Kimberly Stachenfeld ∗
DeepMind, UK

Jessica Hamrick
DeepMind, UK

Tobias Pfaff
DeepMind, UK

{krallen,zepolitat,stachenfeld,alvarosg,peterbattaglia,jhamrick,tpfaff}@deepmind.com

Abstract
Designing physical artifacts that serve a purpose—such as tools and other functional structures—is central to engineering as well as everyday human behavior.
Though automating design using machine learning has tremendous promise, existing methods are often limited by the task-dependent distributions they were exposed
to during training. Here we showcase a task-agnostic approach to inverse design, by
combining general-purpose graph network simulators with gradient-based design
optimization. This constitutes a simple, fast, and reusable approach that solves
high-dimensional problems with complex physical dynamics, including designing
surfaces and tools to manipulate fluid flows and optimizing the shape of an airfoil
to minimize drag. This framework produces high-quality designs by propagating
gradients through trajectories of hundreds of steps, even when using models that
were pre-trained for single-step predictions on data substantially different from the
design tasks. In our fluid manipulation tasks, the resulting designs outperformed
those found by sampling-based optimization techniques. In airfoil design, they
matched the quality of those obtained with a specialized solver. Our results suggest
that despite some remaining challenges, machine learning-based simulators are
maturing to the point where they can support general-purpose design optimization
across a variety of fluid-structure interaction domains.

1

Introduction

Automatically designing objects to exhibit a desired property—often referred to as inverse design—
has the potential to transform science and engineering, including aerodynamics [27], material design
[14], optics [21], and robotics [35, 75]. Despite its promise, widespread practice of inverse design has
been limited by the availability of fast, general-purpose forward models. Traditionally, many methods
rely on specialized “classical” solvers, which are handcrafted to simulate a particular physical process.
However, these models can sometimes be slow, may not provide gradients, or in certain domains,
might even be unknown [23].
To mitigate these issues, machine learning is playing an increasingly important role by substituting
all or part of the inverse design pipeline. “End-to-end” methods can bypass expensive simulation
and data collection by learning a mapping directly from design parameters (such as the shape of
an airplane wing) to a task objective (such as the observed drag) [59, 76, 19]. Learned generative
∗

These authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

