ProcTHOR: Large-Scale Embodied AI Using
Procedural Generation
Matt Deitke†ψ , Eli VanderBilt† , Alvaro Herrasti† , Luca Weihs†
Jordi Salvador† , Kiana Ehsani† , Winson Han† , Eric Kolve†
Ali Farhadiψ , Aniruddha Kembhavi†ψ , Roozbeh Mottaghi†ψ
†
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI, ψ University of Washington, Seattle
procthor.allenai.org

Abstract
Massive datasets and high-capacity models have driven many recent advancements
in computer vision and natural language understanding. This work presents a platform to enable similar success stories in Embodied AI. We propose P ROC THOR, a
framework for procedural generation of Embodied AI environments. P ROC THOR
enables us to sample arbitrarily large datasets of diverse, interactive, customizable,
and performant virtual environments to train and evaluate embodied agents across
navigation, interaction, and manipulation tasks. We demonstrate the power and
potential of P ROC THOR via a sample of 10,000 generated houses and a simple
neural model. Models trained using only RGB images on P ROC THOR, with no
explicit mapping and no human task supervision produce state-of-the-art results
across 6 embodied AI benchmarks for navigation, rearrangement, and arm manipulation, including the presently running Habitat 2022, AI2-THOR Rearrangement
2022, and RoboTHOR challenges. We also demonstrate strong 0-shot results on
these benchmarks, via pre-training on P ROC THOR with no fine-tuning on the
downstream benchmark, often beating previous state-of-the-art systems that access
the downstream training data.

1

Introduction

Computer vision and natural language processing models have become increasingly powerful through
the use of large-scale training data. Recent models such as CLIP [45], DALL-E [47], GPT-3 [7], and
Flamingo [2] use massive amounts of task agnostic data to pre-train large neural architectures that
perform remarkably well at downstream tasks, including in zero and few-shot settings. In comparison,
the Embodied AI (E-AI) research community predominantly trains agents in simulators with far
fewer scenes [46, 29, 13]. Due to the complexity of tasks and the need for long planning horizons, the
best performing E-AI models continue to overfit on the limited training scenes and thus generalize
poorly to unseen environments.
In recent years, E-AI simulators have become increasingly more powerful with support for physics,
manipulators, object states, deformable objects, fluids, and real-sim counterparts [29, 48, 49, 19, 60],
but scaling them up to tens of thousands of scenes has remained challenging. Existing E-AI
environments are either designed manually [29, 19] or obtained via 3D scans of real structures
[48, 46]. The former approach requires 3D artists to spend a significant amount of time designing 3D
assets, arranging them in sensible configurations within large spaces, and carefully configuring the
right textures and lighting in these environments. The latter involves moving specialized cameras
through many real-world environments and then stitching the resulting images together to form 3D
reconstructions of the scenes. These approaches are not scalable, and expanding existing scene
repositories multiple orders of magnitude is not practical.
We present P ROC THOR, a framework built off of AI2-THOR [29], to procedurally generate fullyinteractive, physics-enabled environments for E-AI research. Given a room specification (e.g., a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

