Debiased, Longitudinal and Coordinated Drug
Recommendation through Multi-Visit Clinic Records

Hongda Sun, Shufang Xie, Shuqi Li, Yuhan Chen, Ji-Rong Wen, Rui Yan∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
{sunhongda98,shufangxie,shuqili,yuhanchen,jrwen,ruiyan}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
AI-empowered drug recommendation has become an important task in healthcare
research areas, which offers an additional perspective to assist human doctors with
more accurate and more efficient drug prescriptions. Generally, drug recommendation is based on patients’ diagnosis results in the electronic health records. We
assume that there are three key factors to be addressed in drug recommendation: 1)
elimination of recommendation bias due to limitations of observable information,
2) better utilization of historical health condition and 3) coordination of multiple
drugs to control safety. To this end, we propose DrugRec, a causal inference
based drug recommendation model. The causal graphical model can identify and
deconfound the recommendation bias with front-door adjustment. Meanwhile,
we model the multi-visit in the causal graph to characterize a patient’s historical
health conditions. Finally, we model the drug-drug interactions (DDIs) as the
propositional satisfiability (SAT) problem, and solving the SAT problem can help
better coordinate the recommendation. Comprehensive experiment results show
that our proposed model achieves state-of-the-art performance on the widely used
datasets MIMIC-III and MIMIC-IV, demonstrating the effectiveness and safety of
our method.

1

Introduction

The digitization of healthcare track records with diagnosis, procedure, and prescriptions has become
an inevitable trend rising. Advanced AI can process large-scale electronic health records (EHRs)
and biomedical knowledge graphs (BioKGs) with the massive data available. With the continuous
progress of medical digitization, the advances in deep learning technologies for processing can assist
doctors and researchers in making accurate and efficient medical decisions [26, 18]. More specifically,
the goal of the drug recommendation task is to recommend appropriate medication combinations
based on a patient’s disease conditions. Existing drug recommendation methods model a patient
based on his/her diagnoses and procedures in health records from actual hospital visits and then
determine which drugs to recommend [27, 25]. The information on BioKGs is also widely used in the
drug recommendation process to avoid the negative effect of drug-drug interactions (DDIs) [17, 28].
Despite the promising achievements of previous methods, we argue that three essential factors
should be considered in a drug recommendation model. First, general recommendation systems
often suffer from recommendation bias issues [1] (e.g., conformity bias, exposure bias, popularity
bias, selection bias, etc.), which also happens in drug recommendations but is not handled well
in previous works. Sometimes the diagnostic information in EHRs is insufficient to describe the
patient’s health condition, leading to a recommendation bias due to the limitations of observable
information. Second, the patient’s historical clinic records are critical for recommending drugs
effectively. When recommending drugs, the model should consider both the current visit and previous
∗

Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

