Benchmarking Heterogeneous Treatment Effect
Models through the Lens of Interpretability
Jonathan Crabbé⇤
University of Cambridge
jc2133@cam.ac.uk

Alicia Curth⇤
University of Cambridge
amc253@cam.ac.uk

Ioana Bica⇤
University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute
ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
UCLA
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Estimating personalized effects of treatments is a complex, yet pervasive problem.
To tackle it, recent developments in the machine learning (ML) literature on
heterogeneous treatment effect estimation gave rise to many sophisticated, but
opaque, tools: due to their flexibility, modularity and ability to learn constrained
representations, neural networks in particular have become central to this literature.
Unfortunately, the assets of such black boxes come at a cost: models typically
involve countless nontrivial operations, making it difficult to understand what they
have learned. Yet, understanding these models can be crucial – in a medical context,
for example, discovered knowledge on treatment effect heterogeneity could inform
treatment prescription in clinical practice. In this work, we therefore use posthoc feature importance methods to identify features that influence the model’s
predictions. This allows us to evaluate treatment effect estimators along a new and
important dimension that has been overlooked in previous work: We construct a
benchmarking environment to empirically investigate the ability of personalized
treatment effect models to identify predictive covariates – covariates that determine
differential responses to treatment. Our benchmarking environment then enables
us to provide new insight into the strengths and weaknesses of different types of
treatment effects models as we modulate different challenges specific to treatment
effect estimation – e.g. the ratio of prognostic to predictive information, the possible
nonlinearity of potential outcomes and the presence and type of confounding.

1

Introduction

The need to estimate the effects of actions – such as treatments, policies and other interventions
– is ubiquitous in many domains, ranging from economics to medicine. Many applications where
treatment effects are of interest additionally operate under high stakes, for example treatment decisions
in a hospital setting – making it particularly important that estimates leading to individual decisions
are reliable. As interest in designing personalized treatments is growing across fields, a substantial
literature on learning treatment effect heterogeneity has emerged in machine learning (ML) in recent
years. In this context, a plethora of sophisticated methods for estimating conditional average treatment
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

