Benchopt: Reproducible, efficient and collaborative
optimization benchmarks

Thomas Moreau1,∗ , Mathurin Massias2,∗ , Alexandre Gramfort1,∗ , Pierre Ablin3 ,
Pierre-Antoine Bannier, Benjamin Charlier4 , Mathieu Dagréou1 , Tom Dupré la Tour6 ,
Ghislain Durif4 , Cassio F. Dantas7 , Quentin Klopfenstein8 , Johan Larsson9 , En Lai1 ,
Tanguy Lefort4 , Benoit Malézieux1 , Badr Moufad2 , Binh T. Nguyen10 , Alain Rakotomamonjy11 ,
Zaccharie Ramzi12 , Joseph Salmon4,5 , Samuel Vaiter13
1

Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, 91120 Palaiseau, France
Univ Lyon, Inria, CNRS, ENS de Lyon, UCB Lyon 1, LIP UMR 5668, F-69342, Lyon, France
3
Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL University, CNRS, 75016, Paris, France
4
IMAG, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France 5 Institut Universitaire de France (IUF)
6
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 7 TETIS, Univ Montpellier, INRAE, Montpellier, France
8
University of Luxembourg, LCSB, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
9
The Department of Statistics, Lund University 10 LTCI, Télécom Paris, 91120 Palaiseau, France
11
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France 12 ENS Ulm, CNRS, UMR 8553, Paris, France
13
CNRS & Université Côte d’Azur, Laboratoire J.A. Dieudonné, CNRS, Nice, France
2

Abstract
Numerical validation is at the core of machine learning research as it allows to
assess the actual impact of new methods, and to confirm the agreement between
theory and practice. Yet, the rapid development of the field poses several challenges:
researchers are confronted with a profusion of methods to compare, limited transparency and consensus on best practices, as well as tedious re-implementation work.
As a result, validation is often very partial, which can lead to wrong conclusions that
slow down the progress of research. We propose Benchopt, a collaborative framework to automate, reproduce and publish optimization benchmarks in machine
learning across programming languages and hardware architectures. Benchopt
simplifies benchmarking for the community by providing an off-the-shelf tool for
running, sharing and extending experiments. To demonstrate its broad usability, we
showcase benchmarks on three standard learning tasks: ℓ2 -regularized logistic regression, Lasso, and ResNet18 training for image classification. These benchmarks
highlight key practical findings that give a more nuanced view of the state-of-the-art
for these problems, showing that for practical evaluation, the devil is in the details.
We hope that Benchopt will foster collaborative work in the community hence
improving the reproducibility of research findings.

1

Introduction

Numerical experiments have become an essential part of statistics and machine learning (ML). It
is now commonly accepted that every new method needs to be validated through comparisons with
existing approaches on standard problems. Such validation provides insight into the method’s benefits
and limitations and thus adds depth to the results. While research aims at advancing knowledge
and not just improving the state of the art, experiments ensure that results are reliable and support
theoretical claims (Sculley et al., 2018). Practical validation also helps the ever-increasing number
of ML users in applied sciences to choose the right method for their task. Performing rigorous and
extensive experiments is, however, time-consuming (Raff, 2019), particularly because comparisons
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

