Task-Free Continual Learning via
Online Discrepancy Distance Learning

Fei Ye and Adrian G. Bors
Department of Computer Science
University of York
York, YO10 5GH, UK
{fy689,adrian.bors}@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning from non-stationary data streams, also called Task-Free Continual Learning (TFCL) remains challenging due to the absence of explicit task information in
most applications. Even though recently some algorithms have been proposed for
TFCL, these methods lack theoretical guarantees. Moreover, there are no theoretical studies about forgetting during TFCL. This paper develops a new theoretical
analysis framework that derives generalization bounds based on the discrepancy
distance between the visited samples and the entire information made available
for training the model. This analysis provides new insights into the forgetting
behaviour in classification tasks. Inspired by this theoretical model, we propose a
new approach enabled with the dynamic component expansion mechanism for a
mixture model, namely Online Discrepancy Distance Learning (ODDL). ODDL
estimates the discrepancy between the current memory and the already accumulated
knowledge as an expansion signal aiming to ensure a compact network architecture
with optimal performance. We then propose a new sample selection approach that
selectively stores the samples into the memory buffer through the discrepancybased measure, further improving the performance. We perform several TFCL
experiments with the proposed methodology, which demonstrate that the proposed
approach achieves the state of the art performance.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) and its extension to lifelong learning, represents one of the most desired
functions in an artificial intelligence system, representing the capability of learning new concepts
while maintaining the knowledge of past experiences [32]. Such an ability can be used in many
real-time applications such as robotics, health investigative systems, autonomous vehicles [20] or
for agents exploring artificial (meta) universes. Such applications require to continuously adapt to a
changing environment. Modern deep learning models suffer from degenerated performances on past
data after learning novel knowledge, a phenomenon called catastrophic forgetting [13].
A popular attempt to relieve forgetting in CL is by employing a small memory buffer to preserve
a few past samples and replay them when training on a new task [3, 6]. However, when there
are restrictions on the available memory capacity, memory-based approaches would suffer from
degenerated performance on past tasks, especially when aiming to learn an infinite number of tasks.
Recently, the Dynamic Expansion Model (DEM) [51] has shown promising results in CL, aiming to
guarantee optimal performance by preserving the previously learnt knowledge through the parameters
of frozen components trained on past data, while adding a new component when learning a novel
task. However, such approaches require knowing where and when the knowledge associated with a
given task is changed, which is not always applicable in a real environment.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

