Concentration of Data Encoding in Parameterized
Quantum Circuits
Guangxi Li1,2 , Ruilin Ye2,3 , Xuanqiang Zhao2 , Xin Wang2⇤
1
University of Technology Sydney, NSW, Australia
2
Institute for Quantum Computing, Baidu Research, Beijing, China
3
Peking University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Variational quantum algorithms have been acknowledged as the leading strategy
to realize near-term quantum advantages in meaningful tasks, including machine
learning and optimization. When applied to tasks involving classical data, such
algorithms generally begin with data encoding circuits and train quantum neural
networks (QNNs) to minimize target functions. Although QNNs have been widely
studied to improve these algorithms’ performance on practical tasks, there is a
gap in systematically understanding the influence of data encoding on the eventual
performance. In this paper, we make progress in filling this gap by considering
the common data encoding strategies based on parameterized quantum circuits.
We prove that, under reasonable assumptions, the distance between the average
encoded state and the maximally mixed state could be explicitly upper-bounded
with respect to the width and depth of the encoding circuit. This result in particular
implies that the average encoded state will concentrate on the maximally mixed
state at an exponential speed on depth. Such concentration seriously limits the
capabilities of quantum classifiers, and strictly restricts the distinguishability of
encoded states from a quantum information perspective. To support our findings,
we numerically verify these results on both synthetic and public data sets. Our
results highlight the significance of quantum data encoding and may shed light on
the future design of quantum encoding strategies.

1

Introduction

Quantum machine learning [1, 2, 3, 4] is an emerging and promising interdisciplinary research
direction in the fields of quantum computing and artificial intelligence. In this area, quantum
computers are expected to enhance machine learning algorithms through their inherent parallel
characteristics, thus demonstrating quantum advantages over classical algorithms [5].
With the increasing enormous efforts from academia and industry, the current quantum devices
(usually acknowledged as the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices [6]) already can
show quantum advantages on certain carefully designed tasks [7, 8] despite their limitations in
quantum circuit width and depth. A timely direction is to explore quantum advantages with near-term
quantum devices in practical machine learning tasks, and a leading strategy is the hybrid quantumclassical algorithms, also known as the variational quantum algorithms [9, 10]. Such algorithms
usually use a classical optimizer to train quantum neural networks (QNNs). They in particular hand
over relatively intractable tasks to quantum computers while those rather ordinary tasks to classical
computers.
⇤

wangxin73@baidu.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

