Blessing of Depth in Linear Regression: Deeper
Models Have Flatter Landscape Around the True
Solution
Jianhao Ma
Department of Industrial & Operations Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
jianhao@umich.edu
Salar Fattahi
Department of Industrial & Operations Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
fattahi@umich.edu

Abstract
This work characterizes the effect of depth on the optimization landscape of linear
regression, showing that, despite their nonconvexity, deeper models have more
desirable optimization landscape. We consider a robust and over-parameterized
setting, where a subset of measurements are grossly corrupted with noise, and the
true linear model is captured via an N -layer diagonal linear neural network. On the
negative side, we show that this problem does not have a benign landscape: given
any N 1, with constant probability, there exists a solution corresponding to the
ground truth that is neither local nor global minimum. However, on the positive
side, we prove that, for any N -layer model with N
2, a simple sub-gradient
method becomes oblivious to such “problematic” solutions; instead, it converges
to a balanced solution that is not only close to the ground truth but also enjoys
a flat local landscape, thereby eschewing the need for “early stopping”. Lastly,
we empirically verify that the desirable optimization landscape of deeper models
extends to other robust learning tasks, including deep matrix recovery and deep
ReLU networks with `1 -loss.

1

Introduction

Supported by the empirical success of deep models in contemporary learning tasks, it is by now a
conventional wisdom that “deeper models generalize better” [21, 31, 7]. Indeed, the flurry of recent
attempts towards demystifying this phenomenon is a testament to the amount of research it has
spawned: from simple linear regression to more complex and nonlinear models, it is shown that
deeper models benefit from a range of desirable statistical properties, such as depth separation [33,
15, 34, 35], implicit bias [19, 2, 10], and hierarchical learning [1], to name a few.
Despite the great promise of deeper models—both theoretically and empirically—the effect of depth
on their optimization landscape has remained elusive to this day. A recent body of work attempts to
characterize the effect of depth on the loss function through the notion of benign landscape. Roughly
speaking, an optimization problem has a benign landscape if it is devoid of spurious local minima,
and its true solutions—i.e., solutions corresponding to the ground truth—coincide with global minima.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

