Sound and Complete Causal Identification with
Latent Variables Given Local Background Knowledge

Tian-Zuo Wang, Tian Qin, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China.
{wangtz, qint, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Great efforts have been devoted to causal discovery from observational data, and
it is well known that introducing some background knowledge attained from
experiments or human expertise can be very helpful. However, it remains unknown
that what causal relations are identifiable given background knowledge in the
presence of latent confounders. In this paper, we solve the problem with sound
and complete orientation rules when the background knowledge is given in a local
form. Furthermore, based on the solution to the problem, this paper proposes a
general active learning framework for causal discovery in the presence of latent
confounders, with its effectiveness and efficiency validated by experiments.

1

Introduction

Causality has attracted tremendous attention in recent years, for its application on explainability [1],
fairness [2, 3, 4], decision [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], and so on. In Pearl’s causality framework [10], one important
problem is causal discovery, i.e., learning a causal graph to denote the causal relations among all
the variables [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. Generally, we cannot identify all the causal relations from
observational data, unless we make some additional functional assumptions [17, 18, 19] or exploit
the abundant information in multiple or dynamic environments [20, 21].
In light of the uncertainty of the causal relations, a common practice to reveal them is introducing
background knowledge, which is called BK for short. BK can be attained from experiments or human
expertise. When experiments are available, we can collect interventional data to learn additional
causal relations [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31]. And if in the causal discovery task, there are
some variables familiar to humans, it is also possible that the human expertise can be helpful [32].
For example, if we study the causal relations among some variables including sales and prices, the
causal relations such as price causes sales can be obtained directly according to human expertise.
When BK is available in addition to observational data, a fundamental problem is: what causal
relations are identifiable in the presence of latent variables? This problem is fundamental for its
implication on the maximally identifiable causal knowledge with the observational data and BK.
Its difficulty results from the fact that, in addition to the BK itself, some other causal relations can
also be learned when incorporating BK. For example, they can be identified on the basis of some
restrictions, such as the causal relations are acyclic. It is quite challenging to find the complete
characterization for such additional causal knowledge in the presence of latent variables, and the
complete characterization is necessarily accompanied with theoretical guarantee for the existence
of causal graphs consistent to the observational data and local BK that have exactly different causal
relations for the unidentifiable ones. Unfortunately, the problem remains open.
In this paper, we solve the problem with sound and complete orientation rules when the background
knowledge is given in a local form. In the presence of latent variables, a partial ancestral graph (PAG)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

