Estimating graphical models for count data with
applications to single-cell gene network

Feiyi Xiao ∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
xiaofeiyi1217@pku.edu.cn

Junjie Tang*
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
junjie.tang@pku.edu.cn

Huaying Fang
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Imaging Theory and Technology
Capital Normal University
huayingfang@hotmail.com
Ruibin Xi
School of Mathematical Sciences
Center for Statistical Science
Peking University
ruibinxi@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Graphical models such as Gaussian graphical models have been widely applied for
direct interaction inference in many different areas. In many modern applications,
such as single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) studies, the observed data are
counts and often contain many small counts. Traditional graphical models for
continuous data are inappropriate for network inference of count data. We consider
the Poisson log-normal (PLN) graphical model for count data and the precision
matrix of the latent normal distribution represents the network. We propose a twostep method PLNet to estimate the precision matrix. PLNet first estimates the latent
covariance matrix using the maximum marginal likelihood estimator (MMLE) and
then estimates the precision matrix by minimizing the lasso-penalized D-trace
loss function. We establish the convergence rate of the MMLE of the covariance
matrix and further establish the convergence rate and the sign consistency of the
proposed PLNet estimator of the precision matrix in the high dimensional setting.
Importantly, although the PLN model is not sub-Gaussian, we show that the PLNet
estimator is consistent even if the model dimension goes to infinity exponentially
as the sample size increases. The performance of PLNet is evaluated and compared
with available methods using simulation and gene regulatory network analysis of
real scRNA-seq data.

1

Introduction

Gaussian graphical model (GGM) [15, 28] is widely used for understanding the complex interactions
of the observed variables in various fields [26, 14, 23]. GGM assumes that each sample is drawn
from a multivariate Gaussian distribution, in which the precision matrix (i.e., the inverse of the
covariance matrix) represents the network. In GGM, two nodes are connected if the corresponding
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Ruibin Xi (ruibinxi@math.pku.edu.cn)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

