MetaTeacher: Coordinating Multi-Model Domain
Adaptation for Medical Image Classification
Zhenbin Wang1 , Mao Ye1 ∗, Xiatian Zhu2 , Liuhan Peng3 , Liang Tian1 , Yingying Zhu4
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
3
Xinjiang University, Ürümqi, China
4
University of Texas, Arlington, US
zhenbinwang@foxmail.com, cvlab.uestc@gmail.com, xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
In medical image analysis, often we need to build an image recognition system for
a target scenario with the access to small labeled data and abundant unlabeled data,
as well as multiple related models pretrained on different source scenarios. This
presents the combined challenges of multi-source-free domain adaptation and semisupervised learning simultaneously. However, both problems are typically studied
independently in the literature, and how to effectively combine existing methods is
non-trivial in design. In this work, we introduce a novel MetaTeacher framework
with three key components: (1) A learnable coordinating scheme for adaptive
domain adaptation of individual source models, (2) A mutual feedback mechanism
between the target model and source models for more coherent learning, and (3)
A semi-supervised bilevel optimization algorithm for consistently organizing the
adaption of source models and the learning of target model. It aims to leverage
the knowledge of source models adaptively whilst maximize their complementary
benefits collectively to counter the challenge of limited supervision. Extensive
experiments on five chest x-ray image datasets show that our method outperforms
clearly all the state-of-the-art alternatives. The code is available at https://
github.com/wongzbb/metateacher.

1

Introduction

Despite the great stride made by existing deep learning methods on medical image classification
results [32, 53, 67], their performances often degrade drastically when applied to a new unseen
scenario. This is mainly due to the domain shift challenge between the training and test data, caused
by different environments, different instruments, and different acquisition protocols. Unlike natural
images, annotating medical images requires special clinical expertise. It is hence more difficult to
obtain large-scale medical image datasets with high-quality labels at every single scenario. Domain
adaptation is a feasible solution, but comes with several limitations. Firstly, medical data is often
under strict privacy and license constraints. That means the source domain data is usually inaccessible
during domain adaptation. Secondly, medical data is typically multi-labeled which means that there
are multiple labels for a sample, and the multiple categories are not mutually exclusive. It has more
prominent different characteristics in different scenarios. Considering these practical constraints, we
propose a new Semi-supervised Multi-source-free Domain Adaptation (SMDA) problem setting in
the context of medical image classification. Our proposed setting has three key conditions: (1) There
are multiple source domain models trained on respective multi-label medical image datasets; (2) All
∗

The corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

