Improved Fine-Tuning by Better Leveraging
Pre-Training Data
Ziquan Liu1∗, Yi Xu2 , Yuanhong Xu3 , Qi Qian3 , Hao Li3 , Xiangyang Ji4 , Antoni B. Chan1 ,
Rong Jin3
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
ziquanliu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, yxu@dlut.edu.cn, {yuanhong.xuyh, qi.qian,
lihao.lh}@alibaba-inc.com, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn, abchan@cityu.edu.hk,
rongjinemail@gmail.com
2

Abstract
As a dominant paradigm, fine-tuning a pre-trained model on the target data is
widely used in many deep learning applications, especially for small data sets.
However, recent studies have empirically shown that training from scratch has the
final performance that is no worse than this pre-training strategy once the number
of training samples is increased in some vision tasks. In this work, we revisit this
phenomenon from the perspective of generalization analysis by using excess risk
bound which is popular in learning theory. The result reveals that the excess risk
bound may have a weak dependency on the pre-trained model. The observation
inspires us to leverage pre-training data for fine-tuning, since this data is also
available for fine-tuning. The generalization result of using pre-training data shows
that the excess risk bound on a target task can be improved when the appropriate
pre-training data is included in fine-tuning. With the theoretical motivation, we
propose a novel selection strategy to select a subset from pre-training data to help
improve the generalization on the target task. Extensive experimental results for
image classification tasks on 8 benchmark data sets verify the effectiveness of
the proposed data selection based fine-tuning pipeline. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ziquanliu/NeurIPS2022_UOT_fine_tuning.

1

Introduction

After the success on ImageNet [1], deep learning attracts much attention and improves the performance of various computer vision tasks significantly, e.g., object detection [2], semantic
segmentation[3]. However, as a result of expensive labeling, it is unlikely that we have sufficient
labels for every application. Fortunately, given a model pre-trained on a large-scale data set like
ImageNet, an effective model for the target data set, which may only have hundreds of examples, can
be learned by fine-tuning the pre-trained model. It is because many vision tasks are related [4] and a
model learned from ImageNet that consists of more than one million examples can contain diverse
semantic information and provides a better initialization than random initialization.
Despite the prevalence of fine-tuning pre-trained models, its theoretical understanding is unclear. On
the one hand, when sufficient training data is available, some research [5] has shown that training
∗

Work partially done during an internship at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.
author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

indicates corresponding

