Few-shot Task-agnostic Neural Architecture Search for
Distilling Large Language Models
Dongkuan Xu⇤
NC State University
dxu27@ncsu.edu
Xiaodong Liu
Microsoft Research

Subhabrata Mukherjee†
Microsoft Research
submukhe@microsoft.com

Debadeepta Dey
Microsoft Research

Wenhui Wang
Microsoft Research

Ahmed Hassan Awadallah
Microsoft Research

Xiang Zhang
Penn State University

Jianfeng Gao
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Traditional knowledge distillation (KD) methods manually design student architectures to compress large models given pre-specified computational cost. This requires several trials to find viable students, and repeating the process with change in
computational budget. We use Neural Architecture Search (NAS) to automatically
distill several compressed students with variable cost from a large model. Existing
NAS methods train a single SuperLM consisting of millions of subnetworks with
weight-sharing, resulting in interference between subnetworks of different sizes.
Additionally, many of these works are task-specific requiring task labels for SuperLM training. Our framework AutoDistil addresses above challenges with
the following steps: (a) Incorporates inductive bias and heuristics to partition Transformer search space into K compact sub-spaces (e.g., K=3 can generate typical
student sizes of base, small and tiny); (b) Trains one SuperLM for each sub-space
using task-agnostic objective (e.g., self-attention distillation) with weight-sharing
of students; (c) Lightweight search for the optimal student without re-training.
Task-agnostic training and search allow students to be reused for fine-tuning on any
downstream task. Experiments on GLUE benchmark demonstrate AutoDistil
to outperform state-of-the-art KD and NAS methods with upto 41x reduction in
computational cost. Code and models are available at aka.ms/autodistil.

1

Introduction

While large pre-trained language models (e.g., BERT [1], GPT-3 [2]) are effective, their huge size
poses significant challenges for downstream applications in terms of energy consumption and cost
of inference [3] limiting their usage in on the edge scenarios and under constrained computational
inference budgets. Knowledge distillation [4, 5, 6, 7] has shown strong results in compressing pretrained language models into small student models. However, these works require pre-specification of
the student architecture and computational cost (e.g., number of parameters, FLOPs) for distillation.
This poses two significant challenges: (i) it requires several trials to come up with viable architectures
as they are hand-engineered and to define several hyper-parameters (e.g., number of layers and
attention heads, hidden dimension, etc.); (ii) one has to re-run distillation with any change in
specification for the student architecture or computational cost for using it in a target environment.
⇤
†

Work done while interning at Microsoft Research.
Corresponding author and project lead.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

