Vision GNN: An Image is Worth Graph of Nodes

Kai Han1,2∗

Yunhe Wang2∗ Jianyuan Guo2 Yehui Tang2,3 Enhua Wu1,4
State Key Lab of Computer Science, ISCAS & UCAS
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Peking University 4 University of Macau
{kai.han,yunhe.wang}@huawei.com, weh@ios.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Network architecture plays a key role in the deep learning-based computer vision
system. The widely-used convolutional neural network and transformer treat the
image as a grid or sequence structure, which is not flexible to capture irregular
and complex objects. In this paper, we propose to represent the image as a graph
structure and introduce a new Vision GNN (ViG) architecture to extract graphlevel feature for visual tasks. We first split the image to a number of patches
which are viewed as nodes, and construct a graph by connecting the nearest
neighbors. Based on the graph representation of images, we build our ViG model
to transform and exchange information among all the nodes. ViG consists of
two basic modules: Grapher module with graph convolution for aggregating and
updating graph information, and FFN module with two linear layers for node
feature transformation. Both isotropic and pyramid architectures of ViG are built
with different model sizes. Extensive experiments on image recognition and object
detection tasks demonstrate the superiority of our ViG architecture. We hope this
pioneering study of GNN on general visual tasks will provide useful inspiration
and experience for future research.
The PyTorch code is available at https://github.com/huawei-noah/
Efficient-AI-Backbones and the MindSpore code is available at https:
//gitee.com/mindspore/models.

1

Introduction

In the modern computer vision system, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) used to be the de-facto
standard network architecture [29, 27, 17]. Recently, transformer with attention mechanism was
introduced for visual tasks [9, 3] and attained competitive performance. MLP-based (multi-layer
perceptron) vision models [49, 50] can also work well without using convolutions or self-attention.
These progresses are pushing the vision models towards an unprecedented height.
Different networks treat the input image in different ways. As shown in Figure 1, the image data
is usually represented as a regular grid of pixels in the Euclidean space. CNNs [29] apply sliding
window on the image and introduce the shift-invariance and locality. The recent vision transformer [9]
or MLP [49] treats the image as a sequence of patches. For example, ViT [9] divides a 224 × 224
image into a number of 16 × 16 patches and forms a sequence with length of 196 as input.
Instead of the regular grid or sequence representation, we process the image in a more flexible way.
One basic task of computer vision is to recognize the objects in an image. Since the objects are
usually not quadrate whose shape is irregular, the commonly-used grid or sequence structures in
previous networks like ResNet and ViT are redundant and inflexible to process them. An object can
be viewed as a composition of parts, e.g., a human can be roughly divided into head, upper body,
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

