A Rotated Hyperbolic Wrapped Normal Distribution
for Hierarchical Representation Learning
Seunghyuk Cho1

Juyong Lee1

Jaesik Park1,2

CSED POSTECH1

Dongwoo Kim1,2

GSAI POSTECH2

Abstract
We present a rotated hyperbolic wrapped normal distribution (RoWN), a simple
yet effective alteration of a hyperbolic wrapped normal distribution (HWN). The
HWN expands the domain of probabilistic modeling from Euclidean to hyperbolic
space, where a tree can be embedded with arbitrary low distortion in theory. In this
work, we analyze the geometric properties of the diagonal HWN, a standard choice
of distribution in probabilistic modeling. The analysis shows that the distribution
is inappropriate to represent the data points at the same hierarchy level through
their angular distance with the same norm in the Poincaré disk model. We then
empirically verify the presence of limitations of HWN, and show how RoWN, the
proposed distribution, can alleviate the limitations on various hierarchical datasets,
including noisy synthetic binary tree, WordNet, and Atari 2600 Breakout. The
code is available at https://github.com/ml-postech/RoWN.

1

Introduction

Hyperbolic space has served as an effective medium to learn parsimonious representations of hierarchical data, including vocabulary with relationships (Nickel and Kiela, 2017, 2018; Tifrea et al.,
2019), knowledge graphs (Chami et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020), and social networks (Zhao et al., 2011;
Shavitt and Tankel, 2008). Recent studies reveal that the underlying anatomy in much complex data
is non-Euclidean, supporting the success of representation learning in hyperbolic space (Bronstein
et al., 2017). However, due to the absence of well-defined distribution that is easy to sample and has
an analytic density function in hyperbolic space, earlier studies have focused on the non-probabilistic
learning framework.
Hyperbolic wrapped normal distribution (HWN) has been recently proposed as an alternative to the
celebrated normal distribution in Euclidean space. With an analytic density function and easiness of
sampling, the HWN expands the domain of probabilistic modeling from Euclidean to hyperbolic space.
The HWN has been successfully applied in various probabilistic models, including VAE (Kingma and
Welling, 2014) and probabilistic word embeddings (Vilnis and McCallum, 2015). However, unlike
the normal distribution in Euclidean space, the geometric characteristics of the HWN have not been
fully understood so far. Therefore, figuring out what can be done or not with the HWN is difficult.
In this work, we analyze the geometric properties of the diagonal HWN, a standard choice of
distribution in many probabilistic models (Mathieu et al., 2019; Nagano et al., 2019). Based on the
observation that the principal axes of the diagonal normal distribution in Euclidean space have a
parallel structure with the standard bases, we also focus on the structure of the principal axes of HWN
in hyperbolic space to delve into a deeper understanding. Our analysis shows that the principal axes
of the diagonal HWN are locally parallel to the standard bases in the Poincaré disk model.
Figure 1 (a) shows a common understanding on learned representation of hierarchical data in the
Poincaré disk. The hierarchical structure spreads out like the spokes of a wheel. The local variation
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

