Label-Aware Global Consistency for Multi-Label
Learning with Single Positive Labels

Ming-Kun Xie∗, Jia-Hao Xiao∗, Sheng-Jun Huang†
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, 211106
{mkxie,jiahaoxiao,huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
In single positive multi-label learning (SPML), only one of multiple positive labels
is observed for each instance. The previous work trains the model by simply treating
unobserved labels as negative ones, and designs the regularization to constrain the
number of expected positive labels. However, in many real-world scenarios, the
true number of positive labels is unavailable, making such methods less applicable.
In this paper, we propose to solve SPML problems by designing a Label-Aware
global Consistency (LAC) regularization, which leverages the manifold structure
information to enhance the recovery of potential positive labels. On one hand, we
first perform pseudo-labeling for each unobserved label based on its prediction
probability. The consistency regularization is then imposed on model outputs to
balance the fitting of identified labels and exploring of potential positive labels. On
the other hand, by enforcing label-wise embeddings to maintain global consistency,
LAC loss encourages the model to learn more distinctive representations, which is
beneficial for recovering the information of potential positive labels. Experiments
on multiple benchmark datasets validate that the proposed method can achieve
state-of-the-art performance for solving SPML tasks.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning (MLL) is a practical and effective learning framework for tackling objects with
complex semantics, where each instance is assumed to be associated with multiple class labels. For
example, an image may be annotated with labels beach, sea and sky simultaneously. Multi-label
learning aims to train a classifier that can accurately predict all the relevant labels for unseen instances.
It has been successfully applied into many real-world applications, such as image annotation [2],
scene understanding [22], facial attribute recognition [13].
Given the output space is exponentially larger than that of single-label learning, it often requires a
large number of examples with precise annotations to train an effective MLL classifier. However, in
many real-world scenarios, it is difficult and costly to collect the precise annotations. To reduce the
labeling cost, an alternative solution is to ask the annotators to assign the most obvious label to each
instance, leading to only a single positive label available. Such problem has been formulated as a
learning framework called single positive multi-label learning (SPML) [4]. In this case, except for
the annotated positive label, each of other labels could be positive or negative but unknown, thus the
learning task becomes much more challenging due to the lack of supervision.
To solve SPML problems, the previous work [4] intuitively designs the "assume negative" (AN) loss,
which treats all unobserved labels as negative ones, and trains an MLL classifier with the conventional
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Correspondence to: Sheng-Jun Huang (huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

