LECO: Learnable Episodic Count for
Task-Specific Intrinsic Reward

Daejin Jo∗
Taehwan Kwon

Sungwoong Kim*
Seungeun Rho

Daniel Wontae Nam*
Jongmin Kim

Donghoon Lee

Kakao Brain
Seongnam, South Korea
{daejin.jo, swkim, dwtnam, taehwan.kwon, seungeun.rho, jmkim, dhlee}
@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
Episodic count has been widely used to design a simple yet effective intrinsic
motivation for reinforcement learning with a sparse reward. However, the use of
episodic count in a high-dimensional state space as well as over a long episode time
requires a thorough state compression and fast hashing, which hinders rigorous
exploitation of it in such hard and complex exploration environments. Moreover,
the interference from task-irrelevant observations in the episodic count may cause
its intrinsic motivation to overlook task-related important changes of states, and the
novelty in an episodic manner can lead to repeatedly revisit the familiar states across
episodes. In order to resolve these issues, in this paper, we propose a learnable
hash-based episodic count, which we name LECO, that efficiently performs as
a task-specific intrinsic reward in hard exploration problems. In particular, the
proposed intrinsic reward consists of the episodic novelty and the task-specific
modulation where the former employs a vector quantized variational autoencoder
to automatically obtain the discrete state codes for fast counting while the latter
regulates the episodic novelty by learning a modulator to optimize the task-specific
extrinsic reward. The proposed LECO specifically enables the automatic transition
from exploration to exploitation during reinforcement learning. We experimentally
show that in contrast to the previous exploration methods LECO successfully solves
hard exploration problems and also scales to large state spaces through the most
difficult tasks in MiniGrid and DMLab environments.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), tackling the problem of sparse rewards still remains a great challenge.
Many works have been proposed to develop dense synthetic reward, which is generally called
intrinsic reward, to provide the motivation for exploration in the absence of extrinsic rewards from the
environment [5, 26, 1, 28, 13, 38, 33, 10, 40, 29, 37, 15, 21]. Among them, count-based exploration
[31, 4, 25, 24, 33, 23, 5], that encourages the RL agent to visit novel states, is one of the most popular
classes for intrinsic motivation since it is simple and effective in many tasks, and more importantly it
is theoretically justified [31, 20]. In general, the state novelty can be measured within a single episode
or through an entire task across episodes. In recent RL problems, environments are often changed
over episodes or even procedurally generated within the same task [7, 3, 22, 8, 17]. Therefore,
∗

Contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

