Predictive Querying for Autoregressive Neural
Sequence Models

Alex Boyd∗ 1 Sam Showalter∗ 2 Stephan Mandt1,2 Padhraic Smyth1,2
1
Department of Statistics 2 Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
{alexjb,showalte,mandt,p.smyth}@uci.edu

Abstract
In reasoning about sequential events it is natural to pose probabilistic queries such
as “when will event A occur next” or “what is the probability of A occurring before
B," with applications in areas such as user modeling, language models, medicine,
and finance. These types of queries are complex to answer compared to next-event
prediction, particularly for neural autoregressive models such as recurrent neural
networks and transformers. This is in part due to the fact that future querying
involves marginalization over large path spaces, which is not straightforward to
do efficiently in such models. In this paper we introduce a general typology for
predictive queries in neural autoregressive sequence models and show that such
queries can be systematically represented by sets of elementary building blocks.
We leverage this typology to develop new query estimation methods based on
beam search, importance sampling, and hybrids. Across four large-scale sequence
datasets from different application domains, as well as for the GPT-2 language
model, we demonstrate the ability to make query answering tractable for arbitrary
queries in exponentially-large predictive path-spaces, and find clear differences in
cost-accuracy tradeoffs between search and sampling methods.

1

Introduction

One of the major successes in machine learning in recent years has been the development of neural
sequence models for categorical sequences, particularly in natural language applications but also in
other areas such as automatic code generation and program synthesis [Shin et al., 2019, Chen et al.,
2021], computer security [Brown et al., 2018], recommender systems [Wu et al., 2017], genomics
[Shin et al., 2021, Amin et al., 2021], and survival analysis [Lee et al., 2019]. Many of the models
(although not all) rely on autoregressive training and prediction, allowing for the sequential generation
of sequence completions in a recursive manner conditioned on sequence history.
A natural question in this context is how to compute answers to predictive queries that go beyond
traditional one-step-ahead predictions. Examples of such queries are “how likely is event A to occur
before event B?” and “how likely is event C to occur (once or more) within the next K steps of the
sequence?” These types of queries are very natural across a wide variety of application contexts, for
example, the probability that an individual will finish speaking or writing a sentence within the next
K words, or that a user will use one app before another. See Fig. 1 and Appendix G for examples.
In this paper we develop a general framework for answering such predictive queries in the context of
autoregressive (AR) neural sequence models. This amounts to computing conditional probabilities
of propositional statements about future events, conditioned on the history of the sequence as
summarized by the current hidden state representation. We focus in particular on how to perform near
∗

Authors contributed equally

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

