DP-PCA: Statistically Optimal and
Differentially Private PCA

Xiyang Liu
Paul Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
xiyangl@cs.washington.edu
Prateek Jain
Google Research
prajain@google.com

Weihao Kong
Google Research
weihaokong@google.com

Sewoong Oh
Paul Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington, and Google Research
sewoong@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We study the canonical statistical task of computing the principal component from
n i.i.d. data in d dimensions under (ε, δ)-differential privacy. Although extensively
studied in literature, existing solutions fall short on two key aspects: (i) even for
Gaussian data, existing private algorithms require the number of samples n to
scale super-linearly with d, i.e., n = Ω(d3/2 ), to obtain non-trivial results while
non-private PCA requires only n = O(d), and (ii) existing techniques suffer from
a non-vanishing error even when the randomness in each data point is arbitrarily
small. We propose DP-PCA, which is a single-pass algorithm that overcomes both
limitations. It is based on a private minibatch gradient ascent method that relies
on private mean estimation to add minimal noise required to ensure privacy by
adapting to the geometry of a given minibatch of gradients. For sub-Gaussian data,
we provide nearly optimal statistical error rates even for n = Õ(d). Furthermore,
we provide a lower bound showing that sub-Gaussian style assumption is necessary
in obtaining the optimal error rate.

1

Introduction

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a fundamental statistical tool with multiple applications
including dimensionality reduction, data visualization, and noise reduction. Naturally, it is a key
part of most standard data analysis and ML pipelines. However, when applied to data collected
from numerous individuals, such as the U.S. Census data, outcome of PCA might reveal highly
sensitive personal information. We investigate the design of privacy preserving PCA algorithms and
the involved privacy/utility tradeoffs, for computing the first principal component, that should serve
as the building block of more general rank-k PCA.
Differential privacy (DP) is a widely accepted mathematical notion of privacy introduced in [21],
which is a standard in releasing the U.S. Census data [2] and also deployed in commercial systems
[72, 25, 27]. A query to a database is said to be (ε, δ)-differentialy private if a strong adversary
who knows all other entries but one cannot infer that one entry from the query output, with high
confidence. The parameters ε and δ restricts the confidence as measured by the Type-I and II errors
[49]. Smaller values of ε ∈ [0, ∞) and δ ∈ [0, 1] imply stronger privacy and plausible deniability for
the participants.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

