Tensor Program Optimization with Probabilistic
Programs
Junru Shao
OctoML
jshao@octoml.ai

Xiyou Zhou
OctoML
xiyou@octoml.ai

Bohan Hou
Carnegie Mellon University
bohanhou@cs.cmu.edu
Wuwei Lin
OctoML
wlin@octoml.ai

Siyuan Feng
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
hzfengsy@sjtu.edu.cn

Ruihang Lai
Carnegie Mellon University
ruihangl@cs.cmu.edu

Hongyi Jin
Carnegie Mellon University
hongyij@cs.cmu.edu

Masahiro Masuda
OctoML
mmasuda@octoml.ai

Cody Hao Yu
Amazon Web Services
hyuz@amazon.com

Tianqi Chen
Carnegie Mellon University, OctoML
tqchen@cmu.edu
tqchen@octoml.ai

Abstract
Automatic optimization for tensor programs becomes increasingly important as
we deploy deep learning in various environments, and efficient optimization relies
on a rich search space and effective search. Most existing efforts adopt a search
space which lacks the ability to efficiently enable domain experts to grow the
search space. This paper introduces MetaSchedule, a domain-specific probabilistic programming language abstraction to construct a rich search space of tensor
programs. Our abstraction allows domain experts to analyze the program, and
easily propose stochastic choices in a modular way to compose program transformation accordingly. We also build an end-to-end learning-driven framework to
find an optimized program for a given search space. Experimental results show
that MetaSchedule can cover the search space used in the state-of-the-art tensor
program optimization frameworks in a modular way. Additionally, it empowers
domain experts to conveniently grow the search space and modularly enhance the
system, which brings 48% speedup on end-to-end deep learning workloads.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has become pervasive in daily life. From video understanding [28], natural language
understanding [15], and recommendation system [29] to autonomous driving [21], different deep
learning models are deployed on different hardware platforms and devices. Deep learning frameworks
usually rely on manually optimized libraries [13, 22] to accelerate deployment. Engineers need to
choose from many tensor programs that are logically equivalent but differ significantly in performance
due to memory access, threading, and the use of specialized hardware primitives. The engineering
effort required for tensor program optimization has become a significant bottleneck for machine
learning deployment with the growing number of models and hardware backends.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

