Provably Adversarially Robust Detection of
Out-of-Distribution Data (Almost) for Free
Alexander Meinke∗
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center

Julian Bitterwolf
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center

Matthias Hein
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center

Abstract
The application of machine learning in safety-critical systems requires a reliable
assessment of uncertainty. However, deep neural networks are known to produce
highly overconfident predictions on out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Even if trained
to be non-confident on OOD data, one can still adversarially manipulate OOD data
so that the classifier again assigns high confidence to the manipulated samples.
We show that two previously published defenses can be broken by better adapted
attacks, highlighting the importance of robustness guarantees around OOD data.
Since the existing method for this task is hard to train and significantly limits
accuracy, we construct a classifier that can simultaneously achieve provably adversarially robust OOD detection and high clean accuracy. Moreover, by slightly
modifying the classifier’s architecture our method provably avoids the asymptotic
overconfidence problem of standard neural networks. We provide code for all our
experiments.†

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many application domains.
However, the widespread usage of deep neural networks in safety-critical applications, e.g. in
healthcare, autonomous driving/aviation, manufacturing, raises concerns as deep neural networks
have problematic deficiencies. Among these deficiencies, overconfident predictions on non-task
related inputs [44, 21] have recently attracted a lot of interest. Even theoretically derived weaknesses
like ReLU networks provably being overconfident far away from the training data [20] are yet to
be fixed. Meanwhile, reliable confidences of the classifier on the classification task (in-distribution)
[19] as well as on the out-distribution [21, 20] are important to be able to detect when the deep
neural network is working outside of its specification, which can then be used to either involve a
human operator or to fall back into a “safe state”. Thus, solving this problem is of high importance
for trustworthy ML systems. Crucially, a detection method needs to generalize to novel test outdistributions that are not available during training, since one does not know which unknown inputs
can be expected.
Many approaches have been proposed for OOD detection, [21, 33, 31, 32, 22, 48, 20, 41, 9, 46, 35, 36].
In this paper we focus on confidence based OOD detection, i.e. the probability of the predicted class
is used to decide whether to reject or accept the sample, because of its straightforward interpretation
and because it has been shown to perform no worse than other scores for OOD detection [7]. One of
the currently best performing methods enforces low confidence during training (“outlier exposure”
(OE)) on a large and diverse set of out-distribution images [22] which leads to strong separation of inand out-distribution based on the confidence of the classifier.
∗

Corresponding author - alexander.meinke@uni-tuebingen.de
https://github.com/AlexMeinke/Provable-OOD-Detection

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

