Deep Hierarchical Planning from Pixels

Danijar Hafner 1 2 3

Kuang-Huei Lee 2

Ian Fischer 2

Pieter Abbeel 1 4

Abstract
Intelligent agents need to select long sequences of actions to solve complex tasks.
While humans easily break down tasks into subgoals and reach them through
millions of muscle commands, current artificial intelligence is limited to tasks with
horizons of a few hundred decisions, despite large compute budgets. Research
on hierarchical reinforcement learning aims to overcome this limitation but has
proven to be challenging, current methods rely on manually specified goal spaces
or subtasks, and no general solution exists. We introduce Director, a practical
method for learning hierarchical behaviors directly from pixels by planning inside
the latent space of a learned world model. The high-level policy maximizes task
and exploration rewards by selecting latent goals and the low-level policy learns to
achieve the goals. Despite operating in latent space, the decisions are interpretable
because the world model can decode goals into images for visualization. Director
outperforms exploration methods on tasks with sparse rewards, including 3D maze
traversal with a quadruped robot from an egocentric camera and proprioception,
without access to the global position or top-down view that was used by prior work.
Director also learns successful behaviors across a wide range of environments,
including visual control, Atari games, and DMLab levels.

1

Introduction

Goal

Ant Maze M

Episode

Artificial agents have achieved remarkable performance on reactive video games (Mnih et al., 2015;
Badia et al., 2020) or board games that last for a few hundred moves (Silver et al., 2017). However,
solving complex control problems can require millions of time steps. For example, consider a robot
that needs to navigate along the sidewalk and cross streets to buy groceries and then return home and

(not shown to agent)

T=0

T=40

T=80

T=120

T=160

T=200

T=240

Figure 1: Director on Ant Maze M from egocentric camera inputs. The top row shows agent inputs.
The bottom row shows the internal subgoals of the agent. The goals are latent vectors that Director’s
world model can decode into images for human inspection. Director solves this sparse reward task by
breaking it down into internal goals. It first targets the purple wall in the middle of the maze. Once
reached, it targets the reward object, and then the brown wall behind it to step onto the reward object.
1

UC Berkeley 2 Google Research 3 University of Toronto 4 Covariant
Correspondence to: Danijar Hafner <mail@danijar.com>
Project website with videos and code: https://danijar.com/director
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

