Approximate Secular Equations for
the Cubic Regularization Subproblem
Yihang Gao
Department of Mathematics
The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam, Hong Kong
gaoyh@connect.hku.hk
Man-Chung Yue
Musketeers Foundation Institute of Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam, Hong Kong
mcyue@hku.hk

Michael K. Ng
Department of Mathematics
The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam, Hong Kong
mng@maths.hku.hk

Abstract
The cubic regularization method (CR) is a popular algorithm for unconstrained
non-convex optimization. At each iteration, CR solves a cubically regularized
quadratic problem, called the cubic regularization subproblem (CRS). One way
to solve the CRS relies on solving the secular equation, whose computational
bottleneck lies in the computation of all eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix. In this
paper, we propose and analyze a novel CRS solver based on an approximate secular
equation, which requires only some of the Hessian eigenvalues and is therefore
much more efficient. Two approximate secular equations (ASEs) are developed.
For both ASEs, we first study the existence and uniqueness of their roots and then
establish an upper bound on the gap between the root and that of the standard
secular equation. Such an upper bound can in turn be used to bound the distance
from the approximate CRS solution based ASEs to the true CRS solution, thus
offering a theoretical guarantee for our CRS solver. A desirable feature of our
CRS solver is that it requires only matrix-vector multiplication but not matrix
inversion, which makes it particularly suitable for high-dimensional applications
of unconstrained non-convex optimization, such as low-rank recovery and deep
learning. Numerical experiments with synthetic and real data-sets are conducted to
investigate the practical performance of the proposed CRS solver. Experimental
results show that the proposed solver outperforms two state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The cubic regularization method (CR) is a variant of Newton’s method proposed by Griewank [8], and
later independently by Nesterov and Polyak [12], and Weiser et al. [16]. It gained significant attention
over the last decade due to its attractive theoretical properties, such as convergence to second-order
critical points[12] and quadratic convergence rate under mild assumptions [17]. Each iteration of CR
solves a problem of the following form, called the cubic regularization subproblem (CRS):
1
⇢
minn fA,b,⇢ (x) := bT x + xT Ax + kxk3 ,
(1)
x2R
2
3
where ⇢ > 0 is the regularization parameter, b 2 Rn , and A 2 Rn⇥n is a symmetric matrix, not
necessarily positive semidefinite. Many variants and generalizations of CR are developed, including
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

