Non-Linear Coordination Graphs

Yipeng Kang∗
Tsinghua University
fringsoo@gmail.com

Tonghan Wang∗
Harvard University
twang1@g.harvard.edu

Xiaoran Wu
Tsinghua University
wuxr17@tsinghua.org.cn

Qianlan Yang∗
UIUC
qianlan2@illinois.edu

Chongjie Zhang
Tsinghua University
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Value decomposition multi-agent reinforcement learning methods learn the global
value function as a mixing of each agent’s individual utility functions. Coordination
graphs (CGs) represent a higher-order decomposition by incorporating pairwise
payoff functions and thus is supposed to have a more powerful representational
capacity. However, CGs decompose the global value function linearly over local
value functions, severely limiting the complexity of the value function class that
can be represented. In this paper, we propose the first non-linear coordination
graph by extending CG value decomposition beyond the linear case. One major
challenge is to conduct greedy action selections in this new function class to which
commonly adopted DCOP algorithms are no longer applicable. We study how to
solve this problem when mixing networks with LeakyReLU activation are used. An
enumeration method with a global optimality guarantee is proposed and motivates
an efficient iterative optimization method with a local optimality guarantee. We
find that our method can achieve superior performance on challenging multi-agent
coordination tasks like MACO.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent problems are ubiquitous in real-world applications, such as crewless aerial
vehicles [20, 35] and sensor networks [38]. However, learning control policies for such systems
remains a major challenge. Recently, value decomposition methods [26] significantly push forward
the progress of multi-agent reinforcement learning [22, 24, 28, 29, 30]. In these methods, a centralized
action-value function is learned as a mixing of individual utility functions. The mixing function
can be conditioned on global states [22] while individual utility functions are based on local actionobservation history. The advantage is that agents can utilize global information and avoid learning
non-stationarity [27] via centralized training, while maintaining scalable decentralized execution.
Notably, the major focus of the value function decomposition research was on full decomposition, where local utility functions are based on actions and observations of a single agent. Full
decomposition leads to several drawbacks, such as miscoordination problems in partially observable
environments with stochastic transition functions [28, 32] and a game-theoretical pathology called
relative overgeneralization [18, 4]. Relative overgeneralization embodies that, due to the concurrent
learning and exploration of other agents, the employed utility function may not be able to express
optimal decentralized policies and prefer suboptimal actions that give higher returns on average.
*
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Code is available at https://github.com/fringsoo/CGMIX

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

