Performative Power
Moritz Hardt⇤
Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
hardt@is.mpg.de

Meena Jagadeesan⇤
UC Berkeley
mjagadeesan@berkeley.edu

Celestine Mendler-Dünner⇤
Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
cmendler@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
We introduce the notion of performative power, which measures the ability of a firm
operating an algorithmic system, such as a digital content recommendation platform,
to cause change in a population of participants. We relate performative power to
the economic study of competition in digital economies. Traditional economic
concepts struggle with identifying anti-competitive patterns in digital platforms not
least due to the complexity of market definition. In contrast, performative power
is a causal notion that is identifiable with minimal knowledge of the market, its
internals, participants, products, or prices.
We study the role of performative power in prediction and show that low performative power implies that a firm can do no better than to optimize their objective on
current data. In contrast, firms of high performative power stand to benefit from
steering the population towards more profitable behavior. We confirm in a simple
theoretical model that monopolies maximize performative power. A firm’s ability
to personalize increases performative power, while competition and outside options
decrease performative power. On the empirical side, we propose an observational
causal design to identify performative power from discontinuities in how digital
platforms display content. This allows to repurpose causal effects from various
studies about digital platforms as lower bounds on performative power. Finally, we
speculate about the role that performative power might play in competition policy
and antitrust enforcement in digital marketplaces.

1

Introduction

Digital platforms pose a well-recognized challenge for antitrust enforcement. Traditional market
definitions, along with associated notions of competition and market power, map poorly onto digital
platforms. A core challenge is the difficulty of precisely modeling the interactions between the market
participants, products, and prices. An authoritative report, published by the Stigler Committee [2019],
details the many challenges associated with digital platforms, among them: “Pinpointing the locus of
competition can also be challenging because the markets are multisided and often ones with which
economists and lawyers have little experience. This complexity can make market definition another
hurdle to effective enforcement.” Published the same year, a comprehensive report from the European
Commission calls for “less emphasis on analysis of market definition, and more emphasis on theories
of harm and identification of anti-competitive strategies.” [Crémer et al., 2019]
Our work responds to this call by developing a normative and technical proposal for reasoning
about power in digital economies, while relaxing the reliance on market definition. Our running
⇤

Authors listed in alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

