A sharp NMF result with applications in network
modeling

Jiashun Jin
Department of Statistics & Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jiashun@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
Given an n × n non-negative rank-K matrix Ω where m eigenvalues are negative,
when can we write Ω = ZP Z 0 for non-negative matrices Z ∈ Rn,K and P ∈
RK,K ? While most existing works focused on the case of m = 0, our primary
interest is on the case of general m. With new proof ideas, we present sharp results
on when the NMF problem is solvable, which significantly extend existing results
on this topic. The NMF problem is partially motivated by applications in network
modeling. For a network with K communities, rank-K models are especially
popular. The Degree-Corrected Mixed-Membership (DCMM) model is a recent
rank-K model which is especially useful and interpretable in practice. To enjoy
such properties, it is of interest to study when a rank-K model can be rewritten as
a DCMM model. Using our NMF results, we show that for a rank-K model in the
most interesting parameter ranges, we can always rewrite it as a DCMM model.

1

Introduction

Fix (n, K, m) where n ≥ K ≥ 2 and 0 ≤ m ≤ K − 1. We are interested in the following
Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) problem.
The NMF problem: given an n × n symmetric non-negative irreducible matrix Ω with
rank K where exactly m of the K nonzero eigenvalues are negative, when can we find
non-negative matrices Z ∈ R

n,K

and P ∈ R

K,K

(1.1)

0

such that Ω = ZP Z ?

Definition 1.1 We say a matrix Ω non-negative if all of its entries are non-negative, and we say it
positive if all of its entries are (strictly) positive. We say the NMF problem is solvable for Ω is we can
find non-negative matrices (Z, P ) as above such that Ω = ZP Z 0 .
We assume K ≥ 2 for the case of K = 1 is trivial, and we assume m ≤ K − 1 for an irreducible
non-negative matrix has at least one positive eigenvalue (e.g., by Perron’s theorem [9]).
NMF is a fundamental problem and has applications in areas such as image processing [5, 23], text
learning [21], hyper-spectral unmixing, and social network analysis [13]. Our setting is a special
case of NMF where both Ω and P are symmetric, so we may call it symmetric NMF. In the literature,
symmetric NMF was widely used in clustering of nonlinearly separable data from a similarity matrix
[7], where for a non-negative symmetric matrix Ω, it aims to find a non-negative matrix Z such that
Ω = ZZ 0 ,

where Z ∈ Rn,N and N ≥ K.

(1.2)

Note that, first, this implicitly requires that Ω is positive semi-definite. Second, it is understood
that for many non-negative and positive semi-definite matrices Ω, the smallest N we can find in the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

