Lifting the Information Ratio:
An Information-Theoretic Analysis of
Thompson Sampling for Contextual Bandits

Gergely Neu
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
gergely.neu@gmail.com

Julia Olkhovskaya
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
julia.olkhovskaya@gmail.com

Matteo Papini
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
matteo.papini@upf.edu

Ludovic Schwartz
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
ludovic.v.schwartz76@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the Bayesian regret of the renowned Thompson Sampling algorithm
in contextual bandits with binary losses and adversarially-selected contexts. We
adapt the information-theoretic perspective of Russo and Van Roy [2016] to the
contextual setting by considering a lifted version of the information ratio defined
in terms of the unknown model parameter instead of the optimal action or optimal
policy as done in previous works on the same setting. This allows us to bound
the regret in terms of the entropy of the prior distribution through a remarkably
simple proof, and with no structural assumptions on the likelihood or the prior.
The extension to priors with infinite entropy only requires a Lipschitz assumption
on the log-likelihood. An interesting special case is that of logistic bandits with
d-dimensional
parameters, K actions, and Lipschitz logits, for which we provide a
√
e
O( dKT ) regret upper-bound that does not depend on the smallest slope of the
sigmoid link function.

1

Introduction

Thompson sampling is one of the most popular algorithms for sequential decision making under
uncertainty. First proposed by Thompson [1933], it has been rediscovered several times over the
consequent decades and has been eventually popularized in the machine learning literature by
Chapelle and Li [2011] and Scott [2010], who pointed out its excellent empirical performance
for solving contextual bandit problems. These empirical studies were followed by a sequence of
breakthroughs on the front of theoretical analysis, spearheaded by the works of Agrawal and Goyal
[2012, 2013a,b], Kaufmann et al. [2012], and Russo and Van Roy [2014], Russo and Van Roy [2016].
Thanks to these successes, Thompson sampling has become one of the gold-standard methods for
solving multi-armed bandit problems. Indeed, in the last decade, several Thompson-sampling-style
methods have been developed and analyzed for a variety of problem settings.
The variety of different analysis techniques applied to Thompson sampling is perhaps even larger
than the variety of problem settings that it has been applied to. The first key tools for analyzing the
Bayesian regret of Thompson sampling for multi-armed bandits have been developed by Russo and
Van Roy [2014], and our analysis naturally borrows several of these tools. The worst-case results
developed in said work were refined in [Russo and Van Roy, 2016], where they proved for the first
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

