SurDis: A Surface Discontinuity Dataset for Wearable
Technology to Assist Blind Navigation in Urban
Environments
Kuan Yew Leong
A.I. System Research Co., Ltd.
Kyoto, 606-8302 Japan
kuanyew.leong@gmail.com

Siew Mooi Lim
Tunku Abdul Rahman
University of Management and Technology
siewmooi@tarc.edu.my

Abstract
According to World Health Organization, there is an estimated 2.2 billion people
with a near or distance vision impairment worldwide. Difficulty in self-navigation
is one of the greatest challenges to independence for the blind and low vision (BLV)
people. Through consultations with several BLV service providers, we realized that
negotiating surface discontinuities is one of the very prominent challenges when
navigating an outdoor environment within the urban. Surface discontinuities are
commonly formed by rises and drop-offs along a pathway. They could be a threat
to balancing during a walk and perceiving such a threat is highly challenging to
the BLVs. In this paper, we introduce SurDis, a novel dataset of depth maps and
stereo images that exemplifies the issue of surface discontinuity in the urban areas
of Klang Valley, Malaysia. We seek to address the limitation of existing datasets
of such nature in these areas. Current mobility tools for the BLVs predominantly
focus on furniture, indoor built environments, traffic signs, vehicles, humans and
various types of objects’ detection above the surface of a pathway. We emphasize
a specific purpose for SurDis – to support the development of assistive wearable
technology for the BLVs to negotiate surface discontinuity. We consulted BLV
volunteers on the specifications of surface condition that could become hazardous
for navigation using 3D printed replicas of actual scaled-down scenes, and identified
locations that are frequented by the BLVs as our target data collection fields. With
feedback from these volunteers, we developed a lightweight, small and unobtrusive
prototype equipped with a tiny stereo camera and an embedded system on a
single board computer to capture the samples from 10 different locations. We
describe instrument development, data collection, preprocessing, annotation, and
experiments conducted. The dataset contains: (1) more than 17000 depth maps
generated from 200 sets of stereo image sequences, (2) annotations of surface
discontinuity in the depth maps, and (3) bitmap stereo image pairs corresponding
to the depth maps in (1).

1

Introduction

Safe and efficient navigation has profound importance to the BLVs, as it might be the prerequisite for
getting one to achieve many social functions. Through consultations with several local BLV service
providers in Malaysia, it is realized that there is a diverse range of navigational challenges faced
by the BLVs. To achieve safe and effective navigation, the BLVs need to access global information
relevant to orientation and position on one hand, and deal with local threats along their pathway on
the other. Negotiating surface discontinuities is one of the very prominent challenges when navigating
an outdoor environment within urban areas. Surface discontinuities are various kinds of rises and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

