Human-Robotic Prosthesis as Collaborating Agents for
Symmetrical Walking

Ruofan Wu ∗
Arizona State University

Junmin Zhong ∗
Arizona State University

Xiang Gao
Arizona State University

He Huang
North Carolina State University

Brent Abraham Wallace
Arizona State University
Jennie Si †
Arizona State University

Abstract
This is the first attempt at considering human influence in the reinforcement learning control of a robotic lower limb prosthesis toward symmetrical walking in real
world situations. We propose a collaborative multi-agent reinforcement learning
(cMARL) solution framework for this highly complex and challenging humanprosthesis collaboration (HPC) problem. The design of an automatic controller of
the robot within the HPC context is based on accessible physical features or measurements that are known to affect walking performance. Comparisons are made
with the current state-of-the-art robot control designs, which are single-agent based,
as well as existing MARL solution approaches tailored to the problem, including
multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient (MADDPG) and counterfactual
multi-agent policy gradient (COMA). Results show that, when compared to these
approaches, treating the human and robot as coupled agents and using an estimated
human adaption in robot control design can achieve lower stage cost, peak error,
and improved symmetry to ensure better human walking performance. Additionally, our approach accelerates learning of walking tasks and increases learning
success rate. The proposed framework can potentially be further developed to
examine how human and robotic lower limb prosthesis interact, an area that little
is known about. Advancing cMARL toward real world applications such as HPC
for normative walking sets a good example of how AI can positively impact on
people’s lives.

1

Introduction

The concept, design, and applications of human-robot cooperation have advanced rapidly due to new
demands in AI-enabled applications fueled by powerful deep learning and reinforcement learning
algorithms [1, 2, 3]. Human-robot collaboration can take on a variety of forms depending on tasks to
be solved, how information is shared [1, 2], and the nature of interaction [3]. Examples of complex
collaborative tasks may include picking up or carrying objects together [4, 5], cooperating on a
production line, in which cases a robot can learn to imitate human demonstrations [6, 7, 8]. Other
application scenarios may include intermittent robotic correction of human driving, or vice versa [9].
In essence, most of these recent studies involve interactions between a human and a robot in a way
such that there is either space between the agents, or there is time for predictive counter measures
to interfere. By contrast, in the HPC problem the human and robot agents are physically coupled
together, and there is often little time for the human agent to react to prevent from falling or injury.
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author: si@asu.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

