Lazy and Fast Greedy MAP Inference for
Determinantal Point Process
Shinichi Hemmi
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
hemmi.shinichi@gmail.com
Shinsaku Sakaue
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
sakaue@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Taihei Oki
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
oki@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Kaito Fujii
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
fujiik@nii.ac.jp

Satoru Iwata
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
ICReDD, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
iwata@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference for determinantal point processes
(DPPs) is crucial for selecting diverse items in many machine learning applications.
Although DPP MAP inference is NP-hard, the greedy algorithm often finds highquality solutions, and many researchers have studied its efficient implementation.
One classical and practical method is the lazy greedy algorithm, which is applicable
to general submodular function maximization, while a recent fast greedy algorithm
based on the Cholesky factorization is more efficient for DPP MAP inference.
This paper presents how to combine the ideas of “lazy” and “fast”, which have
been considered incompatible in the literature. Our lazy and fast greedy algorithm
achieves almost the same time complexity as the current best one and runs faster in
practice. The idea of “lazy + fast” is extendable to other greedy-type algorithms.
We also give a fast version of the double greedy algorithm for unconstrained DPP
MAP inference. Experiments validate the effectiveness of our acceleration ideas.

1

Introduction

Determinantal point processes (DPPs) offer a popular diversification model in machine learning.
Macchi [34] first used DPPs to represent repulsion in quantum physics, and later, DPPs have been
used in various scenarios such as recommendation systems [13], document summarization [21, 31],
and diverse molecule selection [39]. An important problem in the DPP applications is the maximum a
posteriori (MAP) inference, which asks to find an item subset with the highest probability. Intuitively,
if each item is associated with a vector whose length and direction represent its importance and
feature, respectively, then the aim of DPP MAP inference is to select items whose vectors form the
largest volume parallelotope, thus selecting important and diverse items.
In DPPs, exact MAP inference is NP-hard [27]. Fortunately, however, the standard greedy algorithm
(G REEDY) for submodular function maximization [41] enjoys a (1 − 1/e)-approximation guarantee
in terms of the log-determinant function value under the monotonicity assumption, and it often finds
high-quality solutions in practice. A naive implementation of G REEDY, however, incurs too much
computation cost for large instances since evaluating the determinant of a k × k matrix takes O(k ω )
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

