A gradient estimator via L1-randomization for online
zero-order optimization with two point feedback
Arya Akhavan
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
aria.akhavanfoomani@iit.it

Evgenii Chzhen
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS
Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay
evgenii.chzhen@cnrs.fr

Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Alexandre B. Tsybakov
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
alexandre.tsybakov@ensae.fr

Abstract
This work studies online zero-order optimization of convex and Lipschitz functions.
We present a novel gradient estimator based on two function evaluations and
randomization on the `1 -sphere. Considering different geometries of feasible sets
and Lipschitz assumptions we analyse online dual averaging algorithm with our
estimator in place of the usual gradient. We consider two types of assumptions
on the noise of the zero-order oracle: canceling noise and adversarial noise. We
provide an anytime and completely data-driven algorithm, which is adaptive to
all parameters of the problem. In the case of canceling noise that was previously
studied in the literature, our guarantees are either comparable or better than stateof-the-art bounds obtained by Duchi et al. [14] and Shamir [33] for non-adaptive
algorithms. Our analysis is based on deriving a new weighted Poincaré type
inequality for the uniform measure on the `1 -sphere with explicit constants, which
may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

In this work we study the problem of convex online zero-order optimization with two-point feedback,
in which adversary fixes a sequence f1 , f2 , . . . : Rd ! R of convex functions and the goal of the
learner is to minimize the cumulative regret with respect to the best action in a prescribed convex set
⇥ ✓ Rd . This problem has received significant attention in the context of continuous bandits and
online optimization [see e.g., 1, 3, 12, 13, 16, 18, 21, 25, 29, 33, and references therein].
We consider the following protocol: at each round t = 1, 2, . . . the algorithm chooses x0t , x00t 2 Rd
(that can be queried outside of ⇥) and the adversary reveals
ft (x0t ) + ⇠t0

and

ft (x00t ) + ⇠t00 ,

where ⇠t0 , ⇠t00

2 R are the noise variables (random or not) to be specified. Based on the above
information and the previous rounds, the learner outputs xt 2 ⇥ and suffers loss ft (xt ). The goal of
the learner is to minimize the cumulative regret
T
X
t=1

ft (xt )

min

x2⇥

T
X

ft (x) .

t=1

At the core of our approach is a novel zero-order gradient estimator based on two function evaluations
outlined in Algorithm 1. A key novelty of our estimator is that it employs a randomization step over
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

