Multi-layer State Evolution Under
Random Convolutional Design
Max Daniels
Northeastern University
daniels.g@northeastern.edu

Cédric Gerbelot
ENS Paris
cedric.gerbelot@ens.fr

Florent Krzakala
IdePHIcs Laboratory, EPFL
florent.krzakala@epfl.ch

Lenka Zdeborová
SPOC Laboratory, EPFL
lenka.zdeborova@epfl.ch

Abstract
Signal recovery under generative neural network priors has emerged as a promising
direction in statistical inference and computational imaging. Theoretical analysis
of reconstruction algorithms under generative priors is, however, challenging.
For generative priors with fully connected layers and Gaussian i.i.d. weights,
this was achieved by the multi-layer approximate message (ML-AMP) algorithm
via a rigorous state evolution. However, practical generative priors are typically
convolutional, allowing for computational benefits and inductive biases, and so the
Gaussian i.i.d. weight assumption is very limiting. In this paper, we overcome this
limitation and establish the state evolution of ML-AMP for random convolutional
layers. We prove in particular that random convolutional layers belong to the same
universality class as Gaussian matrices. Our proof technique is of an independent
interest as it establishes a mapping between convolutional matrices and spatially
coupled sensing matrices used in coding theory.

1

Introduction

In a typical signal recovery problem, one seeks to recover a data signal x0 given access to measurements y0 = G✓ (x0 ), where the parameters ✓ of the signal model are known. In many problems, it is
natural to view the measurement generation process as a composition of simple forward operators, or
‘layers.’ In this work, we are concerned with multi-layer signal models of the form
G✓ (x0 ) = '(1) (W (1) '(2) (W (2) . . . '(L) (W (L) x0 ; ⇣ (L) ) . . .).

(1)

where W (l) 2 Rnl 1 ⇥nl are linear sensing matrices and where '(l) (z; ⇣) are separable channel
functions that may be non-linear and may depend on unknown channel noise ⇣. In the multi-layer
case L > 1, this signal model can be viewed as a simple instance of recovery under a Generative
Neural Network (GNN) prior, a technique which has recently shown promise as a generalization
of sparsity priors for signal processing applications Bora et al. [2017]. For example, Gaussian
compressive sensing y0 = AG✓ (x0 ) + ⇣ under a prior with random Gaussian weights can be naturally
viewed as an instance of the multilayer signal model, and given an estimate x̂, one can recover
the target signal ŝ = G✓ (x̂) from the weights {W (l) } and noise-independent channel functions
{'(l) (z)}.
In practical settings GNNs often use structured convolutional weight matrices, preventing the direct
application of estimators that require W (l) to have unstructured entries. Motivated by this, we take
interest in a variant of the recovery problem (1) in which some of the sensing matrices W (l) may be
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

