Robustness Analysis of Video-Language Models
Against Visual and Language Perturbations

Madeline C. Schiappa
University of Central Florida
madelineschiappa@knights.ucf.edu
Hamid Palangi
Microsoft Research
hpalangi@microsoft.com

Shruti Vyas
University of Central Florida
shruti@crcv.ucf.edu

Yogesh S. Rawat∗
University of Central Florida
yogesh@crcv.ucf.edu

Vibhav Vineet∗
Microsoft Research
vivineet@microsoft.com

Abstract
Joint visual and language modeling on large-scale datasets has recently shown
good progress in multi-modal tasks when compared to single modal learning.
However, robustness of these approaches against real-world perturbations has not
been studied. In this work, we perform the first extensive robustness study of
video-language models against various real-world perturbations. We focus on textto-video retrieval and propose two large-scale benchmark datasets, MSRVTT-P and
YouCook2-P, which utilize 90 different visual and 35 different text perturbations.
The study reveals some interesting initial findings from the studied models: 1)
models are more robust when text is perturbed versus when video is perturbed,
2) models that are pre-trained are more robust than those trained from scratch,
3) models attend more to scene and objects rather than motion and action. We
hope this study will serve as a benchmark and guide future research in robust
video-language learning. The benchmark introduced in this study along with the
code and datasets is available at https://bit.ly/3CNOly4.

1

Introduction

Human beings learn different skills sequentially and in a continual manner. Sequential data like
video and language are natural forms of input to any intelligent vision system operating in the real
world. Robustness of these intelligent systems against real-world distribution shifts is crucial for
various applications including autonomous driving [36, 26, 17, 43], medicine [4, 2, 31, 54], robotics
[31, 65, 32, 6] and others. In a multimodal setting where both language and video are used, these
distribution shifts can occur for a variety of reasons. In video, these can include lighting, camera
movement, digital compression, etc. In text, these can include spelling errors, incorrect synonym
swapping, bias, etc. These distribution shifts can cause deep learning models to fail when deployed
in a real world setting [28, 12, 17].
It is crucial that these models are robust against such distribution shifts for successful deployment.
Robustness has been an active topic of research in deep learning. However, most of the effort is
directed towards robustness against adversarial attacks [9, 3, 20]. There are some recent efforts
on robustness against real-world distribution shifts, but they focus on non-sequential image data
[28, 8, 27] and natural language [59] independently. Because video and text are vital sequential
inputs for real-world intelligent systems, studying robustness in a multimodal setting is an important
step towards developing reliable systems and has never been studied before.
∗

The authors contributed equally as supervisors to this paper.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

