Latent Planning via Expansive Tree Search

Robert Gieselmann
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
robgie@kth.se

Florian T. Pokorny
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
fpokorny@kth.se

Abstract
Planning enables autonomous agents to solve complex decision-making problems by evaluating predictions of the future. However, classical planning algorithms often become infeasible in real-world settings where state spaces are
high-dimensional and transition dynamics unknown. The idea behind latent planning is to simplify the decision-making task by mapping it to a lower-dimensional
embedding space. Common latent planning strategies are based on trajectory optimization techniques such as shooting or collocation, which are prone to failure in
long-horizon and highly non-convex settings. In this work, we study long-horizon
goal-reaching scenarios from visual inputs and formulate latent planning as an
explorative tree search. Inspired by classical sampling-based motion planning
algorithms, we design a method which iteratively grows and optimizes a tree representation of visited areas of the latent space. To encourage fast exploration, the
sampling of new states is biased towards sparsely represented regions within the estimated data support. Our method, called Expansive Latent Space Trees (ELAST),
relies on self-supervised training via contrastive learning to obtain (a) a latent
state representation and (b) a latent transition density model. We embed ELAST
into a model-predictive control scheme and demonstrate significant performance
improvements compared to existing baselines given challenging visual control
tasks in simulation, including the navigation for a deformable object.

1

Introduction

To perform challenging control tasks in real-world environments, intelligent agents must reason across many temporal
steps, often relying on high-dimensional sensor data such as images. Over the past decade, machine learning has significantly
improved the state-of-the-art in image-based robotics and perception [34, 9, 2, 36, 17, 15]. However, existing methods are
often limited to problems with relatively short time horizons
and fail when the target is too far in the future. Reinforcement
learning (RL), for example, is prone to failure in such scenarios
due to sparse reward feedback and the resulting complexity
of credit assignment [37, 16]. Classical planning algorithms
[30], on the other hand, excel at solving temporally-extended
decision problems, but typically require compact representations, state distance metrics and perfect knowledge of transition
dynamics.

zstart

zgoal
Figure 1: Sampling-based latent exploration with ELAST. A tree (blue) is
iteratively grown and optimized while
being bound to the estimated latent support region (gray).

Recent work proposes a mixture of planning and deep learning
methods to enable planning from complex visual observations. Current approaches can be broadly
divided into planning (a) directly in the observation space [44, 8, 35] and (b) in learned latent
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

