Learning from a Sample in Online Algorithms

C.J. Argue

Alan M. Frieze
Anupam Gupta
Christopher Seiler
Departments of Computer Science and Mathematics
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
We consider three central problems in optimization: the restricted assignment
load-balancing problem, the Steiner tree network design problem, and facility location clustering. We consider the online setting, where the input arrives over
time, and irrevocable decisions must be made without knowledge of the future.
For all these problems, any online algorithm must incur a cost that is approximately log |I| times the optimal cost in the worst-case, where |I| is the length of
the input. But can we go beyond the worst-case? In this work we give algorithms
that perform substantially better when a p-fraction of the input is given as a sample: the algorithm use this sample to learn a good strategy to use for the rest of
the input.

1

Introduction

The area of sequential decision-making (a.k.a. online algorithms) is a central direction in algorithms
under uncertainty: faced with a sequence of requests arriving over time, an algorithm needs to make
decisions without knowing the future. Given this lack of information, how can it make near-optimal
decisions? An enormous amount of work has been done on problems in this area over the past
decades, and we know near-optimal worst-case bounds for many problems of interest in clustering,
online resource allocation, scheduling, and network design.
However, these worst-case bounds are often pessimistic (perhaps by definition): they focus on the
hardest, pathological instances. Can we give algorithms that work for instances that arise in practice,
which tend to be very far from the worst case? There have been many attempts to formalize this
question: see the textbook by Roughgarden [2020] for several approaches to go beyond the worstcase.
In this paper we focus on online algorithms with a sample (AOS) framework of Kaplan et al. [2020,
2022]: a similar model was defined by Lattanzi et al. [2021] based on Kumar et al. [2019]. In this
model, we assume that an arbitrary instance I is chosen, perhaps by an adversary. A random sample
S containing a p-fraction of the instance is then presented to the algorithm, as part of a “training
phase”. Having used this sample to learn something about I, the algorithm faces the rest of the
instance R := I \ S (in its adversary-chosen order). This is essentially the “testing phase”. The
algorithm needs to service these requests, and ensure that for each input I,
ER [ cost of algorithm A on R ] ≤ g(p) · ER [ optimal cost for R ].

(1)

Here the expectation is taken over both the p-random sample S (and hence its complement R),
as well over the internal randomness of the algorithm A. Can we design algorithms that use this
small random sample (just an p fraction) to extract enough information to substantially improve its
performance?
We show the answer is “yes” for three combinatorial optimization problems in load-balancing, clustering, and network design:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

