VAEL: Bridging Variational Autoencoders and
Probabilistic Logic Programming

Eleonora Misino
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Bologna, Italy
eleonora.misino2@unibo.it
Giuseppe Marra, Emanuele Sansone
Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven, Belgium
{first}.{last}@kuleuven.be

Abstract
We present VAEL, a neuro-symbolic generative model integrating variational
autoencoders (VAE) with the reasoning capabilities of probabilistic logic (L) programming. Besides standard latent subsymbolic variables, our model exploits a
probabilistic logic program to define a further structured representation, which is
used for logical reasoning. The entire process is end-to-end differentiable. Once
trained, VAEL can solve new unseen generation tasks by (i) leveraging the previously acquired knowledge encoded in the neural component and (ii) exploiting
new logical programs on the structured latent space. Our experiments provide
support on the benefits of this neuro-symbolic integration both in terms of task
generalization and data efficiency. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the
first to propose a general-purpose end-to-end framework integrating probabilistic
logic programming into a deep generative model.

1

Introduction

Neuro-symbolic learning has gained tremendous attention in the last few years [4, 10, 33, 3] as such
integration has the potential of leading to a new era of intelligent solutions, enabling the integration
of deep learning and reasoning strategies (e.g. logic-based or expert systems). Indeed, these two
worlds have different strengths that complement each other [31]. Deep learning systems excel at
dealing with noisy and ambiguous high dimensional raw data, whereas reasoning systems leverage
relations between symbols to reason and to generalize from a small amount of training data. While
a lot of effort has been devoted to devising neuro-symbolic methods in the discriminative setting
[47, 67, 49], less attention has been paid to the generative counterpart. An ideal generative neurosymbolic framework should be able to encode the available small amount of training data into an
expressive symbolic representation and to exploit complex forms of high level reasoning on such
representation to generate new data samples. For example, consider a task where a single image of
multiple handwritten numbers is labeled with their sum. Suppose that we want to generate new images
not only given their addition, but also given their multiplication, power, etc. Common generative
approaches, like VAE-based models, have a strong connection between the latent representation
and the label of the training task (i.e. the addition) [35, 30]. Consequently, when considering new
generation tasks that go beyond the simple addition, they have to be retrained on new data.
In this paper, we tackle the problem by providing a novel generative neuro-symbolic solution, named
VAEL. In VAEL, the latent representation is not directly linked to the label of the task, but to a set
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

