Improving Diffusion Models for Inverse Problems
using Manifold Constraints

Hyungjin Chung∗,1

Byeongsu Sim∗,2
Dohoon Ryu1
Jong Chul Ye3,1,2
Dept. of Bio and Brain Engineering
2
Dept. of Mathematical Sciences
3
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
∗
Equal contribution
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{hj.chung, byeongsu.s, dh.ryu, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
1

Abstract
Recently, diffusion models have been used to solve various inverse problems in
an unsupervised manner with appropriate modifications to the sampling process.
However, the current solvers, which recursively apply a reverse diffusion step
followed by a projection-based measurement consistency step, often produce suboptimal results. By studying the generative sampling path, here we show that
current solvers throw the sample path off the data manifold, and hence the error
accumulates. To address this, we propose an additional correction term inspired
by the manifold constraint, which can be used synergistically with the previous
solvers to make the iterations close to the manifold. The proposed manifold
constraint is straightforward to implement within a few lines of code, yet boosts
the performance by a surprisingly large margin. With extensive experiments,
we show that our method is superior to the previous methods both theoretically
and empirically, producing promising results in many applications such as image
inpainting, colorization, and sparse-view computed tomography. Code available
here

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have shown impressive performance both as generative models themselves [41, 13],
and also as unsupervised inverse problem solvers [41, 8, 9, 25] that do not require problem-specific
training. Specifically, given a pre-trained unconditional score function (i.e. denoiser), solving the
reverse stochastic differential equation (SDE) numerically would amount to sampling from the data
generating distribution [41]. For many different inverse problems (e.g. super-resolution [8, 9],
inpainting [41, 9], compressed-sensing MRI (CS-MRI) [40, 9], sparse view CT (SV-CT) [40], etc.),
it was shown that simple incorporation of the measurement process produces satisfactory conditional
samples, even when the model was not trained for the specific problem.
Nevertheless, for certain problems (e.g. inpainting), currently used algorithms often produce unsatisfactory results when implemented naively (e.g. boundary artifacts, as shown in Fig. 1 (b)). The
authors in [32] showed that in order to produce high quality reconstructions, one needs to iterate
back and forth between the noising and the denoising step at least > 10 times per iteration. These
iterations are computationally demanding and should be avoided, considering that diffusion models
are slow to sample from even without such iterations. On the other hand, a classic result of Tweedie’s
formula [37, 42] shows that one can perform Bayes optimal denoising in one step, once we know
the gradient of the log density. Extending such result, it was recently shown that one can indeed
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

