Iron: Private Inference on Transformers
Meng Hao1∗ Hongwei Li1† Hanxiao Chen1 Pengzhi Xing1 Guowen Xu2 Tianwei Zhang2
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Nanyang Technological University
{menghao,hanxiao.chen,p.xing}@std.uestc.edu.cn
hongweili@uestc.edu.cn
{guowen.xu,tianwei.zhang}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We initiate the study of private inference on Transformer-based models in the
client-server setting, where clients have private inputs and servers hold proprietary
models. Our main contribution is to provide several new secure protocols for matrix
multiplication and complex non-linear functions like Softmax, GELU activations,
and LayerNorm, which are critical components of Transformers. Specifically, we
first propose a customized homomorphic encryption-based protocol for matrix
multiplication that
√ crucially relies on a novel compact packing technique. This
design achieves m× less communication (m is the number of rows of the output
matrix) over the most efficient work. Second, we design efficient protocols for three
non-linear functions via integrating advanced underlying protocols and specialized
optimizations. Compared to the state-of-the-art protocols, our recipes reduce about
half of the communication and computation overhead. Furthermore, all protocols
are numerically precise, which preserve the model accuracy of plaintext. These
techniques together allow us to implement Iron, an efficient Transformer-based
private inference framework. Experiments conducted on several real-world datasets
and models demonstrate that Iron achieves 3 ∼ 14× less communication and
3 ∼ 11× less runtime compared to the prior art.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based models [1–5] have realized tremendous success in the fields of natural language
processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV) due to their strong representation capabilities. As a
new neural network architecture, the Transformer [1] mainly utilizes the self-attention mechanism
to compute representations without sequence-aligned recurrence or convolution. Following this
work, a number of Transformer variants, such as BERT [2] and GPT [3] in NLP, ViT [4] and Swin
Transformer [5] in CV, have achieved state-of-the-art performance on lots of real-world tasks.
The success of Transformers and other big models facilitates emerging inference services and
applications [6, 7]. In particular, a service provider trains a complex model based on the Transformer,
and deploys it as a paid inference service, e.g., machine translation and question answering. A
client queries this service with his input samples and obtains the desired responses. Unfortunately,
current inference systems suffer from serious privacy concerns [8]. On the one hand, clients need
to send confidential inputs to the service provider, which could compromise the data privacy of
these clients if the provider is untrusted. On the other hand, it is undesirable for the provider to
distribute the proprietary Transformer-based model to clients, since he needs a large amount of
data and computation resources to construct the model [9]. Therefore, there exists a gap between
∗
†

This work was done at NTU as a visiting student.
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

