A Unified Framework for Alternating Offline
Model Training and Policy Learning

Shentao Yang1 , Shujian Zhang1 , Yihao Feng2 , Mingyuan Zhou1
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Salesforce Research
shentao.yang@mccombs.utexas.edu
szhang19@utexas.edu
yihaof@salesforce.com mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
In offline model-based reinforcement learning (offline MBRL), we learn a dynamic model from historically collected data, and subsequently utilize the learned
model and fixed datasets for policy learning, without further interacting with
the environment. Offline MBRL algorithms can improve the efficiency and stability of policy learning over the model-free algorithms. However, in most of
the existing offline MBRL algorithms, the learning objectives for the dynamic
models and the policies are isolated from each other. Such an objective mismatch may lead to inferior performance of the learned agents. In this paper, we
address this issue by developing an iterative offline MBRL framework, where
we maximize a lower bound of the true expected return, by alternating between
dynamic-model training and policy learning. With the proposed unified modelpolicy learning framework, we achieve competitive performance on a wide range of
continuous-control offline reinforcement learning datasets. Source code is released
at https://github.com/Shentao-YANG/AMPL_NeurIPS2022.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (offline RL) [1, 2], where the agents are trained from static and
pre-collected datasets, avoids direct interactions with the underlying real-world environment during
the learning process. Unlike traditional online RL, whose success largely depends on simulator-based
trial-and-error [e.g., 3, 4], offline RL enables training policies for real-world applications, where it is
infeasible or even risky to collect online experimental data, such as robotics, advertisement, or dialog
systems [e.g., 5–8]. Though promising, it remains challenging to train agents under the offline setting,
due to the discrepancy between the distribution of the offline data and the state-action distribution
induced by the current learning policy. With such a discrepancy, directly transferring standard online
off-policy RL methods [e.g., 9–11] to the offline setting tends to be problematic [12, 13], especially
when the offline data cannot sufficiently cover the state-action space [14]. To tackle this issue in offline
RL, recent works [e.g., 15–17] propose to approximate the policy-induced state-action distribution by
leveraging a learned dynamic model to draw imaginary rollouts. These additional synthetic rollouts
help mitigate the distributional discrepancy and stabilize the policy-learning algorithms under the
offline setting.
Most of the prior offline model-based RL (MBRL) methods [e.g., 16, 18–21], however, first pretrain
a one-step forward dynamic model via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) on the offline dataset,
and then use the learned model to train the policy, without further improving the dynamic model
during the policy learning process. As a result, the objective function used for model training (e.g.,
MLE) and the objective of model utilization are unrelated with each other. Specifically, the model is
trained to be “simply a mimic of the world,” but is used to improve the performance of the learned
policy [22–24]. Though such a training paradigm is historically rooted [25, 26], this issue of objective
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

