ELASTIC: Numerical Reasoning with
Adaptive Symbolic Compiler

Jiaxin Zhang
University of Strathclyde
16 Richmond Street, Glasgow, G1 1XQ
jiaxin.zhang@strath.ac.uk

Yashar Moshfeghi
University of Strathclyde
16 Richmond Street, Glasgow, G1 1XQ
yashar.moshfeghi@strath.ac.uk

Abstract
Numerical reasoning over text is a challenging task of Artificial Intelligence (AI),
requiring reading comprehension and numerical reasoning abilities. Previous
approaches use numerical reasoning programs to represent the reasoning process.
However, most works do not separate the generation of operators and operands,
which are key components of a numerical reasoning program, thus limiting their
ability to generate such programs for complicated tasks. In this paper, we introduce
the numEricaL reASoning with adapTive symbolIc Compiler (ELASTIC) model,
which is constituted of the RoBERTa as the Encoder and a Compiler with four
modules: Reasoning Manager, Operator Generator, Operands Generator, and
Memory Register. ELASTIC is robust when conducting complicated reasoning.
Also, it is domain agnostic by supporting the expansion of diverse operators without
caring about the number of operands it contains. Experiments show that ELASTIC
achieves 68.96 and 65.21 of execution accuracy and program accuracy on the
FinQA dataset and 83.00 program accuracy on the MathQA dataset, outperforming
previous state-of-the-art models significantly.1

1

Introduction

Recently, Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] show astonishing performance over
reading comprehension tasks like SQuAD [6]. However, PLMs fall short of numerical reasoning over
text [7], which requires conducting numerical reasoning based on understanding the text. Hence,
numerical reasoning over text is more challenging than reading comprehension [8] and attracts the
interest of the AI community. Previous approaches adopt the sequence-to-sequence architecture to
generate the sequential format of numerical reasoning programs (see (b) in Table 1) [9, 10]. However,
the sequential format could produce invalid expressions such as "3 − ((2)" because of the wrong
position of parentheses [11]. To avoid this, some methods convert the reasoning program to the binary
tree, then use the tree-decoder to generate the pre/post-order traversal sequence (see (c) in Table 1)
[12, 13, 14]. Alternatively, FinQANet [15] represents the reasoning program in a flattened format
and generates the right parentheses forcibly after generating two consecutive operands. To increase
the scalability, NeRd [7] introduces the symbolic operations and generates the reasoning program as
the nested compositional format (see (e) in Table 1). Researchers also investigate to capture valuable
information between entities and numbers to improve numerical reasoning ability. Some works use
PLMs [8, 7, 16], while others, like Li et al. [17] and Ran et al. [18], adopt graph neural network to
encode the text.
Currently, proposed approaches struggle with two significant problems. Firstly, they are vulnerable to
complicated numerical reasoning problems. The complicated numerical reasoning problems usually
1

ELASTIC code can be found at https://github.com/NeuraSearch/NeurIPS-2022-Submission-3

358
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

