Noise Attention Learning: Enhancing Noise
Robustness by Gradient Scaling

Yangdi Lu
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University
luy100@mcmaster.ca

Yang Bo
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University
boy2@mcmaster.ca

Wenbo He
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University
hew11@mcmaster.ca

Abstract
Machine learning has been highly successful in data-driven applications but is
often hampered when the data contains noise, especially label noise. When trained
on noisy labels, deep neural networks tend to fit all noisy labels, resulting in poor
generalization. To handle this problem, a common idea is to force the model to
fit only clean samples rather than mislabeled ones. In this paper, we propose a
simple yet effective method that automatically distinguishes the mislabeled samples
and prevents the model from memorizing them, named Noise Attention Learning.
In our method, we introduce an attention branch to produce attention weights
based on representations of samples. This attention branch is learned to divide
the samples according to the predictive power in their representations. We design
the corresponding loss function that incorporates the attention weights for training
the model without affecting the original learning direction. Empirical results
show that most of the mislabeled samples yield significantly lower weights than
the clean ones. Furthermore, our theoretical analysis shows that the gradients
of training samples are dynamically scaled by the attention weights, implicitly
preventing memorization of the mislabeled samples. Experimental results on two
benchmarks (CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100) with simulated label noise and three realworld noisy datasets (ANIMAL-10N, Clothing1M and Webvision) demonstrate
that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

With the emergence of highly-curated datasets such as ImageNet [1] and CIFAR [2], deep neural
networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable performance on many classification tasks. However, in
real-world applications, it is extremely time-consuming and expensive, sometimes even impossible
to label a new large-scale dataset containing fully correct annotations. To alleviate this problem,
one may obtain the data with lower quality annotations efficiently through online keywords queries
[3] or crowdsourcing [4], but noisy labels (e.g. a cat image is mislabeled as dog) are inevitably
introduced consequently. Previous study [5] has empirically demonstrated that noisy labels in training
data are problematic for deep neural networks, resulting in overfitting and performance degradation.
Therefore, designing robust algorithms against noisy labels is of great practical importance.
Given the training data consists of clean (correctly labeled) samples and mislabeled samples, DNNs
have been observed to correctly predict the true labels for all training samples during a early learning
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

