Leveraging Inter-Layer Dependency for Post -Training
Quantization

Changbao Wang
Ant Technology Group Co., Ltd.
changbao.wcb@antgroup.com

Dandan Zheng
Ant Technology Group Co., Ltd.
yuandan.zdd@antgroup.com

Yuanliu Liu
Ant Technology Group Co., Ltd.
yuanliu.lyl@antgroup.com

Liang Li
Ant Technology Group Co., Ltd.
double.ll@antgroup.com

Abstract
Prior works on Post-training Quantization (PTQ) typically separate a neural network into sub-nets and quantize them sequentially. This process pays little attention
to the dependency across the sub-nets, hence is less optimal. In this paper, we
propose a novel Network-Wise Quantization (NWQ) approach to fully leveraging
inter-layer dependency. NWQ faces a larger scale combinatorial optimization problem of discrete variables than in previous works, which raises two major challenges:
over-fitting and discrete optimization problem. NWQ alleviates over fitting via
a Activation Regularization (AR) technique, which better controls the activation
distribution. To optimize discrete variables, NWQ introduces Annealing Softmax
(ASoftmax) and Annealing Mixup (AMixup) to progressively transition quantized
weights and activations from continuity to discretization, respectively. Extensive
experiments demonstrates that NWQ outperforms prior state-of-the-art approaches
by a large margin: 20.24% for the challenging configuration of MobileNetV2 with
2 bits on ImageNet, pushing extremely low-bit PTQ from feasibility to usability.
In addition, NWQ is able to achieve competitive or better results with only 10%
computation cost of previous works.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has seen a boom of architectures with ever-increasing capabilities and capacity. Huge
capacity, however, always comes with boosting parameters, resulting in large computation cost
and memory footprint. Researchers have utilized strategies like neural architecture search (NAS)
[4, 11, 29, 49], network pruning [12, 19], and knowledge distillation (KD) [18, 21] to design compact
networks and improve their accuracy. Furthermore, neural network quantization [7, 15, 22, 25, 28]
is typically applied along with the methods mentioned above to reduce the computation cost and
memory footprint. Quantization represents neural networks with lower bit precision, usually 8 bits in
practice, and saves 75% of memory while offering 2 ∼ 4× speedup[26].
Network quantization techniques are typically categorized into Quantization Aware Training (QAT)
and Post-training Quantization(PTQ) based on the dependency on labeled data and the necessity of
weight tuning. Generally, PTQ techniques are preferred in industry because they rely less on labeled
data and take into account privacy concerns as well as compute resources. This paper focuses on
PTQ.
PTQ usually suffers from significant accuracy degradation, especially for low-bit quantization which
offers much more memory reduction and speedup. To improve the accuracy of PTQ, much effort
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

