Robust Binary Models by Pruning
Randomly-initialized Networks
Chen Liu⇤ Ziqi Zhao⇤ Sabine Süsstrunk Mathieu Salzmann
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,
{chen.liu, ziqi.zhao, sabine.susstrunk, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Robustness to adversarial attacks was shown to require a larger model capacity, and
thus a larger memory footprint. In this paper, we introduce an approach to obtain robust yet compact models by pruning randomly-initialized binary networks. Unlike
adversarial training, which learns the model parameters, we initialize the model
parameters as either +1 or 1, keep them fixed, and find a subnetwork structure
that is robust to attacks. Our method confirms the Strong Lottery Ticket Hypothesis in the presence of adversarial attacks, and extends this to binary networks.
Furthermore, it yields more compact networks with competitive performance than
existing works by 1) adaptively pruning different network layers; 2) exploiting an
effective binary initialization scheme; 3) incorporating a last batch normalization
layer to improve training stability. Our experiments demonstrate that our approach
not only always outperforms the state-of-the-art robust binary networks, but also
can achieve accuracy better than full-precision ones on some datasets. Finally, we
show the structured patterns of our pruned binary networks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved unprecedented success in machine learning [19, 30, 56]. However, their state-of-the-art performance comes with costs. First, modern deep neural networks usually
have millions of parameters, making them difficult to deploy on devices with limited memory or
computational power. Second, these models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks: imperceptible
perturbations of the input can dramatically change their output and lead to incorrect predictions [55].
Furthermore, jointly addressing both issues is complicated by the fact that, as shown in [44, 60],
achieving robustness against adversarial attacks typically requires higher network capacity.
In this paper, we introduce an approach to obtaining compact and robust binary neural networks. Our
method follows a fundamentally different philosophy from typical adversarial training [44]: instead
of using adversarial examples to train the model parameters, we fix the model parameters and search
for a robust network structure. To this end, and to simultaneously achieve compactness, we prune
randomly-initialized binary networks. The resulting sparse and binary networks have much smaller
memory footprint than the dense or full-precision ones. They are inherently lightweight and robust.
Our work is motivated by the Strong Lottery Ticket Hypothesis [51], which observed that within a
random overparameterized network, there exists a subnetwork achieving performance similar to that
of trained networks with the same number of parameters. The Robust Scratch Ticket [22] extends this
hypothesis to the context of adversarial robustness. Here, we introduce a novel pruning strategy that
yields higher compression rates, and investigate the case of binary model parameters. Specifically,
we develop an adaptive pruning strategy to adaptively use different pruning rates for different layers.
Furthermore, we introduce a normalization-based technique to increase the algorithm’s stability for
⇤

indicates equal contributions

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

