On the generalization of learning algorithms that do
not converge

Nisha Chandramoorthy
Institute for Data, Systems and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
nishac@mit.edu
Khashayar Gatmiry
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
gatmiry@mit.edu

Andreas Loukas
Prescient Design
Genentech, Roche
andreas.loukas@roche.com
Stefanie Jegelka
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
Generalization analyses of deep learning typically assume that the training converges to a fixed point. But, recent results indicate that in practice, the weights of
deep neural networks optimized with stochastic gradient descent often oscillate
indefinitely. To reduce this discrepancy between theory and practice, this paper
focuses on the generalization of neural networks whose training dynamics do not
necessarily converge to fixed points. Our main contribution is to propose a notion
of statistical algorithmic stability (SAS) that extends classical algorithmic stability
to non-convergent algorithms and to study its connection to generalization. This
ergodic-theoretic approach leads to new insights when compared to the traditional
optimization and learning theory perspectives. We prove that the stability of the
time-asymptotic behavior of a learning algorithm relates to its generalization and
empirically demonstrate how loss dynamics can provide clues to generalization
performance. Our findings provide evidence that networks that “train stably generalize better” even when the training continues indefinitely and the weights do not
converge.

1

Introduction

It is common practice that when the training loss of a neural networks converges close to some
value, the learning algorithm—typically some variant of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)—is
terminated. Perhaps surprisingly, recent works indicate that the network function at termination time
is typically not a fixed point of the learning algorithm: if run longer, the gradient norm does not vanish
and the learning algorithm outputs functions with significantly different parameters [Cohen et al.,
2021, Zhang et al., 2022, Lobacheva et al., 2021]. This observation stands in contrast to common
generalization analyses that assume convergence of the training algorithm to a fixed point. It also
raises the question of when (and why) non-convergent learning algorithms should be expected to
generalize.
Standard approaches for obtaining generalization bounds find ways to bound the complexity measure
of the function class expressible by a neural network in a data-independent e.g., [Vapnik, 1999,
Bartlett et al., 2017, Neyshabur et al., 2018, Golowich et al., 2018, Bartlett et al., 2019, Arora et al.,
2018] or data-dependent manner, e.g., [von Luxburg and Bousquet, 2004, Xu and Mannor, 2012,
Sokolić et al., 2017]. Nevertheless, even with recent technical improvements, by and large these
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

