Fully Sparse 3D Object Detection

Lue Fan1,2,3,4 Feng Wang5 Naiyan Wang5 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,6,
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
4
School of Future Technology, UCAS
5
6
TuSimple
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI_CAS
{fanlue2019, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

{feng.wff, winsty}@gmail.com

Abstract
As the perception range of LiDAR increases, LiDAR-based 3D object detection
becomes a dominant task in the long-range perception task of autonomous driving.
The mainstream 3D object detectors usually build dense feature maps in the network
backbone and prediction head. However, the computational and spatial costs
on the dense feature map are quadratic to the perception range, which makes
them hardly scale up to the long-range setting. To enable efficient long-range
LiDAR-based object detection, we build a fully sparse 3D object detector (FSD).
The computational and spatial cost of FSD is roughly linear to the number of
points and independent of the perception range. FSD is built upon the general
sparse voxel encoder and a novel sparse instance recognition (SIR) module. SIR
resolves the issue of center feature missing, which hinders the design of the fully
sparse architecture. Moreover, SIR avoids the time-consuming neighbor queries in
previous point-based methods. We conduct extensive experiments on the large-scale
Waymo Open Dataset to reveal the inner workings, and state-of-the-art performance
is reported. To demonstrate the superiority of FSD in long-range detection, we also
conduct experiments on Argoverse 2 Dataset, which has a much larger perception
range (200m) than Waymo Open Dataset (75m). On such a large perception
range, FSD achieves state-of-the-art performance and is 2.4× faster than the dense
counterpart. Our code is released at https://github.com/TuSimple/SST.

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving systems are eager for efficient
long-range perception for downstream tasks, especially in high-speed scenarios. Current 3D LiDARbased object detectors usually convert sparse features
into dense feature maps for further feature extraction and prediction. For simplicity, we name the
detectors utilizing dense feature maps as dense detectors. Dense detectors perform well on current
popular benchmarks [31, 7, 2], where the perception range is relatively short (less than 75 meters).
However, it is impractical to scale the dense detectors to the long-range setting (more than 200 meters,
Fig. 2). In such settings, the computational and spatial complexity on dense feature maps is quadratic
to the perception range. Fortunately, the sparsity of
LiDAR point clouds also increases as the perception
range extends (see Fig. 2), and the calculation on the

Figure 1: Illustration of center feature missing and feature diffusion on dense feature
maps from Bird’s Eye View. The empty instance center (red dot) is filled by the features
diffused from occupied voxels (with LiDAR
points), after several convolutions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

