Robust Neural Posterior Estimation and Statistical
Model Criticism
Daniel Ward1

Patrick Cannon2 Mark Beaumont3
Sebastian M. Schmon2,4

Matteo Fasiolo1

1

School of Mathematics, Bristol University, UK
2
Improbable, UK
3
School of Biological Sciences, Bristol University, UK
4
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Durham University, UK

Abstract
Computer simulations have proven a valuable tool for understanding complex
phenomena across the sciences. However, the utility of simulators for modelling
and forecasting purposes is often restricted by low data quality, as well as practical
limits to model fidelity. In order to circumvent these difficulties, we argue that
modellers must treat simulators as idealistic representations of the true data
generating process, and consequently should thoughtfully consider the risk of
model misspecification. In this work we revisit neural posterior estimation (NPE),
a class of algorithms that enable black-box parameter inference in simulation
models, and consider the implication of a simulation-to-reality gap. While recent
works have demonstrated reliable performance of these methods, the analyses
have been performed using synthetic data generated by the simulator model itself,
and have therefore only addressed the well-specified case. In this paper, we find
that the presence of misspecification, in contrast, leads to unreliable inference
when NPE is used naïvely. As a remedy we argue that principled scientific inquiry
with simulators should incorporate a model criticism component, to facilitate
interpretable identification of misspecification and a robust inference component,
to fit ‘wrong but useful’ models. We propose robust neural posterior estimation
(RNPE), an extension of NPE to simultaneously achieve both these aims, through
explicitly modelling the discrepancies between simulations and the observed
data. We assess the approach on a range of artificially misspecified examples, and
find RNPE performs well across the tasks, whereas naïvely using NPE leads to
misleading and erratic posteriors.

1

Introduction

Stochastic simulators have become a ubiquitous modelling tool across the sciences and are regularly
applied to some of the most complex and challenging problems of scientific interest, including climate
change (see e.g. Randall et al., 2007), particle physics (e.g. Brehmer et al., 2020), and the Covid-19
pandemic (e.g. Ferguson et al., 2020). Simulators implicitly define a likelihood function p(x | θ),
where x is the simulator output and θ are the simulator parameters. Although running the simulator
to sample from the model is straightforward, the inherent complexity of simulators often makes
analytic calculation of the likelihood intractable. As a result, classical inference techniques to find the
parameter posterior p(θ | x) such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Metropolis et al., 1953) are
infeasible. To overcome this issue, a large family of simulation-based inference (SBI) methods have
been developed that allow parameter inference to be performed on arbitrary black-box simulators
(see Cranmer et al., 2020). Broadly, these approaches estimate a function that allows access to an
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

