On-Demand Sampling:
Learning Optimally from Multiple Distributions ∗

Nika Haghtalab, Michael I. Jordan, and Eric Zhao
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Societal and real-world considerations such as robustness, fairness, social welfare
and multi-agent tradeoffs have given rise to multi-distribution learning paradigms,
such as collaborative [5], group distributionally robust [36], and fair federated
learning [27]. In each of these settings, a learner seeks to minimize its worstcase loss over a set of n predefined distributions, while using as few samples as
possible. In this paper, we establish the optimal sample complexity of these learning
paradigms and give algorithms that meet this sample complexity. Importantly, our
sample complexity bounds exceed that of the sample complexity of learning a
single distribution only by an additive factor of n log(n)
. These improve upon the
ε2
best known sample complexity of agnostic federated learning by Mohri et al. [27]
by a multiplicative factor of n, the sample complexity of collaborative learning by
n
Nguyen and Zakynthinou [29] by a multiplicative factor log
ε3 , and give the first
sample complexity bounds for the group DRO objective of Sagawa et al. [36]. To
achieve optimal sample complexity, our algorithms learn to sample and learn from
distributions on demand. Our algorithm design and analysis extends stochastic
optimization techniques to solve zero-sum games in a new stochastic setting.

1

Introduction

Pervasive needs for robustness, fairness, and multi-agent collaboration in learning have given rise to
multi-distribution learning paradigms (e.g., [5, 36, 27, 12]). In these settings, we seek to learn a model
that performs well on any distribution in a pre-defined set of interest. For fairness considerations,
these distributions may represent heterogeneous populations of different protected or socio-economic
attributes; in robustness applications, they may capture a learner’s uncertainty regarding the true
underlying task; and in muti-agent collaborative or federated applications, they may represent agentspecific learning tasks. In these applications, the performance and optimality of a model is measured
by its worst test-time performance on a distribution in the set. We are concerned with this fundamental
problem of designing sample-efficient multi-distribution learning algorithms.
The sample complexity of multi-distribution learning differs from that of learning a single distribution
in several ways. On one hand, learning tasks of varying difficulty require different numbers of samples.
On the other hand, similarity or overlap among learning tasks may obviate the need to sample from
some distributions. This makes the use of a fixed per-distribution sample budget highly inefficient
and suggests that optimal multi-distribution learning algorithms should sample on demand. That is,
algorithms should take additional samples whenever they need them and from whichever distribution
they want them. On-demand sampling is especially appropriate when some population data is scarce
(as in fairness mechanisms in which samples are amended [32]); when the designer can actively
∗
Authors are ordered alphabetically. Addresses: nika@berkeley.edu, jordan@cs.berkeley.edu,
eric.zh@berkeley.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

