FP8 Quantization: The Power of the Exponent
Andrey Kuzmin⇤, Mart Van Baalen⇤, Yuwei Ren,
Markus Nagel, Jorn Peters, Tijmen Blankevoort
Qualcomm AI Research†
{akuzmin,mart,ren,markusn,jpeters,tijmen}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
When quantizing neural networks for efficient inference, low-bit integers are the
go-to format for efficiency. However, low-bit floating point numbers have an extra
degree of freedom, assigning some bits to work on an exponential scale instead.
This paper in-depth investigates this benefit of the floating point format for neural
network inference. We detail the choices that can be made for the FP8 format,
including the important choice of the number of bits for the mantissa and exponent,
and show analytically in which settings these choices give better performance.
Then we show how these findings translate to real networks, provide an efficient
implementation for FP8 simulation, and a new algorithm that enables the learning
of both the scale parameters and number of exponent bits in the FP8 format. Our
chief conclusion is that when doing post-training quantization for a wide range of
networks, the FP8 format is better than INT8 in terms of accuracy, and the choice
of the number of exponent bits is driven by the severity of outliers in the network.
We also conduct experiments with quantization-aware training where the difference
in formats disappears as the network is trained to reduce the effect of outliers1 .

1

Introduction

Neural network quantization is one of the most effective ways to improve the efficiency of neural
networks. Quantization allows weights and activations to be represented in low bit-width formats,
e.g. 8 bit integers (INT8). When executing networks on any device, this leads to a reduction in
data movement and enables the use of low bit-width computations, resulting in significantly faster
inference and lower energy consumption.
Roughly speaking, values in neural networks are represented in either integer (INT) or floatingpoint formats (FP). Most quantization research has gone into low-bit integer formats such as INT8
and INT4, as the corresponding hardware for this is widely available. However, some research
suggests there might be benefits to using low bit-width floating-point formats for neural network
computations [40].
In this paper, we set out to thoroughly investigate the potential benefits of the floating point format
for neural network inference. We show that floating point numbers add an extra dimension on top
of the INT8 format that makes outliers in the quantized distribution less harmful to the overall
performance. We investigate the effect of the quantization formats on neural network quantization
on three levels: 1) Analytically for several common data and weight distributions, 2) practically in
INT8 and FP8 post-training quantization (PTQ) settings, and 3) in quantization-aware training (QAT)
settings with both INT8 and different FP8 formats. We will show there is a strong agreement between
our theoretical results and our practical results on real networks.
⇤

Equal contribution
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
1
Code will be made available at https://github.com/Qualcomm-AI-research/FP8-quantization

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

