DeepTOP: Deep Threshold-Optimal Policy for MDPs
and RMABs
Khaled Nakhleh

I-Hong Hou

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
{khaled.jamal, ihou}@tamu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the optimal threshold policy for control
problems. Threshold policies make control decisions by evaluating whether an
element of the system state exceeds a certain threshold, whose value is determined
by other elements of the system state. By leveraging the monotone property
of threshold policies, we prove that their policy gradients have a surprisingly
simple expression. We use this simple expression to build an off-policy actor-critic
algorithm for learning the optimal threshold policy. Simulation results show that
our policy significantly outperforms other reinforcement learning algorithms due
to its ability to exploit the monotone property.
In addition, we show that the Whittle index, a powerful tool for restless multi-armed
bandit problems, is equivalent to the optimal threshold policy for an alternative
problem. This observation leads to a simple algorithm that finds the Whittle index
by learning the optimal threshold policy in the alternative problem. Simulation
results show that our algorithm learns the Whittle index much faster than several
recent studies that learn the Whittle index through indirect means.

1

Introduction

This paper considers a class of control policies, called threshold policies, that naturally arise in many
practical problems. For example, a smart home server may only turn on the air conditioner when
the room temperature exceeds a certain threshold, and a central bank may only raise the interest rate
when inflation exceeds a certain threshold. For such problems, finding the optimal control policies
can be reduced to finding the appropriate thresholds given other factors of the system, such as the
number of people in the room in the smart home server scenario or the unemployment rate and the
current interest rate in the central bank scenario.
An important feature of threshold policies is that their actions are monotone. For example, if a smart
home server would turn on the air conditioner at a certain temperature, then, all other factors being
equal, the server would also turn on the air conditioner when the temperature is even higher. By
leveraging this monotone property, an algorithm aiming to learn the optimal threshold can potentially
be much more efficient than generic reinforcement learning algorithms seeking to learn the optimal
action at different points of temperature separately. In order to design an efficient algorithm for
learning the optimal threshold policy, we first formally define a class of Markov decision processes
(MDPs) that admit threshold policies and its objective function. The optimal threshold policy is
then the one that maximizes the objective function. However, the objective function involves an
integral over a continuous range, which makes it infeasible to directly apply standard tools, such as
backward-propagation in neural networks, to perform gradient updates.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

