Cooperative Distribution Alignment
via JSD Upper Bound

Wonwoong Cho∗
Purdue University†
cho436@purdue.edu

Ziyu Gong∗
Purdue University†
gong123@purdue.edu

David I. Inouye
Purdue University†
dinouye@purdue.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised distribution alignment estimates a transformation that maps two
or more source distributions to a shared aligned distribution given only samples
from each distribution. This task has many applications including generative
modeling, unsupervised domain adaptation, and socially aware learning. Most
prior works use adversarial learning (i.e., min-max optimization), which can be
challenging to optimize and evaluate. A few recent works explore non-adversarial
flow-based (i.e., invertible) approaches, but they lack a unified perspective and
are limited in efficiently aligning multiple distributions. Therefore, we propose to
unify and generalize previous flow-based approaches under a single non-adversarial
framework, which we prove is equivalent to minimizing an upper bound on the
Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD). Importantly, our problem reduces to a minmin, i.e., cooperative, problem and can provide a natural evaluation metric for
unsupervised distribution alignment. We show empirical results on both simulated
and real-world datasets to demonstrate the benefits of our approach. Code is
available at https://github.com/inouye-lab/alignment-upper-bound.

1

Introduction

In many cases, a practitioner has access to multiple related but distinct distributions such as agricultural
measurements from two farms, experimental data collected in different months, or sales data before
and after a major event. Unsupervised distribution alignment (UDA) is the ML task aimed at aligning
these related but distinct distributions in a shared space, without any pairing information between
the samples from these distrbibutions (i.e., unsupervised). This task has many applications such as
generative modeling (e.g., [1]), unsupervised domain adaptation (e.g., [2, 3]), batch effect mitigation
in biology (e.g., [4]), and fairness-aware learning (e.g., [5]).
The most common approach for obtaining such alignment transformations stems from Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN) [6], which can be viewed as minimizing a lower bound on the JensenShannon Divergence (JSD) between real and generated distributions. The lower bound is tight if and
only if the inner maximization is solved perfectly. CycleGAN [1] maps between two datasets via two
GAN objectives between the domains and a cycle consistency loss, which encourages approximate
invertibility of the transformations.
However, adversarial learning can be challenging to optimize in practice (see e.g. [7–11]) in part
because of the competitive nature of the min-max optimization problem. Perhaps more importantly,
the research community has resorted to surrogate evaluation metrics for GAN because likelihood
computation is intractable. Specifically, the commonly accepted Frechet Inception Distance (FID)
[12] is only applicable to image or auditory data for which there exist publicly available classifiers
∗
†

Equal contributions
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

