Learning Single-Index Models
with Shallow Neural Networks
Alberto Bietti
New York University
Meta AI

Joan Bruna
New York University

Clayton Sanford
Columbia University

Min Jae Song
New York University

Abstract
Single-index models are a class of functions given by an unknown univariate
“link” function applied to an unknown one-dimensional projection of the input.
These models are particularly relevant in high dimension, when the data might
present low-dimensional structure that learning algorithms should adapt to. While
several statistical aspects of this model, such as the sample complexity of recovering the relevant (one-dimensional) subspace, are well-understood, they rely on
tailored algorithms that exploit the specific structure of the target function. In this
work, we introduce a natural class of shallow neural networks and study its ability
to learn single-index models via gradient flow. More precisely, we consider shallow networks in which biases of the neurons are frozen at random initialization.
We show that the corresponding optimization landscape is benign, which in turn
leads to generalization guarantees that match the near-optimal sample complexity
of dedicated semi-parametric methods.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional learning with both computational and statistical guarantees, which is particularly
relevant given the current scaling trends, remains an outstanding challenge. One important question
which has received considerable attention is on understanding the advantages of using non-linear
learning models, such as neural networks, over more mature (from a theoretical standpoint) counterparts, such as kernel methods [56, 57, 84, 22]. Perhaps surprisingly, the question remains largely
open even for shallow neural networks.
While approximation benefits of shallow neural networks over non-adaptive kernels have been
known for decades [9, 69], another important piece of the theoretical puzzle was provided by [5],
whose analysis hinted at an inherent statistical advantage of neural networks for extracting information from high-dimensional data with a “hidden” low-dimensional structure. Providing computational guarantees, the remaining piece of this puzzle, is still mostly unresolved.
Several computational hardness results for learning functions that can be efficiently approximated
by shallow neural networks have been established in the literature [30, 41, 28, 78, 20], ruling out
positive results in the general setting. On the other hand, progress has been made on the positive
side [1, 2, 73] by focusing on function classes with strong structural properties, thereby showcasing
the adaptive representation learning capabilities of neural networks.
This work aligns with the latter effort, and focuses on the class of single-index models. Singleindex models are high-dimensional functions F : Rd ! R of the form F⇤ (x) = f⇤ (h✓⇤ , xi),
where both the univariate “link” function f⇤ : R ! R and relevant (one-dimensional) subspace
✓⇤ 2 Sd 1 are unknown. These models have been extensively studied in the statistics literature [45,
48, 26, 46, 33], leading to dedicated algorithmic procedures, and can be provably approximated with
shallow neural networks without incurring in a curse-of-dimensionality [5]. In contrast, the analysis
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

