Active-Passive SimStereo – Benchmarking the
Cross-Generalization Capabilities of Deep
Learning-based Stereo Methods

Laurent Jospin1∗

Allen Antony1 Lian Xu1 Hamid Laga2 Farid Boussaid1
Mohammed Bennamoun1
1
University of Western Australia 2 Murdoch University
{laurent.jospin,lian.xu,farid.boussaid,mohammed.bennamoun}@uwa.edu.au
H.Laga@murdoch.edu.au

Abstract
In stereo vision, self-similar or bland regions can make it difficult to match patches
between two images. Active stereo-based methods mitigate this problem by projecting a pseudo-random pattern on the scene so that each patch of an image pair
can be identified without ambiguity. However, the projected pattern significantly
alters the appearance of the image. If this pattern acts as a form of adversarial
noise, it could negatively impact the performance of deep learning-based methods, which are now the de-facto standard for dense stereo vision. In this paper, we
propose the Active-Passive SimStereo dataset and a corresponding benchmark to
evaluate the performance gap between passive and active stereo images for stereo
matching algorithms. Using the proposed benchmark and an additional ablation
study, we show that the feature extraction and matching modules of a selection of
twenty selected deep learning-based stereo matching methods generalize to active
stereo without a problem. However, the disparity refinement modules of three of
the twenty architectures (ACVNet, CascadeStereo, and StereoNet) are negatively
affected by the active stereo patterns due to their reliance on the appearance of the
input images.

1

Introduction

Stereo vision is used by many artificial or natural vision systems to acquire depth information from
a pair of 2D projective views of the 3D world. In the context of computer vision, stereo matching
operates in a multi-step pipeline (Fig. 2) composed of: (i) a feature volume construction from the left
and right views, (ii) a cost volume computation, which may be coupled with a regularization module,
(iii) a disparity extraction from the cost volume, which is done using the argmin function, and (iv)
a disparity refinement module, which may also use the cost volume and/or the image features as
additional cues. The central step in this pipeline is the construction of the cost volume, which is a
function C(x, y, d) that measures how unlikely a pixel of spatial coordinates (x, y) is to be assigned
a disparity value d. Textureless and repetitive patterns in images can produce flat or periodic cost
curves in the cost volume, leading to erroneous disparity maps in passive stereo systems, where only
a pair of cameras is used. To address this issue, active stereo-based methods [13] project a pseudorandom light pattern on the scene to remove the textureless or self-similar areas in the stereo images
(Fig. 1). Active stereo is now a critical component in many applications such as augmented reality
[22] and robotics [3]. They are also part of consumer electronics devices such as smartphones [26].
Traditional stereo matching pipelines rely solely on closed-form formulations [29]. However, in recent years, learning-based methods have led to a series of breakthroughs in the field. Early learning36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

