Pseudo-Riemannian Graph Convolutional Networks
Bo Xiong⇤
University of Stuttgart
Stuttgart, Germany

Shichao Zhu⇤
IIE, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China

Nico Potyka
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom

Shirui Pan
Griffith University
Queensland, Australia

Chuan Zhou
AMSS, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China

Steffen Staab
University of Stuttgart
University of Southampton
Stuttgart, Germany

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are powerful frameworks for learning embeddings of graph-structured data. GCNs are traditionally studied through the lens
of Euclidean geometry. Recent works find that non-Euclidean Riemannian manifolds provide specific inductive biases for embedding hierarchical or spherical
data. However, they cannot align well with data of mixed graph topologies. We
consider a larger class of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds that generalize hyperboloid and sphere. We develop new geodesic tools that allow for extending neural network operations into geodesically disconnected pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. As a consequence, we derive a pseudo-Riemannian GCN that models data
in pseudo-Riemannian manifolds of constant nonzero curvature in the context
of graph neural networks. Our method provides a geometric inductive bias that
is sufficiently flexible to model mixed heterogeneous topologies like hierarchical graphs with cycles. We demonstrate the representational capabilities of this
method by applying it to the tasks of graph reconstruction, node classification and
link prediction on a series of standard graphs with mixed topologies. Empirical
results demonstrate that our method outperforms Riemannian counterparts when
embedding graphs of complex topologies.

1

Introduction

Learning from graph-structured data is a pivotal task in machine learning, for which graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [1, 2, 3, 4] have emerged as powerful graph representation learning
techniques. GCNs exploit both features and structural properties in graphs, which makes them wellsuited for a wide range of applications. For this purpose, graphs are usually embedded in Riemannian
manifolds equipped with a positive definite metric. Euclidean geometry is a special case of Riemannian manifolds of constant zero curvature that can be understood intuitively and has well-defined
operations. However, the representation power of Euclidean space is limited [5], especially when
embedding complex graphs exhibiting hierarchical structures [6]. Non-Euclidean Riemannian manifolds of constant curvatures provide an alternative to accommodate specific graph topologies. For
example, hyperbolic manifold of constant negative curvature has exponentially growing volume and
is well suited to represent hierarchical structures such as tree-like graphs [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Similarly,
spherical manifold of constant positive curvature is suitable for embedding spherical data in various fields [12, 13, 14] including graphs with cycles. Some recent works [15, 16, 17, 18, 19] have
extended GCNs to such non-Euclidean manifolds and have shown substantial improvements.
⇤

Equal contribution. Correspondence to bo.xiong@ipvs.uni-stuttgart.de

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

