DOPE: Doubly Optimistic and Pessimistic
Exploration for Safe Reinforcement Learning
Archana Bura, Aria HasanzadeZonuzy, Dileep Kalathil,
Srinivas Shakkottai, Jean-Francois Chamberland
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University
{archanabura,azonuzy,dileep.kalathil,sshakkot,chmbrlnd}@tamu.edu

Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning is extremely challenging–not only must the agent
explore an unknown environment, it must do so while ensuring no safety constraint
violations. We formulate this safe reinforcement learning (RL) problem using the
framework of a finite-horizon Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) with
an unknown transition probability function, where we model the safety requirements as constraints on the expected cumulative costs that must be satisfied during
all episodes of learning. We propose a model-based safe RL algorithm that we call
Doubly Optimistic and Pessimistic
Exploration (DOPE), and show that it achieves
p
an objective regret Õ(|S| |A|K) without violating the safety constraints during
learning, where |S| is the number of states, |A| is the number of actions, and K is
the number of learning episodes. Our key idea is to combine a reward bonus for
exploration (optimism) with a conservative constraint (pessimism), in addition to
the standard optimistic model-based exploration. DOPE is not only able to improve
the objective regret bound, but also shows a significant empirical performance
improvement as compared to earlier optimism-pessimism approaches.

1

Introduction

Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs) impose restrictions that pertain to resource or
safety constraints of the system. For example, the average radiated power in a wireless communication
system must be restricted due to user health and battery lifetime considerations or the frequency of
braking or accelerating in an autonomous vehicle must be kept bounded to ensure passenger comfort.
Since these systems have complex dynamics, a constrained reinforcement learning (CRL) approach
is attractive for determining an optimal control policy. But how do we ensure that safety or resource
availability constraints are not violated while learning such an optimal control policy?
Our goal is to develop a framework for safe exploration without constraint violation (with high
probability) for solving CMDP problems where the model is unknown. While there has been much
work on RL for both the MDP and the CMDP setting, ensuring safe exploration in the CRL setting
has received less attention. The problem is challenging, since we do not allow constraint violation
either during learning or deployment, while ensuring a low regret in terms of the optimal objective.
Our aim is to explore a model-based approach in an episodic setting under which the model (the
transition kernel of the CMDP) is empirically determined as samples from the system are gathered.
There has been much recent interest in model-based RL approaches to solving a constrained MDP,
the most relevant of which we have summarized in Table 1. The setup is of a finite horizon episodic
CMDP, with a state space of size |S|, an action space of size |A| and a horizon of length H. Regret
is measured over the first K episodes of the algorithm. Both the attained objective and constraint
satisfaction are computed in an expected sense for a given policy. Allowing constraint violations
during learning means that the algorithm suffers both an objective regret and a constraint regret.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

