Exploration via Elliptical Episodic Bonuses
Mikael Henaff
Meta AI Research
mikaelhenaff@meta.com

Roberta Raileanu
Meta AI Research
raileanu@meta.com

Minqi Jiang
University College London
Meta AI Research
meta@fb.com

Tim Rocktäschel
University College London
t.rocktaschel@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
In recent years, a number of reinforcement learning (RL) methods have been proposed to explore complex environments which differ across episodes. In this work,
we show that the effectiveness of these methods critically relies on a count-based
episodic term in their exploration bonus. As a result, despite their success in
relatively simple, noise-free settings, these methods fall short in more realistic
scenarios where the state space is vast and prone to noise. To address this limitation, we introduce Exploration via Elliptical Episodic Bonuses (E3B), a new
method which extends count-based episodic bonuses to continuous state spaces and
encourages an agent to explore states that are diverse under a learned embedding
within each episode. The embedding is learned using an inverse dynamics model
in order to capture controllable aspects of the environment. Our method sets a
new state-of-the-art across 16 challenging tasks from the MiniHack suite, without requiring task-specific inductive biases. E3B also matches existing methods
on sparse reward, pixel-based Vizdoom environments, and outperforms existing
methods in reward-free exploration on Habitat, demonstrating that it can scale to
high-dimensional pixel-based observations and realistic environments.

1

Introduction

Exploration in environments with sparse rewards is a fundamental challenge in reinforcement learning
(RL). In the tabular setting, provably optimal algorithms have existed since the early 2000s [36, 10].
More recently, exploration has been studied in the context of deep RL, and a number of empirically
successful methods have been proposed, such as pseudocounts [9], intrinsic curiosity modules (ICM)
[52], and random network distillation (RND) [13]. These methods rely on intrinsically generated
exploration bonuses that reward the agent for visiting states that are novel according to some measure.
Different measures of novelty have been proposed, such as the likelihood of a state under a learned
density model, the error of a forward dynamics model, or the loss on a random prediction task. These
approaches have proven effective on hard exploration problems, as exemplified by the Atari games
Montezuma’s Revenge and PitFall [22].
The approaches above are, however, designed for singleton RL tasks, where the agent is spawned
in the same environment in every episode. Recently, several studies have drawn attention to the
fact that RL agents exhibit poor generalization across environments, and that even minor changes
to the environment can lead to substantial degradation in performance [75, 35, 74, 18, 38]. This
has motivated the creation of benchmarks in the Contextual Markov Decision Process (CMDP)
framework, where different episodes correspond to different environments that nevertheless share
certain characteristics. Examples of CMDPs include procedurally generated (PCG) environments
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

