All Politics is Local: Redistricting via Local Fairness
Shao-Heng Ko∗

Erin Taylor∗
Pankaj K. Agarwal
Kamesh Munagala
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, North Carolina 27708 USA
Email: {sk684,ect15,pankaj,kamesh}@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose to use the concept of local fairness for auditing and
ranking redistricting plans. Given a redistricting plan, a deviating group is a
population-balanced contiguous region in which a majority of individuals are of
the same interest and in the minority of their respective districts; such a set of
individuals have a justiﬁed complaint with how the redistricting plan was drawn.
A redistricting plan with no deviating groups is called locally fair. We show that
the problem of auditing a given plan for local fairness is NP-complete. We present
an MCMC approach for auditing as well as ranking redistricting plans. We also
present a dynamic programming based algorithm for the auditing problem that we
use to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our MCMC approach. Using these tools, we test
local fairness on real-world election data, showing that it is indeed possible to ﬁnd
plans that are almost or exactly locally fair. Further, we show that such plans can be
generated while sacriﬁcing very little in terms of compactness and existing fairness
measures such as competitiveness of the districts or seat shares of the plans.

1

Introduction

Redistricting in the United States is the process of partitioning a state into districts, each of which
elects one representative to the Congress, for the most part, via simple majority voting. As of April
2022, one year after the US Census Bureau released the results of the 2020 decennial census, 41 out
of the 50 states have ﬁnished redrawing the congressional redistricting plans for the next decade [29].
This process has triggered numerous debates and litigation along the way. Much of this debate centers
on whether the plans are gerrymandered so that one of the two parties gets more representatives.
Given its high-stakes impact and mathematical richness, there has been persistent interest in tackling
redistricting as an algorithmic question since the early 1960s [7].
There is ongoing debate around what a “desirable” redistricting plan should be. It is commonly agreed
that “desirable” plans should, at minimum, produce population balanced, contiguous, and compact
districts [1]. Beyond this basic agreement, there is still debate on richer notions of desirability,
particularly notions related to the “fairness” of a plan. This has motivated a long line of recent
work [14, 15, 23] as well as software tools [4, 29] on auditing a given redistricting plan against
various fairness concepts. Some of these concepts have since been adopted in Wisconsin’s and
Michigan’s redistricting efforts [11]. It should be noted that under most notions of desirability
proposed in literature, the problem of redistricting is computationally hard [27], leading to the study
of heuristic approaches, which we outline later.
Global versus Local Fairness. Zooming into fairness criteria, most extant notions of fairness focus
on the global outcomes of the redistricting plans, e.g., whether the seat shares proportionally represent
the demographics [41], or how competitive the districts drawn are [14]. However, it is argued in [5]
∗

Equal contributions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

