HandMeThat: Human-Robot Communication
in Physical and Social Environments

Yanming Wan∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University

Jiayuan Mao∗
MIT CSAIL

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL

Abstract
We introduce HandMeThat, a benchmark for a holistic evaluation of instruction
understanding and following in physical and social environments. While previous
datasets primarily focused on language grounding and planning, HandMeThat
considers the resolution of human instructions with ambiguities based on the
physical (object states and relations) and social (human actions and goals) information. HandMeThat contains 10,000 episodes of human-robot interactions. In each
episode, the robot first observes a trajectory of human actions towards her internal
goal. Next, the robot receives a human instruction and should take actions to accomplish the subgoal set through the instruction. In this paper, we present a textual
interface for our benchmark, where the robot interacts with a virtual environment
through textual commands. We evaluate several baseline models on HandMeThat,
and show that both offline and online reinforcement learning algorithms perform
poorly on HandMeThat, suggesting significant room for future work on physical
and social human-robot communications and interactions.

1

Introduction

To collaborate with human partners successfully in complex environments, robots should be able to
interpret and follow natural language instructions in contexts. Consider the example shown in Fig. 1,
a human is preparing fruits for bottling. In the middle of her actions, the human asks a robot agent
for help: “can you hand me that one on the table please?” The robot needs to correctly interpret the
sentence in the current context and interact with objects to accomplish this task.
Here, the human utterance essentially specifies a subgoal for the robot (getting the knife), derived from
her own goal (bottling fruits). In reality, such subgoal can be under-specified in human utterances,
typically for two reasons. First, the human assumes that the robot has knowledge about her goal [1, 2].
Second, human makes trade-offs between accuracy and efficiency of communication [3, 4, 5]. While
previous benchmarks in similar domains have been primarily focusing on the language grounding
of object properties (e.g., “table”), relations (e.g., “on”), and planning (e.g., object search and
manipulation) [6, 7], in this paper, we highlights the additional challenge for understanding human
instructions with ambiguities (i.e., recognizing the subgoal) based on physical states and human
actions and goals. In this example, the human has just taken fruits out of the refrigerator and is trying
to slice them on the countertop. Thus, the object to be retrieved should be the knife.
Developing a benchmark for resolving ambiguous instructions based on both physical and social
environments is challenging in both data collection and automatic evaluation: it is hard to collect the
everyday dialogues with corresponding physical states, and it is hard to build automatic evaluation
protocols that involve human judgments about robot success. In this paper, we present a new
benchmark, HandMeThat, aiming for a holistic evaluation of language instruction understanding and
∗
indicates equal contribution. Correspondence to: jiayuanm@mit.edu.
Project website: http://handmethat.csail.mit.edu/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

