Learning with convolution and pooling operations in
kernel methods
Theodor Misiakiewicz
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
misiakie@stanford.edu

Song Mei
Department of Statistics
University of California Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
songmei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Recent empirical work has shown that hierarchical convolutional kernels inspired
by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) significantly improve the performance
of kernel methods in image classification tasks. A widely accepted explanation for
their success is that these architectures encode hypothesis classes that are suitable
for natural images. However, understanding the precise interplay between approximation and generalization in convolutional architectures remains a challenge. In
this paper, we consider the stylized setting of covariates (image pixels) uniformly
distributed on the hypercube, and characterize exactly the RKHS of kernels composed of single layers of convolution, pooling, and downsampling operations. We
use this characterization to compute sharp asymptotics of the generalization error
for any given function in high-dimension. In particular, we quantify the gain in
sample complexity brought by enforcing locality with the convolution operation
and approximate translation invariance with average pooling. Notably, these results
provide a precise description of how convolution and pooling operations trade off
approximation with generalization power in one layer convolutional kernels.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become essential elements of the deep learning toolbox,
achieving state-of-the-art performance in many computer vision tasks [27, 30]. CNNs are constructed
by stacking convolution and pooling layers, which were shown to be paramount to their empirical
success [31]. A widely accepted hypothesis to explain their favorable properties is that these
architectures successfully encode useful properties of natural images: locality and compositionality of
the data, stability by local deformations, and translation invariance. While some theoretical progress
has been made in studying the approximation and generalization benefits brought by convolution and
pooling operations [6, 15, 16], our mathematical understanding of the interaction between network
architecture, image distribution, and efficient learning remains limited.
Consider x ∈ Rd an input signal, which we can think of as a grayscale pixel representation of
an image. For mathematical convenience, we will consider one-dimensional images with cyclic
convention xd+i := xi , and denote x(k) = (xk , xk+1 , . . . , xk+q−1 ) the k-th patch of the signal x,
k ∈ [d], with patch size q ≤ d. Most of our results can be extended to two-dimensional images.
We further consider a simple convolutional neural network composed of a single convolution layer
followed by local average pooling and downsampling. The network first computes the nonlinear
convolution of N filters w1 , . . . , wN ∈ Rq with the image patches x(k) . The outputs of the
convolution operation σ(hwi , x(k) i) are then averaged locally over segments of length ω (local
average pooling). This pooling operation is followed by downsampling which extracts one out of
every ∆ output coordinates (for simplicity, ∆ is assumed to be a divisor of d). Finally, the results are
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

