Multi-Class H-Consistency Bounds
Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
pranjalawasthi@google.com

Anqi Mao
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
aqmao@cims.nyu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research & Courant Institute
New York, NY 10011
mohri@google.com

Yutao Zhong
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
yutao@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We present an extensive study of H-consistency bounds for multi-class classification. These are upper bounds on the target loss estimation error of a predictor
in a hypothesis set H, expressed in terms of the surrogate loss estimation error
of that predictor. They are stronger and more significant guarantees than Bayesconsistency, H-calibration or H-consistency, and more informative than excess
error bounds derived for H being the family of all measurable functions. We give
a series of new H-consistency bounds for surrogate multi-class losses, including
max losses, sum losses, and constrained losses, both in the non-adversarial and
adversarial cases, and for different differentiable or convex auxiliary functions
used. We also prove that no non-trivial H-consistency bound can be given in some
cases. To our knowledge, these are the first H-consistency bounds proven for the
multi-class setting. Our proof techniques are also novel and likely to be useful in
the analysis of other such guarantees.

1

Introduction

The loss functions optimized by learning algorithms are often distinct from the original one specified
for a task. This is typically because optimizing the original loss is computationally intractable or
because it does not admit some favorable properties of differentiability or smoothness. As an example,
the loss function minimized by the support vector machine (SVM) algorithm is the hinge loss (Cortes
and Vapnik, 1995) or the one associated to AdaBoost is the exponential loss (Schapire and Freund,
2012), both distinct from the binary classification loss used as a benchmark in applications. But, what
learning guarantees can we rely on when using a surrogate loss? This is a fundamental question in
learning theory that directly relates to the design of algorithms.
The standard property of Bayes-consistency, which has been shown to hold for several surrogate
losses (Zhang, 2004a,b; Bartlett, Jordan, and McAuliffe, 2006; Tewari and Bartlett, 2007; Steinwart,
2007), does not supply a sufficient guarantee, since it only ensures that, asymptotically, near optimal
minimizers of the surrogate excess loss nearly optimally minimize the target excess error. Moreover,
this asymptotic property only holds for the full family of measurable functions, which of course is
distinct from the more restricted hypothesis set used by a learning algorithm. In fact, it has been
shown by Long and Servedio (2013), both theoretically and empirically, that for some hypothesis sets
and distributions, the expected error of an algorithm minimizing a Bayes-consistent loss is bounded
below by a positive constant, while that of an algorithm minimizing an inconsistent loss goes to zero.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

