Simulation-guided Beam Search
for Neural Combinatorial Optimization
Jinho Choo ∗ 1
Yeong-Dae Kwon ∗ 1
Jihoon Kim1
Jeongwoo Jae1
André Hottung2
Kevin Tierney2
Youngjune Gwon1
1

Samsung SDS, Korea

2

Bielefeld University, Germany

Abstract
Neural approaches for combinatorial optimization (CO) equip a learning mechanism to discover powerful heuristics for solving complex real-world problems.
While neural approaches capable of high-quality solutions in a single shot are
emerging, state-of-the-art approaches are often unable to take full advantage of
the solving time available to them. In contrast, hand-crafted heuristics perform
highly effective search well and exploit the computation time given to them, but
contain heuristics that are difficult to adapt to a dataset being solved. With the
goal of providing a powerful search procedure to neural CO approaches, we propose simulation-guided beam search (SGBS), which examines candidate solutions
within a fixed-width tree search that both a neural net-learned policy and a simulation (rollout) identify as promising. We further hybridize SGBS with efficient
active search (EAS) [1], where SGBS enhances the quality of solutions backpropagated in EAS, and EAS improves the quality of the policy used in SGBS. We
evaluate our methods on well-known CO benchmarks and show that SGBS significantly improves the quality of the solutions found under reasonable runtime
assumptions.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization (CO) problems arise in a wide variety of real-world settings in which
finding high-quality solutions quickly is an important, challenging task. Efficient methods for solving CO problems have attracted significant attention, and the literature now contains vastly different
styles of solution approaches. The majority relies on human-designed tricks and insights. However,
neural approaches have recently begun to offer a means for data-driven optimization. Through reinforcement learning (RL), a deep neural net can automatically learn to generate heuristics that are
customized to a specific context for a given dataset, without the intervention of a domain expert or
the need for a pre-existing optimization approach [2].
Using a construction paradigm for neural CO methods, solutions to a CO problem can be built in
a step-by-step manner following the policy calculated by the neural network. Previous work in this
area tends to focus on building a good policy network model and bringing the quality of its solution
generated in a single shot as close to the optimal as possible. However, research for an effective
inference method for neural CO has been rare. An effective inference strategy to maximize the
quality of the solution found within a given time budget is just as important, because practitioners of
many industrial CO tasks are generally willing to wait even up to multiple days to find high-quality
solutions to their problems.
A well-known search strategy for neural construction methods is to sample solutions from the output probability distributions calculated by the neural network (e.g., [3, 4]). While this has better
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
∗

Equal contribution. Address: jinho12.choo@samsung.com, y.d.kwon@samsung.com.

