Geodesic Self-Attention for 3D Point Clouds
Zhengyu Li1

Xuan Tang1

Zihao Xu1

Mingsong Chen1

Xihao Wang2

Hui Yu3

Xian Wei1⇤

East China Normal University
Technical University of Munich
3
FJIRSM, Chinese Academy of Sciences
xwei@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
1

2

Abstract
Due to the outstanding competence in capturing long-range relationships, selfattention mechanism has achieved remarkable progress in point cloud tasks. Nevertheless, point cloud object often has complex non-Euclidean spatial structures, with
the behavior changing dynamically and unpredictably. Most current self-attention
modules highly rely on the dot product multiplication in Euclidean space, which
cannot capture internal non-Euclidean structures of point cloud objects, especially
the long-range relationships along the curve of the implicit manifold surface represented by point cloud objects. To address this problem, in this paper, we introduce
a novel metric on the Riemannian manifold to capture the long-range geometrical
dependencies of point cloud objects to replace traditional self-attention modules,
namely, the Geodesic Self-Attention (GSA) module. Our approach achieves stateof-the-art performance compared to point cloud Transformers [13, 10, 44, 26] on
object classification, few-shot classification and part segmentation benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the rapid development of applications
in robotics, autonomous vehicles, and so on, research in 3D information processing with Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) is likewise undergoing
a revolution. Point cloud has garnered considerable research attention as one of the most readily
available and vital data in the 3D vision field. The
essence of a point cloud is discrete 3D coordinates
sampled from a continuous 3D shape, presenting a
non-Euclidean property. Therefore, it is typically
considered to represent a geometric surface or a 2D
manifold embedded in Euclidean space. In addition,
3D point cloud data mainly consists of geometric
coordinate information and is generally processed
only with it, whereas word vectors and image pixel
matrices contain rich semantic features. The geometric features should be the first concern when
analyzing point clouds. Although there have been
⇤

Sampled Points
Euclidean Distance
Geodesic Distance

FPS

Raw Point Cloud

Sampled Center Points

Figure 1: A typical geometric semantics confusion scenario, where two pairs of points (uppermiddle and lower-middle pairs) on raw point
cloud have similar Euclidean distances but get
different geodesic distances and semantics.

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

