Washing The Unwashable : On The (Im)possibility of
Fairwashing Detection
Ali Shahin Shamsabadi⇤
The Alan Turing Institute
Vector Institute
Sierra Wyllie
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Mohammad Yaghini⇤
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Ulrich Aïvodji
ÉTS Montréal

Sébastien Gambs
Université du Québec à Montréal

Natalie Dullerud⇤
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Aisha Alaagib
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Nicolas Papernot
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Abstract
The use of black-box models (e.g., deep neural networks) in high-stakes decisionmaking systems, whose internal logic is complex, raises the need for providing
explanations about their decisions. Model explanation techniques mitigate this problem by generating an interpretable and high-fidelity surrogate model (e.g., a logistic
regressor or decision tree) to explain the logic of black-box models. In this work,
we investigate the issue of fairwashing, in which model explanation techniques are
manipulated to rationalize decisions taken by an unfair black-box model using deceptive surrogate models. More precisely, we theoretically characterize and analyze
fairwashing, proving that this phenomenon is difficult to avoid due to an irreducible
factor—the unfairness of the black-box model. Based on the theory developed, we
propose a novel technique, called FRAUD-Detect (FaiRness AUDit Detection),
to detect fairwashed models by measuring a divergence over subpopulation-wise
fidelity measures of the interpretable model. We empirically demonstrate that this
divergence is significantly larger in purposefully fairwashed interpretable models
than in honest ones. Furthermore, we show that our detector is robust to an informed
adversary trying to bypass our detector. The code implementing FRAUD-Detect
is available at https://github.com/cleverhans-lab/FRAUD-Detect.

1

Introduction

The wide applicability of machine learning models has recently increased their usage in high-stakes
decision systems such as credit scoring [43], insurance risk [10] and predictive justice [30]. The
consequences of erroneous decisions that are based on predictions of machine learning models
(e.g., people being wrongly denied parole [46]) have increased the demand—from both the public
and government—to provide an explanation to humans about model decisions. For instance, this
appears as an explanation requirement in the European General Data Protection Regulation [26].
However, various widely-used model architectures, such as deep neural networks, are considered
black-boxes due to their complex and hidden internal logic, impeding the ability to explain their
decisions in terms that are understandable by a human. To address this issue, black-box model
⇤

Contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

