Why neural networks find simple solutions:
the many regularizers of geometric complexity
Benoit Dherin⇤
Google
dherin@google.com

Michael Munn⇤
Google
munn@google.com

Mihaela Rosca
DeepMind, London
University College London
mihaelacr@deepmind.com

David G.T. Barrett
DeepMind, London
barrettdavid@deepmind.com

Abstract
In many contexts, simpler models are preferable to more complex models and
the control of this model complexity is the goal for many methods in machine
learning such as regularization, hyperparameter tuning and architecture design. In
deep learning, it has been difficult to understand the underlying mechanisms of
complexity control, since many traditional measures are not naturally suitable for
deep neural networks. Here we develop the notion of geometric complexity, which
is a measure of the variability of the model function, computed using a discrete
Dirichlet energy. Using a combination of theoretical arguments and empirical
results, we show that many common training heuristics such as parameter norm
regularization, spectral norm regularization, flatness regularization, implicit gradient regularization, noise regularization and the choice of parameter initialization
all act to control geometric complexity, providing a unifying framework in which
to characterize the behavior of deep learning models.

1

Introduction

Regularization is an essential ingredient in the deep learning recipe and understanding its impact on
the properties of the learned solution is a very active area of research [36, 46, 79, 90]. Regularization
can assume a multitude of forms, either added explicitly as a penalty term in a loss function [36] or
implicitly through our choice of hyperparameters [7, 82, 85, 87, 89], model architecture [61, 63, 64]
or initialization [34, 40, 41, 62, 74, 99, 100]. These forms are generally not designed to be analytically
tractable, but in practice, regularization is often invoked in the control of model complexity, putting a
pressure on a model to discover simple solutions more so than complex solutions.
To understand regularization in deep learning, we need to precisely define model ‘complexity’ for
deep neural networks. Complexity theory provides many techniques for measuring the complexity
of a model, such as a simple parameter count, or a parameter norm measurement [4, 25, 67, 76] but
many of these measures can be problematic for neural networks [48, 97, 77]. The recently observed
phenomena of ‘double-descent’ [12, 13, 75] illustrates this clearly: neural networks with high model
complexity, as measured by a parameter count, can fit training data closely (sometimes interpolating
the data exactly), while simultaneously having low test error [75, 97]. Classically, we expect that
interpolation of training data is evidence of overfitting, but yet, neural networks seem to be capable
of interpolation while also having low test error. It is often suggested that some form of implicit
⇤

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

