Function Classes for Identifiable Nonlinear
Independent Component Analysis
Simon Buchholz, Michel Besserve & Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
{sbuchholz,mbesserve,bs}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Unsupervised learning of latent variable models (LVMs) is widely used to represent
data in machine learning. When such models reflect the ground truth factors and
the mechanisms mapping them to observations, there is reason to expect that they
allow generalization in downstream tasks. It is however well known that such
identifiability guaranties are typically not achievable without putting constraints on
the model class. This is notably the case for nonlinear Independent Component
Analysis, in which the LVM maps statistically independent variables to observations
via a deterministic nonlinear function. Several families of spurious solutions fitting
perfectly the data, but that do not correspond to the ground truth factors can be
constructed in generic settings. However, recent work suggests that constraining
the function class of such models may promote identifiability. Specifically, function
classes with constraints on their partial derivatives, gathered in the Jacobian matrix,
have been proposed, such as orthogonal coordinate transformations (OCT), which
impose orthogonality of the Jacobian columns. In the present work, we prove that
a subclass of these transformations, conformal maps, is identifiable and provide
novel theoretical results suggesting that OCTs have properties that prevent families
of spurious solutions to spoil identifiability in a generic setting.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised representation learning methods can fit Latent Variables Models (LVM) to complex
real world data. While those latent representations allow to create realistic novel samples or represent
the data in a compact way [32, 16], they are a priori not related to the ground truth generative factors
of the data. It is highly desirable to recover the true underlying source distribution because those are
expected to help with various downstream tasks, e.g., out of distribution generalization [45, 2].
One principled framework for representation learning is Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
where one tries to recover unobserved sources s 2 Rd from observations x = f (s) and one assumes
that the components si are independent. An important result is that for linear functions f it is
possible to recover s from observations x up to certain symmetries, i.e., the model is identifiable
[8]. In contrast, for general non-linear models f is highly non-identifiable [25]. This has important
consequences for representation learning, in particular the learning of disentangled representations is
also unidentifiable without some access to the underlying sources [37]. Notably, this makes theoretical
analysis of a large body of methods (see, e.g., [20, 30, 42]) that enforces disentanglement difficult.
Several additional assumptions were suggested to make the ICA problem identifiable. Broadly, there
are two directions. First, some works imposed additional or different restrictions on the distribution of
the sources. One line of research adds temporal structure by considering time series data [19, 23, 24].
More recently, Hyvärinen et al. [26] proposed to introduce an observed auxiliary variable u, e.g., a
class label, such that the source distribution has independent components conditional on the auxiliary
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

