MCL-GAN: Generative Adversarial Networks
with Multiple Specialized Discriminators

Jinyoung Choi1,3
Bohyung Han1,2,3
1
2
3
ECE, IPAI, ASRI
Seoul National University, Korea
{jin0.choi,bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a framework of generative adversarial networks with multiple discriminators, which collaborate to represent a real dataset more effectively. Our approach
facilitates learning a generator consistent with the underlying data distribution
based on real images and thus mitigates the chronic mode collapse problem. From
the inspiration of multiple choice learning, we guide each discriminator to have
expertise in a subset of the entire data and allow the generator to find reasonable
correspondences between the latent and real data spaces automatically without
extra supervision for training examples. Despite the use of multiple discriminators,
the backbone networks are shared across the discriminators and the increase in
training cost is marginal. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm using
multiple evaluation metrics in the standard datasets for diverse tasks.

1

Introduction

With recent advances in deep generative models, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1]
and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [2] have shown impressive achievements in generation of
high-dimensional realistic images as well as various computer vision applications including image-toimage translation [3–5], image inpainting [6], image super-resolution [7], etc. GANs have particularly
received a lot of attention due to their interesting framework of minimax games, where two agents, a
generator and a discriminator, compete against each other. Furthermore, compared to VAEs, GANs
tend to produce acute, high-quality images. In theory, the generator learns the real data distribution
by reaching an equilibrium point of the minimax game. However, in practice, the alternating training
procedure does not guarantee the convergence to the optimal solution and often experiences mode
collapsing, failing to cover the multiple modes of real data or, even worse, reaching trivial solutions.
This paper focuses on the mode collapse problem in training GANs by adopting multiple collaborating
discriminators. Each discriminator learns to be specialized in a subset of reference data space, which
is identified automatically during training, so the ensemble of discriminators provides not only the
differentiation of fake data but also more accurate predictions over the clusters of real data. In this
respect, a generator is encouraged to produce diverse modes that deceive a set of discriminators. To
achieve these goals, we employ a Multiple Choice Learning (MCL) [8] framework to learn multiple
discriminators and update the generator via a set of expert discriminators, where each discriminator
is associated with a subset of the true and generated examples. Our approach, based on a single
generator and multiple discriminators, is called MCL-GAN, which is optimized by the standard
objective of GANs combined with the objective of MCL on the discriminator side.
There are several GAN literature that adopts multiple discriminators [9–14]. Among them,
GMAN [10] is closely related to our approach in the sense that it utilizes an ensemble prediction of discriminators. It explores multi-discriminator extensions of GANs with diverse versions of
the aggregated prediction of discriminators—from a harsh trainer to a lenient teacher with softened
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

