Log-Polar Space Convolution Layers

Bing Su, Ji-Rong Wen∗
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
Beijing 100872, China
subingats@gmail.com; jrwen@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks use regular quadrilateral convolution kernels to
extract features. Since the number of parameters increases quadratically with the
size of the convolution kernel, many popular models use small convolution kernels,
resulting in small local receptive fields in lower layers. This paper proposes a novel
log-polar space convolution (LPSC) layer, where the convolution kernel is elliptical
and adaptively divides its local receptive field into different regions according to
the relative directions and logarithmic distances. The local receptive field grows
exponentially with the number of distance levels. Therefore, the proposed LPSC
not only naturally encodes local spatial structures, but also greatly increases the
single-layer receptive field while maintaining the number of parameters. We show
that LPSC can be implemented with conventional convolution via log-polar space
pooling and can be applied in any network architecture to replace conventional convolutions. Experiments on different tasks and datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed LPSC.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks [1, 2] have achieved great success in the field of computer vision.
The size of the convolution kernel determines the locally weighted range of the image or feature
map, which is called the local receptive field (LRF). In many computer vision tasks such as image
classification [2, 3, 4] and intensive prediction [5, 6, 7], larger LRF is generally desired to capture
the dependencies between long-distance spatial positions and a wide range of context information.
Simply increasing the size of the convolution kernel is not plausible because the number of parameters
increases quadratically with the size.
In practice, commonly used techniques to obtain larger receptive fields include adding pooling layers,
replacing a single-layer large convolution kernel with multi-layer small convolution kernels, and
using dilated convolutions [8, 9]. The pooling process often causes information loss. Increasing
the number of convolutional layers may cause vanishing gradients and make training more difficult.
Moreover, going deeper with small kernels may not indicate a larger receptive field. A plain CNN
with all 3 × 3 convolution kernels cannot be too deep without residual connections. Some studies [10]
have found that ResNets behave like ensembles of shallow networks. Regardless of the actual depth,
the effective number of layers for ResNets maybe limited. That is, even if a ResNet with hundreds of
layers is stacked, its actual receptive field may be equivalent to that of a shallow network.
According to the effective receptive field (ERF) theory [11], the ERF is proportional to the square root
of the depth and directly proportional to the kernel size. Therefore, it is easier to achieve a large ERF
by increasing the kernel size than by adding layers. The success of Vision Transformers [12, 13] may
also reveal the effectiveness of large local windows, while various sparse attention mechanisms [14,
∗

Corresponding author: Ji-Rong Wen.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

