What You See is What You Classify:
Black Box Attributions
Steven Stalder
Swiss Data Science Center
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Nathanaël Perraudin
Swiss Data Science Center
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Fernando Perez-Cruz
Swiss Data Science Center
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Radhakrishna Achanta
Swiss Data Science Center
EPFL, Switzerland

Michele Volpi
Swiss Data Science Center
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
An important step towards explaining deep image classifiers lies in the identification
of image regions that contribute to individual class scores in the model’s output.
However, doing this accurately is a difficult task due to the black-box nature of such
networks. Most existing approaches find such attributions either using activations
and gradients or by repeatedly perturbing the input. We instead address this
challenge by training a second deep network, the Explainer, to predict attributions
for a pre-trained black-box classifier, the Explanandum. These attributions are
provided in the form of masks that only show the classifier-relevant parts of an
image, masking out the rest. Our approach produces sharper and more boundaryprecise masks when compared to the saliency maps generated by other methods.
Moreover, unlike most existing approaches, ours is capable of directly generating
very distinct class-specific masks in a single forward pass. This makes the proposed
method very efficient during inference. We show that our attributions are superior
to established methods both visually and quantitatively with respect to the PASCAL
VOC-2007 and Microsoft COCO-2014 datasets.

1

Introduction

Image recognition and classification systems based on deep learning are considered black boxes. It
is often hard, if not impossible, to directly locate the portions of the input image responsible for a
given classification output. Being able to systematically perform such attributions is a crucial step
towards explainable deep learning, which can contribute to its widespread adoption. Attribution
allows understanding the potential errors and biases [13, 17, 21]. It also enables the use of deep
networks as decision support tools, e.g. in medicine [15], and facilitating meeting legal regulations [8].
Note that we refer to attribution as the goal of associating input image regions to model decisions,
which differs from the notion of interpretability that relates to models that can be directly used to
infer causal or general structural relationships that link inputs and outputs [23].
The problem of performing attribution for deep image classifiers has been addressed by several recent
works. These belong to two broad categories. The first relies on visualising the derived model’s
activations and backpropagated signals [31, 24, 3]. Although these methods provide a direct way
to visualize salient areas, they heavily depend on the quality of the trained models’ architectures
and weights. Furthermore, some of these methods turn out to be independent of the labels the
model has been trained on, as well as to some extent the parameters of the models, as shown
through randomization tests [1]. This suggests that many of these methods are strongly influenced
by low-level, class-agnostic features and are therefore inadequate. The second category relies on
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

