Coresets for Wasserstein Distributionally Robust
Optimization Problems
Ruomin Huang1

Jiawei Huang2,3

Wenjie Liu2

Hu Ding∗ 2

1
School of Data Science
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{hrm, hjw0330, lwj1217}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, huding@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization (WDRO) is a popular model to
enhance the robustness of machine learning with ambiguous data. However,
the complexity of WDRO can be prohibitive in practice since solving its “minimax” formulation requires a great amount of computation. Recently, several fast
WDRO training algorithms for some speciﬁc machine learning tasks (e.g., logistic regression) have been developed. However, the research on designing efﬁcient
algorithms for general large-scale WDROs is still quite limited, to the best of our
knowledge. Coreset is an important tool for compressing large dataset, and thus
it has been widely applied to reduce the computational complexities for many
optimization problems. In this paper, we introduce a uniﬁed framework to construct the ϵ-coreset for the general WDRO problems. Though it is challenging
to obtain a conventional coreset for WDRO due to the uncertainty issue of ambiguous data, we show that we can compute a “dual coreset” by using the strong
duality property of WDRO. Also, the error introduced by the dual coreset can be
theoretically guaranteed for the original WDRO objective. To construct the dual
coreset, we propose a novel grid sampling approach that is particularly suitable
for the dual formulation of WDRO. Finally, we implement our coreset approach
and illustrate its effectiveness for several WDRO problems in the experiments.
See arXiv:2210.04260 for the full version of this paper. The code is available at
https://github.com/h305142/WDRO_coreset.

1

Introduction

In the past decades, a number of optimization techniques have been proposed for solving machine
learning problems [49]. However, real-world optimization problems often suffer from the issue of
data ambiguity that can be generated by natural data noise, potential adversarial attackers [3], or the
constant changes of the underlying distribution (e.g., continual learning [42]). As a consequence,
our obtained dataset usually cannot be fully trusted. Instead it is actually a perturbation of the true
distribution. The recent studies have shown that even small perturbation can seriously destroy the
ﬁnal optimization result and could also yield unexpected error for the applications like classiﬁcation
and pattern recognition [20; 50].
The “distributionally robust optimization (DRO)” is an elegant model for solving the issue of
ambiguous data. The idea follows from the intuition of game theory [41]. Roughly speaking, the
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

