Grounding Aleatoric Uncertainty for
Unsupervised Environment Design

Minqi Jiang∗
UCL & Meta AI
Heinrich Küttler‡
Inflection AI

Michael Dennis
UC Berkeley

Jack Parker-Holder
University of Oxford

Edward Grefenstette‡
UCL & Cohere

Tim Rocktäschel‡
UCL

Andrei Lupu
MILA & Meta AI
Jakob Foerster
FLAIR, U of Oxford

Abstract
Adaptive curricula in reinforcement learning (RL) have proven effective for
producing policies robust to discrepancies between the train and test environment.
Recently, the Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) framework generalized RL
curricula to generating sequences of entire environments, leading to new methods
with robust minimax regret properties. Problematically, in partially-observable or
stochastic settings, optimal policies may depend on the ground-truth distribution
over aleatoric parameters of the environment in the intended deployment setting,
while curriculum learning necessarily shifts the training distribution. We formalize
this phenomenon as curriculum-induced covariate shift (CICS), and describe how
its occurrence in aleatoric parameters can lead to suboptimal policies. Directly
sampling these parameters from the ground-truth distribution avoids the issue, but
thwarts curriculum learning. We propose SAMPLR, a minimax regret UED method
that optimizes the ground-truth utility function, even when the underlying training
data is biased due to CICS. We prove, and validate on challenging domains, that our
approach preserves optimality under the ground-truth distribution, while promoting
robustness across the full range of environment settings.

1

Introduction

Adaptive curricula, which dynamically adjust the distribution of training environments to facilitate
learning [26, 35], have played a key role in many recent achievements in deep reinforcement learning
(RL). Applications span both single-agent RL [34, 53, 58, 22, 27], where adaptation occurs over
environment variations, and multi-agent RL, where adaptation can additionally occur over co-players
[43, 52, 44]. These methods demonstrably improve the sample efficiency and robustness of the final
policy [25, 8, 21, 20], e.g. by presenting the agent with challenges at the threshold of its abilities.
In this paper we introduce and address a fundamental problem relevant to adaptive curriculum learning
methods for RL, which we call curriculum-induced covariate shift (CICS). Analogous to the covariate
shift that occurs in supervised learning (SL) [18], CICS refers to a mismatch between the input
distribution at training and test time. In the case of RL, we will show this becomes problematic when
the shift occurs over the aleatoric parameters of the environment—those aspects of the environment
holding irreducible uncertainty even in the limit of infinite experiential data [9]. While in some cases,
CICS may impact model performance in SL, adaptive curricula for SL have generally not been found
to be as impactful as in RL [55]. Therefore, we focus on addressing CICS specifically as it arises in
the RL setting, leaving investigation of its potential impact in SL to future work.
∗

Correspondence to msj@meta.com. ‡ Work done while at Meta AI.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

