Multitasking Models are Robust to Structural Failure:
A Neural Model for Bilingual Cognitive Reserve

Giannis Daras˚
The University of Texas at Austin
giannisdaras@utexas.edu

Negin Raoof˚
The University of Texas at Austin
neginraoof@gmail.com

Zoi Gkalitsiou
The University of Texas at Austin
zoi.gkalitsiou@austin.utexas.edu

Alexandros G. Dimakis
The University of Texas at Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We find a surprising connection between multitask learning and robustness to
neuron failures. Our experiments show that bilingual language models retain
higher performance under various neuron perturbations, such as random deletions,
magnitude pruning and weight noise compared to equivalent monolingual ones. We
provide a theoretical justification of this robustness by mathematically analyzing
linear representation learning and showing that multitasking creates more robust
representations. Our analysis connects robustness to spectral properties of the
learned representation and proves that multitasking leads to higher robustness for
diverse task vectors. We open-source our code and models in the following URL:
https://github.com/giannisdaras/multilingual robustness.

1

Introduction

Converging evidence from cognitive science research indicates that bilingualism increases brain
robustness by reducing the rate of cognitive decline due to aging [1, 2] and delaying the onset of
symptoms of dementia [3, 4]. It appears that individuals who speak more than one language on a
regular basis are able to maintain typical cognitive functioning despite neural degeneration. This
mismatch between cognitive functioning and brain pathology is called Cognitive Reserve [5], and its
underlying mechanisms are poorly understood and are an active topic of investigation.
Inspired by this research, we study whether artificial neural networks are more robust when trained
on multiple languages or multiple tasks. Our experiments demonstrate that training on multiple
tasks indeed increases structural robustness. We train monolingual and bilingual GPT-2 models
with the same architecture and dataset sizes. Initially, monolingual GPT-2 [6] models are slightly
outperforming the bilingual ones, but when we introduce structural noise (by randomly deleting
neurons or adding noise to the weights) bilingual models degrade more gracefully and eventually
outperform the monolingual models in the high-noise regime. For some amount of noise, bilingual
models start outperforming the monolingual ones demonstrating a cross-over in performance due
to their increased robustness. We observe this phenomenon for numerous models across three
different types of corruption: additive Gaussian noise to the weights, random weight pruning and
magnitude-based weight pruning [7].
Our Contributions: We provide a theoretical justification of this phenomenon by mathematically
analyzing linear multitask representation learning [8, 9]. Our analysis shows that introducing more
˚

equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

