DreamShard: Generalizable Embedding Table
Placement for Recommender Systems

Daochen Zha1 Louis Feng2 Qiaoyu Tan3 Zirui Liu1 Kwei-Herng Lai1
Bhargav Bhushanam2 Yuandong Tian2 Arun Kejariwal2 Xia Hu1
1
Rice University 2 Meta Platforms, Inc. 3 Texas A&M University
{daochen.zha,Zirui.Liu,khlai,Xia.Hu}@rice.edu
{lofe,bbhushanam,yuandong,akejariwal}@fb.com
qytan@tamu.edu

Abstract
We study embedding table placement for distributed recommender systems, which
aims to partition and place the tables on multiple hardware devices (e.g., GPUs)
to balance the computation and communication costs. Although prior work has
explored learning-based approaches for the device placement of computational
graphs, embedding table placement remains to be a challenging problem because of
1) the operation fusion of embedding tables, and 2) the generalizability requirement
on unseen placement tasks with different numbers of tables and/or devices. To
this end, we present DreamShard, a reinforcement learning (RL) approach for
embedding table placement. DreamShard achieves the reasoning of operation
fusion and generalizability with 1) a cost network to directly predict the costs
of the fused operation, and 2) a policy network that is efficiently trained on an
estimated Markov decision process (MDP) without real GPU execution, where
the states and the rewards are estimated with the cost network. Equipped with
sum and max representation reductions, the two networks can directly generalize
to any unseen tasks with different numbers of tables and/or devices without finetuning. Extensive experiments show that DreamShard substantially outperforms
the existing human expert and RNN-based strategies with up to 19% speedup over
the strongest baseline on large-scale synthetic tables and our production tables.
The code is available at https://github.com/daochenzha/dreamshard.

1

Introduction

Embedding learning is a commonly used technique to deal with categorical features in deep recommendation models by mapping sparse features into dense vectors [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, the
embedding tables can be extremely large due to the large feature sizes [6]. For example, in the
YouTube recommendation model, a single categorical feature contains tens of millions of video
IDs [7]; the Meta recommendation model demands multi-terabyte memory [8]. Distributed training
has been adopted to place the tables on multiple hardware devices such as GPUs [3, 6, 9, 10, 11].
However, even with distributed training, the embedding tables are often still the efficiency bottlenecks.
For instance, embedding lookup is shown to dominate the training throughput in the Meta recommendation model [8]. In our internal production model, which has hundreds of tables, embedding lookup
accounts for 48% and 65% of the total computation and communication costs, respectively.
How the embedding tables are placed can significantly impact the costs. Figure 1 shows the traces
of different placement strategies on a task of placing 50 tables on 4 devices. Typically, embedding
lookup consists of four stages. In the forward pass, the sparse indices are mapped into dense
vectors (forward computation), which are then sent to the target devices (forward communication).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

