Towards Trustworthy Automatic Diagnosis Systems by
Emulating Doctors’ Reasoning with Deep
Reinforcement Learning

Arsène Fansi Tchango †
arsene.fansi.tchango@mila.quebec

Rishab Goel ‡
rgoel0112@gmail.com

Julien Martel §
julien@datadoc.ca

Zhi Wen †
Gaétan Marceau Caron †
Joumana Ghosn †
{zhi.wen,gaetan.marceau.caron,joumana.ghosn}@mila.quebec
†
Mila-Quebec AI Institute
‡
Work done while at Mila-Quebec AI Institute
§
Work done while at Dialogue Health Technologies Inc.

Abstract
The automation of the medical evidence acquisition and diagnosis process has
recently attracted increasing attention in order to reduce the workload of doctors
and democratize access to medical care. However, most works proposed in the
machine learning literature focus solely on improving the prediction accuracy of a
patient’s pathology. We argue that this objective is insufficient to ensure doctors’
acceptability of such systems. In their initial interaction with patients, doctors do
not only focus on identifying the pathology a patient is suffering from; they instead
generate a differential diagnosis (in the form of a short list of plausible diseases)
because the medical evidence collected from patients is often insufficient to establish a final diagnosis. Moreover, doctors explicitly explore severe pathologies
before potentially ruling them out from the differential, especially in acute care
settings. Finally, for doctors to trust a system’s recommendations, they need to
understand how the gathered evidences led to the predicted diseases. In particular, interactions between a system and a patient need to emulate the reasoning of
doctors. We therefore propose to model the evidence acquisition and automatic
diagnosis tasks using a deep reinforcement learning framework that considers three
essential aspects of a doctor’s reasoning, namely generating a differential diagnosis
using an exploration-confirmation approach while prioritizing severe pathologies.
We propose metrics for evaluating interaction quality based on these three aspects.
We show that our approach performs better than existing models while maintaining
competitive pathology prediction accuracy.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the digital healthcare industry has grown rapidly, benefiting from advances in machine
learning (Esteva et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2018). In particular, telemedicine, i.e., healthcare services
provided via digital means, has received much attention (Kichloo et al., 2020). Aiming to reduce
the workload of human doctors and thereby broaden access to care by automating parts of the
interaction with patients, telemedicine applications typically involve two significant components,
among others: evidence acquisition and automatic diagnosis. In a typical interaction, a patient first

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

