AutoML Two-Sample Test
Jonas M. Kübler1 , Vincent Stimper1 , Simon Buchholz1 , Krikamol Muandet2 , and
Bernhard Schölkopf1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
CISPA - Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany
{jmkuebler,vstimper,sbuchholz,bs}@tue.mpg.de, muandet@cispa.de
2

Abstract
Two-sample tests are important in statistics and machine learning, both as tools
for scientific discovery as well as to detect distribution shifts. This led to the
development of many sophisticated test procedures going beyond the standard
supervised learning frameworks, whose usage can require specialized knowledge
about two-sample testing. We use a simple test that takes the mean discrepancy
of a witness function as the test statistic and prove that minimizing a squared loss
leads to a witness with optimal testing power. This allows us to leverage recent
advancements in AutoML. Without any user input about the problems at hand,
and using the same method for all our experiments, our AutoML two-sample test
achieves competitive performance on a diverse distribution shift benchmark as well
as on challenging two-sample testing problems.
We provide an implementation of the AutoML two-sample test in the Python
package autotst.

1

Introduction

Testing whether two distributions are the same based on data is a fundamental problem in data science.
A classical application is to test whether two differently treated groups have the same characteristics
or not [Student, 1908, Welch, 1947, Golland and Fischl, 2003]. Testing independence of two random
variables can also be phrased as a two-sample problem by testing whether the joint distribution equals
the product of the marginal distributions [Gretton et al., 2005]. A more recent application in machine
learning is to detect distribution shifts, i.e., whether the distribution a model was trained on equals the
distribution the model is deployed on [Lipton et al., 2018, Rabanser et al., 2019, Koch et al., 2022].
Classical methods have a fixed test statistic that makes strong parametric assumptions. For example,
Student’s two-sample t-test only tests whether the distributions have equal mean, assuming both
distributions follow a normal distribution with the same (but unknown) variance. With modern
datasets, which are often high-dimensional, such test cannot be applied because the strong assumptions
are often not justified. Nonparametric kernel-based test such as the Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD) [Gretton et al., 2012a] are very flexible and, theoretically, can detect differences of any kind
given enough data. However, this generality often harms test power at finite data size. This can
simply be understood in terms of a classical bias-variance tradeoff. To mitigate this, it has become
common to optimize the test statistic first on a held-out dataset and then apply the test only on the
other part of the data [Sutherland et al., 2017, Liu et al., 2020]. However, the derived objective as
well as optimizing a kernel function are no standard tasks in machine learning and no automated
packages exist, making it hard for practitioners to apply them.
Tests that fit well into the standard machine learning pipeline are based on the classification accuracy.
First, a classifier is trained to detect the difference between the two samples, and then its accuracy on
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

