Natural Color Fool: Towards Boosting Black-box
Unrestricted Attacks
Shengming Yuan
shengming.yuan@outlook.com
Lianli Gao∗
lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn

Qilong Zhang
qilong.zhangdl@gmail.com

Yaya Cheng
yaya.cheng@hotmail.com

Jingkuan Song
jingkuan.song@gmail.com

Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Unrestricted color attacks, which manipulate semantically meaningful color of
an image, have shown their stealthiness and success in fooling both human eyes
and deep neural networks. However, current works usually sacrifice the flexibility of the uncontrolled setting to ensure the naturalness of adversarial examples.
As a result, the black-box attack performance of these methods is limited. To
boost transferability of adversarial examples without damaging image quality,
we propose a novel Natural Color Fool (NCF) which is guided by realistic color
distributions sampled from a publicly available dataset and optimized by our
neighborhood search and initialization reset. By conducting extensive experiments and visualizations, we convincingly demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method. Notably, on average, results show that our NCF can outperform state-of-the-art approaches by 15.0%∼32.9% for fooling normally trained
models and 10.0%∼25.3% for evading defense methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/VL-Group/Natural-Color-Fool.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved excellent performance on a large number of tasks, such
as image recognition [1, 2], medical diagnostics [3, 4], and autonomous driving [5]. However, with
the rise of the field of adversarial attack [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], the robustness of state-of-the-art
DNNs [2, 13, 14, 15, 16] is put in question. Adversarial examples thus reveal the vulnerability of
DNNs and inevitably raise concerns about widely deployed models. To avoid potential risks, it is
crucial to expose as many of the model’s “blind spots” as possible at this stage.
Generally, scenarios of adversarial attacks can divide into white-box and black-box. For the white-box
scenario [17, 18, 19, 20], all information about the target model is publicly available, such as the
architecture and parameters. Although the attacker can easily fool them with human-imperceptible
perturbations in this case, it is not practical in the real world since deployed models are usually
opaque to unauthorized users. To overcome this limitation, numerous works begin to study the
black-box attack [7, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25], which relies on the cross-model transferability of adversarial
examples. Typically, most existing black-box attacks maintain image quality by constraining the
Lp -norm of perturbation [26, 23, 27, 8]. However, the Lp -norm constraint in RGB color space is
not an ideal indicator for measuring the perceptual distance between two images since adversarial
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

