Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Semantic
Segmentation using Depth Distribution

Quanliang Wu, Huajun Liu∗
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{quanliangwu, huajunliu}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed significant advancements made in the field of unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. Depth information has
been proved to be effective in building a bridge between synthetic datasets and
real-world datasets. However, the existing methods may not pay enough attention
to depth distribution in different categories, which makes it possible to use them for
further improvement. Besides the existing methods that only use depth regression
as an auxiliary task, we propose to use depth distribution density to further support
semantic segmentation. Therefore, considering the relationship among depth distribution density, depth and semantic segmentation, we propose a branch balance loss
for these three sub-tasks in multi-task learning schemes. In addition, we also propose a spatial aggregation priors of pixels in different categories, which can be used
to refine the pseudo-labels for self-training, thus further improving the performance
of the prediction model. Experiments on SYNTHIA-to-Cityscapes and SYNTHIAto-Mapillary benchmarks show the effectiveness of the method. The source code is
available at https://github.com/depdis/Depth_Distribution.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation refers to the task of assigning semantic categories to each pixel in an image,
such as sky, road, car, etc. It is very important for many applications, such as autonomous driving [1]
and image editing [2]. In this field, approaches of recent years are mostly based on fully convolutional
network (FCN) [3] with modifications designed for pixel-wise prediction [4, 5, 6]. To tackle the
challenge of large-scale annotations, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is broadly used. A
typical practice of UDA is to adapt the semantic segmentation model trained on synthetic datasets [7]
(source domain) to perform on real-world datasets [8, 9] (target domain). In order to obtain better
adaptation, the GAN [10] structure is widely used to minimize the feature distribution discrepancy,
so that the model can utilize the knowledge learned from the source domain and apply it to the target
domain.
As depth information has been proved to be effective in promoting the performance of semantic
segmentation [11, 12, 13, 14], it is usually used to help build the semantic connection between two
domains. SPIGAN [11] makes use of the privileged information in the source data from a simulator
through the privileged network, which serves as an auxiliary task and is regularized to the main
segmentation network. DADA [12] is a depth-aware domain adaptation scheme to dig deeper into
geometry information, which not only executes the depth regression task when training the generator,
but also fuses it together with semantic information during adversarial learning. CTRL [13] uses
multi-task learning to establish the relationships between different visual semantic categories and
depth levels in UDA context. On the premise of obtaining or generating depth information in advance,
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

