Continuous MDP Homomorphisms and
Homomorphic Policy Gradient

Sahand Rezaei-Shoshtari
McGill University and Mila

Rosie Zhao
McGill University and Mila

David Meger
McGill University and Mila

Prakash Panangaden
McGill University and Mila

Doina Precup
McGill University, Mila, and DeepMind

Abstract
Abstraction has been widely studied as a way to improve the efficiency and generalization of reinforcement learning algorithms. In this paper, we study abstraction in
the continuous-control setting. We extend the definition of MDP homomorphisms
to encompass continuous actions in continuous state spaces. We derive a policy
gradient theorem on the abstract MDP, which allows us to leverage approximate
symmetries of the environment for policy optimization. Based on this theorem, we
propose an actor-critic algorithm that is able to learn the policy and the MDP homomorphism map simultaneously, using the lax bisimulation metric. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method on benchmark tasks in the DeepMind Control Suite.
Our method’s ability to utilize MDP homomorphisms for representation learning
leads to improved performance when learning from pixel observations.

Introduction
Actual Policy

Abstract Policy
Policy Lifting
Inverse Policy Lifting

Value Equivalent

Homomorphic Policy Gradient

For reinforcement learning from high-dimensional observations, such as images, learning a simpler problem
by abstraction from the original problem can be critical [2, 49]. The coupling between states, actions and
rewards complicates learning RL abstractions. MDP
homomorphisms [64, 65, 67, 59] define a concept that
allows one to exploit symmetries, yielding behavioral
equivalence and preserving values, while giving the potential to arrive at a substantially smaller MDP. Recent
works [81, 83, 11] have shown that using MDP homomorphisms is effective to guide learning in discrete problems. This paper is one of the first to consider MDP
homomorphisms in the continuous-control setting and
to develop actor-critic algorithms with a tightly integrated state-action abstraction. To that end, we identify
and answer a series of key challenges:

Deterministic Policy Gradient

1

Figure 1: Schematics of our method. The
↑
actual MDP M is used to train Qπ and
update π ↑ with DPG, while the abstract
MDP M is used to train Qπ and update π
with HPG. M is the MDP homomorphic
image of M obtained by learning the homomorphism map h=(f, gs ). Policies π ↑
Can MDP homomorphisms be defined on continu- and π can be derived from each other.
ous state and action spaces? Our first contribution is
to define continuous MDP homomorphisms on continuous state and action spaces, which requires
more intricate proofs that do not follow in any direct way from the finite case and requires tools from
measure theory and differential geometry.
Can MDP homomorphisms be tightly integrated into the policy gradient? Our second contribution is the derivation of the homomorphic policy gradient (HPG) theorem to closely integrate the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

