On the Effectiveness of Persistent Homology

Renata Turkeš
University of Antwerp
renata.turkes@uantwerpen.be

Guido Montúfar
University of California, Los Angeles
montufar@math.ucla.edu

Nina Otter
Queen Mary University of London
n.otter@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Persistent homology (PH) is one of the most popular methods in Topological Data
Analysis. Even though PH has been used in many different types of applications,
the reasons behind its success remain elusive; in particular, it is not known for
which classes of problems it is most effective, or to what extent it can detect
geometric or topological features. The goal of this work is to identify some
types of problems where PH performs well or even better than other methods in
data analysis. We consider three fundamental shape analysis tasks: the detection
of the number of holes, curvature and convexity from 2D and 3D point clouds
sampled from shapes. Experiments demonstrate that PH is successful in these
tasks, outperforming several baselines, including PointNet, an architecture inspired
precisely by the properties of point clouds. In addition, we observe that PH remains
effective for limited computational resources and limited training data, as well
as out-of-distribution test data, including various data transformations and noise.
For convexity detection, we provide a theoretical guarantee that PH is effective
for this task in Rd , and demonstrate the detection of a convexity measure on the
FLAVIA data set of plant leaf images. Due to the crucial role of shape classification
in understanding mathematical and physical structures and objects, and in many
applications, the findings of this work will provide some knowledge about the types
of problems that are appropriate for PH, so that it can — to borrow the words from
Wigner 1960 — “remain valid in future research, and extend, to our pleasure", but
to our lesser bafflement, to a variety of applications.

1

Introduction

Persistent homology (PH) is an extension of homology, which gives a way to capture topological
information about connectivity and holes in a geometric object. PH can be regarded as a framework
to compute representations of raw data that can be used for further processing or as inputs to learning
algorithms. There have been numerous successful applications of PH in the last decade, from
prediction of biomolecular properties [18, 19, 110], face, gait and activity recognition [58, 66, 70, 122]
or digital forensics [6], to discriminating breast-cancer subtypes [97], quantifying the porosity of
nanoporous materials [69], classifying fingerprints [50], or studying the morphology of leaves [71].1
At the same time, the reasons behind these successes are not yet well understood. Indeed, the data
used in real-world applications is complex, so that there are numerous effects at play and one is often
left unsure why PH worked, i.e., what type of topological or geometric information it captured that
facilitated the good performance.
1

A database of applications of persistent homology is being maintained at [51].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

