FETA: Towards Specializing Foundation Models for
Expert Task Applications

Amit Alfassy*1,3 Assaf Arbelle*1 Oshri Halimi1,3 Sivan Harary1
Roei Herzig1 Eli Schwartz1 Rameswar Panda1 Michele Dolfi1 Christoph Auer1
Kate Saenko2,4 Peter W. J. Staar1 Rogerio Feris2 Leonid Karlinsky*2
1

IBM Research, 2 MIT-IBM AI-Watson Lab, 3 Technion, 4 Boston University

Abstract
Foundation Models (FMs) have demonstrated unprecedented capabilities including
zero-shot learning, high fidelity data synthesis, and out of domain generalization.
However, as we show in this paper, FMs still have poor out-of-the-box performance
on expert tasks (e.g. retrieval of car manuals technical illustrations from language
queries), data for which is either unseen or belonging to a long-tail part of the data
distribution of the huge datasets used for FM pre-training. This underlines the
necessity to explicitly evaluate and finetune FMs on such expert tasks, arguably
ones that appear the most in practical real-world applications. In this paper, we
propose a first of its kind FETA benchmark built around the task of teaching FMs
to understand technical documentation, via learning to match their graphical illustrations to corresponding language descriptions. Our FETA benchmark focuses
on text-to-image and image-to-text retrieval in public car manuals and sales catalogue brochures. FETA is equipped with a procedure for completely automatic
annotation extractaion, allowing easy extension of FETA to more documentation
types and application domains in the future. Our automatic annotation leads to
an automated performance metric shown to be consistent with metrics computed
on human-curated annotations (also released). We provide multiple baselines and
analysis of popular FMs on FETA leading to several interesting findings that we
believe would be very valuable to the FM community, paving the way towards
real-world application of FMs for practical expert tasks currently “overlooked” by
standard benchmarks focusing on common objects.

1

Introduction

Foundation Models (FMs) is a broad term, relating to models that through their training on huge
data acquire "skills" going beyond the base training objectives [6]. They are commonly trained
using hundreds of millions of data points and a collection of base tasks either uni-modal, e.g.
only language, or multi-modal, e.g. text-image pairs. Remarkably, the skills acquired by FMs
demonstrate very good transferability to a wide variety of new downstream tasks, many times
with very limited or no data for the target task. Since their introduction in the Natural Language
Processing (NLP) domain [6, 12, 46], FMs have been applied to uni-modal [8, 12, 46] and multimodal [1, 14, 21, 30, 31, 32, 45, 52, 60, 62, 63] Vision & Language (V&L) scenarios, as well as
demonstrated unprecedented capabilities for high fidelity data synthesis [40, 47, 49] and out of
domain generalization [48]. However, despite the tremendous progress in FMs many gaps still remain
open with regards to reaching human level performance in some mundane tasks [56], as well as in
many human expert ones. In particular, for many types of ‘specialized’ data (e.g. illustrated technical,
scientific documentation, medical, or other expert domains data), which are of the utmost interest for
many real-world applications, FM performance is still lacking in many respects due to: (i) specialized
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

