Museformer: Transformer with Fine- and
Coarse-Grained Attention for Music Generation
Botao Yu† , Peiling Lu‡ , Rui Wang‡ , Wei Hu†∗ , Xu Tan‡ ∗ ,
Wei Ye§ , Shikun Zhang§ , Tao Qin‡ , Tie-Yan Liu‡
†
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
‡
Microsoft Research Asia
§
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University, China
btyu@foxmail.com, {peil,ruiwa,xuta,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com,
whu@nju.edu.cn, {wye,zhangsk}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Symbolic music generation aims to generate music scores automatically. A recent
trend is to use Transformer or its variants in music generation, which is, however, suboptimal, because the full attention cannot efficiently model the typically
long music sequences (e.g., over 10,000 tokens), and the existing models have
shortcomings in generating musical repetition structures. In this paper, we propose Museformer, a Transformer with a novel fine- and coarse-grained attention
for music generation. Specifically, with the fine-grained attention, a token of a
specific bar directly attends to all the tokens of the bars that are most relevant
to music structures (e.g., the previous 1st, 2nd, 4th and 8th bars, selected via
similarity statistics); with the coarse-grained attention, a token only attends to the
summarization of the other bars rather than each token of them so as to reduce the
computational cost. The advantages are two-fold. First, it can capture both music
structure-related correlations via the fine-grained attention, and other contextual
information via the coarse-grained attention. Second, it is efficient and can model
over 3× longer music sequences compared to its full-attention counterpart. Both
objective and subjective experimental results demonstrate its ability to generate
long music sequences with high quality and better structures.1

1

Introduction

Symbolic music generation aims at generating music scores automatically and has drawn more and
more attention in recent years [1–3]. Since music can be represented in organized sequences of
discrete tokens just like text, Transformer-based models, which have been demonstrated to work
well on text generation [4, 5], are increasingly applied in music generation [3, 6–11] and have made
great success. While the self-attention mechanism empowers Transformer to capture the complex
correlations in music, there are two ubiquitous challenges to solve for this task: 1) Long sequence
modeling. Music sequences are typically very long, especially for multi-instrument polyphonic music
where the lengths can usually exceed 10,000. The quadratic complexity of full attention limits its
scalability to that length. 2) Music structure modeling. Music has its unique structures, where a piece
can usually repeat some patterns of a previous piece, occasionally with some variations, after either a
short or a long distance (see Figure 1 for an example). Successfully generating reasonable structures
would make the music more realistic just like human-made music.
∗

Wei Hu and Xu Tan are the corresponding authors. This work was partially done while the first author was
interning at Microsoft Research Asia.
1
The generated music samples can be found at https://ai-muzic.github.io/museformer. The source
code can be found at https://github.com/microsoft/muzic.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

