DAGMA: Learning DAGs via M-matrices and a
Log-Determinant Acyclicity Characterization

Kevin Bello†‡
Bryon Aragam†
Pradeep Ravikumar‡
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637
‡
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
†

Abstract
The combinatorial problem of learning directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) from data
was recently framed as a purely continuous optimization problem by leveraging a
differentiable acyclicity characterization of DAGs based on the trace of a matrix
exponential function. Existing acyclicity characterizations are based on the idea that
powers of an adjacency matrix contain information about walks and cycles. In this
work, we propose a new acyclicity characterization based on the log-determinant
(log-det) function, which leverages the nilpotency property of DAGs. To deal
with the inherent asymmetries of a DAG, we relate the domain of our log-det
characterization to the set of M-matrices, which is a key difference to the classical
log-det function defined over the cone of positive definite matrices. Similar to
acyclicity functions previously proposed, our characterization is also exact and
differentiable. However, when compared to existing characterizations, our log-det
function: (1) Is better at detecting large cycles; (2) Has better-behaved gradients;
and (3) Its runtime is in practice about an order of magnitude faster. From the
optimization side, we drop the typically used augmented Lagrangian scheme and
propose DAGMA (Directed Acyclic Graphs via M-matrices for Acyclicity), a
method that resembles the central path for barrier methods. Each point in the
central path of DAGMA is a solution to an unconstrained problem regularized
by our log-det function, then we show that at the limit of the central path the
solution is guaranteed to be a DAG. Finally, we provide extensive experiments
for linear and nonlinear SEMs and show that our approach can reach large speedups and smaller structural Hamming distances against state-of-the-art methods.
Code implementing the proposed method is open-source and publicly available at
https://github.com/kevinsbello/dagma.

1

Introduction

Structural equation models (SEMs) [44] are a standard modeling tool in several fields such as
economics, social sciences, genetics, and causal inference, to name a few. Under this framework,
in its general form, the value of each variable in the model is assigned by a general nonlinear,
nonparametric function that takes as input the values of other variables in the model, thus, every
SEM can be associated to a graphical model. In particular, we will consider graphical models that are
directed acyclic graphs (DAGs).
A long-standing and active research area deals with the problem of learning the graphical structure
(DAG) given passively observed data (a.k.a. causal discovery). Computationally, this problem is
well-known to be NP-hard in general [10, 12], mainly due to the combinatorial nature of the space of
DAGs. In this work, we will follow a score-based approach, a popular learning framework where the
goal is to find a DAG that minimizes a given score [21, 11]. Recently, Zheng et al. [58] proposed an
exact smooth nonconvex characterization of acyclicity which opened the door to solving the originally
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

