Accelerated Projected Gradient Algorithms for
Sparsity Constrained Optimization Problems

Jan Harold Alcantara
Academia Sinica
Taipei, Taiwan
jan.harold.alcantara@gmail.com

Ching-pei Lee
Academia Sinica
Taipei, Taiwan
leechingpei@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider the projected gradient algorithm for the nonconvex best subset selection problem that minimizes a given empirical loss function under an `0 -norm
constraint. Through decomposing the feasible set of the given sparsity constraint as
a finite union of linear subspaces, we present two acceleration schemes with global
convergence guarantees, one by same-space extrapolation and the other by subspace
identification. The former fully utilizes the problem structure to greatly accelerate
the optimization speed with only negligible additional cost. The latter leads to a
two-stage meta-algorithm that first uses classical projected gradient iterations to
identify the correct subspace containing an optimal solution, and then switches to a
highly-efficient smooth optimization method in the identified subspace to attain
superlinear convergence. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed accelerated
algorithms are magnitudes faster than their non-accelerated counterparts as well as
the state of the art.

1

Introduction

We consider the sparsity-constrained optimization problem in <n :
minw∈As f (w),
(1)
where f is convex with L-Lipschitz continuous gradient, s ∈ N, and As is the sparsity set given by
As := {w ∈ <n : kwk0 ≤ s},
(2)
where kwk0 denotes the `0 -norm that indicates the number of nonzero components in w. We further
assume that f is lower-bounded on As .
A classical problem that fits in the framework of (1) is the best subset selection problem in linear
regression [6, 20]. Given a response vector y ∈ <m and a design matrix of explanatory variables
X ∈ <m×n , traditional linear regression minimizes a least squares (LS) loss function
f (w) = ky − Xwk2 /2.
(3)
However, due to either high dimensionality in terms of the number of features n or having significantly
fewer instances m than features n (i.e., m  n), we often seek a linear model that selects only a
subset of the explanatory variables that will best predict the outcome y. Towards this goal, we can
solve (1) with f given by (3) to fit the training data while simultaneously selecting the best-s features.
Indeed, such a sparse linear regression problem is fundamental in many scientific applications, such
as high-dimensional statistical learning and signal processing [22]. The loss in (3) can be generalized
to the following linear empirical risk to cover various tasks in machine learning beyond regression
Xm
f (w) = g(Xw), g(z) =
gi (zi ),
(4)
i=1

where g is convex. Such a problem structure makes evaluations of the objective and its derivatives
highly efficient, and such efficient computation is a key motivation for our algorithms for (1).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

