Symmetry Teleportation for Accelerated Optimization
Bo Zhao
University of California, San Diego
bozhao@ucsd.edu

Nima Dehmamy
IBM Research
nima.dehmamy@ibm.com

Robin Walters
Northeastern University
r.walters@northeastern.edu

Rose Yu
University of California, San Diego
roseyu@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Existing gradient-based optimization methods update parameters locally, in a
direction that minimizes the loss function. We study a different approach, symmetry
teleportation, that allows parameters to travel a large distance on the loss level
set, in order to improve the convergence speed in subsequent steps. Teleportation
exploits symmetries in the loss landscape of optimization problems. We derive
loss-invariant group actions for test functions in optimization and multi-layer neural
networks, and prove a necessary condition for teleportation to improve convergence
rate. We also show that our algorithm is closely related to second order methods.
Experimentally, we show that teleportation improves the convergence speed of
gradient descent and AdaGrad for several optimization problems including test
functions, multi-layer regressions, and MNIST classification. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/Symmetry-Teleportation.

1

Introduction

Consider the optimization problem of finding argminw L(w), where L is a loss function and w are
the parameters. While finding global minima of L(w) is hard for non-convex problems, we can use
gradient descent (GD) to find local minima. In GD we apply the following update rule at every step:
wt+1

wt

⌘rL,

(1)

where ⌘ is the learning rate. Gradient descent is a first-order method that uses only gradient
information. It is easy to compute but suffers from slow convergence. Second-order methods such as
Newton’s method use the second derivative to account for the landscape geometry. These methods
enjoy faster convergence, but calculating the second derivative (Hessian) can be computationally
expensive over high dimensional spaces (Hazan, 2019).

Figure 1: Left to right: gradient descent, second-order methods, proposed method.
In this paper, we propose a new optimization method based on parameter space symmetries, which are
group actions on the parameter space that leave the loss unchanged. Our algorithm takes advantage
of higher-order landscape geometry but uses only gradient information in most steps, thus avoiding
the computational cost of second-order methods.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

