Extrapolative Continuous-time Bayesian Neural
Network for Fast Training-free Test-time Adaptation

Hengguan Huang1∗ Xiangming Gu1 Hao Wang2 Chang Xiao1 Hongfu Liu1 Ye Wang1*
1
National University of Singapore 2 Rutgers University

Abstract
Human intelligence has shown remarkably lower latency and higher precision than
most AI systems when processing non-stationary streaming data in real-time. Numerous neuroscience studies suggest that such abilities may be driven by internal
predictive modeling. In this paper, we explore the possibility of introducing such a
mechanism in unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for handling non-stationary
streaming data for real-time streaming applications. We propose to formulate internal predictive modeling as a continuous-time Bayesian filtering problem within
a stochastic dynamical system context. Such a dynamical system describes the
dynamics of model parameters of a UDA model evolving with non-stationary
streaming data. Building on such a dynamical system, we then develop extrapolative continuous-time Bayesian neural networks (ECBNN 2 ), which generalize
existing Bayesian neural networks to represent temporal dynamics and allow us
to extrapolate the distribution of model parameters before observing the incoming
data, therefore effectively reducing the latency. Remarkably, our empirical results
show that ECBNN is capable of continuously generating better distributions of
model parameters along the time axis given historical data only, thereby achieving
(1) training-free test-time adaptation with low latency, (2) gradually improved
alignment between the source and target features and (3) gradually improved model
performance over time during the real-time testing stage.

1

Introduction

Human consciousness requires building an internal predictive model that describes the external world
[1, 2]. Numerous neuroscience studies have suggested that humans continually update their internal
predictive model to represent the statistics of the fluctuating environments accurately [3, 4, 5, 6].
Internal predictive modeling is crucial for humans to perceive a continuous stream of sensory inputs
(e.g. sound and sight) in real-time, due to constraints on neural transmission delays [7]. For example,
in order to catch a fast-moving object, the internal predictive model is required to forecast its
trajectory ahead to compensate for the response latency of neurons; in order to recognize words from
lip movements at various view angles in real-time, again, the internal predictive model is needed to
ensure that decision outcome is not delayed [8].
Such a mechanism allows humans to process non-stationary streaming sensory data with remarkably
low latency and high precision by continuously and instantly generating internal predictive models. In
contrast, most existing domain adaptation algorithms either require the collection of additional data
from a large amount of increasingly more domains for training [9], or the use of testing streaming data
for test-time fine-tuning [10, 11, 12, 13], which is impractical for real-time streaming applications.
∗
Correspondence to:
Hengguan Huang <huang.hengguan@u.nus.edu>,
<wangye@comp.nus.edu.sg>
2
Our code will soon be available online: https://github.com/guxm2021/ECBNN

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

Ye

Wang

