Exploring the Algorithm-Dependent Generalization
of AUPRC Optimization with List Stability
Peisong Wen1,2
Yuan He3

Qianqian Xu1∗
Zhiyong Yang2
Qingming Huang1,2,4,5∗

1

2

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba Group
4
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{wenpeisong20z,xuqianqian}@ict.ac.cn
{yangzhiyong21,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn
heyuan.hy@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Stochastic optimization of the Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve (AUPRC)
is a crucial problem for machine learning. Although various algorithms have been
extensively studied for AUPRC optimization, the generalization is only guaranteed in the multi-query case. In this work, we present the first trial in the singlequery generalization of stochastic AUPRC optimization. For sharper generalization bounds, we focus on algorithm-dependent generalization. There are both
algorithmic and theoretical obstacles to our destination. From an algorithmic perspective, we notice that the majority of existing stochastic estimators are biased
when the sampling strategy is biased, and is leave-one-out unstable due to the nondecomposability. To address these issues, we propose a sampling-rate-invariant
unbiased stochastic estimator with superior stability. On top of this, the AUPRC
optimization is formulated as a composition optimization problem, and a stochastic algorithm is proposed to solve this problem. From a theoretical perspective,
standard techniques of the algorithm-dependent generalization analysis cannot be
directly applied to such a listwise compositional optimization problem. To fill this
gap, we extend the model stability from instancewise losses to listwise losses and
bridge the corresponding generalization and stability. Additionally, we construct
state transition matrices to describe the recurrence of the stability, and simplify
calculations by matrix spectrum. Practically, experimental results on three image
retrieval datasets on speak to the effectiveness and soundness of our framework.

1

Introduction

Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve (AUPRC) is a widely used metric in the machine learning
community, especially in learning to rank, which effectively measures the trade-off between precision and recall of a ranking model. Compared with threshold-specified metrics like accuracy and
recall@k, AUPRC reflects a more comprehensive performance by capturing all possible thresholds.
In addition, literature has shown that AUPRC is insensitive toward data distributions [20], making it
adaptable to largely skewed data. Benefiting from these appealing properties, AUPRC has become
one of the standard metrics in various applications, e.g., retrieval [55, 58, 22, 41], object detection
[45, 49, 15], medical diagnosis [50, 35], and recommendation systems [16, 73, 1, 64, 2].
Over the past decades, the importance of AUPRC has prompted extensive researches on direct
AUPRC optimization. Early work focuses on full-batch optimization [45, 44, 26]. However, in
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

