A Neural Pre-Conditioning Active Learning Algorithm
to Reduce Label Complexity
Seo Taek Kong1,∗,†
1

Soomin Jeon2 Dongbin Na3 Jaewon Lee3
Kyu-Hwan Jung4,∗,†

University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 2 Dong-A University
4
Sungkyunkwan University

Hong-Seok Lee3
3

VUNO Inc.

Abstract
Deep learning (DL) algorithms rely on massive amounts of labeled data. Semisupervised learning (SSL) and active learning (AL) aim to reduce this label complexity by leveraging unlabeled data or carefully acquiring labels, respectively. In
this work, we primarily focus on designing an AL algorithm but first argue for
a change in how AL algorithms should be evaluated. Although unlabeled data
is readily available in pool-based AL, AL algorithms are usually evaluated by
measuring the increase in supervised learning (SL) performance at consecutive
acquisition steps. Because this measures performance gains from both newly acquired instances and newly acquired labels, we propose to instead evaluate the
label efficiency of AL algorithms by measuring the increase in SSL performance at
consecutive acquisition steps. After surveying tools that can be used to this end, we
propose our neural pre-conditioning (NPC) algorithm inspired by a Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK) analysis. Our algorithm incorporates the classifier’s uncertainty on
unlabeled data and penalizes redundant samples within candidate batches to efficiently acquire a diverse set of informative labels. Furthermore, we prove that NPC
improves downstream training in the large-width regime in a manner previously
observed to correlate with generalization. Comparisons with other AL algorithms
show that a state-of-the-art SSL algorithm coupled with NPC can achieve high
performance using very few labeled data.

1

Introduction

Active learning (AL) describes the setting where a model can interact with a dedicated annotator
and query for labels. This is in contrast to passive learning where labels are acquired randomly.
In pool-based AL, both unlabeled ZU = XU and labeled data ZL = (XL , YL ) are available for
training, and labels are incrementally acquired by querying |Y s | = Q labels at each query step s until
a labeling budget B is met. The question we aim to answer in this work is: “Given images X and
a labeling budget B, what’s the maximum performance that can be achieved?” Traditionally, AL
algorithms have been evaluated by measuring downstream supervised learning (SL) performance,
i.e. training on ZL , but we argue that downstream semi-supervised learning (SSL) performance, i.e.
training on Z = ZL ∪ ZU , is a better benchmark for the following reasons. Supervised learning
performance as an evaluation metric for AL fails to extricate performance gains from newly-acquired
labels Y s+1 from the influence of newly-acquired samples X s+1 . In contrast, SSL trains a model on
Z and the only difference of datasets Z s+1 − Z s after subsequent query steps is the labels Y s+1 ,
and the respective performances reveal gains from newly-acquired labels. While it has been shown
* This work was submitted while the authors worked at Vuno Inc.
†
Correspondence to skong10@illinois.edu and khwanjung@skku.edu
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

