Multi-Instance Causal Representation Learning for
Instance Label Prediction and Out-of-Distribution
Generalization
∗

Weijia Zhang1 , Xuanhui Zhang2 , Han-Wen Deng1 , Min-Ling Zhang1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
School of Information Management, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
zhangwj@seu.edu.cn, zhangxhdo@163.com, {denghw,zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-instance learning (MIL) deals with objects represented as bags of instances
and can predict instance labels from bag-level supervision. However, significant
performance gaps exist between instance-level MIL algorithms and supervised
learners since the instance labels are unavailable in MIL. Most existing MIL algorithms tackle the problem by treating multi-instance bags as harmful ambiguities
and predicting instance labels by reducing the supervision inexactness. This work
studies MIL from a new perspective by considering bags as auxiliary information, and utilize it to identify instance-level causal representations from bag-level
weak supervision. We propose the CausalMIL algorithm, which not only excels
at instance label prediction but also provides robustness to distribution change
by synergistically integrating MIL with identifiable variational autoencoder. Our
approach is based on a practical and general assumption: the prior distribution over
the instance latent representations belongs to the non-factorized exponential family
conditioning on the multi-instance bags. Experiments on synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms various baselines
on instance label prediction and out-of-distribution generalization tasks.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning has achieved great success in many applications. However, an important
limitation of existing supervised learning algorithms is that they model complex objects as a single
feature vector and thus cannot make fine-grained predictions without the corresponding level of
supervision, e.g., localizing the region of interest within an image from coarse-grained image-level
supervision. Unfortunately, acquiring fine-grained labels is often not only a tedious task but also
prohibitively expensive, especially for applications that require a high level of domain-specific
expertise such as drug activity prediction [8] and medical image classification [24].
Multi-Instance Learning (MIL) [8] is a weakly supervised learning paradigm originally proposed for
drug activity prediction, where the task is to predict whether a molecule is suitable for binding to
a target receptor. Since a molecule can take many low-energy conformations and its suitability for
making drugs depends on some specific but unknown conformations, objects in MIL are represented
by groups of instances called bags where each instance is described by its own feature vector, instead
of represented by a single feature vector as in standard supervised learning. Because only moleculelevel drug binding suitability is known to human experts, MIL algorithms are only coarsely supervised
at the bag-level, while fine-grained instance labels are unknown.
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

