Continual Learning with Evolving Class Ontologies

Zhiqiu Lin1
1

Deepak Pathak1
2
CMU
UIUC

Yu-Xiong Wang2 Deva Ramanan1,3∗ Shu Kong4∗
3
4
Argo AI
Texas A&M University

Open-source code in webpage

Abstract
Lifelong learners must recognize concept vocabularies that evolve over time. A
common yet underexplored scenario is learning with class labels that continually
refine/expand old classes. For example, humans learn to recognize dog before
dog breeds. In practical settings, dataset versioning often introduces refinement
to ontologies, such as autonomous vehicle benchmarks that refine a previous
vehicle class into school-bus as autonomous operations expand to new
cities. This paper formalizes a protocol for studying the problem of Learning
with Evolving Class Ontology (LECO). LECO requires learning classifiers in
distinct time periods (TPs); each TP introduces a new ontology of “fine” labels that
refines old ontologies of “coarse” labels (e.g., dog breeds that refine the previous
dog). LECO explores such questions as whether to annotate new data or relabel
the old, how to exploit coarse labels, and whether to finetune the previous TP’s
model or train from scratch. To answer these questions, we leverage insights from
related problems such as class-incremental learning. We validate them under the
LECO protocol through the lens of image classification (on CIFAR and iNaturalist)
and semantic segmentation (on Mapillary). Extensive experiments lead to some
surprising conclusions; while the current status quo in the field is to relabel existing
datasets with new class ontologies (such as COCO-to-LVIS or Mapillary1.2-to-2.0),
LECO demonstrates that a far better strategy is to annotate new data with the new
ontology. However, this produces an aggregate dataset with inconsistent old-vs-new
labels, complicating learning. To address this challenge, we adopt methods from
semi-supervised and partial-label learning. We demonstrate that such strategies can
surprisingly be made near-optimal, in the sense of approaching an “oracle” that
learns on the aggregate dataset exhaustively labeled with the newest ontology.

1

Introduction

Humans, as lifelong learners, learn to recognize the ontology of concepts which is being refined and
expanded over time. For example, we learn to recognize dog and then dog breeds (refining the class
dog). The class ontology often evolves from coarse to fine concepts in the real open world and can
sometimes introduce new classes. We call this Learning with Evolving Class Ontology (LECO).
Motivation. LECO is common when building machine-learning systems in practice. One often trains
and maintains machine-learned models with class labels (or a class ontology) that are refined over time
periods (TPs) (Fig. 1). Such ontology evolution can be caused by new requirements in applications,
such as autonomous vehicles that expand operations to new cities. This is well demonstrated in many
contemporary large-scale datasets that release updated versions by refining and expanding classes,
such as Mapillary [52, 55], Argoverse [12, 78], KITTI [4, 23] and iNaturalist [33–37, 69, 75]. For
example, Mapillary V1.2 [55] defined the road class, and Mapillary V2.0 [52] refined it with fine
∗

Authors share senior authorship.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

