Online Minimax Multiobjective Optimization:
Multicalibeating and Other Applications

Daniel Lee1 , Georgy Noarov1 , Mallesh Pai2 , Aaron Roth1
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2 Rice University
daniellee@alumni.upenn.edu, gnoarov@seas.upenn.edu,
mallesh.pai@rice.edu, aaroth@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
We introduce a simple but general online learning framework in which a learner
plays against an adversary in a vector-valued game that changes every round.
Even though the learner’s objective is not convex-concave (and so the minimax
theorem does not apply), we give a simple algorithm that can compete with the
setting in which the adversary must announce their action first, with optimally
diminishing regret. We demonstrate the power of our framework by using it to
(re)derive optimal bounds and efficient algorithms across a variety of domains,
ranging from multicalibration to a large set of no regret algorithms, to a variant
of Blackwell’s approachability theorem for polytopes with fast convergence rates.
As a new application, we show how to “(multi)calibeat” an arbitrary collection of
forecasters — achieving an exponentially improved dependence on the number of
models we are competing against, compared to prior work.

1

Introduction

We introduce and study a simple but powerful framework for online adversarial multiobjective
minimax optimization. At each round t, an adaptive adversary chooses an environment for the learner
to play in, defined by a convex compact action set X t for the learner, a convex compact action set Y t
for the adversary, and a d-dimensional continuous loss function `t : X t × Y t → [−1, 1]d that, in each
coordinate, is convex in the learner’s action and concave in the adversary’s action. The learner then
chooses an action, or distribution over actions, xt , and the adversary responds with an action y t . This
results in a loss vector `t (xt , y t ), which accumulates over time. The learner’s
the
P goal is to minimize

T
t
t t
maximum accumulated loss over each of the d dimensions: maxj∈[d]
`
(x
,
y
)
.
t=1 j
One may view the environment chosen at each round t as defining a zero-sum game in which the
learner wishes to minimize the maximum coordinate of the resulting loss vector. The objective of the
1
learner in the stage game in isolation can be written
 as:

t
wL
= tinf t max
max `tj (xt , y t ) .
t
t
x ∈X y ∈Y

j∈[d]

Unfortunately, although `tj is convex-concave in each coordinate, the maximum over coordinates
does not preserve concavity for the adversary. Thus the minimax theorem does not hold, and the
value of the game in which the learner moves first (defined above) is larger than the value of the game
t
T
t
in which the adversary moves first— that is, wL
> wA
, where wA
is defined as:
t
A brief aside about the “inf max max” structure of wL
: since each `tj is continuous, so is maxj `tj , and
t
t
hence maxy (maxj `j ) is attained on the compact set Y . However, maxy (maxj `tj ) may not be a continuous
function of x and therefore the infimum over X t need not be attained.
1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

