I2DFormer: Learning Image to Document Attention
for Zero-Shot Image Classification
Muhammad Ferjad Naeem1
1

Yongqin Xian1

ETH Zürich

2

TUM

Luc Van Gool1
3

Federico Tombari2,3

Google

Abstract
Despite the tremendous progress in zero-shot learning (ZSL), the majority of
existing methods still rely on human-annotated attributes, which are difficult to
annotate and scale. An unsupervised alternative is to represent each class using
the word embedding associated with its semantic class name. However, word
embeddings extracted from pre-trained language models do not necessarily capture
visual similarities, resulting in poor zero-shot performance. In this work, we argue
that online textual documents, e.g., Wikipedia, contain rich visual descriptions
about object classes, therefore can be used as powerful unsupervised side information for ZSL. To this end, we propose I2DFormer, a novel transformer-based ZSL
framework that jointly learns to encode images and documents by aligning both
modalities in a shared embedding space. In order to distill discriminative visual
words from noisy documents, we introduce a new cross-modal attention module
that learns fine-grained interactions between image patches and document words.
Consequently, our I2DFormer not only learns highly discriminative document
embeddings that capture visual similarities but also gains the ability to localize
visually relevant words in image regions. Quantitatively, we demonstrate that our
I2DFormer significantly outperforms previous unsupervised semantic embeddings
under both zero-shot and generalized zero-shot learning settings on three public
datasets. Qualitatively, we show that our method leads to highly interpretable results where document words can be grounded in the image regions. Code available
at https://github.com/ferjad/I2DFormer.

1

Introduction

“What does a tiger look like? It is a fierce animal that looks like a scary, big cat with stripes." Tigers
are not native to Japan, yet when the travelers coming from China described them in relation to
native animals, it inspired a range of historic paintings depicting tigers in Japan. Humans possess
an impressive ability to imagine and identify unseen objects from pure language descriptions. In
computer vision, the ability to predict unseen classes is called zero-shot learning, which can be
achieved by transferring knowledge from seen classes using auxiliary side information (or semantic
embeddings) e.g., attributes [22], word embeddings [17], etc. Although remarkable progress has
been made, most of prior works [22, 1, 57, 71, 31, 10] rely on human annotated attributes as the side
information. While attributes are appealing, they are often costly to annotate [48, 65, 51] and scale
to large datasets. Towards unsupervised semantic embeddings [46, 17, 2], word embeddings can be
easily obtained from pre-trained language models [35]. Yet, they often do not reflect fine-grained
visual similarities, thus limiting the performance [2].
The goal of this work is to learn visually aligned unsupervised semantic embeddings from online
textual documents for zero-shot image classification. With the advent of the Internet, the collective
knowledge of humans about the world has been distilled into online encyclopedias like Wikipedia.
These encyclopedias present a rich source of fine-grained auxiliary information for a model. While
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

