Disentangling Transfer in Continual Reinforcement
Learning

Maciej Wołczyk∗

Michał Zaj ˛
ac∗

Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science

Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science

Jagiellonian University
Kraków, Poland
maciej.wolczyk@doctoral.uj.edu.pl

Jagiellonian University
Kraków, Poland
emzajac@gmail.com

Razvan Pascanu
DeepMind
London, UK
razp@google.com

Łukasz Kuciński
Polish Academy of Sciences
Warsaw, Poland
lkucinski@impan.pl

Piotr Miłoś
Ideas NCBR,
Polish Academy of Sciences,
deepsense.ai
Warsaw, Poland
pmilos@impan.pl

Abstract
The ability of continual learning systems to transfer knowledge from previously
seen tasks in order to maximize performance on new tasks is a significant challenge
for the field, limiting the applicability of continual learning solutions to realistic
scenarios. Consequently, this study aims to broaden our understanding of transfer
and its driving forces in the specific case of continual reinforcement learning.
We adopt SAC as the underlying RL algorithm and Continual World as a suite
of continuous control tasks. We systematically study how different components
of SAC (the actor and the critic, exploration, and data) affect transfer efficacy,
and we provide recommendations regarding various modeling options. The best
set of choices, dubbed ClonEx-SAC, is evaluated on the recent Continual World
benchmark. ClonEx-SAC achieves 87% final success rate compared to 80% of
PackNet, the best method in the benchmark. Moreover, the transfer grows from
0.18 to 0.54 according to the metric provided by Continual World.

1

Introduction

The ability of continual learning (CL) systems ([17, 22]) to utilize knowledge from previously
seen tasks in order to maximize transfer on the current task is a significant challenge for the field.
Achieving progress in this area would bring benefits both for real-life applications and multiple
machine learning domains [24, 18, 46, 10], including reinforcement learning (RL), as advocated in
[47]. In particular, it would constitute a critical step towards making efficient lifelong learning agents
a reality.
The goal of this paper is to expand our understanding of transfer and its driving factors in continual
reinforcement learning (CRL). As the underlying RL algorithm, we assume soft actor-critic (SAC), see
[16], and use Continual World [47] as the suite of continuous control environments. We systematically
study the critic and actor networks, the key components of SAC, with regard to their influence on
transfer. Similarly, we measure the impact of various choices regarding exploration and buffer data
usage. The low-level mechanisms of transfer are not yet fully understood even in the supervised
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

