Generalization Bounds with Minimal Dependency on
Hypothesis Class via Distributionally Robust
Optimization

Yibo Zeng
Columbia University
yibo.zeng@columbia.edu

Henry Lam
Columbia University
henry.lam@columbia.edu

Abstract
Established approaches to obtain generalization bounds in data-driven optimization
and machine learning mostly build on solutions from empirical risk minimization
(ERM), which depend crucially on the functional complexity of the hypothesis class.
In this paper, we present an alternate route to obtain these bounds on the solution
from distributionally robust optimization (DRO), a recent data-driven optimization
framework based on worst-case analysis and the notion of ambiguity set to capture
statistical uncertainty. In contrast to the hypothesis class complexity in ERM,
our DRO bounds depend on the ambiguity set geometry and its compatibility
with the true loss function. Notably, when using statistical distances such as
maximum mean discrepancy, Wasserstein distance, or ϕ-divergence in the DRO,
our analysis implies generalization bounds whose dependence on the hypothesis
class appears the minimal possible: The bound depends solely on the true loss
function, independent of any other candidates in the hypothesis class. To our best
knowledge, it is the first generalization bound of this type in the literature, and we
hope our findings can open the door for a better understanding of DRO, especially
its benefits on loss minimization and other machine learning applications.

1

Introduction

We study generalization error in the following form. Let ℓ : F × Z → R be a loss function
over the function class F and sample space Z ⊂ Rd . Let EP [ℓ(f, z)] be the expected loss under
the true distribution P for the random object z. This EP [ℓ(f, z)] can be an objective function
ranging from various operations research applications to the risk of a machine learning model.
Given iid samples {zi }ni=1 ∼ P , we solve a data-driven optimization problem or fit model to give
solution fdata . The excess risk, or optimality gap of fdata with respect to the oracle best solution
f ∗ ∈ arg minf ∈F EP [ℓ(f, z)], is given by
EP [ℓ(fdata , z)] − EP [ℓ(f ∗ , z)]

(1)

This gap measures the relative performance of a data-driven solution in future test data, giving rise to
a direct measurement on the generalization error. Established approaches to obtain high probability
bounds for (1) have predominantly focused on empirical risk minimization (ERM)
fˆ∗ ∈ arg min EP̂ [ℓ(f, z)]
f ∈F

for empirical distribution P̂ , or its regularized versions. A core determination of the quality of these
bounds is the functional complexity of the model, or hypothesis class, which dictates the richness
of the function class F or L := {ℓ(f, ·) | f ∈ F } and leads to well-known measures such as the
Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension [1]. On a high level, these complexity measures arise from the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

