NOTE: Robust Continual Test-time Adaptation
Against Temporal Correlation
Taesik Gong, Jongheon Jeong, Taewon Kim, Yewon Kim, Jinwoo Shin, and Sung-Ju Lee
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
{taesik.gong,jongheonj,maxkim139,yewon.e.kim,jinwoos,profsj}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) is an emerging paradigm that addresses distributional
shifts between training and testing phases without additional data acquisition or
labeling cost; only unlabeled test data streams are used for continual model adaptation. Previous TTA schemes assume that the test samples are independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.), even though they are often temporally correlated
(non-i.i.d.) in application scenarios, e.g., autonomous driving. We discover that
most existing TTA methods fail dramatically under such scenarios. Motivated by
this, we present a new test-time adaptation scheme that is robust against non-i.i.d.
test data streams. Our novelty is mainly two-fold: (a) Instance-Aware Batch Normalization (IABN) that corrects normalization for out-of-distribution samples, and (b)
Prediction-balanced Reservoir Sampling (PBRS) that simulates i.i.d. data stream
from non-i.i.d. stream in a class-balanced manner. Our evaluation with various
datasets, including real-world non-i.i.d. streams, demonstrates that the proposed robust TTA not only outperforms state-of-the-art TTA algorithms in the non-i.i.d. setting, but also achieves comparable performance to those algorithms under the i.i.d.
assumption. Code is available at https://github.com/TaesikGong/NOTE.

1

Introduction

While deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successful in several applications, their performance
degrades under distributional shifts between the training data and test data [32]. This distributional
shift hinders DNNs from being widely deployed in many risk-sensitive applications, such as autonomous driving, medical imaging, and mobile health care, where new types of test data unseen
during training could result in undesirable disasters. For instance, Tesla Autopilot has caused 12
“deaths” until recently [2]. To address this problem, test-time adaptation (TTA) aims to adapt DNNs
to the target/unseen domain with only unlabeled test data streams, without any additional data acquisition or labeling cost. Recent studies reported that TTA is a promising, practical direction to mitigate
distributional shifts [29, 33, 41, 4, 44].
Prior TTA studies typically assume (implicitly or explicitly) that a target test sample xt at time t and
the corresponding ground-truth label yt (unknown to the learner) are independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) following a target domain, i.e., (xt , yt ) is drawn independently from a time-invariant
distribution PT (x, y). However, the distribution of online test samples often changes across the time
axis, i.e., (xt , yt ) ⇠ PT (x, y | t) in many applications; for instance, AI-powered self-driving car’s
object encounter will be dominated by cars while driving on the highway, but less dominated by
them on downtown where other classes such as pedestrians and bikes are visible. In human activity
recognition, some activities last for a short term (e.g., a fall down), whereas certain activities last longer
(e.g., a sleep). Figure 1 illustrates that some data distributions in the real world, such as autonomous
driving and human activity recognition, are often temporally correlated. Considering that most
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

