Scalable and Efficient Non-adaptive Deterministic
Group Testing
Dariusz R. Kowalski
School of Computer and Cyber Sciences
Augusta University, USA
dkowalski@augusta.edu

Dominik Pajak
Department of Pure Mathematics
Wroclaw University of Science and Technology,
Infermedica, Poland
dominik.pajak@pwr.edu.pl

Abstract
Group Testing (GT) is about learning a (hidden) subset K, of size k, of some
large domain N , of size n
k, using a sequence of queries. A result of a query
provides some information about the intersection of the query with the unknown set
K. The goal is to design efficient (polynomial time) and scalable (polylogarithmic
number of queries per element in K) algorithms for constructing queries that allow
to decode every hidden set K based on the results of the queries. A vast majority
of the previous work focused on randomized algorithms minimizing the number
of queries; however, in case of large domains N , randomization may result in a
significant deviation from the expected precision of learning the set K. Others
assumed unlimited computational power (existential results) or adaptiveness of
queries (next query could be constructed taking into account the results of the
previous queries) – the former approach is less practical due to non-efficiency, and
the latter has several drawbacks including non-parallelization. To avoid all the
abovementioned drawbacks, for Quantitative Group Testing (QGT) where query
result is the size of its intersection with the hidden set, we present the first efficient
and scalable non-adaptive deterministic algorithms for constructing queries and
decoding a hidden set K from the results of the queries – these solutions do not
use any randomization, adaptiveness or unlimited computational power.

1

Introduction

In the Group Testing (GT) field, the goal is to identify all elements of an unknown set K by asking
queries. Originally GT was applied to identifying infected individuals in large populations using
pooled tests [26] which regained interest during COVID-19 pandemic [2, 52, 56]. Recently GT found
applications in various areas of Machine Learning including approximating the nearest neighbor [28],
simplifying multi-label classifiers [58] and accelerating forward pass of a deep neural network [51].
All we initially know about set K is that |K|  k, for some known parameter k  n, and that it is a
subset of some much larger set N with |N | = n. The answer to a query Q depends on the intersection
between K and Q and equals to Result(K \ Q), where Result is some result function (also called
feedback function in this paper).
The sequence of queries is a correct solution to Group Testing if and only if for any two different sets
K1 , K2 (satisfying some cardinality restriction), the sequence of answers for K1 and K2 is different.
Note that although this allows to uniquely identify the hidden set K based on the results of the queries,
in some cases decoding of set K could be a hard computational problem. The objective is: for a given
deterministic feedback function Result(·), to find a fixed sequence of queries that will identify any set
K, and the length of this sequence, called the query complexity, is as short as possible. In particular,
we are interested in solutions that have query complexity logarithmic in n and polynomial in k.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

