Communication Efficient Distributed Learning for
Kernelized Contextual Bandits
Chuanhao Li1 Huazheng Wang2 Mengdi Wang3 Hongning Wang1
1
University of Virginia 2 Oregon State University 3 Princeton University
{cl5ev,hw5x}@virginia.edu
huazheng.wang@oregonstate.edu mengdiw@princeton.edu

Abstract
We tackle the communication efficiency challenge of learning kernelized contextual
bandits in a distributed setting. Despite the recent advances in communicationefficient distributed bandit learning, existing solutions are restricted to simple
models like multi-armed bandits and linear bandits, which hamper their practical
utility. In this paper, instead of assuming the existence of a linear reward mapping
from the features to the expected rewards, we consider non-linear reward mappings, by letting agents collaboratively search in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS). This introduces significant challenges in communication efficiency as
distributed kernel learning requires the transfer of raw data, leading to a communication cost that grows linearly w.r.t. time horizon T . We address this issue by
equipping all agents to communicate via a common Nyström embedding that gets
updated adaptively as more data points are collected. We rigorously proved that
our algorithm can attain sub-linear rate in both regret and communication cost.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandit algorithms have been widely used for a variety of real-world applications, including
recommender systems [20], display advertisement [21] and clinical trials [11]. While most existing
bandit solutions assume a centralized setting (i.e., all the data reside in and all the actions are
taken by a central server), there is increasing research effort on distributed bandit learning lately
[30, 10, 24, 17, 19], where N clients, under the coordination of a central server, collaborate to
minimize the overall cumulative regret incurred over a finite time horizon T . In many distributed
application scenarios, communication is the main bottleneck, e.g., communication in a network of
mobile devices can be slower than local computation by several orders of magnitude [16]. Therefore,
it is vital for distributed bandit learning algorithms to attain sub-linear rate (w.r.t. time horizon T ) in
both cumulative regret and communication cost.
However, prior works in this line of research are restricted to linear models [30], which could oversimplify the problem and thus leads to inferior performance in practice. In centralized setting, kernelized
bandit algorithms, e.g., KernelUCB [29] and IGP-UCB [6], are proposed to address this issue by
modeling the unknown reward mapping as a non-parametric function lying in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS), i.e., the expected reward is linear w.r.t. an action feature map of possibly
infinite dimensions. Despite the strong modeling capability of kernel method, collaborative exploration in the RKHS gives rise to additional challenges in designing a communication efficient bandit
algorithm. Specifically, unlike distributed linear bandit where the clients can simply communicate
the d × d sufficient statistics [30], where d is the dimension of the input feature vector, the joint
kernelized estimation of the unknown reward function requires communicating either 1) the p × p
sufficient statistics in the RKHS, where p is the dimension of the RKHS that is possibly infinite, or 2)
the set of input feature vectors that grows linearly w.r.t. T . Neither of them is practical due to the
huge communication cost.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

