Clipped Stochastic Methods
for Variational Inequalities with Heavy-Tailed Noise

Eduard Gorbunov∗ †
MIPT, Russia
Mila & UdeM, Canada
MBZUAI, UAE

Marina Danilova∗
MIPT, Russia

David Dobre∗
Mila & UdeM, Canada

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT, Russia
HSE University, Russia
IITP RAS, Russia

Pavel Dvurechensky
WIAS, Germany

Gauthier Gidel
Mila & UdeM, Canada
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Stochastic first-order methods such as Stochastic Extragradient (SEG) or Stochastic
Gradient Descent-Ascent (SGDA) for solving smooth minimax problems and,
more generally, variational inequality problems (VIP) have been gaining a lot of
attention in recent years due to the growing popularity of adversarial formulations
in machine learning. However, while high-probability convergence bounds are
known to reflect the actual behavior of stochastic methods more accurately, most
convergence results are provided in expectation. Moreover, the only known highprobability complexity results have been derived under restrictive sub-Gaussian
(light-tailed) noise and bounded domain assumption [Juditsky et al., 2011a]. In
this work, we prove the first high-probability complexity results with logarithmic
dependence on the confidence level for stochastic methods for solving monotone
and structured non-monotone VIPs with non-sub-Gaussian (heavy-tailed) noise
and unbounded domains. In the monotone case, our results match the best-known
ones in the light-tails case [Juditsky et al., 2011a], and are novel for structured
non-monotone problems such as negative comonotone, quasi-strongly monotone,
and/or star-cocoercive ones. We achieve these results by studying SEG and SGDA
with clipping. In addition, we numerically validate that the gradient noise of many
practical GAN formulations is heavy-tailed and show that clipping improves the
performance of SEG/SGDA.

1

Introduction

Recently, game formulations have been receiving a lot of interest from the optimization and machine
learning communities. In such problems, different models/players competitively minimize their
loss functions, e.g., see adversarial example games [Bose et al., 2020], hierarchical reinforcement
learning [Wayne and Abbott, 2014, Vezhnevets et al., 2017], and generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014]. Very often, such problems are studied through the lens of solving
a variational inequality problem (VIP) [Harker and Pang, 1990, Ryu and Yin, 2021, Gidel et al.,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

