Sparse Probabilistic Circuits via Pruning and Growing
Meihua Dang
CS Department
UCLA
mhdang@cs.ucla.edu

Anji Liu
CS Department
UCLA
liuanji@cs.ucla.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
CS Department
UCLA
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Probabilistic circuits (PCs) are a tractable representation of probability distributions
allowing for exact and efficient computation of likelihoods and marginals. There
has been significant recent progress on improving the scale and expressiveness of
PCs. However, PC training performance plateaus as model size increases. We discover that most capacity in existing large PC structures is wasted: fully-connected
parameter layers are only sparsely used. We propose two operations: pruning
and growing, that exploit the sparsity of PC structures. Specifically, the pruning
operation removes unimportant sub-networks of the PC for model compression
and comes with theoretical guarantees. The growing operation increases model capacity by increasing the size of the latent space. By alternatingly applying pruning
and growing, we increase the capacity that is meaningfully used, allowing us to
significantly scale up PC learning. Empirically, our learner achieves state-of-the-art
likelihoods on MNIST-family image datasets and on Penn Tree Bank language data
compared to other PC learners and less tractable deep generative models such as
flow-based models and variational autoencoders (VAEs).

1

Introduction

Probabilistic circuits (PCs) [44, 3] are a unifying framework to abstract from a multitude
of tractable probabilistic models. The key
property that separates PCs from other deep
generative models such as flow-based models [31] and VAEs [19] is their tractability. It
enables them to compute various queries, including marginal probabilities, exactly and efficiently [45]. Therefore, PCs are increasingly
used in inference-demanding applications such
as enforcing algorithmic fairness [2, 4], making
predictions under missing data [6, 18, 23], data
compression [26], and anomaly detection [13].
Recent advancements in PC learning and regularization [40, 25], and efficient implementa- Figure 1: Histogram of parameter values for a statetions [33, 30, 8] have been pushing the limits of-the-art PC with 2.18M parameters on MNIST.
of PC’s expressiveness and scalability such that 95% of the parameters have close-to-zero values.
they can even match the performance of less
tractable deep generative models, including flow-based models and VAEs. However, the performance
of PCs plateaus as model size increases. This suggests that to further boost the performance of PCs,
simply scaling up the model size does not suffice and we need to better utilize the available capacity.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

