RLIP: Relational Language-Image Pre-training
for Human-Object Interaction Detection

Hangjie Yuan1∗ Jianwen Jiang2∗ Samuel Albanie3
Tao Feng2 Ziyuan Huang4 Dong Ni1† Mingqian Tang2
1

2
3
Zhejiang University
Alibaba Group
University of Cambridge
4
National University of Singapore
{hj.yuan, dni}@zju.edu.cn
sma71@cam.ac.uk
ziyuan.huang@u.nus.edu
{jianwen.jjw, shisi.ft, mingqian.tmq}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
The task of Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection targets fine-grained visual
parsing of humans interacting with their environment, enabling a broad range of applications. Prior work has demonstrated the benefits of effective architecture design
and integration of relevant cues for more accurate HOI detection. However, the
design of an appropriate pre-training strategy for this task remains underexplored
by existing approaches. To address this gap, we propose Relational LanguageImage Pre-training (RLIP), a strategy for contrastive pre-training that leverages
both entity and relation descriptions. To make effective use of such pre-training,
we make three technical contributions: (1) a new Parallel entity detection and
Sequential relation inference (ParSe) architecture that enables the use of both entity
and relation descriptions during holistically optimized pre-training; (2) a synthetic
data generation framework, Label Sequence Extension, that expands the scale of
language data available within each minibatch; (3) mechanisms to account for
ambiguity, Relation Quality Labels and Relation Pseudo-Labels, to mitigate the
influence of ambiguous/noisy samples in the pre-training data. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate the benefits of these contributions, collectively termed
RLIP-ParSe, for improved zero-shot, few-shot and fine-tuning HOI detection performance as well as increased robustness to learning from noisy annotations. Code
will be available at https://github.com/JacobYuan7/RLIP.

1

Introduction

Driven by improvements in storage, sensors and networking technology, humanity is amassing vast
archives of image and video data. A significant fraction of this media is human-centric—it is content
focused on humans and their actions. The task of human-object interaction (HOI) detection [4] aims
to provide a step towards fine-grained parsing of such content by detecting all possible triplets of the
form <human, relation, object> present in visual data. Robust HOI detection has myriad uses for
image/video data analysis and represents essential functionality for visual and language applications
such as image/video captioning [62, 48], image retrieval [27], image synthesis [26] and video action
understanding [24, 65].
Given that sustained progress in object detection has yielded increasingly robust systems for detecting
people and objects [53, 16, 10], a key remaining challenge for HOI detection is to develop methods
capable of generalising to the many possible pairs of interactions between these entities when
provided with non-exhaustive training data. To tackle this challenge, we draw inspiration from recent
∗

Equal contribution. This work was done when Hangjie Yuan was an intern at DAMO Academy, Alibaba
Group, supported by Alibaba Research Intern Program.
†
Corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

