Censored Quantile Regression Neural Networks
for Distribution-Free Survival Analysis

1

Tim Pearce1,2,⇤ , Jong-Hyeon Jeong3 , Yichen Jia3 , Jun Zhu1⇤
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., NRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University
2
Microsoft Research, 3 University of Pittsburgh

Abstract
This paper considers doing quantile regression on censored data using neural
networks (NNs). This adds to the survival analysis toolkit by allowing direct
prediction of the target variable, along with a distribution-free characterisation
of uncertainty, using a flexible function approximator. We begin by showing
how an algorithm popular in linear models can be applied to NNs. However, the
resulting procedure is inefficient, requiring sequential optimisation of an individual
NN at each desired quantile. Our major contribution is a novel algorithm that
simultaneously optimises a grid of quantiles output by a single NN. To offer
theoretical insight into our algorithm, we show firstly that it can be interpreted
as a form of expectation-maximisation, and secondly that it exhibits a desirable
‘self-correcting’ property. Experimentally, the algorithm produces quantiles that
are better calibrated than existing methods on 10 out of 12 real datasets.
Code: https://github.com/TeaPearce/Censored_Quantile_Regression_NN.

1

Introduction

Domains such as biomedical sciences and reliability engineering often produce datasets with a
particular challenge – for many datapoints the target variable is not directly observed and only a lower
or upper bound is recorded. For example, when modelling the time to failure of a machine, in many
cases it might have been preemptively maintained before a failure event was observed, meaning only
a lower bound on the time to failure is recorded. This is known as censored data, which is studied in
the field of survival analysis.
Recently, there has been interest in combining ideas from survival analysis with neural networks
(NNs), in the hope of leveraging the capabilities of deep learning for this important class of problem.
Quantile regression has proven valuable in survival analysis, since it directly predicts the variable
of interest, naturally capturing the uncertainty of the conditional distribution with no assumptions
made about the distribution of residual errors [Peng, 2021]. Despite a wealth of research in the linear
setting, explorations into its combination with NNs are at an early stage [Jia and Jeong, 2022]. This
paper advances this line of research, showing how an estimator from Portnoy [2003], used for doing
quantile regression in linear models on left and right censored data, can be combined with NNs.
Section 2 introduces Portnoy’s estimator, and outlines a sequential grid algorithm that is used in its
optimisation for linear models [Neocleous et al., 2006]. As our first contribution, Section 3.1 shows
how this algorithm can be directly adapted to work with NNs. Unfortunately, the resulting method is
inefficient, requiring sequential optimisation of a new NN at each predicted quantile. Section 3.2
outlines our main contribution; an improved algorithm that is well suited to NNs, named ‘censored
quantile regression neural network’ (CQRNN). Our CQRNN algorithm is a significant departure from
⇤
Majority of work completed while Tim Pearce was at Tsinghua University.
tim.pearce@microsoft.com; dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

Correspondance to:

