Unknown-Aware Domain Adversarial Learning
for Open-Set Domain Adaptation

JoonHo Jang
KAIST
adkto8093@kaist.ac.kr

Byeonghu Na
KAIST
wp03052@kaist.ac.kr

DongHyeok Shin
KAIST
tlsehdgur0@kaist.ac.kr

Mingi Ji ∗
KAIST
qwertgfdcvb@kaist.ac.kr

Kyungwoo Song
University of Seoul
kyungwoo.song@uos.ac.kr

Il-Chul Moon
KAIST, Summary.AI
icmoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Open-Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA) assumes that a target domain contains unknown classes, which are not discovered in a source domain. Existing domain
adversarial learning methods are not suitable for OSDA because distribution matching with unknown classes leads to negative transfer. Previous OSDA methods have
focused on matching the source and the target distribution by only utilizing known
classes. However, this known-only matching may fail to learn the target-unknown
feature space. Therefore, we propose Unknown-Aware Domain Adversarial Learning (UADAL), which aligns the source and the target-known distribution while
simultaneously segregating the target-unknown distribution in the feature alignment procedure. We provide theoretical analyses on the optimized state of the
proposed unknown-aware feature alignment, so we can guarantee both alignment
and segregation theoretically. Empirically, we evaluate UADAL on the benchmark
datasets, which shows that UADAL outperforms other methods with better feature
alignments by reporting state-of-the-art performances† .

1

Introduction

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) means leveraging knowledge from a labeled source domain
to an unlabeled target domain [4, 3, 2, 14, 8]. This adaptation implicitly assumes the source and the
target data distributions, where each distribution is likely to be drawn from different distributions,
i.e., domain shift (see Figure 1a). Researchers have approached the modeling of two distributions by
statistical matching [20, 27, 15, 16], or domain adversarial learning [7, 28, 18]. Among them, domain
adversarial learning has been successful in matching between the source and the target distributions
via feature alignment, so the model can accomplish the domain-invariant representations.
There is another dynamic aspect of the source and the target distribution. In a realistic scenario, these
distributions may expand a class set, which is called unknown classes. This expansion creates a field
of Open-Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA) [23, 13]. Existing adversarial learning methods of UDA
have limitations to solve OSDA because matching the source and the target distribution with the
unknown classes may lead to the negative transfer [6] due to the class set mismatch (see Figure 1b).
Previous OSDA methods focused on matching between the source and the target domain only
embedded in the known class set via domain adversarial learning [23, 13]. However, this knownonly feature alignment may fail to learn the target-unknown feature space because of no alignment
∗
†

now at Google (mingiji@google.com)
The code will be publicly available on https://github.com/JoonHo-Jang/UADAL.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

