A Consolidated Cross-Validation Algorithm for
Support Vector Machines via Data Reduction

Boxiang Wang
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
boxiang-wang@uiowa.edu

Archer Y. Yang
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
McGill University
Montreal, QC H3A 0B9, Canada
archer.yang@mcgill.ca

Abstract
We propose a consolidated cross-validation (CV) algorithm for training and tuning
the support vector machines (SVM) on reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. Our
consolidated CV algorithm utilizes a recently proposed exact leave-one-out formula
for the SVM and accelerates the SVM computation via a data reduction strategy. In
addition, to compute the SVM with the bias term (intercept), which is not handled
by the existing data reduction methods, we propose a novel two-stage consolidated
CV algorithm. With numerical studies, we demonstrate that our algorithm is about
an order of magnitude faster than the two mainstream SVM solvers, kernlab and
LIBSVM, with almost the same accuracy.

1

Introduction

This paper concerns one of the most successful classifiers, the kernel support vector machine (SVM)
(Cortes and Vapnik, 1995; Vapnik, 1995, 1998), which has been popularly used on structured data
in the past two decades. The success of the SVM is mainly attributed to its appealing geometric
interpretation, solid theoretical foundation, and high predictive power. To assess the predictive
accuracy of the SVM, cross-validation (CV)(Wahba and Wold, 1975; Arlot and Celisse, 2010) is
perhaps the most commonly used method in practice. In a K-fold CV procedure, the training data is
randomly split into K equal-sized groups. Based on data splitting, part of the data is used for training
each competing model and the rest of the data is reserved for evaluating the prediction error. The
model with the smallest CV error is finally elected. Typical choices of K are 5, 10, or n (the sample
size), where K = n yields the so-called leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV).
LOOCV is generally less used than ten-fold and five-fold CV, largely because of the two popular
arguments: (1) high computational cost of LOOCV; (2) much larger variance than five-fold or ten-fold
CV. We must point out that while the first argument is true in some sense, the second argument is
not generally true about LOOCV. For instance, Kohavi (1995) and Hastie et al. (2009) argue that
leave-one-out is almost unbiased, but it has high variance, leading to unreliable estimates. A series of
revealing works, e.g., Burman (1989); Bengio and Grandvalet (2004); Molinaro et al. (2005); Zhang
and Yang (2015), have shown that, both empirically and theoretically, for modeling procedures with
low instability, LOOCV often has the smallest variability. For example, in the context of the kernel
SVM, Wang and Zou (2021) provided convincing numerical examples to show that (1) LOOCV has
almost no bias in estimating the generalization error; (2) LOOCV does not necessarily have higher
variance than ten-fold and five-fold CV. Consequently LOOCV results in a smaller overall error when
estimating the prediction error as compared with ten-fold and five-fold CV.
From the aforementioned arguments, we can see the only legitimate complaint of LOOCV would
arise from its expensive computation, as a typical approach needs to fit the models n times on the
leave-one-out data before evaluating their performance with each of the sample removed, so the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

