On the Double Descent of Random Features Models
Trained with SGD
Fanghui Liu∗
LIONS, EPFL
fanghui.liu@epfl.ch

Johan A.K. Suykens
ESAT-STADIUS, KU Leuven
johan.suykens@esat.kuleuven.be

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study generalization properties of random features (RF) regression in high
dimensions optimized by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in under-/overparameterized regime. In this work, we derive precise non-asymptotic error bounds
of RF regression under both constant and polynomial-decay step-size SGD setting,
and observe the double descent phenomenon both theoretically and empirically.
Our analysis shows how to cope with multiple randomness sources of initialization,
label noise, and data sampling (as well as stochastic gradients) with no closedform solution, and also goes beyond the commonly-used Gaussian/spherical data
assumption. Our theoretical results demonstrate that, with SGD training, RF regression still generalizes well for interpolation learning, and is able to characterize the
double descent behavior by the unimodality of variance and monotonic decrease of
bias. Besides, we also prove that the constant step-size SGD setting incurs no loss
in convergence rate when compared to the exact minimum-norm interpolator, as a
theoretical justification of using SGD in practice.

1

Introduction

Over-parameterized models, e.g., linear/kernel regression [1, 2, 3, 4] and neural networks [5, 6, 7],
still generalize well even if the labels are pure noise [8]. Such high-capacity models have received
significant attention recently as they go against with classical generalization theory. A paradigm for
understanding this important phenomenon is double descent [9], in which the test error first decreases
with increasing number of model parameters in the under-parameterized regime. They large error is
yielded until interpolating the data, which is called the interpolation threshold. Finally, the test error
decreases again in the over-parameterized regime.
Our work partakes in this research vein and studies the random features (RF) model [10], as a simplified version of neural networks, in the context of double descent phenomenon. Briefly, RF model
samples random features {ωi }m
i=1 from a specific distribution, corresponding to a kernel function. We
then construct an explicit map: x ∈ Rd 7→ σ(W x) ∈ Rm , where W = [ω1 , · · · , ωm ]⊤ ∈ Rm×d is
the random features matrix and σ(·) is the nonlinear (activation) function determined by the kernel.
As a result, the RF model can be viewed as training a two-layer neural network where the weights in
the first layer are chosen randomly and then fixed (a.k.a. the random features) and only the output
layer is optimized, striking a trade-off between practical performance and accessibility to analysis
∗
Most of this work was done when Fanghui was at KU Leuven. Correspondence to: Fanghui Liu
<fanghui.liu@epfl.ch>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

