Simple Unsupervised Object-Centric Learning
for Complex and Naturalistic Videos

Gautam Singh∗
Rutgers University
singh.gautam@rutgers.edu

Yi-Fu Wu
Rutgers University
yifu.wu@gmail.com

Sungjin Ahn
KAIST
sjn.ahn@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised object-centric learning aims to represent the modular, compositional,
and causal structure of a scene as a set of object representations and thereby
promises to resolve many critical limitations of traditional single-vector representations such as poor systematic generalization. Although there have been many
remarkable advances in recent years, one of the most critical problems in this
direction has been that previous methods work only with simple and synthetic
scenes but not with complex and naturalistic images or videos. In this paper,
we propose STEVE, an unsupervised model for object-centric learning in videos.
Our proposed model makes a significant advancement by demonstrating its effectiveness on various complex and naturalistic videos unprecedented in this line
of research. Interestingly, this is achieved by neither adding complexity to the
model architecture nor introducing a new objective or weak supervision. Rather,
it is achieved by a surprisingly simple architecture that uses a transformer-based
image decoder conditioned on slots and the learning objective is simply to reconstruct the observation. Our experiment results on various complex and naturalistic
videos show significant improvements compared to the previous state-of-the-art.
https://sites.google.com/view/slot-transformer-for-videos

1

Introduction

The goal of object-centric representation learning is to represent the inherent structure of the physical
world such as compositionality and causality as a set of representation vectors (and their relations)
each corresponding to a conceptual entity module such as an object (Greff et al., 2020; Schölkopf
et al., 2021). Many previous works have demonstrated the potential of this approach as a way of
resolving the key limitations of traditional single-vector representations (Greff et al., 2020; Schölkopf
et al., 2021; Dittadi et al., 2021; Eslami et al., 2016; Bapst et al., 2019; Mambelli et al., 2022;
Ghasemipour et al., 2022). For example, considering object-centric representations as independent
mechanisms helps realize systematic and zero-shot generalization for image generation (Singh et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2021). Also, the ability to decompose a visual observation into a set of discrete
knowledge modules has shown to be useful for visual reasoning (Zhou et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021).
One of the most critical challenges remaining in object-centric representation learning is to successfully apply it to complex and natural images or videos. Achieving this has primary importance
because it opens up a way to utilize the enormous amounts of images and videos available on the
internet and thereby unleash the full potential of this method by applying it at scale — the machine
learning community has recently observed the power of scale in large-scale language models (Brown
et al., 2020; Bommasani et al., 2021).
∗

Correspondence to singh.gautam@rutgers.edu and sjn.ahn@gmail.com.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

