MsSVT: Mixed-scale Sparse Voxel Transformer for 3D
Object Detection on Point Clouds

Shaocong Dong1,∗, Lihe Ding1,∗ , Haiyang Wang2 , Tingfa Xu1,† ,
Xinli Xu1 , Ziyang Bian1 , Ying Wang1 , Jie Wang1 , Jianan Li1,†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Peking University.
{dsc1010295799, dean.dinglihe, xxlbigbrother, jwang123bit}@gmail.com,
wanghaiyang@stu.pku.edu.cn, {lijianan,ciom_xtf1}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection from the LiDAR point cloud is fundamental to autonomous
driving. Large-scale outdoor scenes usually feature significant variance in instance
scales, thus requiring features rich in long-range and fine-grained information to
support accurate detection. Recent detectors leverage the power of window-based
transformers to model long-range dependencies but tend to blur out fine-grained
details. To mitigate this gap, we present a novel Mixed-scale Sparse Voxel Transformer, named MsSVT, which can well capture both types of information simultaneously by the divide-and-conquer philosophy. Specifically, MsSVT explicitly
divides attention heads into multiple groups, each in charge of attending to information within a particular range. All groups’ output is merged to obtain the final
mixed-scale features. Moreover, we provide a novel chessboard sampling strategy
to reduce the computational complexity of applying a window-based transformer in
3D voxel space. To improve efficiency, we also implement the voxel sampling and
gathering operations sparsely with a hash map. Endowed by the powerful capability
and high efficiency of modeling mixed-scale information, our single-stage detector
built on top of MsSVT surprisingly outperforms state-of-the-art two-stage detectors
on Waymo. Our project page: https://github.com/dscdyc/MsSVT.

1

Introduction

3D object detection has received increasing attention due to its successful autonomous driving
applications. Unlike 2D images with a regular structure of pixels, LiDAR point clouds are naturally
irregular and unordered. Hence directly applying CNN-like operations [11, 12] to them can be
difficult. To solve this, many researchers have rasterized point clouds into regular voxel grids [24]
and employed 3D CNNs to extract high-dimensional voxel features. With the recent rise of vision
transformer (ViT) [42] on 2D images, some attempts have been made to generalize global or more
efficient window-based transformers to 3D voxels [23] or pillars [7]. These methods successfully seek
long-range context by utilizing transformers’ powerful abilities in modeling long-range information.
However, they ignore that blindly increasing receptive fields would easily blur fine-grained details,
especially in sparse 3D space, crucial to accurate object recognition and localization.
Standard window-based transformers update the features of queries in a local window by attending to
keys from the same window. Hence simultaneously aggregating long-range context and fine-grained
details require enlarging the window size to embrace local and distant voxels. Nevertheless, directly
gathering all the voxels within the window as keys suffers a cubical growth of the computational
load with the window size. Some attempts alleviate this by sampling only a certain number of key
∗

Equal contribution. † Correspondence to: Jianan Li and Tingfa Xu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

