LAION-5B: An open large-scale dataset for training
next generation image-text models

Christoph Schuhmann1 §§°° Romain Beaumont1 §§°° Richard Vencu1,3,8 §§°°
Cade Gordon2 §§°° Ross Wightman1 §§ Mehdi Cherti 1,10 §§
Theo Coombes1 Aarush Katta1 Clayton Mullis1 Mitchell Wortsman6
Patrick Schramowski1,4,5 Srivatsa Kundurthy1 Katherine Crowson1,8,9
Ludwig Schmidt6 °° Robert Kaczmarczyk1,7 °° Jenia Jitsev1,10 °°
LAION1 UC Berkeley2 Gentec Data3 TU Darmstadt4 Hessian.AI5
University of Washington, Seattle6 Technical University of Munich7 Stability AI8
EleutherAI9 Juelich Supercomputing Center (JSC), Research Center Juelich (FZJ)10
contact@laion.ai
§§ Equal first contributions, °° Equal senior contributions

Abstract
Groundbreaking language-vision architectures like CLIP and DALL-E proved the
utility of training on large amounts of noisy image-text data, without relying on
expensive accurate labels used in standard vision unimodal supervised learning.
The resulting models showed capabilities of strong text-guided image generation
and transfer to downstream tasks, while performing remarkably at zero-shot classification with noteworthy out-of-distribution robustness. Since then, large-scale
language-vision models like ALIGN, BASIC, GLIDE, Flamingo and Imagen made
further improvements. Studying the training and capabilities of such models requires datasets containing billions of image-text pairs. Until now, no datasets of
this size have been made openly available for the broader research community.
To address this problem and democratize research on large-scale multi-modal
models, we present LAION-5B - a dataset consisting of 5.85 billion CLIP-filtered
image-text pairs, of which 2.32B contain English language. We show successful
replication and fine-tuning of foundational models like CLIP, GLIDE and Stable
Diffusion using the dataset, and discuss further experiments enabled with an openly
available dataset of this scale. Additionally we provide several nearest neighbor
indices, an improved web-interface for dataset exploration and subset generation,
and detection scores for watermark, NSFW, and toxic content detection. 1

1

Introduction

Learning from multimodal data such as text, images, and audio is a longstanding research challenge
in machine learning [31, 51, 56, 83, 86]. Recently, contrastive loss functions combined with large
neural networks have led to breakthroughs in the generalization capabilities of vision and language
models [58, 59, 66]. For instance, OpenAI’s CLIP models [58] achieved large gains in zero-shot
classification on ImageNet [65], improving from the prior top-1 accuracy of 11.5% [41] to 76.2%.
In addition, CLIP achieved unprecedented performance gains on multiple challenging distribution
shifts [3, 23, 61, 70, 78, 82]. Inspired by CLIP’s performance, numerous groups have further improved
image-text models by increasing the amount of computation and the training set size [28, 54, 89, 94].
Another recent success of multimodal learning is in image generation, where DALL-E [59] and later
1

Project page: https://laion.ai/laion-5b-a-new-era-of-open-large-scale-multi-modal-datasets/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

