Semi-Supervised Generative Models for Multi-Agent
Trajectories

Dennis Fassmeyer
Leuphana University of Lüneburg
dennis.fassmeyer@leuphana.de

Pascal Fassmeyer
Leuphana University of Lüneburg
pascal.fassmeyer@leuphana.de

Ulf Brefeld
Luephana University of Lüneburg
brefeld@leuphana.de

Abstract
Analyzing the spatiotemporal behavior of multiple agents is of great interest to
many communities. Existing probabilistic models in this realm are formalized
either in an unsupervised framework, where the latent space is described by discrete
or continuous variables, or in a supervised framework, where weakly preserved
labels add explicit information to continuous latent representations. To overcome inherent limitations, we propose a novel objective function for processing
multi-agent trajectories based on semi-supervised variational autoencoders, where
equivariance and interaction of agents are captured via customized graph networks.
The resulting architecture disentangles discrete and continuous latent effects and
provides a natural solution for injecting expensive domain knowledge into interactive sequential systems. Empirically, our model not only outperforms various
state-of-the-art baselines in trajectory forecasting, but also learns to effectively
leverage unsupervised multi-agent sequences for classification tasks on interactive
real-world sports datasets.

1

Introduction

Analyzing the spatiotemporal behavior of multiple agents bears a great deal of value in many domains
such as autonomous driving [45, 15], public transportation [29, 54], migration [37, 23] or sports
analytics [50, 11]. Particularly, the detection of collective patterns across time and space is of interest
to many communities but non-trivial inter-dependencies between agents render estimating the inherent
multi-modal distributions often difficult.
Existing generative approaches to modeling sequential multi-agent data thus capitalize on variants
from graph networks [52, 14] and (sequential) variational autoencoders [25, 8]; being purely unsupervised, their functionality is grounded in uncovering the implicit modular structure in agent-wise latent
variables directly from the observed trajectories via approximate inference [27, 48, 55, 17, 16, 32].
Although a generative view on the problem is very appealing, approaches in this regime either lack
interpretable and controllable latent factors (e.g., [55]), thus being limited in practical settings, or put
a strong focus on relationship discovery (e.g., [27]), which limits their generative capacity.
An alternative is offered by supervised approaches that aim to counteract these issues by incorporating
discrete behavioral indicators into the generation process [60, 61, 49]. Ideally, these labels encode
implicit expert knowledge that would be learned by the model and substantially expand the scope of
information captured in latent space. Instead of arguing in favor of expensive and tedious manual
annotations of spatiotemporal data, however, these approaches propose to incorporate heuristic
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

