Decision Trees with Short Explainable Rules

Victor F. C. Souza
Departamento de Informática
Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro, RJ - Brazil
vfsouza@inf.puc-rio.br
Ferdinando Cicalese
Department of Computer Science
University of Verona
Verona - Italy
ferdinando.cicalese@univr.it
Eduardo Sany Laber
Departamento de Informática
Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro, RJ - Brazil
laber@inf.puc-rio.br
Marco Molinaro
Microsoft Research & Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
mmolinaro@microsoft.com

Abstract
Decision trees are widely used in many settings where interpretable models are
preferred or required. As confirmed by recent empirical studies, the interpretability/explainability of a decision tree critically depends on some of its structural
parameters, like size and the average/maximum depth of its leaves. There is indeed
a vast literature on the design and analysis of decision tree algorithms that aim at
optimizing these parameters.
This paper contributes to this important line of research: we propose as a novel
criterion of measuring the interpretability of a decision tree, the sparsity of the set of
attributes that are (on average) required to explain the classification of the examples.
We give a tight characterization of the best possible guarantees achievable by a
decision tree built to optimize both our new measure (which we call the explanation
size) and the more classical measures of worst-case and average depth. In particular,
we give an algorithm that guarantees O(ln n)-approximation (hence optimal if
P 6= N P ) for the minimization of both the average/worst-case explanation size
and the average/worst-case depth. In addition to our theoretical contributions,
experiments with 20 real datasets show that our algorithm has accuracy competitive
with CART while producing trees that allow for much simpler explanations.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models and algorithms appear more and more frequently in systems that make
decisions with an impact in our lives. Thus, it is highly desirable that the output of these methods
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

