Generalised Implicit Neural Representations

Daniele Grattarola
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
daniele.grattarola@epfl.ch

Pierre Vandergheynst
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
pierre.vandergheynst@epfl.ch

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning implicit neural representations (INRs) for
signals on non-Euclidean domains. In the Euclidean case, INRs are trained on
a discrete sampling of a signal over a regular lattice. Here, we assume that the
continuous signal exists on some unknown topological space from which we sample
a discrete graph. In the absence of a coordinate system to identify the sampled
nodes, we propose approximating their location with a spectral embedding of the
graph. This allows us to train INRs without knowing the underlying continuous
domain, which is the case for most graph signals in nature, while also making the
INRs independent of any choice of coordinate system. We show experiments with
our method on various real-world signals on non-Euclidean domains.

Figure 1: Given a continuous signal on a non-Euclidean domain, we observe a discrete graph
realisation of it. A generalised implicit neural representation is a neural network fθ trained to map a
spectral embedding of each node to the corresponding signal value.

1

Introduction

Implicit neural representations (INRs) are a class of techniques to parametrise signals using neural
networks [48, 41, 45, 34]. INRs are trained to map each point in a given domain to the corresponding
value of a signal at that point. For example, INRs for images learn to map the 2D coordinates of
pixels to their corresponding RGB values. INRs can also be conditioned on a latent vector, typically
learned end-to-end as part of the model, that allows them to represent different signals on the same
domain. INRs have been successfully applied to model complex signals like images [48, 45], signed
distance functions [41], and radiance fields [40].
By expressing a signal as an INR, we obtain a continuous approximation of the signal on the whole
domain. This allows us to compute a higher-resolution approximation of the signal by sampling more
points on the domain (e.g., a finer grid of pixels). Additionally, since INRs are fully differentiable,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

