Learning Dense Object Descriptors from Multiple
Views for Low-shot Category Generalization

Stefan Stojanov, Anh Thai, Zixuan Huang, James M. Rehg
Georgia Institute of Technology
{sstojanov, athai6, zixuanh, rehg}@gatech.edu

Abstract
A hallmark of the deep learning era for computer vision is the successful use of
large-scale labeled datasets to train feature representations. This has been done
for tasks ranging from object recognition and semantic segmentation to optical
flow estimation and novel view synthesis of 3D scenes. In this work, we aim to
learn dense discriminative object representations for low-shot category recognition
without requiring any category labels. To this end, we propose Deep Object Patch
Encodings (DOPE), which can be trained from multiple views of object instances
without any category or semantic object part labels. To train DOPE, we assume
access to sparse depths, foreground masks and known cameras, to obtain pixellevel correspondences between views of an object, and use this to formulate a
self-supervised learning task to learn discriminative object patches. We find that
DOPE can directly be used for low-shot classification of novel categories using
local-part matching, and is competitive with and outperforms supervised and selfsupervised learning baselines. Code and data available at https://github.com/
rehg-lab/dope_selfsup

1

Introduction

Achieving high accuracy at object category recognition generally requires deep models with millions
of parameters [26, 13] and million-scale datasets [11, 37]. Alleviating this data requirement is a
fundamental challenge for computer vision and has driven the development of low-shot [57, 65,
17, 76, 5] and self-supervised [43, 25, 4, 22] methods for learning object representations. Despite
the increasing interest in low-shot and self-supervised learning, only a few works tackle the case
where multiple unlabelled views of object instances are available for self-supervised learning of
discriminative object representations [27, 32]. In addition, their primary focus is not on low-shot
generalization. Using multi-view data to learn representations for low-shot categorization in a selfsupervised manner is of practical interest, as such data can potentially be obtained from robots moving
around and handling objects [19, 23] or by images and videos collected by humans using mobile
devices [77, 53].
The goal of this paper is to address this gap by using multiple-views of many object instances for
training, combined with some additional geometric information about the views, to learn representations that can be directly used for low-shot object category recognition. We assume access to sparse
depth, known camera pose/calibration, and foreground segmentation during training, with no access
to category labels. We use this information to formulate a self-supervised representation learning
task. In practice, the additional data necessary for self-supervision can be obtained in controlled
indoor settings using robotic arms equipped with RGB-D sensors or by postprocessing RGB-D
sensor data and using forward kinematics to obtain the camera pose [19, 23]. Otherwise, in less
constrained settings where the data is videos of objects captured using mobile devices, the data
needed for self-supervision can be obtained from a Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and Multi-View
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

