Grounded Reinforcement Learning:
Learning to Win the Game under Human Commands

Shusheng Xu1 , Huaijie Wang1 and Yi Wu1,2
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China
{xuss20, wanghuai19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
jxwuyi@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of building a reinforcement learning (RL) agent that
can both accomplish non-trivial tasks, like winning a real-time strategy game, and
strictly follow high-level language commands from humans, like “attack”, even if
a command is sub-optimal. We call this novel yet important problem, Grounded
Reinforcement Learning (GRL). Compared with other language grounding tasks,
GRL is particularly non-trivial and cannot be simply solved by pure RL or behavior
cloning (BC). From the RL perspective, it is extremely challenging to derive a
precise reward function for human preferences since the commands are abstract
and the valid behaviors are highly complicated and multi-modal. From the BC
perspective, it is impossible to obtain perfect demonstrations since human strategies
in complex games are typically sub-optimal. We tackle GRL via a simple, tractable,
and practical constrained RL objective and develop an iterative RL algorithm,
REinforced demonstration Distillation (RED), to obtain a strong GRL policy. We
evaluate the policies derived by RED, BC and pure RL methods on a simplified
real-time strategy game, MiniRTS. Experiment results and human studies show
that the RED policy is able to consistently follow human commands and, at the
same time, achieve a higher win rate than the baselines. We release our code and
present more examples at https://sites.google.com/view/grounded-rl.

1

Introduction

Building assistive agents that can help humans accomplish complex tasks remains a long-standing
challenge in artificial intelligence. Natural language, as the most generic protocol for humans to
exchange and share knowledge, becomes a general and important interface for human-AI interaction.
Decades of research efforts have been continuously made to develop AI systems that can ground
agent behaviors to natural language commands [69, 64, 46].
Recently, as deep reinforcement learning (RL) techniques have been widely used to develop interactive
agents to solve a variety of challenging problems, it becomes a new trend to cast language grounding
as an RL problem to train agents that can automatically ground language concepts to visual objects or
behaviors in an interactive fashion [29, 13, 15]. In particular, an RL agent is typically presented with
a language command describing the goal of the RL task and will receive a success reward when the
desired goal state under the command is achieved. A well-trained RL agent can often exhibit strong
generalization capabilities to novel commands. Despite the simplicity and effectiveness, such an RL
formulation requires a language generator to repeatedly output random commands and an explicit
reward function to determine whether the command is accomplished. Hence, most existing RL works
focus on simple navigation problems with template-based compositional languages over objects and
attributes, e.g., “go to the red box next to the blue wall” [56, 68, 34, 15].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

