Active Bayesian Causal Inference

Christian Toth
TU Graz

Lars Lorch
ETH Zürich

Robert Peharz∗
TU Graz

Christian Knoll
TU Graz

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich

Franz Pernkopf
TU Graz

Julius von Kügelgen∗
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Causal discovery and causal reasoning are classically treated as separate and consecutive tasks: one first infers the causal graph, and then uses it to estimate causal
effects of interventions. However, such a two-stage approach is uneconomical,
especially in terms of actively collected interventional data, since the causal query
of interest may not require a fully-specified causal model. From a Bayesian perspective, it is also unnatural, since a causal query (e.g., the causal graph or some
causal effect) can be viewed as a latent quantity subject to posterior inference—
other unobserved quantities that are not of direct interest (e.g., the full causal
model) ought to be marginalized out in this process and contribute to our epistemic
uncertainty. In this work, we propose Active Bayesian Causal Inference (ABCI), a
fully-Bayesian active learning framework for integrated causal discovery and reasoning, which jointly infers a posterior over causal models and queries of interest.
In our approach to ABCI, we focus on the class of causally-sufficient, nonlinear
additive noise models, which we model using Gaussian processes. We sequentially
design experiments that are maximally informative about our target causal query,
collect the corresponding interventional data, and update our beliefs to choose the
next experiment. Through simulations, we demonstrate that our approach is more
data-efficient than several baselines that only focus on learning the full causal graph.
This allows us to accurately learn downstream causal queries from fewer samples
while providing well-calibrated uncertainty estimates for the quantities of interest.

1

Introduction

Causal reasoning, that is, answering causal queries such as the effect of a particular intervention,
is a fundamental scientific quest [3, 36, 39, 49]. A rigorous treatment of this quest requires a
reference causal model, typically consisting at least of (i) a causal diagram, or directed acyclic graph
(DAG), capturing the qualitative causal structure between a system’s variables [55] and (ii) a joint
distribution that is Markovian w.r.t. this causal graph [75]. Other frameworks additionally model (iii)
the functional dependence of each variable on its causal parents in the graph [56, 83]. If the graph
is not known from domain expertise, causal discovery aims to infer it from data [48, 75]. However,
given only passively-collected observational data and no assumptions on the data-generating process,
causal discovery is limited to recovering the Markov equivalence class (MEC) of DAGs implying
the conditional independences present in the data [75]. Additional assumptions like linearity can
render the graph identifiable [37, 61, 71, 86] but are often hard to falsify, thus leading to risk of
∗
Shared last author.
Correspondence to: {christian.toth,robert.peharz}@tugraz.at, jvk@tue.mpg.de
Code available at: https://www.github.com/chritoth/active-bayesian-causal-inference

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

