A Consistent and Differentiable
Lp Canonical Calibration Error Estimator

Teodora Popordanoska∗
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven
teodora.popordanoska@kuleuven.be

Raphael Sayer∗†
University of Tübingen
raphael.sayer@uni-tuebingen.de

Matthew B. Blaschko
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven
matthew.blaschko@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Calibrated probabilistic classifiers are models whose predicted probabilities can
directly be interpreted as uncertainty estimates. It has been shown recently that
deep neural networks are poorly calibrated and tend to output overconfident predictions. As a remedy, we propose a low-bias, trainable calibration error estimator
based on Dirichlet kernel density estimates, which asymptotically converges to the
true Lp calibration error. This novel estimator enables us to tackle the strongest
notion of multiclass calibration, called canonical (or distribution) calibration, while
other common calibration methods are tractable only for top-label and marginal
calibration. The computational complexity of our estimator is O(n2 ), the convergence rate is O(n−1/2 ), and it is unbiased up to O(n−2 ), achieved by a geometric
series debiasing scheme. In practice, this means that the estimator can be applied
to small subsets of data, enabling efficient estimation and mini-batch updates. The
proposed method has a natural choice of kernel, and can be used to generate consistent estimates of other quantities based on conditional expectation, such as the
sharpness of a probabilistic classifier. Empirical results validate the correctness of
our estimator, and demonstrate its utility in canonical calibration error estimation
and calibration error regularized risk minimization.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shown tremendous success in classification tasks, being regularly the
best performing models in terms of accuracy. However, they are also known to make overconfident
predictions [Guo et al., 2017], which is particularly problematic in safety-critical applications, such
as medical diagnosis [Esteva et al., 2017, 2019] or autonomous driving [Caesar et al., 2020, Sun et al.,
2020]. In many real world applications it is not only the predictive performance that is important, but
also the trustworthiness of the prediction, i.e., we are interested in accurate predictions with robust
uncertainty estimates. To this end, it is necessary that the models are uncertainty calibrated, which
means that, for instance, among all cells that have been predicted with a probability of 0.8 to be
cancerous, 80% should indeed belong to a malignant tumor.
The field of uncertainty calibration has been mostly focused on binary problems, often considering
only the confidence score of the predicted class. However, this so called top-label (or confidence)
calibration [Guo et al., 2017]) is often not sufficient in multiclass settings. A stronger notion of
calibration is marginal (or class-wise) [Kull et al., 2019], that splits up the multiclass problem
∗

Equal contribution

†

Most of this work was done while at KU Leuven

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

