Probable Domain Generalization
via Quantile Risk Minimization
Cian Eastwood∗1,2
Julius von Kügelgen1,4

Alexander Robey∗3

Hamed Hassani 3

Shashank Singh1

George J. Pappas 3

Bernhard Schölkopf 1

1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
2 University of Edinburgh

3 University of Pennsylvania

4 University of Cambridge

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) seeks predictors which perform well on unseen test
distributions by leveraging data drawn from multiple related training distributions
or domains. To achieve this, DG is commonly formulated as an average- or worstcase problem over the set of possible domains. However, predictors that perform
well on average lack robustness while predictors that perform well in the worst case
tend to be overly-conservative. To address this, we propose a new probabilistic
framework for DG where the goal is to learn predictors that perform well with
high probability. Our key idea is that distribution shifts seen during training should
inform us of probable shifts at test time, which we realize by explicitly relating
training and test domains as draws from the same underlying meta-distribution. To
achieve probable DG, we propose a new optimization problem called Quantile Risk
Minimization (QRM). By minimizing the α-quantile of predictor’s risk distribution
over domains, QRM seeks predictors that perform well with probability α. To solve
QRM in practice, we propose the Empirical QRM (EQRM) algorithm and provide:
(i) a generalization bound for EQRM; and (ii) the conditions under which EQRM
recovers the causal predictor as α → 1. In our experiments, we introduce a more
holistic quantile-focused evaluation protocol for DG, and demonstrate that EQRM
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on datasets from WILDS and DomainBed.

1

Introduction

Despite remarkable successes in recent years [1–3], machine learning systems often fail calamitously
when presented with out-of-distribution (OOD) data [4–7]. Evidence of state-of-the-art systems
failing in the face of distribution shift is mounting rapidly—be it due to spurious correlations [8–10],
changing sub-populations [11–13], changes in location or time [14–16], or other naturally-occurring
variations [17–23]. These OOD failures are particularly concerning in safety-critical applications
such as medical imaging [24–28] and autonomous driving [29–31], where they represent one of the
most significant barriers to the real-world deployment of machine learning systems [32–35].
Domain generalization (DG) seeks to improve a system’s OOD performance by leveraging datasets
from multiple environments or domains at training time, each collected under different experimental
conditions [36–38] (see Fig. 1a). The goal is to build a predictor which exploits invariances across the
training domains in the hope that these invariances also hold in related but distinct test domains [38–
41]. To realize this goal, DG is commonly formulated as an average- [36, 42, 43] or worst-case [9, 44,
45] optimization problem over the set of possible domains. However, optimizing for average performance provably lacks robustness to OOD data [46], while optimizing for worst-domain performance
tends to lead to overly-conservative solutions, with worst-case outcomes unlikely in practice [47, 48].
∗ Equal contribution. Correspondence to c.eastwood@ed.ac.uk or arobey1@seas.upenn.edu.

Code available at: https://github.com/cianeastwood/qrm
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

