SoteriaFL: A Unified Framework for Private Federated

Learning with Communication Compression

Zhize Li
Carnegie Mellon University
zhizel@andrew.cmu.edu

Haoyu Zhao
Princeton University
haoyu@princeton.edu

Boyue Li
Carnegie Mellon University
boyuel@andrew.cmu.edu

Yuejie Chi
Carnegie Mellon University
yuejiec@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
To enable large-scale machine learning in bandwidth-hungry environments such
as wireless networks, significant progress has been made recently in designing
communication-efficient federated learning algorithms with the aid of communication compression. On the other end, privacy-preserving, especially at the client
level, is another important desideratum that has not been addressed simultaneously
in the presence of advanced communication compression techniques yet. In this
paper, we propose a unified framework that enhances the communication efficiency
of private federated learning with communication compression. Exploiting both
general compression operators and local differential privacy, we first examine a simple algorithm that applies compression directly to differentially-private stochastic
gradient descent, and identify its limitations. We then propose a unified framework
SoteriaFL for private federated learning, which accommodates a general family
of local gradient estimators including popular stochastic variance-reduced gradient methods and the state-of-the-art shifted compression scheme. We provide a
comprehensive characterization of its performance trade-offs in terms of privacy,
utility, and communication complexity, where SoteriaFL is shown to achieve better
communication complexity without sacrificing privacy nor utility than other private
federated learning algorithms without communication compression.

1

Introduction

With the proliferation of mobile and edge devices, federated learning (FL) [42, 55] has recently
emerged as a disruptive paradigm for training large-scale machine learning models over a vast amount
of geographically distributed and heterogeneous devices. For instance, Google uses FL in the Gboard
mobile keyboard for next word predictions [29]. FL is often modeled as a distributed optimization
problem [41, 42, 55, 35, 72], aiming to solve
(
)
n
m
1X
1 X
min f (x; D) :=
f (x; Di ) , where f (x; Di ) :=
f (x; di,j ).
(1)
n i=1
m j=1
x2Rd

Here, D denotes the entire dataset distributed across all n clients, where each client i has a local
1
d
dataset Di = {di,j }m
j=1 of equal size m, x 2 R denotes the model parameters, f (x; D), f (x; Di ),
and f (x; di,j ) denote the nonconvex loss function of the current model x on the entire dataset D, the
local dataset Di , and a single data sample di,j , respectively. For simplicity, we use f (x), fi (x) and
fi,j (x) to denote f (x; D), f (x; Di ) and f (x; di,j ), respectively.
1

This is without loss of generality, since otherwise one can simply adjust the weights of the loss function.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

