SAViT: Structure-Aware Vision Transformer Pruning
via Collaborative Optimization

Chuanyang Zheng1 , Zheyang Li1,2 , Kai Zhang1 , Zhi Yang1 ,
Wenming Tan1 , Jun Xiao2 , Ye Ren1 , Shiliang Pu1
1
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
2
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{zhengchuanyang,lizheyang,zhangkai23,yangzhi13}@hikvision.com
tanwenming@hikvision.com, junx@cs.zju.edu.cn
{renye,pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) yield impressive performance across various vision
tasks. However, heavy computation and memory footprint make them inaccessible for edge devices. Previous works apply importance criteria determined
independently by each individual component to prune ViTs. Considering that
heterogeneous components in ViTs play distinct roles, these approaches lead to
suboptimal performance. In this paper, we introduce joint importance, which
integrates essential structural-aware interactions between components for the first
time, to perform collaborative pruning. Based on the theoretical analysis, we
construct a Taylor-based approximation to evaluate the joint importance. This
guides pruning toward a more balanced reduction across all components. To further
reduce the algorithm complexity, we incorporate the interactions into the optimization function under some mild assumptions. Moreover, the proposed method
can be seamlessly applied to various tasks including object detection. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Notably, the proposed
approach outperforms the existing state-of-the-art approaches on ImageNet, increasing accuracy by 0.7% over the DeiT-Base baseline while saving 50% FLOPs.
On COCO, we are the first to show that 70% FLOPs of Faster R-CNN with ViT
backbone can be removed with only 0.3% mAP drop. The code is available at
https://github.com/hikvision-research/SAViT.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have dominated nearly every aspect of computer vision for a
long time [1]. Recently, the emerging ViTs [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] have shown competitive performance
on image classification, object detection, and other vision tasks. Despite the success, ViTs contain
complicated submodules and require more intensive computational cost [8], limiting their deployment
on resource-restricted devices. This naturally calls for compression and acceleration in ViTs as those
done in CNNs.
One common direction for speeding up deep neural networks is to remove a group of less important
connections that have a negligible impact on the network’s performance. As pruning is proven
very powerful to accelerate CNNs [9, 10, 11, 12], the exploration of pruning ViTs has just emerged.
Different from CNNs whose parameters mainly rely on the homogeneous component, i.e., convolutional filter, transformers contain heterogeneous components such as multi-head self-attention
(MSA), hidden neurons, and embedding neurons, as shown in Figure 1. These components play
different functional roles in capturing contextual information and each one is associated with a distinct
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

