Real-Valued Backpropagation is Unsuitable for
Complex-Valued Neural Networks

Zhi-Hao Tan, Yi Xie, Yuan Jiang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{tanzh, xiey, jiangy, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently complex-valued neural networks have received increasing attention due
to successful applications in various tasks and the potential advantages of better
theoretical properties and richer representational capacity. However, the training
dynamics of complex networks compared to real networks remains an open problem. In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of deep complex networks during
real-valued backpropagation in the infinite-width limit via neural tangent kernel
(NTK). We first extend the Tensor Program to the complex domain, to show that
the dynamics of any basic complex network architecture is governed by its NTK
under real-valued backpropagation. Then we propose a way to investigate the
comparison of training dynamics between complex and real networks by studying
their NTKs. As a result, we surprisingly prove that for most complex activation
functions, the commonly used real-valued backpropagation reduces the training
dynamics of complex networks to that of ordinary real networks as the widths tend
to infinity, thus eliminating the characteristics of complex-valued neural networks.
Finally, the experiments validate our theoretical findings numerically.

1

Introduction

Recently complex-valued neural networks have been successfully applied to various tasks, such
as time-series prediction [Wisdom et al., 2016], computer vision [Trabelsi et al., 2018], signal
processing [Yao et al., 2020]. Compared to real-valued neural networks, it is shown that complex
networks have the potential to provide richer representational capacity [Arjovsky et al., 2016], faster
learning [Danihelka et al., 2016], better motivation and generalization for signal-related tasks [Hirose
and Yoshida, 2012, Tygert et al., 2016]. Theoretically, there have been significant advances for
complex networks regarding the universal approximation property [Voigtlaender, 2020], critical
points [Nitta, 2002], local minima [Nitta, 2013] and separation results [Zhang et al., 2022].
However, training deep complex networks has been challenging because of several non-intuitive
analytical properties of complex algebra. Firstly, in practice, we often deal with a real-valued cost
function, which is non-analytic with respect to complex-valued parameters. Secondly, Liouville’s
theorem asserts that every bounded and complex-differentiable function is a constant. Thus almost
all activation functions are non-analytic due to the preference for boundedness before the popularity
of ReLU [Scardapane et al., 2018]. Moreover, Voigtlaender [2020] has proved that the universal
approximation property holds only when using non-holomorphic activation functions.
Due to these reasons, different backpropagation algorithms in the complex domain were independently
proposed for non-holomorphic networks [Bassey et al., 2021], mostly by optimizing the real and
imaginary components separately. Recently, real-valued backpropagation [Nitta, 1997] is widely
used due to the convenience of utilizing the real-valued deep learning library [Arjovsky et al., 2016,
Trabelsi et al., 2018, Tan et al., 2020]. It optimized the complex network just like a real network by
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

