Additive MIL: Intrinsically Interpretable Multiple
Instance Learning for Pathology
Syed Ashar Javed
PathAI Inc
ashar.javed@pathai.com

Dinkar Juyal
PathAI Inc
dinkar.juyal@pathai.com

Harshith Padigela
PathAI Inc
harshith.padigela@pathai.com
Limin Yu
PathAI Inc
limin.yu@pathai.com

Amaro Taylor-Weiner
PathAI Inc
amaro.taylor@pathai.com
Aaditya Prakash
PathAI Inc
adi.prakash.ml@gmail.com

Abstract
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) has been widely applied in pathology towards
solving critical problems such as automating cancer diagnosis and grading, predicting patient prognosis, and therapy response. Deploying these models in a clinical
setting requires careful inspection of these black boxes during development and
deployment to identify failures and maintain physician trust. In this work, we
propose a simple formulation of MIL models, which enables interpretability while
maintaining similar predictive performance. Our Additive MIL models enable
spatial credit assignment such that the contribution of each region in the image can
be exactly computed and visualized. We show that our spatial credit assignment
coincides with regions used by pathologists during diagnosis and improves upon
classical attention heatmaps from attention MIL models. We show that any existing
MIL model can be made additive with a simple change in function composition.
We also show how these models can debug model failures, identify spurious features, and highlight class-wise regions of interest, enabling their use in high-stakes
environments such as clinical decision-making.

1

Introduction

Histopathology is the study and diagnosis of disease by microscopic inspection of tissue. Histologic
examination of tissue samples plays a key role in both clinical diagnosis and drug development. It is
regarded as medicine’s ground truth for various diseases and is important in evaluating disease severity,
measuring treatment effects, and biomarker scoring [42]. A differentiating feature of digitized tissue
slides or whole slide images (WSI) is their extremely large size, often billions of pixels per image. In
addition to being large, WSIs are extremely information dense, with each image containing thousands
of cells and detailed tissue regions that make manual analysis of these images challenging. This
information richness makes pathology an excellent application for machine learning, and indeed
there has been tremendous progress in recent years in applying machine learning to pathology data
[43, 9, 19, 46, 12, 7, 14, 13].
The most important applications of ML in digital pathology involve predicting patient’s clinical
characteristics from a WSI image. Models need to be able to make predictions about the entire slide
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

