Dataset Inference for Self-Supervised Models
Adam Dziedzic⇤ †, Haonan Duan† , Muhammad Ahmad Kaleem† , Nikita Dhawan,
Jonas Guan, Yannis Cattan, Franziska Boenisch, Nicolas Papernot
University of Toronto and Vector Institute

Abstract

Self-supervised models are increasingly prevalent in machine learning (ML) since
they reduce the need for expensively labeled data. Because of their versatility in
downstream applications, they are increasingly used as a service exposed via public
APIs. At the same time, these encoder models are particularly vulnerable to model
stealing attacks due to the high dimensionality of vector representations they output.
Yet, encoders remain undefended: existing mitigation strategies for stealing attacks
focus on supervised learning. We introduce a new dataset inference defense, which
uses the private training set of the victim encoder model to attribute its ownership
in the event of stealing. The intuition is that the log-likelihood of an encoder’s
output representations is higher on the victim’s training data than on test data if it
is stolen from the victim, but not if it is independently trained. We compute this
log-likelihood using density estimation models. As part of our evaluation, we also
propose measuring the fidelity of stolen encoders and quantifying the effectiveness
of the theft detection without involving downstream tasks; instead, we leverage
mutual information and distance measurements. Our extensive empirical results in
the vision domain demonstrate that dataset inference is a promising direction for
defending self-supervised models against model stealing.

1

Introduction

The self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigm enables pre-training models with unlabeled data to learn
generally useful domain knowledge and then transfer the knowledge to solve specific downstream
tasks. The ability to learn from unlabeled data alleviates the high costs of labeling large datasets [24],
and the transfer learning setup reduces the computational costs of retraining. These advantages have
made SSL increasingly popular [20] in domains like vision [5], language [12], and bioinformatics [29].
Recently, commercial service providers like Cohere [1] and OpenAI [2] began offering paid query
access to trained SSL encoders over public APIs. This exposes the encoders to black-box extraction
attacks, i.e., model stealing. In a model stealing attack, an attacker aims to train an approximate
copy of a victim model by submitting carefully chosen queries and observing the victim’s outputs.
The high costs of data collection, preprocessing and model training make encoders valuable targets
for stealing. For example, the training data of CLIP includes 400 million image and text pairs [37],
while computation costs of training a large language model can exceed one million USD [41]. The
threat of model stealing in SSL is real: researchers have demonstrated that encoders can be stolen at a
fraction of the victim’s training cost [14, 39]. Yet, most current defenses are designed for supervised
models [15, 23, 35] and cannot be directly applied to encoders [14].
Dataset inference [31] is a state-of-the-art defense against model stealing in the supervised learning
setting. The defense provides ownership resolution: it enables the model owner to make a strong
statistical claim that a given model is a stolen copy of their own model by showing that this model
is derivative of their own private training data. Dataset inference does not require retraining or
overfitting the model to any form of explicit watermark [4] and has been shown to resist attacks from
⇤
†

Corresponding and leading author: adam.dziedzic@utoronto.ca
Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

