Learning Robust Dynamics through
Variational Sparse Gating

Arnav Kumar Jain1,2,∗ , Shivakanth Sujit2,3 , Shruti Joshi2,3 , Vincent Michalski1,2
Danijar Hafner4,5 , Samira Ebrahimi-Kahou2,3,6

Abstract
Learning world models from their sensory inputs enables agents to plan for actions
by imagining their future outcomes. World models have previously been shown to
improve sample-efficiency in simulated environments with few objects, but have not
yet been applied successfully to environments with many objects. In environments
with many objects, often only a small number of them are moving or interacting
at the same time. In this paper, we investigate integrating this inductive bias of
sparse interactions into the latent dynamics of world models trained from pixels.
First, we introduce Variational Sparse Gating (VSG), a latent dynamics model that
updates its feature dimensions sparsely through stochastic binary gates. Moreover,
we propose a simplified architecture Simple Variational Sparse Gating (SVSG)
that removes the deterministic pathway of previous models, resulting in a fully
stochastic transition function that leverages the VSG mechanism. We evaluate the
two model architectures in the BringBackShapes (BBS) environment that features
a large number of moving objects and partial observability, demonstrating clear
improvements over prior models.

1

Introduction

Latent dynamics models are models that generate agent’s future states in the compact latent space
without feeding the high-dimensional observations back to the model. They have shown promising
results on various tasks like video prediction (Karl et al., 2016; Kalman, 1960; Krishnan et al., 2015),
model-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Hafner et al., 2020; 2021; 2019; Ha and Schmidhuber,
2018), and robotics (Watter et al., 2015). Generating sequences in the compact latent space reduces
the accumulating errors leading to more accurate long-term predictions. Additionally, having lower
dimensionality leads to a lower memory footprint. Solving tasks in model-based RL involves learning
a world model (Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018) that can predict outcomes of actions, followed by
using them to derive behaviors (Sutton, 1991). Motivated by these benefits, the recently proposed
DreamerV1 (Hafner et al., 2020) and DreamerV2 (Hafner et al., 2021) agents achieved state-of-the-art
results on a wide range of visual control tasks.
Many complex tasks require reliable long-term prediction of dynamics. This is true especially in
partially observable environments where only a subspace is visible to the agent, and it is usually
required to accurately retain information over multiple time steps to solve the task. The Dreamer
agents (Hafner et al., 2020; 2021) employ an Recurrent State-Space Model (RSSM) (Hafner et al.,
2019) comprising of a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). Training RNNs for long sequences is challenging as they suffer from optimization problems like vanishing gradients (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio
et al., 1994). Different ways of applying sparse updates in RNNs have been investigated (Campos
et al., 2017; Neil et al., 2016; Goyal et al., 2019), enabling a subset of state dimensions to be constant
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
1
5

Université de Montréal, 2 Mila- Quebec AI Institute, 3 École de technologie supérieure, 4 University of Toronto,
Google Brain, 6 CIFAR. ∗ Correspondence to Arnav Kumar Jain <arnav-kumar.jain@mila.quebec>.

