GAL: Gradient Assisted Learning for Decentralized
Multi-Organization Collaborations

Enmao Diao
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durhm, NC 27705, USA
enmao.diao@duke.edu

Jie Ding
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
dingj@umn.edu

Vahid Tarokh
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durhm, NC 27705, USA
vahid.tarokh@duke.edu

Abstract
Collaborations among multiple organizations, such as financial institutions, medical
centers, and retail markets in decentralized settings are crucial to providing improved service and performance. However, the underlying organizations may have
little interest in sharing their local data, models, and objective functions. These
requirements have created new challenges for multi-organization collaboration.
In this work, we propose Gradient Assisted Learning (GAL), a new method for
multiple organizations to assist each other in supervised learning tasks without
sharing local data, models, and objective functions. In this framework, all participants collaboratively optimize the aggregate of local loss functions, and each
participant autonomously builds its own model by iteratively fitting the gradients
of the overarching objective function. We also provide asymptotic convergence
analysis and practical case studies of GAL. Experimental studies demonstrate that
GAL can achieve performance close to centralized learning when all data, models,
and objective functions are fully disclosed. Our code is available here 1 .

1

Introduction

One of the main challenges in harnessing the power of big data is the fusion of knowledge from
numerous decentralized organizations that may have proprietary data, models, and objective functions.
Due to various ethical and regulatory constraints, it may not be feasible for decentralized organizations
to centralize their data and fully collaborate to learn a shared model. Thus, a large-scale autonomous
decentralized learning method that can avoid data, models, and objective functions transparency may
be of critical interest.
Cooperative learning may have various scientific and business applications [1]. As illustrated in
Figure 1, a medical institute may be helped by multiple clinical laboratories and pharmaceutical
entities to improve clinical treatment and facilitate scientific research [2, 3]. Financial organizations
may collaborate with universities and insurance companies to predict loan default rates [4]. The
organizations can match the correspondence with common identifiers, such as user identification
associated with the registration of different online platforms, timestamps associated with different
1

Resources related to Assisted Learning (AL) can be found at http://www.assisted-learning.org.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

