Contact-aware Human Motion Forecasting

Wei Mao1 , Miaomiao Liu1 , Richard Hartley1 , Mathieu Salzmann2,3
1
Australian National University; 2 CVLab, EPFL; 3 ClearSpace, Switzerland
{wei.mao, miaomiao.liu, richard.hartley}@anu.edu.au, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the task of scene-aware 3D human motion forecasting,
which consists of predicting future human poses given a 3D scene and a past human
motion. A key challenge of this task is to ensure consistency between the human
and the scene, accounting for human-scene interactions. Previous attempts to do
so model such interactions only implicitly, and thus tend to produce artifacts such
as “ghost motion" because of the lack of explicit constraints between the local
poses and the global motion. Here, by contrast, we propose to explicitly model
the human-scene contacts. To this end, we introduce distance-based contact maps
that capture the contact relationships between every joint and every 3D scene
point at each time instant. We then develop a two-stage pipeline that first predicts
the future contact maps from the past ones and the scene point cloud, and then
forecasts the future human poses by conditioning them on the predicted contact
maps. During training, we explicitly encourage consistency between the global
motion and the local poses via a prior defined using the contact maps and future
poses. Our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art human motion forecasting
and human synthesis methods on both synthetic and real datasets. Our code is
available at https://github.com/wei-mao-2019/ContAwareMotionPred.

1

Introduction

Human motion prediction has a broad application potential covering human robot interaction [17],
autonomous driving [23], virtual/augmented reality (AR/VR) [28] and animation [31]. As such, it
has been an active research topic for decades [4, 27, 30, 35]. Nevertheless, most methods [19, 1,
22, 32, 9, 18, 21, 5] disregard the fact that humans evolve in 3D environments, thus ignoring the
human-scene interactions. By contrast, in this work, we tackle the task of scene-aware human motion
forecasting, which aims to incorporate the scene context to predict future 3D human motions.
While some recent works in human motion prediction [6, 8] and human synthesis [33] have started
to explore the use of scene context, they do so implicitly, by taking an embedding of a 2D scene
image [6], a 3D scene [33], or a specific object [8] as an additional input to their model. While
such embeddings encode valuable information, they do not provide precise cues to help placing the
human in the scene. In the context of synthesizing a static human body in a scene, some efforts have
nonetheless been made to incorporate more precise information, such as the distance between every
scene point and the closest vertex on body surface [36], or a semantic scene label, e.g., floor, sofa, at
every vertex on the 3D body mesh [12]. However, while such representations allow one to place a
human in the scene, they remain under-constrained for motion prediction. Specifically, they impose
neither temporal consistency, nor consistency between local pose changes and global motion. As
such, they yield artifacts such as “ghost motion".
In this paper, we address this by explicitly modeling the contact between the human body joints
and the scene. To this end, we introduce per-joint contact maps that encode the distance between
each joint and every 3D scene point. Such contact maps constrain both the global motion and the
local human pose, thus avoiding the “ghost motion" issue. As illustrated in Fig 1, our human motion
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

