SelecMix: Debiased Learning by
Contradicting-pair Sampling
Inwoo Hwang1 Sangjun Lee1 Yunhyeok Kwak1 Seong Joon Oh3
Damien Teney4 Jin-Hwa Kim⇤12 Byoung-Tak Zhang⇤1
1
AI Institute, Seoul National University 2 NAVER AI Lab
3
University of Tübingen 4 Idiap Research Institute

Abstract
Neural networks trained with ERM (empirical risk minimization) sometimes learn
unintended decision rules, in particular when their training data is biased, i.e.,
when training labels are strongly correlated with undesirable features. To prevent
a network from learning such features, recent methods augment training data
such that examples displaying spurious correlations (i.e., bias-aligned examples)
become a minority, whereas the other, bias-conflicting examples become prevalent.
However, these approaches are sometimes difficult to train and scale to real-world
data because they rely on generative models or disentangled representations. We
propose an alternative based on mixup, a popular augmentation that creates convex
combinations of training examples. Our method, coined SelecMix, applies mixup
to contradicting pairs of examples, defined as showing either (i) the same label
but dissimilar biased features, or (ii) different labels but similar biased features.
Identifying such pairs requires comparing examples with respect to unknown
biased features. For this, we utilize an auxiliary contrastive model with the popular
heuristic that biased features are learned preferentially during training. Experiments
on standard benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of the method, in particular
when label noise complicates the identification of bias-conflicting examples.

1

Introduction

The inductive biases contributing to the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) can sometimes
limit their capabilities for out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. DNNs are prone to learn simple,
linear predictive patterns from their training data, sometimes ignoring more complex but important
ones [30, 32]. It has been suggested that the simplest correlations in the data are often spurious [7].
A DNN relying on such simple, spurious patterns will therefore display poor OOD generalization.
Spurious correlations in a dataset are often the result of a selection bias, and such datasets are therefore
said to be biased. This paper is about debiased learning, also known as debiasing, i.e., methods that
prevent a network from relying on spurious correlations when trained on a biased dataset.
Biased datasets typically contain a majority of so-called bias-aligned examples and a minority of
bias-conflicting ones. In bias-aligned examples, ground truth labels are correlated with both robust
and biased features.2 In bias-conflicting examples, labels are correlated only with robust features.
Clearly, the issues of models trained on biased datasets stem from the prevalence of bias-aligned
samples. Various approaches for debiased learning encourage models to ignore biased features. Since
⇤

Corresponding authors.
A feature is biased if it displays a pattern that is statistically predictive of the labels over the dataset, though
not necessarily on every example. For instance, a blue background may be present in most (but not all) images
of birds. These images are said to be bias-aligned.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

