HorNet: Efficient High-Order Spatial Interactions
with Recursive Gated Convolutions
Yongming Rao1∗ Wenliang Zhao1∗ Yansong Tang1
Jie Zhou1† Ser-Nam Lim2† Jiwen Lu1†
1
Tsinghua University 2 Meta AI

Abstract
Recent progress in vision Transformers exhibits great success in various tasks
driven by the new spatial modeling mechanism based on dot-product self-attention.
In this paper, we show that the key ingredients behind the vision Transformers,
namely input-adaptive, long-range and high-order spatial interactions, can also
be efficiently implemented with a convolution-based framework. We present the
Recursive Gated Convolution (gn Conv) that performs high-order spatial interactions with gated convolutions and recursive designs. The new operation is highly
flexible and customizable, which is compatible with various variants of convolution
and extends the two-order interactions in self-attention to arbitrary orders without
introducing significant extra computation. gn Conv can serve as a plug-and-play
module to improve various vision Transformers and convolution-based models.
Based on the operation, we construct a new family of generic vision backbones
named HorNet. Extensive experiments on ImageNet classification, COCO object
detection and ADE20K semantic segmentation show HorNet outperform Swin
Transformers and ConvNeXt by a significant margin with similar overall architecture and training configurations. HorNet also shows favorable scalability to
more training data and a larger model size. Apart from the effectiveness in visual encoders, we also show gn Conv can be applied to task-specific decoders and
consistently improve dense prediction performance with less computation. Our
results demonstrate that gn Conv can be a new basic module for visual modeling
that effectively combines the merits of both vision Transformers and CNNs. Code
is available at https://github.com/raoyongming/HorNet.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have driven remarkable progress in deep learning and computation vision since the introduction of AlexNet [31] in the last decade. There are quite a few nice
properties of CNNs making them naturally suitable for a wide range of vision applications. Translation equivariance introduces useful inductive biases to major vision tasks and enables transferability
across different input resolutions. The highly optimized implementation makes it efficient on both
high-performance GPUs and edge devices. The evolution of architectures [32, 31, 49, 50, 22, 24, 51]
further increases its popularity on various vision tasks.
The emergence of Transformer-based architectures [16, 52, 42] greatly challenges the dominance
of CNNs. By combining some successful designs in CNN architectures and the new self-attention
mechanism, vision Transformers have shown leading performance on various vision tasks such
as image classification [12, 42, 48], object detection [70, 41], semantic segmentation [6, 8] and
video understanding [64, 18]. What makes vision Transformers more powerful than CNNs? Some
efforts have been made to improve the CNN architectures by learning from the new designs in vision
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

