Path Independent Equilibrium Models Can Better
Exploit Test-Time Computation

Cem Anil1∗ Ashwini Pokle2∗ Kaiqu Liang3∗ Johannes Treutlein1,4
Yuhuai Wu5 Shaojie Bai2 Zico Kolter2,6 Roger Grosse1
1
University of Toronto and Vector Institute 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Princeton University
4
University of California, Berkeley 5 Stanford University and Google Research 6 Bosch Center for AI
{anilcem, rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu kl2471@princeton.edu
{apokle, shaojieb, zkolter}@cs.cmu.edu
yuhuai@google.com johannestreutlein@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Designing networks capable of attaining better performance with an increased inference budget is important to facilitate generalization to harder problem instances.
Recent efforts have shown promising results in this direction by making use of
depth-wise recurrent networks. We show that a broad class of architectures named
equilibrium models display strong upwards generalization, and find that stronger
performance on harder examples (which require more iterations of inference to
get correct) strongly correlates with the path independence of the system—its tendency to converge to the same steady-state behaviour regardless of initialization,
given enough computation. Experimental interventions made to promote path independence result in improved generalization on harder problem instances, while
those that penalize it degrade this ability. Path independence analyses are also useful on a per-example basis: for equilibrium models that have good in-distribution
performance, path independence on out-of-distribution samples strongly correlates
with accuracy. Our results help explain why equilibrium models are capable of
strong upwards generalization and motivates future work that harnesses path independence as a general modelling principle to facilitate scalable test-time usage.

1

Introduction

One of the main challenges limiting the practical applicability of modern deep learning systems
is the ability to generalize outside the training distribution [Koh et al., 2021]. One particularly
important type of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is upwards generalization, or the ability to
generalize to more difficult problem instances than those encountered at training time [Selsam et al.,
2018, Bansal et al., 2022, Schwarzschild et al., 2021b, Nye et al., 2021]. Often, good performance on
more difficult instances will require a larger amount of test-time computation, so a natural question
arises: how can we design neural net architectures which can reliably exploit additional test-time
computation to achieve better accuracy?
Equilibrium models, a broad class of architectures whose outputs are the fixed points of learned
dynamical systems, are particularly suited to meet this challenge. Closely related to weight-tied
recurrent models – networks that apply the same fixed neural network module repeatedly to hiddenlayer activations – equilibrium models are capable of adapting their compute budget based on the
input they are given. Under what conditions, if any, can this input-dependent ability to scale-up testtime compute actually lead to upwards generalization?
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to anilcem@cs.toronto.edu and apokle@cs.cmu.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

