Robust Anytime Learning of
Markov Decision Processes ∗
Marnix Suilen
Department of Software Science
Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Thiago D. Simão
Department of Software Science
Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands

David Parker
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom

Nils Jansen
Department of Software Science
Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract
Markov decision processes (MDPs) are formal models commonly used in sequential decision-making. MDPs capture the stochasticity that may arise, for instance,
from imprecise actuators via probabilities in the transition function. However,
in data-driven applications, deriving precise probabilities from (limited) data introduces statistical errors that may lead to unexpected or undesirable outcomes.
Uncertain MDPs (uMDPs) do not require precise probabilities but instead use
so-called uncertainty sets in the transitions, accounting for such limited data.
Tools from the formal verification community efficiently compute robust policies
that provably adhere to formal specifications, like safety constraints, under the
worst-case instance in the uncertainty set. We continuously learn the transition
probabilities of an MDP in a robust anytime-learning approach that combines
a dedicated Bayesian inference scheme with the computation of robust policies.
In particular, our method (1) approximates probabilities as intervals, (2) adapts
to new data that may be inconsistent with an intermediate model, and (3) may
be stopped at any time to compute a robust policy on the uMDP that faithfully
captures the data so far. Furthermore, our method is capable of adapting to changes
in the environment. We show the effectiveness of our approach and compare it to
robust policies computed on uMDPs learned by the UCRL2 reinforcement learning
algorithm in an experimental evaluation on several benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making in realistic scenarios is inherently subject to uncertainty, commonly
captured via probabilities. Markov decision processes (MDPs) are the standard model to reason
about such decision-making problems [Puterman, 1994, Bertsekas, 2005]. Safety-critical scenarios
require assessments of correctness which can, for instance, be described by temporal logic [Pnueli,
1977] or expected reward specifications. A fundamental requirement for providing such correctness
guarantees on MDPs is that probabilities are precisely given. Methods such as variants of modelbased reinforcement learning [Moerland et al., 2020] or PAC-learning [Strehl et al., 2009] can
learn MDPs by deriving point estimates of probabilities from data to satisfy this requirement. This
∗

Supported by NWO OCENW.KLEIN.187: “Provably Correct Policies for Uncertain Partially Observable
Markov Decision Processes”, NWA.1160.18.238 (PrimaVera) and by the ERC under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (FUN2MODEL, grant agreement No. 834115).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

