The Privacy Onion Effect: Memorization is Relative

Nicholas Carlini
Andreas Terzis

Matthew Jagielski
Florian Tramer
Google Research

Nicolas Papernot
Chiyuan Zhang

Abstract
Machine learning models trained on private datasets have been shown to leak
their private data. While recent work has found that the average data point is
rarely leaked, the outlier samples are frequently subject to memorization and,
consequently, privacy leakage. We demonstrate and analyse an Onion Effect of
memorization: removing the “layer” of outlier points that are most vulnerable to
a privacy attack exposes a new layer of previously-safe points to the same attack.
We perform several experiments to study this effect, and understand why it occurs.
The existence of this effect has various consequences. For example, it suggests that
proposals to defend against memorization without training with rigorous privacy
guarantees are unlikely to be effective. Further, it suggests that privacy-enhancing
technologies such as machine unlearning could actually harm the privacy of other
users.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have been shown to memorize their training data [7, 8, 11, 29, 35], and this
property is often a privacy violation when the training data is sensitive [8]. This risk incentivizes the
removal of private data from a model’s training set in a number of scenarios. For example, a user
might withdraw consent to use their data for learning, if they deem the privacy risk to be too high.
Such removal interventions are increasingly formalized in legislation (e.g., the GDPR or CCPA).
Alternatively, the party that trains a model (e.g., a company) may wish to proactively assess the
privacy risk [16, 23] of different points in the training set, in order to adaptively remove the data points
whose privacy is most at risk. Indeed, prior work has shown that the privacy of training data is highly
non-uniform: while data points tend to be well protected on average, the empirical risk of privacy
leakage (resulting from attacks) is concentrated on a small fraction of data outliers [2, 6, 12, 21, 33].
We show that removing easy-to-attack training examples—i.e., those most at risk from privacy
attacks—has counter-intuitive consequences: by removing the most vulnerable data under a specific
privacy attack and retraining a model on only the previously safe data, a new set of examples in turn
becomes vulnerable to the same privacy attack. We call this phenomenon the Privacy Onion Effect,
which we define as follows:
Removing the “layer” of outlier points that are most vulnerable to a privacy attack
exposes a new layer of previously-safe points to the same attack.
In this paper, we consider a canonical family of privacy attacks called membership inference attacks [14], which predict whether or not a given example is contained in the model’s training set [29].
Membership inference attacks are the most commonly used privacy metric due to their simplicity [6, 34], generality across domains [21, 22, 27, 37], and utility as the basis for more sophisticated
attacks [8]. We empirically corroborate this Privacy Onion Effect on standard neural network models
trained on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 image classification datasets [19]. For example, we find
that if we remove the 5,000 training samples that are most at risk from membership inference, in the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

