Residual Multiplicative Filter Networks
for Multiscale Reconstruction

1

Shayan Shekarforoush1, 2
shayan@cs.toronto.edu

David B. Lindell1, 2
lindell@cs.toronto.edu

David J. Fleet1, 2, 3
fleet@cs.toronto.edu

Marcus A. Brubaker1, 2, 4
mab@eecs.yorku.ca

University of Toronto

2

Vector Institute

3

Google Research

4

York University

Abstract
Coordinate networks like Multiplicative Filter Networks (MFNs) and BACON offer
some control over the frequency spectrum used to represent continuous signals
such as images or 3D volumes. Yet, they are not readily applicable to problems for
which coarse-to-fine estimation is required, including various inverse problems in
which coarse-to-fine optimization plays a key role in avoiding poor local minima.
We introduce a new coordinate network architecture and training scheme that
enables coarse-to-fine optimization with fine-grained control over the frequency
support of learned reconstructions. This is achieved with two key innovations.
First, we incorporate skip connections so that structure at one scale is preserved
when fitting finer-scale structure. Second, we propose a novel initialization scheme
to provide control over the model frequency spectrum at each stage of optimization.
We demonstrate how these modifications enable multiscale optimization for coarseto-fine fitting to natural images. We then evaluate our model on synthetically
generated datasets for the the problem of single-particle cryo-EM reconstruction.
We learn high resolution multiscale structures, on par with the state-of-the art.
Project webpage: https://shekshaa.github.io/ResidualMFN/.

1

Introduction

Coordinate networks have emerged as a powerful way to represent and reconstruct images, videos, and
3D scenes [1–3], and for solving challenging inverse problems such as 3D molecular reconstruction
for cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) [4–6]. They typically take as input a point defined on a
continuous, low-dimensional domain (e.g., a 2D position for images), and they output the signal
value at that point (e.g., the color). In recently proposed architectures [7, 8], the frequency content of
the represented signal can also be explicitly controlled. Such networks are motivated in part by the
effectiveness of multiscale methods in image processing and 3D reconstruction.
Nevertheless, while current scale-aware coordinate network architectures offer some control over
scale [8–10], they are not readily compatible with classical multiscale methods used for coarse-to-fine
optimization, like pyramids [11, 12] or multigrid solvers [13]. State-of-the-art cryo-EM models,
for instance, use frequency-marching to progressively estimate 3D density, beginning with a coarse
structure, then adding finer structure at each iteration [14, 15]. Some networks use heuristics to
empirically constrain the scale of network output for coarse-to-fine optimization, but they have no
explicit constraints on the represented frequencies [9, 16, 17]. Others represent signals at multiple
scales at inference time, but do not enable control of the frequency spectrum during training [8, 10].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

