Debiased Self-Training for Semi-Supervised Learning

Baixu Chen∗, Junguang Jiang∗, Ximei Wang, Pengfei Wan§ , Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng LongB
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
§
Y-tech, Kuaishou Technology
{chenbx18,jjg20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks achieve remarkable performances on a wide range of tasks
with the aid of large-scale labeled datasets. Yet these datasets are time-consuming
and labor-exhaustive to obtain on realistic tasks. To mitigate the requirement for
labeled data, self-training is widely used in semi-supervised learning by iteratively
assigning pseudo labels to unlabeled samples. Despite its popularity, self-training is
well-believed to be unreliable and often leads to training instability. Our experimental studies further reveal that the bias in semi-supervised learning arises from both
the problem itself and the inappropriate training with potentially incorrect pseudo
labels, which accumulates the error in the iterative self-training process. To reduce
the above bias, we propose Debiased Self-Training (DST). First, the generation and
utilization of pseudo labels are decoupled by two parameter-independent classifier
heads to avoid direct error accumulation. Second, we estimate the worst case
of self-training bias, where the pseudo labeling function is accurate on labeled
samples, yet makes as many mistakes as possible on unlabeled samples. We then
adversarially optimize the representations to improve the quality of pseudo labels
by avoiding the worst case. Extensive experiments justify that DST achieves an
average improvement of 6.3% against state-of-the-art methods on standard semisupervised learning benchmark datasets and 18.9% against FixMatch on 13 diverse
tasks. Furthermore, DST can be seamlessly adapted to other self-training methods
and help stabilize their training and balance performance across classes in both
cases of training from scratch and finetuning from pre-trained models.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved great success in many machine learning problems in the past decades,
especially where large-scale labeled datasets are present. In real-world applications, however,
manually labeling sufficient data is time-consuming and labor-exhaustive. To reduce the requirement
for labeled data, semi-supervised learning (SSL) improves the data efficiency of deep models by
learning from a few labeled samples and a large number of unlabeled samples [20, 30, 51, 7]. Among
them, self-training is an effective approach to deal with the lack of labeled data. Typical self-training
methods [30, 47] assign pseudo labels to unlabeled samples with the model’s predictions and then
iteratively train the model with these pseudo labeled samples as if they were labeled examples.
Although self-training has achieved great advances in benchmark datasets, they still exhibit large
training instability and extreme performance imbalance across classes. For instance, the accuracy of
FixMatch [47], one of the state-of-the-art self-training methods, fluctuates greatly when trained from
scratch (see Figure 7). Though its performance will gradually recover after a sudden sharp drop, this
is still not expected, since pre-trained models are more often adopted [14, 7, 24] are improve data
efficiency, and the performance of pre-trained models is difficult to recover after a drastic decline due
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

