Self-Supervised Learning via
Maximum Entropy Coding

Xin Liu
Zhongdao Wang
Yali Li
Shengjin Wang∗
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
{xinliu20, wcd17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
A mainstream type of current self-supervised learning methods pursues a generalpurpose representation that can be well transferred to downstream tasks, typically
by optimizing on a given pretext task such as instance discrimination. In this work,
we argue that existing pretext tasks inevitably introduce biases into the learned
representation, which in turn leads to biased transfer performance on various
downstream tasks. To cope with this issue, we propose Maximum Entropy Coding (MEC), a more principled objective that explicitly optimizes on the structure
of the representation, so that the learned representation is less biased and thus generalizes better to unseen downstream tasks. Inspired by the principle of maximum
entropy in information theory, we hypothesize that a generalizable representation
should be the one that admits the maximum entropy among all plausible representations. To make the objective end-to-end trainable, we propose to leverage the
minimal coding length in lossy data coding as a computationally tractable surrogate
for the entropy, and further derive a scalable reformulation of the objective that
allows fast computation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MEC learns a
more generalizable representation than previous methods based on specific pretext
tasks. It achieves state-of-the-art performance consistently on various downstream
tasks, including not only ImageNet linear probe, but also semi-supervised classification, object detection, instance segmentation, and object tracking. Interestingly,
we show that existing batch-wise and feature-wise self-supervised objectives could
be seen equivalent to low-order approximations of MEC. Code and pre-trained
models are available at https://github.com/xinliu20/MEC.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) aims to learn rich and meaningful representations without relying
on human annotations. Pursuing general-purpose representations, SSL models are typically used as
pre-trained weights for providing a good initialization to downstream tasks. In this sense, SSL [12,
31, 10, 29, 15, 14, 86, 30] has seen great progress in computer vision, and can achieve competitive or
even better performance on various downstream tasks compared to its supervised counterparts.
At the core of current SSL methods is the design of pretext tasks. A pretext task is a (usually
hand-crafted) learning objective in which the supervision signals could be mined from the data itself,
with the aim of applying the learned representation to other downstream tasks. Early attempts of
pretext tasks typically discard a certain property of the input data and then force the model to predict
the discarded property. For instance, one can convert an RGB image to a gray-scale one, and train the
model to predict the original color [87, 88]; or apply random rotation to image patches and ask the
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

