Oracle Inequalities for Model Selection
in Offline Reinforcement Learning
Jonathan N. Lee
Stanford University
jnl@stanford.edu
Ofir Nachum
Google Research
ofirnachum@google.com

George Tucker
Google Research
gjt@google.com

Bo Dai
Google Research
bodai@google.com

Emma Brunskill
Stanford University
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In offline reinforcement learning (RL), a learner leverages prior logged data to
learn a good policy without interacting with the environment. A major challenge
in applying such methods in practice is the lack of both theoretically principled and
practical tools for model selection and evaluation. To address this, we study the
problem of model selection in offline RL with value function approximation. The
learner is given a nested sequence of model classes to minimize squared Bellman
error and must select among these to achieve a balance between approximation and
estimation error of the classes. We propose the first model selection algorithm for
offline RL that achieves minimax rate-optimal oracle inequalities up to logarithmic
factors. The algorithm, M OD BE, takes as input a collection of candidate model
classes and a generic base offline RL algorithm. By successively eliminating
model classes using a novel one-sided generalization test, M OD BE returns a policy
with regret scaling with the complexity of the minimally complete model class. In
addition to its theoretical guarantees, it is conceptually simple and computationally
efficient, amounting to solving a series of square loss regression problems and then
comparing relative square loss between classes. We conclude with several numerical
simulations showing it is capable of reliably selecting a good model class.1

1

Introduction

Model selection is a fundamental task in supervised learning and statistical learning theory. Given
a sequence of model classes, the goal is to optimally balance the approximation error (bias) and
estimation error (variance) offered by the potential model class choices, even though the best model
class is not known in advance. Model selection algorithms are extremely well-studied in learning
theory (Massart, 2007; Lugosi and Nobel, 1999; Bartlett et al., 2002; Bartlett, 2008), and methods
like cross-validation have become essential steps for practitioners.
In recent years, interest has turned to model selection in decision-making problems like bandits and reinforcement learning. A number of theoretical works have studied the online setting (Agarwal et al., 2017;
Foster et al., 2019; Pacchiano et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021a; Modi et al., 2020; Chatterji et al., 2020;
Muthukumar and Krishnamurthy, 2021). Similar to the bias-variance balance in supervised learning,
these algorithms typically aim to select the model class with smallest statistical complexity that contains
the true model. Despite these recent efforts, the current understanding of model selection in offline
(or batch) reinforcement learning (RL) is comparatively nascent. Offline RL is a paradigm where the
1

Supplementary material is available at: https://sites.google.com/stanford.edu/offline-model-selection.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

