SInGE: Sparsity via Integrated Gradients Estimation
of Neuron Relevance
Edouard Yvinec1,2 , Arnaud Dapogny2 , Matthieu Cord1 , Kevin Bailly1,2
Sorbonne Université1 , CNRS, ISIR, f-75005, 4 Place Jussieu 75005 Paris, France
Datakalab2 , 114 boulevard Malesherbes, 75017 Paris, France
ey@datakalab.com

Abstract
The leap in performance in state-of-the-art computer vision methods is attributed
to the development of deep neural networks. However it often comes at a computational price which may hinder their deployment. To alleviate this limitation,
structured pruning is a well known technique which consists in removing channels,
neurons or filters, and is commonly applied in order to produce more compact
models. In most cases, the computations to remove are selected based on a relative
importance criterion. At the same time, the need for explainable predictive models
has risen tremendously and motivated the development of robust attribution methods that highlight the relative importance of pixels of an input image or feature
map. In this work, we discuss the limitations of existing pruning heuristics, among
which magnitude and gradient-based methods. We draw inspiration from attribution methods to design a novel integrated gradient pruning criterion, in which the
relevance of each neuron is defined as the integral of the gradient variation on a
path towards this neuron removal. Furthermore, we propose an entwined DNN
pruning and fine-tuning flowchart to better preserve DNN accuracy while removing
parameters. We show through extensive validation on several datasets, architectures
as well as pruning scenarios that the proposed method, dubbed SInGE , significantly
outperforms existing state-of-the-art DNN pruning methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are ubiquitous in modern solutions for most computer vision problems
such as image classification [1], object detection [2] and semantic segmentation [3]. However, this
performance was achieved at the price of high computational requirements and memory foot-print.
As such, over-parameterization [4] is a common trait of well performing DNNs that may hinder their
deployment on mobile and embedded devices. Furthermore, in the case of deployment on a cloud
environment, latency and energy consumption are of paramount importance.
Consequently, compression and acceleration techniques aim at tackling the issue of DNN deployment.
Among these methods, pruning approaches consist in removing individual weights (unstructured
pruning) or entire computational blocks, such as neurons channels or filters (structured pruning)
[5, 6, 7, 8]. The sparsity induced by pruning reduces both the computational cost and the memory
foot-print of neural networks. To do so, there exists a wide variety of heuristics behind such pruning
techniques. A few examples are: pruning at initialization [9], grid search [10, 11], magnitude-based
[12] or redundancy based [7, 13] approaches. Among such heuristics, magnitude-based pruning
remains the favoured one [14, 15, 16]. It consists in defining a metric to assess the relevance of
each neuron in the network, with the goal to remove the least important ones while still preserving
the predictive function as much as possible. An important limitation of these methods lies in the
choice of this importance criterion: magnitude-based criteria [17] do not take into account the whole
computations performed in the network (e.g. within the other layers) and gradient-based [18] criteria
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

