No-regret learning in games with noisy feedback:
Faster rates and adaptivity via learning rate separation
Yu-Guan Hsieh∗
yu-guan.hsieh@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr

Kimon Antonakopoulos†
kimon.antonakopoulos@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher†
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Panayotis Mertikopoulos∗‡
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
We examine the problem of regret minimization when the learner is involved
in a continuous game with other optimizing agents: in this case, if all players
follow a no-regret algorithm, it is possible to achieve significantly lower regret
relative to fully adversarial environments. We study this problem in the context of
variationally stable games (a class of continuous games which includes all convexconcave and monotone games), and when the players only have access to noisy
estimates of their individual payoff gradients. If the noise is additive, the gametheoretic and purely adversarial settings enjoy similar regret guarantees; however,
if the noise is multiplicative, we show that the learners can, in fact, achieve constant
regret. We achieve this faster rate via an optimistic gradient scheme with learning
rate separation – that is, the method’s extrapolation and update steps are tuned to
different schedules, depending on the noise profile. Subsequently, to eliminate the
need for delicate hyperparameter tuning, we propose a fully adaptive method that
attains nearly the same guarantees as its non-adapted counterpart, while operating
without knowledge of either the game or of the noise profile.

1

Introduction

Owing to its simplicity and versatility, the notion of regret has been the mainstay of online learning
ever since the field’s first steps [6, 17]. Stated abstractly, it concerns processes of the following form:
1. At each stage t = 1, 2, . . . , the learner selects an action xt from some d-dimensional real space.
2. The environment determines a convex loss function ℓt and the learner incurs a loss of ℓt (xt ).
3. Based on this loss (and any other piece of information revealed), the learner updates their action
xt ← xt+1 and the process repeats.
In this general setting, the agent’s regret RegT is defined as the difference between the cumulative
loss incurred by the sequence xt , t = 1, 2, . . . , T , versus that of the best fixed action over the horizon
of play T . Accordingly, the learner’s objective is to minimize the growth rate of RegT , guaranteeing
in this way that the chosen sequence of actions becomes asymptotically efficient over time.
Without further assumptions on the learner’s environment or the type of loss√
functions encountered,
it is not possible to go beyond the well-known minimax regret bound of Ω( T ) [18, 37], which is
achieved by the online gradient descent (OGD) policy of Zinkevich [39]. However, this lower bound
concerns environments that are “adversarial” and loss functions that may vary arbitrarily from one
stage to the next: if the environment is “smoother” – and not actively seeking to sabotage the learner’s
efforts – one could plausibly expect faster regret minimization rates.
∗

Univ. Grenoble Alpes
EPFL
‡
CNRS, Inria, LIG & Criteo AI Lab
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

