Rate-Distortion Theoretic Bounds on
Generalization Error for Distributed Learning
Milad Sefidgaran ∤ , Romain Chor ∤ , Abdellatif Zaidi : ∤
∤
Paris Research Center, Huawei Technologies France
: Université Paris-Est, Champs-sur-Marne 77454, France
{milad.sefidgaran2, romain.chor}@huawei.com, abdellatif.zaidi@u-pem.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we use tools from rate-distortion theory to establish new upper
bounds on the generalization error of statistical distributed learning algorithms.
Specifically, there are K clients whose individually chosen models are aggregated
by a central server. The bounds depend on the compressibility of each client’s
algorithm while keeping other clients’ algorithms un-compressed, and leveraging
the fact that small changes in each local model change the aggregated model by a
factor of only 1{K. Adopting a recently proposed approach by Sefidgaran et al.,
and extending it suitably to the distributed setting, enables smaller rate-distortion
terms which are shown to translate into tighter generalization bounds. The bounds
are then applied to the distributed support vector machines (SVM), suggesting
that the generalization error of the distributed
setting decays faster than that of the
a
centralized one with a factor of Op logpK q{K q. This finding is validated also
experimentally. A similar conclusion is obtained for a multiple-round federated
learning setup where each client uses stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics
(SGLD).

1

Introduction

A key performance indicator of any stochastic learning algorithm that uses a given finite set of data
points is how well it performs on points that are outside that set, i.e., unseen data. This is often captured
through the so-called generalization error. The questions of what really controls the generalization
error of a given stochastic algorithm, and how to make it sufficiently small, are still not yet well
understood, however. For example, while classic approaches [SSBD14] suggest that algorithms with
over-parameterized models are likely to overfit, it is now known that there exist a few such ones which
do generalize well [ZBH 17]. Common approaches to studying the generalization error of a statistical
learning algorithm often consider the effective hypothesis space induced by the algorithm, rather
than the entire hypothesis space, or the information leakage about the training dataset. Examples
include information-theoretic (mutual information) approaches [RZ16, XR17, HRVSG21, HDMR21,
NHD 20, SZ20], compression-based approaches [AGNZ18, SAN20, HJTW21, BSE 21, KLG 21]
and intrinsic-dimension or fractal based approaches [ŞSDE20, BLGŞ21, HŞKM21]. Recently, a
novel approach [SGRS22] that generalizes the notion of algorithm compressibility by using lossy
covering from source coding concepts was used to show that the compression error rate of an algorithm
is strongly connected to its generalization error both in-expectation and with high probability; and,
consequently, establish new rate-distortion-based bounds on the generalization error. The bounds
of [SGRS22] were shown to possibly improve strictly upon those of [XR17, BZV20] and [SZ20]. The
approach also has the advantage to offer a unifying perspective on mutual information, compressibility,
and fractal-based frameworks.
Another major focus of machine learning research over recent years has been the study of statistical
learning algorithms when applied in distributed (network or graph) settings. In part, this is due to the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

