Lethal Dose Conjecture on Data Poisoning

Wenxiao Wang, Alexander Levine and Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
{wwx, alevine0, sfeizi}@umd.edu

Abstract
Data poisoning considers an adversary that distorts the training set of machine
learning algorithms for malicious purposes. In this work, we bring to light one
conjecture regarding the fundamentals of data poisoning, which we call the Lethal
Dose Conjecture. The conjecture states: If n clean training samples are needed for
accurate predictions, then in a size-N training set, only Θ(N/n) poisoned samples
can be tolerated while ensuring accuracy. Theoretically, we verify this conjecture
in multiple cases. We also offer a more general perspective of this conjecture
through distribution discrimination. Deep Partition Aggregation (DPA) and its
extension, Finite Aggregation (FA) are recent approaches for provable defenses
against data poisoning, where they predict through the majority vote of many base
models trained from different subsets of training set using a given learner. The
conjecture implies that both DPA and FA are (asymptotically) optimal—if we
have the most data-efficient learner, they can turn it into one of the most robust
defenses against data poisoning. This outlines a practical approach to developing
stronger defenses against poisoning via finding data-efficient learners. Empirically,
as a proof of concept, we show that by simply using different data augmentations
for base learners, we can respectively double and triple the certified robustness of
DPA on CIFAR-10 and GTSRB without sacrificing accuracy.

1

Introduction

With the increasing popularity of machine learning and especially deep learning, concerns about the
reliability of training data have also increased: typically, because of the availability of data, many
training samples have to be collected from users, internet websites, or other potentially malicious
sources for satisfying utilities. This motivates the development of the data poisoning threat model,
which focuses on the reliability of models trained from adversarially distorted data [13].
Data poisoning is a class of training-time adversarial attacks: The adversary is given the ability to
insert and remove a bounded number of training samples to manipulate the behavior (e.g. predictions
for some target samples) of models trained using the resulted, poisoned dataset. Models trained from
the poisoned dataset are referred to as poisoned models and the allowed number of insertion and
removal is the attack size.
To challenge the reliability of poisoned models, many variants of poisoning attacks have been
proposed, including triggerless attacks [28, 37, 1, 12], which do not modify target samples, and
backdoor attacks [5, 32, 27], which modify them. In addition, in cases where the adversary can
achieve its goal with a non-negligible
probability by doing nothing, a theoretical study [23] discovers
√
a provable attack replacing Õ( N ) samples in a size-N training set. Meanwhile, defenses against
data poisoning are also emerging, including detection-based defenses [30, 10, 25, 31, 33], trying
to identify poisoned samples, and training-based defenses [35, 26, 22, 15, 20, 17, 4, 34], aiming at
robustifying models trained from poisoned data.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

