Synergy-of-Experts: Collaborate to Improve
Adversarial Robustness
Sen Cui1* , Jingfeng Zhang2* , Jian Liang3 , Bo Han4 , Masashi Sugiyama2,5 , Changshui Zhang1
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Automation,Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R.China
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan
3
Alibaba Group, China
4
Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
5
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
cuis19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
jingfeng.zhang@riken.jp
xuelang.lj@alibaba-inc.com
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning adversarially robust models requires invariant predictions to a small
neighborhood of its natural inputs, often encountering insufficient model capacity.
There is research showing that learning multiple sub-models in an ensemble could
mitigate this insufficiency, further improving the generalization and the robustness.
However, the ensemble’s voting-based strategy excludes the possibility that the true
predictions remain with the minority. Therefore, this paper further improves the
ensemble through a collaboration scheme—Synergy-of-Experts (SoE). Compared
with the voting-based strategy, the SoE enables the possibility of correct predictions
even if there exists a single correct sub-model. In SoE, every sub-model fits its
specific vulnerability area and reserves the rest of the sub-models to fit other
vulnerability areas, which effectively optimizes the utilization of the model capacity.
Empirical experiments verify that SoE outperforms various ensemble methods
against white-box and transfer-based adversarial attacks. The source codes are
available at https://github.com/cuis15/synergy-of-experts.

1

Introduction

Deep models have been widely applied in various real-world applications including high-stakes
scenarios (such as in healthcare, finance, and autonomous driving). An increasing concern is whether
these models make adversarially robust decisions [1, 2]. Recently, there are research revealing that
an adversarially robust method requires invariant predictions to a small neighborhood of its natural
inputs, thus often encountering insufficient model capacity [3, 4]. This limits the further improvement
of robustness and has the undesirable degradation of generalization [5].
Learning multiple sub-models in an ensemble [6, 7] can mitigate this insufficiency. Remarkably,
there are research [8, 9, 10] proposing to minimize the vulnerability overlaps between each pair of
sub-models and improving both robustness and generalization over a single model. However, the
voting-based ensemble may waste the limited capacity of multiple models.
In the example of three sub-models (see Figure 1(b)), the adversarial input that lies in the black areas
can fool the ensemble successfully, i.e., more than half of sub-models must correctly classify the
adversarial input. Therefore, the ensemble’s voting-based strategy excludes the possibility that true
∗The first two authors have made equal contributions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

