CLIPDraw: Exploring Text-to-Drawing Synthesis
through Language-Image Encoders
Kevin Frans
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
Cross Labs, Cross Compass Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
kvfrans@csail.mit.edu
L. B. Soros
Cross Labs, Cross Compass Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
Olaf Witkowski
Cross Labs, Cross Compass Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
Earth-Life Science Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
College of Arts and Sciences, University of Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
CLIPDraw is an algorithm that synthesizes novel drawings from natural language
input. It does not require any additional training; rather, a pre-trained CLIP
language-image encoder is used as a metric for maximizing similarity between the
given description and a generated drawing. Crucially, CLIPDraw operates over
vector strokes rather than pixel images, which biases drawings towards simpler
human-recognizable shapes. Results compare CLIPDraw with other synthesisthrough-optimization methods, as well as highlight various interesting behaviors
of CLIPDraw, such as satisfying ambiguous text in multiple ways, reliably producing drawings in diverse styles, and scaling from simple to complex visual
representations as stroke count increases.

1

Introduction

When humans hear a description of a scene, it’s easy to imagine what it may look like. Conversely,
when we construct a mental image, it’s easy to then describe that scene. At some level, humans have
a deeply coupled representation for textual and visual structures key to understanding our world.
The recent introduction of CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), a dual language-image encoder, is a large
step towards unifying textual and visual information. In a CLIP model, both text and images are
mapped onto the same representational space, thus enabling the similarity between images and textual
descriptions to be measured. When trained on large amounts of data, CLIP representations have been
shown to solve a robust range of image-based recognition tasks.
This work presents CLIPDraw, an algorithm that synthesizes novel drawings based on natural
language input. CLIPDraw does not require any training; rather a pre-trained CLIP model is used as
a metric for maximizing similarity between the given description and a generated drawing. Rather
than photorealistic images, CLIPDraw aims to synthesize simple drawings that nevertheless match
the prompt. Thus, CLIPDraw optimizes a set of vector strokes rather than pixel images, a constraint
that biases drawings towards simple human-recognizable shapes.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

