TCT: Convexifying Federated Learning using
Bootstrapped Neural Tangent Kernels
Yaodong Yu
UC Berkeley
yyu@eecs.berkeley.edu

Alexander Wei
UC Berkeley
awei@berkeley.edu

Yi Ma
UC Berkeley
yima@eecs.berkeley.edu

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy
UC Berkeley
sp.karimireddy@berkeley.edu
Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
State-of-the-art federated learning methods can perform far worse than their centralized counterparts when clients have dissimilar data distributions. For neural
networks, even when centralized SGD easily finds a solution that is simultaneously
performant for all clients, current federated optimization methods fail to converge
to a comparable solution. We show that this performance disparity can largely be
attributed to optimization challenges presented by nonconvexity. Specifically, we
find that the early layers of the network do learn useful features, but the final layers
fail to make use of them. That is, federated optimization applied to this non-convex
problem distorts the learning of the final layers. Leveraging this observation, we
propose a Train-Convexify-Train (TCT) procedure to sidestep this issue: first, learn
features using off-the-shelf methods (e.g., FedAvg); then, optimize a convexified
problem obtained from the network’s empirical neural tangent kernel approximation. Our technique yields accuracy improvements of up to +36% on FMNIST and
+37% on CIFAR10 when clients have dissimilar data.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a newly emerging paradigm for machine learning where multiple data holders
(clients) collaborate to train a model on their combined dataset. Clients only share partially trained
models and other statistics computed from their dataset, keeping their raw data local and private [53,
37]. By obviating the need for a third party to collect and store clients’ data, federated learning has
several advantages over the classical, centralized paradigm [14, 31, 23]: it ensures clients’ consent is
tied to the specific task at hand by requiring active participation of the clients in training, confers
some basic level of privacy, and has the potential to make machine learning more participatory in
general [43, 36]. Further, widespread legislation of data portability and privacy requirements (such as
GDPR and CCPA) might even make federated learning a necessity [59].
Collaboration among clients is most attractive when clients have very different subsets of the combined
dataset (data heterogeneity). For example, different autonomous driving companies may only be able
to collect data in weather conditions specific to their location, whereas their vehicles would need
to function under all conditions. In such a scenario, it would be mutually beneficial for companies
in geographically diverse locations to collaborate and share data with each other. Further, in such
settings, clients are physically separated and connected by ad-hoc networks with large latencies and
limited bandwidth. This is especially true when clients are edge devices such as mobile phones, IoT
sensors, etc. Thus, communication efficiency is crucial for practical federated learning. However, it is
precisely under such circumstances (large data heterogeneity and low communication) that current
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

