The Burer-Monteiro SDP method can fail even above
the Barvinok-Pataki bound
Liam O’Carroll
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
liamocarroll2023@u.northwestern.edu

Vaidehi Srinivas
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
vaidehi@u.northwestern.edu

Aravindan Vijayaraghavan
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
aravindv@northwestern.edu

Abstract
The most widely used technique for solving large-scale semidefinite programs
(SDPs) in practice is the non-convex Burer-Monteiro method, which explicitly
maintains a low-rank SDP solution for memory efficiency. There has been much
recent interest in obtaining a better theoretical understanding of the Burer-Monteiro
method. When the maximum allowed rank p of the SDP solution is above the
Barvinok-Pataki bound (where a globally optimal solution of rank at most p is
guaranteed to exist), a recent line of work established convergence to a global
optimum for generic or smoothed instances of the problem. However, it was open
whether there even exists an instance in this regime where the Burer-Monteiro
method fails. We prove that the Burer-Monteiro method can fail for the Max-Cut
p
SDP on n vertices when the rank is above the Barvinok-Pataki bound (p
2n).
We provide a family of instances that have spurious local minima even when the
rank p = n/2. Combined with existing guarantees, this settles the question of the
existence of spurious local minima for the Max-Cut formulation in all ranges of the
rank and justifies the use of beyond worst-case paradigms like smoothed analysis
to obtain guarantees for the Burer-Monteiro method.

1

Introduction

Semidefinite programs (SDPs) are a powerful algorithmic tool with wide-ranging applications in
combinatorial optimization, control theory, machine learning and operations research. Notably, they
yield optimal approximation algorithms for NP-hard problems like Max-Cut [GW95] and other
constraint satisfaction problems [Rag08]. While interior-point algorithms and the ellipsoid method
give polynomial time guarantees for solving semidefinite programs, memory becomes a bottleneck for
relatively modest instance sizes. This has prompted research into scalable semidefinite programming
algorithms—see [MHA20] for a recent survey.
One of the most popular methods for solving SDPs in practice is the one pioneered by Burer and
Monteiro [BM03, BM05], which explicitly constrains the rank of the SDP solution for efficiency.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

