coVariance Neural Networks
Saurabh Sihag
University of Pennsylvania
sihags@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Gonzalo Mateos
University of Rochester
gmateosb@ece.rochester.edu

Corey McMillan
University of Pennsylvania
cmcmilla@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
University of Pennsylvania
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNN) are an effective framework that exploit interrelationships within graph-structured data for learning. Principal component analysis (PCA) involves the projection of data on the eigenspace of the covariance matrix
and draws similarities with the graph convolutional filters in GNNs. Motivated by
this observation, we study a GNN architecture, called coVariance neural network
(VNN), that operates on sample covariance matrices as graphs. We theoretically
establish the stability of VNNs to perturbations in the covariance matrix, thus,
implying an advantage over standard PCA-based data analysis approaches that are
prone to instability due to principal components associated with close eigenvalues. Our experiments on real-world datasets validate our theoretical results and
show that VNN performance is indeed more stable than PCA-based statistical approaches. Moreover, our experiments on multi-resolution datasets also demonstrate
that VNNs are amenable to transferability of performance over covariance matrices
of different dimensions; a feature that is infeasible for PCA-based approaches.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are among the most popular deep learning (DL) architectures due to their demonstrated ability to learn latent features from Euclidean data adaptively and
automatically [1]. Motivated by the fact that graph models can naturally represent data in many
practical applications [2], the generalizations of CNNs to adapt to graph data using GNN architectures
have rapidly emerged in recent years [3]. A practical challenge to DL architectures is scalability to
high-dimensional data [4]. Specifically, DL models can typically have millions of parameters that
require long training times and high storage capacity [5]. GNN architectures have two attractive
features towards learning from high-dimensional data: 1. the number of parameters associated
with graph convolution operations in GNNs is independent of the graph size; and 2. under certain
assumptions, GNN performance can be transferred across graphs of different dimensions [6].
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a traditional, non-parametric approach for linear dimensionality reduction and increase of interpretability of high dimensional datasets [7]. Accordingly, it is
common to embed the PCA transform within a DL pipeline [4, 8, 9]. Such approaches usually use
PCA to optimize the DL model parameters by removing redundancy in the features in intermediate
layers. The scope of our work is different. In this paper, we leverage the connections between PCA
and the mathematical concepts used in GNNs to propose a learning framework that can recover PCA
and also, inherit additional desirable features associated with GNNs.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

