NeuPhysics: Editable Neural Geometry and Physics
from Monocular Videos
Yi-Ling Qiao†

Alexander Gao† Ming C. Lin

University of Maryland, College Park
†
Equal Contribution

Abstract
We present a method for learning 3D geometry and physics parameters of a dynamic
scene from only a monocular RGB video input. To decouple the learning of
underlying scene geometry from dynamic motion, we represent the scene as a
time-invariant signed distance function (SDF) which serves as a reference frame,
along with a time-conditioned deformation field. We further bridge this neural
geometry representation with a differentiable physics simulator by designing a twoway conversion between the neural field and its corresponding hexahedral mesh,
enabling us to estimate physics parameters from the source video by minimizing
a cycle consistency loss. Our method also allows a user to interactively edit 3D
objects from the source video by modifying the recovered hexahedral mesh, and
propagating the operation back to the neural field representation. Experiments
show that our method achieves superior mesh and video reconstruction of dynamic
scenes compared to competing Neural Field approaches, and we provide extensive
examples which demonstrate its ability to extract useful 3D representations from
videos captured with consumer-grade cameras.

1

Introduction

Monocular RGB videos are ubiquitous today, and computers’ ability to understand spatial and
physical properties embedded in their contents is essential for many applications. Can you imagine
one day being able to build a fully-interactive digital twin of your surrounding world using just
a smartphone? You could capture a moving, fully 3D portrait of yourself (Sec. 4.1), estimate the
physical material parameters of objects and interact with them virtually (Sec. 4.3), playback existing
recordings from new angles (Sec. 4.2), or even edit your favorite cartoon videos (Sec. 4.4). In this
paper, we design a system that makes progress toward realizing all of these things. Taking a single
RGB video as input, our method estimates the geometry and dynamics parameters of the scene,
parameterized by neural fields [37], and enables subsequent editing and physically-based simulation.
While humans can easily infer 3D shapes and physical properties of their environment even from a
single eye, these tasks remain challenging for computer algorithms. Geometry reconstruction from a
single view is an intrinsically under-constrained problem: there is usually more than one 3D structure
that could result in a given 2D projection of a scene. Another key challenge lies in choosing a suitable
representation to model the complex geometry of the real world. Explicit representations like surface
mesh [4, 38] are widely used in computer graphics, but they suffer from limited resolution and
fixed topology. Implicit representations such as signed distance functions (SDFs) describe complex
geometric structure more elegantly, but are not directly suitable for reasoning about dynamics
properties. Estimating dynamics parameters is yet more challenging, since it is contingent upon
correctly estimating geometry and its variation over time.
In this paper, we design an end-to-end differentiable rendering and simulation pipeline that can
directly learn the geometry and dynamics from a monocular video. By assuming the existence of a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

