Biologically plausible solutions for spiking networks
with efficient coding

Veronika Koren
Department of Excellence for Neural Information Processing
Center for Molecular Neurobiology (ZMNH)
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE)
Falkenried 94, 20251 Hamburg, Germany
v.koren@uke.de
Stefano Panzeri
Department of Excellence for Neural Information Processing
Center for Molecular Neurobiology (ZMNH)
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE)
Falkenried 94, 20251 Hamburg, Germany
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Genoa, Italy
s.panzeri@uke.de

Abstract
Understanding how the dynamics of neural networks is shaped by the computations
they perform is a fundamental question in neuroscience. Recently, the framework
of efficient coding proposed a theory of how spiking neural networks can compute
low-dimensional stimulus signals with high efficiency. Efficient spiking networks
are based on time-dependent minimization of a loss function related to information
coding with spikes. To inform the understanding of the function and dynamics
of biological networks in the brain, however, the mathematical models have to
be informed by biology and obey the same constraints as biological networks.
Currently, spiking network models of efficient coding have been extended to include
some features of biological plausibility, such as architectures with excitatory and
inhibitory neurons. However, biological realism of efficient coding theories is
still limited to simple cases and does not include single neuron and network
properties that are known to be key in biological circuits. Here, we revisit the
theory of efficient coding with spikes to develop spiking neural networks that are
closer to biological circuits. Namely, we find a biologically plausible spiking
model realizing efficient coding in the case of a generalized leaky integrate-andfire network with excitatory and inhibitory units, equipped with fast and slow
synaptic currents, local homeostatic currents such as spike-triggered adaptation,
hyperpolarization-activated rebound current, heterogeneous firing thresholds and
resets, heterogeneous postsynaptic potentials, and structured, low-rank connectivity.
We show how the complexity of E-E connectivity matrix shapes network responses.

1

Introduction

Complex biological systems are thought to be shaped through evolution to perform optimally a set of
desired functions within the constraints of their biological features. A bulk of previous influential
work [34, 25, 9] has proposed that the organization of the mammalian cortex, the most sophisticated
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

