Generalization Analysis of Message Passing Neural
Networks on Large Random Graphs

Sohir Maskey∗
Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich†
maskey@math.lmu.de

Ron Levie∗
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology ‡
levieron@technion.ac.il

Yunseok Lee
Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich†
ylee@math.lmu.de

Gitta Kutyniok
Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich†
University of Tromsø§
kutyniok@math.lmu.de

Abstract
Message passing neural networks (MPNN) have seen a steep rise in popularity
since their introduction as generalizations of convolutional neural networks to
graph structured data, and are now considered state-of-the-art tools for solving
a large variety of graph-focused problems. We study the generalization error of
MPNNs in graph classification and regression. We assume that graphs of different
classes are sampled from different random graph models. We show that, when
training a MPNN on a dataset sampled from such a distribution, the generalization
gap increases in the complexity of the MPNN, and decreases, not only with respect
to the number of training samples, but also with the average number of nodes in
the graphs. This shows how a MPNN with high complexity can generalize from a
small dataset of graphs, as long as the graphs are large. The generalization bound
is derived from a uniform convergence result, that shows that any MPNN, applied
on a graph, approximates the MPNN applied on the geometric model that the graph
discretizes.

1

Introduction

A graph is an abstract structure that represents a set of objects along with the connections that exist
between those objects. In many important fields, such as chemistry, biology, social networks, or
computer graphics, data can be described by graphs. This has led to a tremendous interest in the
development of machine learning models for graph-structured data in recent years. A ubiquitous tool
for processing such data are graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs), which extend standard
Euclidean convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to graph-structured data.
Most GCNNs used in practice can be described using the general architecture of Message Passing
Neural Networks (MPNNs). MPNNs generalize the convolution operator to graph domains by a
(t−1)
neighborhood aggregation or message passing scheme. By fi
denoting the feature of node i in
layer t − 1 and ej,i denoting edge features from node j to i, one layer in a message passing graph
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work
Department of Mathematics, LMU Munich, 80333 Munich, Germany
‡
Faculty of Mathematics, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, 32000 Haifa, Israel
§
Department of Physics and Technology, University of Tromsø, 9019 Tromsø, Norway
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

