Picking on the Same Person:
Does Algorithmic
Monoculture lead to Outcome Homogenization?

Rishi Bommasani∗
Computer Science
Stanford University
nlprishi@stanford.edu

Kathleen A. Creel
Philosophy, Computer Science
Northeastern University
k.creel@northeastern.edu

Dan Jurafsky
Linguistics, Computer Science
Stanford University
jurafsky@stanford.edu

Ananya Kumar
Computer Science
Stanford University
ananya@cs.stanford.edu

Percy Liang
Computer Science
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
As the scope of machine learning broadens, we observe a recurring theme of
algorithmic monoculture: the same systems, or systems that share components
(e.g. datasets, models), are deployed by multiple decision-makers. While sharing
offers advantages like amortizing effort, it also has risks. We introduce and formalize
one such risk, outcome homogenization: the extent to which particular individuals
or groups experience the same outcomes across different deployments. If the
same individuals or groups exclusively experience undesirable outcomes, this
may institutionalize systemic exclusion and reinscribe social hierarchy. We relate
algorithmic monoculture and outcome homogenization by proposing the component
sharing hypothesis: if algorithmic systems are increasingly built on the same data or
models, then they will increasingly homogenize outcomes. We test this hypothesis
on algorithmic fairness benchmarks, demonstrating that increased data-sharing
reliably exacerbates homogenization and individual-level effects generally exceed
group-level effects. Further, given the current regime in AI of foundation models, i.e.,
pretrained models that can be adapted to myriad downstream tasks, we test whether
model-sharing homogenizes outcomes across tasks. We observe mixed results: we
find that for both vision and language settings, the specific methods for adapting
a foundation model significantly influence the degree of outcome homogenization.
We also identify societal challenges that inhibit the measurement, diagnosis, and
rectification of outcome homogenization in deployed machine learning systems.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is built on strong traditions of sharing: we share datasets (e.g. ImageNet), models
(e.g. BERT), libraries (e.g. PyTorch), optimizers (e.g. Adam), evaluations (e.g. SuperGLUE) and much
more. This ethos of sharing serves the field well: we are able to repeatedly capitalize on the effort
required to build high-quality assets (e.g. ImageNet has supported thousands of researchers in computer
vision), and improvements to these assets have sweeping benefits (e.g. BERT raised all boats in NLP).
Yet does sharing also have risks? Could this central tenet of the field lead to undesirable outcomes?
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

