Gradient Descent: The Ultimate Optimizer
Kartik Chandra⇤
MIT CSAIL†
Cambridge, MA

kach@csail.mit.edu

Audrey Xie⇤
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
ahx@mit.edu

Jonathan Ragan-Kelley
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
jrk@csail.mit.edu

Erik Meijer
Meta, Inc.
Menlo Park, CA
erikm@fb.com

Abstract
Working with any gradient-based machine learning algorithm involves the tedious
task of tuning the optimizer’s hyperparameters, such as its step size. Recent work
has shown how the step size can itself be optimized alongside the model parameters
by manually deriving expressions for “hypergradients” ahead of time.
We show how to automatically compute hypergradients with a simple and elegant
modification to backpropagation. This allows us to easily apply the method to
other optimizers and hyperparameters (e.g. momentum coefficients). We can even
recursively apply the method to its own hyper-hyperparameters, and so on ad infinitum. As these towers of optimizers grow taller, they become less sensitive to the
initial choice of hyperparameters. We present experiments validating this for MLPs,
CNNs, and RNNs. Finally, we provide a simple PyTorch implementation of this
algorithm (see people.csail.mit.edu/kach/gradient-descent-the-ultimate-optimizer).

1

Introduction

When we train deep neural networks by gradient descent, we have to select a step size ↵ for our
optimizer. If ↵ is too small, the optimizer runs very slowly, whereas if ↵ is too large, the optimizer
fails to converge. Choosing an appropriate ↵ is thus itself an optimization task that machine learning
practitioners face every day. Why not apply gradient descent here, too? To do so, we need to compute
the derivative of the loss function not only with respect to the neural network’s weights, but also with
respect to ↵. Baydin et al. (2018), applying an insight from Almeida et al. (1999), describe how to
efficiently compute such “hypergradients” by manually differentiating standard optimizer update
rules with respect to the step size hyperparameter. This allows for on-line learning rate adaptation,
which generally improves convergence, especially when the initial ↵ is sub-optimal.
However, the above method has three limitations: (1) manually differentiating optimizer update rules
is tedious and error-prone, and must be re-done for each optimizer variant; (2) the method only tunes
the step size hyperparameter, not other hyperparameters such as the momentum coefficient; and
(3) the method introduces a new hyperparameter, the hyper-step-size, which must also be tuned.
In this paper, we address all three limitations by replacing manual differentiation with automatic
differentiation (AD), which (1) automatically computes correct derivatives without any additional
human effort, and (2) naturally generalizes to other hyperparameters (e.g. momentum coefficient)
for free. As for (3), we observe that AD can be applied to optimize not only the hyperparameters,
but also the hyper-hyperparameters, and the hyper-hyper-hyperparameters, and so on. In fact, we
can implement arbitrarily tall towers of recursive optimizers, which are increasingly robust to the
choice of initial hyperparameter. These “hyperoptimizers” therefore reduce the burden on humans
responsible for tuning the hyperparameters. (Such an effect was hypothesized by Baydin et al., but
not tested because manual differentiation of complex sequences of nested optimizers is impractical.)
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Work done in part at Meta, Inc. and in part at Stanford University.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

