Listen to Interpret: Post-hoc Interpretability for Audio
Networks with NMF
Jayneel Parekh1 Sanjeel Parekh1,2∗ Pavlo Mozharovskyi1
Florence d’Alché-Buc1 Gaël Richard1
1
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris 2 Audio Analytic
{jayneel.parekh,pavlo.mozharovskyi,florence.dalche,gael.richard}@telecom-paris.fr
sanjeel.parekh@audioanalytic.com

Abstract
This paper tackles post-hoc interpretability for audio processing networks. Our goal
is to interpret decisions of a trained network in terms of high-level audio objects
that are also listenable for the end-user. To this end, we propose a novel interpreter
design that incorporates non-negative matrix factorization (NMF). In particular,
a regularized interpreter module is trained to take hidden layer representations
of the targeted network as input and produce time activations of pre-learnt NMF
components as intermediate outputs. Our methodology allows us to generate
intuitive audio-based interpretations that explicitly enhance parts of the input signal
most relevant for a network’s decision. We demonstrate our method’s applicability
on popular benchmarks, including a real-world multi-label classification task.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models, while state-of-the-art for several tasks in domains such as computer vision,
natural language processing and audio, are typically not interpretable. Their increasing use, especially
in decision-critical domains, necessitates interpreting their decisions. A good interpretation is often
characterized by its understandability for the end users (see for instance [16]). More importantly,
attributes that aid understandability may largely be dependent on the data modality. In this paper, our
aim is to generate post-hoc human–understandable interpretations for deep networks that process the
audio modality. Here, post-hoc interpretability refers to the problem of interpreting decisions of a
fixed pre–trained network.
Traditional approaches generate interpretations through input attribution, either directly on the
raw input features or on a given simplified representation [30, 38, 36, 27]. To generate more
understandable interpretations, a small number of approaches consider other means, such as logical
rules [37], sentences [19] and high-level concepts [15].
Most existing post-hoc interpretability methods are primarily designed for application to images and
tabular data. This limits their applicability to other data modalities such as audio. Although many
audio processing networks operate on spectrogram-like representations, which can be seen as 2D
time-frequency images, a visualization or attribution in this space is not as meaningful to a common
user as it is for images [26].
This leads us to build an interpretation system that takes into account audio–specific understandability
features. We motivate these features through an example: suppose an audio event detection network
deployed in a house recognizes an “alarm” sound event. An ideal interpreter for this classification
decision would have the ability to “show” that it was indeed an alarm sound that triggered this
decision. To do so, it must be able to localize the alarm amid other events in the house (for e.g. dog
∗

Work conducted while the author was at Télécom Paris

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

