Curriculum Reinforcement Learning using Optimal
Transport via Gradual Domain Adaptation

Peide Huang, Mengdi Xu, Jiacheng Zhu, Laixi Shi, Fei Fang, Ding Zhao
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{peideh, mengdixu, jzhu4, laixis, feifang, dingzhao}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Curriculum Reinforcement Learning (CRL) aims to create a sequence of tasks,
starting from easy ones and gradually learning towards difficult tasks. In this work,
we focus on the idea of framing CRL as interpolations between a source (auxiliary)
and a target task distribution. Although existing studies have shown the great
potential of this idea, it remains unclear how to formally quantify and generate the
movement between task distributions. Inspired by the insights from gradual domain
adaptation in semi-supervised learning, we create a natural curriculum by breaking
down the potentially large task distributional shift in CRL into smaller shifts. We
propose GRADIENT, which formulates CRL as an optimal transport problem with
a tailored distance metric between tasks. Specifically, we generate a sequence of
task distributions as a geodesic interpolation (i.e., Wasserstein barycenter) between
the source and target distributions. Different from many existing methods, our
algorithm considers a task-dependent contextual distance metric and is capable
of handling nonparametric distributions in both continuous and discrete context
settings. In addition, we theoretically show that GRADIENT enables smooth
transfer between subsequent stages in the curriculum under certain conditions. We
conduct extensive experiments in locomotion and manipulation tasks and show that
our proposed GRADIENT achieves higher performance than baselines in terms of
learning efficiency and asymptotic performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1] has demonstrated great potential in solving complex decisionmaking tasks [2], including but not limited to video games [3], chess [4], and robotic manipulation
[5]. Among them, various prior works highlight daunting challenges resulting from sparse rewards.
For example, in the maze navigation task, since the agent needs to navigate from the initial position
to the goal to receive a positive reward, the task requires a large amount of randomized exploration.
One solution to address this issue is Curriculum Reinforcement Learning (CRL) [6, 7], of which the
objective is to create a sequence of environments to facilitate the learning of difficult tasks.
Although there are different interpretations of CRL, we focus on the one that views a curriculum as a
sequence of task distributions that interpolate between a source (auxiliary) task distribution and a
target task distribution [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. This interpretation allows more general presentations
of tasks and a wider range of objectives such as generalization (uniform distribution over the task
collection) or learning to complete difficult tasks (a subset of the task collection). Again we use
the maze navigation as an example. Given a fixed maze layout and goal, a task is then defined by a
start position, and the task distribution is a categorical distribution over all possible start positions.
With a target distribution putting mass over start positions far away from the goal position, a natural
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

