Deep Compression of Pre-trained Transformer
Models
Naigang Wang
Chia-Yu Chen

Chi-Chun Liu

Swagath Venkataramani

Kaoutar El Maghraoui

Sanchari Sen

Vijayalakshmi Srinivasan

Leland Chang
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
{nwang,cliu,swagath.venkataramani,sanchari.sen,
cchen,kelmaghr,viji,lelandc}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Pre-trained transformer models have achieved remarkable success in natural language processing (NLP) and have recently become competitive alternatives to
Convolution Neural Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) in
vision and speech tasks, respectively. Due to their excellent computational efficiency and scalability, transformer models can be trained on exceedingly large
amounts of data at the expense of tremendous growth in model size. As high
performance, large-scale, and pre-trained transformer models become increasingly
available for users to download and fine-tune for customized downstream tasks,
their deployment becomes challenging due to the vast amount of operations and
large memory footprint. To address this challenge, we introduce methods to deeply
compress pre-trained transformer models across three major application domains:
NLP, speech, and vision. Specifically, we quantize transformer backbones down to
4-bit and further achieve 50% fine-grained structural sparsity on pre-trained BERT,
Wav2vec2.0, and Vision Transformer (ViT) models to demonstrate 16x compression while maintaining model accuracy. This is achieved by identifying critical
initialization strategies for quantization- and sparsity- aware fine-tuning as well as
developing novel techniques such as quantizers with a zero-preserving format and
scheduled dropout. These hardware-friendly techniques need only to be applied in
the fine-tuning phase for downstream tasks, which renders them especially suitable
for acceleration and deployment of pre-trained transformer models.

1

Introduction

Since its inception in 2017, the attention-based transformer architecture [1] has excelled in many
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks and become the preferred building block for state-of-the-art
language models. With their excellent capacity for transfer learning, transformer models that are pretrained on large corpora, such as BERT [2]) and GPT-3 [3], can be fine-tuned for downstream tasks
to achieve state-of-the-art performance. Today, fine-tuning a transformer-based pre-trained language
model has become the de facto standard for NLP tasks. Inspired by this success in NLP, transformer
models are also being actively explored in other application domains and making tremendous progress.
For vision applications, transformer models have demonstrated excellent performance — matching
or exceeding CNN-based models on image classification [4, 5] and object detection [6] tasks. For
speech applications, models with a transformer backbone such as Wav2vec2.0 [7], HuBERT [8], and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

