Sequence-to-Set Generative Models
Longtao Tang1 , Ying Zhou2 and Yu Yang⇤ 1,3
School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Department of Economics and Finance, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
Hong Kong Institute for Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
longttang2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {ying.zhou, yuyang}@cityu.edu.hk
1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a sequence-to-set method that can transform any sequence
generative model based on maximum likelihood to a set generative model where
we can evaluate the utility/probability of any set. An efficient importance sampling
algorithm is devised to tackle the computational challenge of learning our sequenceto-set model. We present GRU2Set, which is an instance of our sequence-to-set
method and employs the famous GRU model as the sequence generative model. To
further obtain permutation invariant representation of sets, we devise the SetNN
model which is also an instance of the sequence-to-set model. A direct application
of our models is to learn an order/set distribution from a collection of e-commerce
orders, which is an essential step in many important operational decisions such as
inventory arrangement for fast delivery. Based on the intuition that small-sized
sets are usually easier to learn than large sets, we propose a size-bias trick that can
help learn better set distributions with respect to the `1 -distance evaluation metric.
Two e-commerce order datasets, TMALL and HKTVMALL, are used to conduct
extensive experiments to show the effectiveness of our models. The experimental
results demonstrate that our models can learn better set/order distributions from
order data than the baselines. Moreover, no matter what model we use, applying
the size-bias trick can always improve the quality of the set distribution learned
from data.

1

Introduction

Learning a generative model [Goodfellow et al., 2014, Kingma and Welling, 2014] from data to
generate random samples is a fundamental unsupervised learning task. In many real applications, the
data, such as customer orders and drug packages, can be represented by sets. Learning a set generative
model can boost many important applications such as simulating users’ demand of e-commerce
orders for inventory arrangement [Wu et al., 2021]. However, in literature, little attention has been
paid to generative models for sets.
In this paper, we study the problem of learning a set generative model from data. Specifically, we
study sets containing some categorical items from a finite ground set. Some previous studies [Benson
et al., 2018, Wu et al., 2021] proposed traditional statistical models to learn the set generative model,
while how to employ deep learning to design set generative models remains largely untouched.
Meanwhile, deep generative models for sequence data [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997, Schäfer
and Zimmermann, 2006, Cho et al., 2014, Devlin et al., 2018] have been extensively studied. Since
the only difference between a sequence and a set is that the order of items does not matter in a set, we
propose to leverage a sequence generative model to build a set generative model.
⇤

Yu Yang is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

