ZooD: Exploiting Model Zoo for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Qishi Dong 2,1∗, Awais Muhammad 3,1∗, Fengwei Zhou 1∗, Chuanlong Xie 4,1†, Tianyang Hu 1 ,
Yongxin Yang 1 , Sung-Ho Bae 3 , Zhenguo Li 1†
2

1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
Hong Kong Baptist University,
3
Kyung-Hee University,
4
Beijing Normal University

Abstract
Recent advances on large-scale pre-training have shown great potentials of leveraging a large set of Pre-Trained Models (PTMs) for improving Out-of-Distribution
(OoD) generalization, for which the goal is to perform well on possible unseen
domains after fine-tuning on multiple training domains. However, maximally exploiting a zoo of PTMs is challenging since fine-tuning all possible combinations of PTMs
is computationally prohibitive while accurate selection of PTMs requires tackling
the possible data distribution shift for OoD tasks. In this work, we propose ZooD, a
paradigm for PTMs ranking and ensemble with feature selection. Our proposed metric ranks PTMs by quantifying inter-class discriminability and inter-domain stability
of the features extracted by the PTMs in a leave-one-domain-out cross-validation
manner. The top-K ranked models are then aggregated for the target OoD task. To
avoid accumulating noise induced by model ensemble, we propose an efficient variational EM algorithm to select informative features. We evaluate our paradigm on
a diverse model zoo consisting of 35 models for various OoD tasks and demonstrate:
(i) model ranking is better correlated with fine-tuning ranking than previous methods
and up to 9859x faster than brute-force fine-tuning; (ii) OoD generalization after
model ensemble with feature selection outperforms the state-of-the-art methods and
the accuracy on most challenging task DomainNet is improved from 46.5% to 50.6%.
Furthermore, we provide the fine-tuning results of 35 PTMs on 7 OoD datasets,
hoping to help the research of model zoo and OoD generalization. Code will be
available at https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/zood.

1

Introduction

Although data Independent and Identically Distributed (IID) is a primary assumption behind most
machine learning systems, it does not hold in many real-world scenarios due to continuous distribution
shifts [39, 88]. Machine learning models encounter serious performance degradation [9, 32, 34] in
such Out-of-Distribution (OoD) scenarios. To alleviate the accuracy degradation caused by distribution
shifts, numerous algorithms have been proposed [3, 1, 40, 44, 5, 41, 70, 31, 20, 47, 6]. Recently,
Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz [29] have argued for the systematic comparisons of OoD algorithms and
introduced a standard and rigorous test bed called DomainBed. Their experimental comparison has
raised concerns about the effectiveness of OoD algorithms since they often fail to outperform the
simple Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM).
∗
†

Equal Contribution. This work was carried out at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
Correspondence to: li.zhenguo@huawei.com; clxie@bnu.edu.cn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

