LST: Ladder Side-Tuning for
Parameter and Memory Efficient Transfer Learning

Yi-Lin Sung

Jaemin Cho
UNC Chapel Hill

Mohit Bansal

{ylsung, jmincho, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Fine-tuning large pre-trained models on downstream tasks has been adopted in
a variety of domains recently. However, it is costly to update the entire parameter
set of large pre-trained models. Although recently proposed parameter-efficient
transfer learning (PETL) techniques allow updating a small subset of parameters
(e.g. only using 2% of parameters) inside a pre-trained backbone network for a
new task, they only reduce the training memory requirement by up to 30%. This
is because the gradient computation for the trainable parameters still requires
backpropagation through the large pre-trained backbone model. To address this,
we propose Ladder Side-Tuning (LST), a new PETL technique that can reduce
training memory requirements by more substantial amounts. Unlike existing
parameter-efficient methods that insert additional parameters inside backbone
networks, we train a ladder side network, a small and separate network that takes
intermediate activations as input via shortcut connections (called ladders) from
backbone networks and makes predictions. LST has significantly lower memory
requirements than previous methods, because it does not require backpropagation
through the backbone network, but instead only through the side network and ladder
connections. We evaluate our method with various models (T5 and CLIP-T5) on
both natural language processing (GLUE) and vision-and-language (VQA, GQA,
NLVR2 , MSCOCO) tasks. LST saves 69% of the memory costs to fine-tune the
whole network, while other methods only save 26% of that in similar parameter usages (hence, 2.7x more memory savings). Moreover, LST achieves higher accuracy
than Adapter and LoRA in a low-memory regime. To further show the advantage
of this better memory efficiency, we also apply LST to larger T5 models (T5-large,
T5-3B), attaining better GLUE performance than full fine-tuning and other PETL
methods. The trend also holds in the experiments on vision-and-language tasks,
where LST achieves similar accuracy to other PETL methods when training a
similar number of parameters while also having 2.7x more memory savings.1

1

Introduction

Recently, large-scale pre-training and fine-tuning of transformers [54] have been successful in various
domains [8, 36, 44, 38, 53, 7, 20, 1, 10]. As the model size grows rapidly, fine-tuning the entire
parameter set of the large pre-trained model has become very costly. Parameter-efficient transfer
learning (PETL) [31, 23, 39, 40, 34, 51, 58, 17, 24, 18, 42, 60, 14, 52, 59] is a recent research
direction for online or multi-task learning. The goal is to build a system that performs well on all
tasks without training an entire new model for every new task. Concretely, PETL methods select
a small subset of pre-trained parameters and/or insert a few parameters to a pre-trained network
and update those parameters for new tasks, while freezing most of the original parameters. In the
1

Our code is available at: https://github.com/ylsung/Ladder-Side-Tuning.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

