A Dataset for Efforts Towards Achieving the
Sustainable Development Goal of Safe Working
Environments
Eirik Lund Flogard
Norwegian Labour Inspection Authority
Prinsens gate 1
Trondheim, Norway
eirik.flogard@arbeidstilsynet.no

Ole Jakob Mengshoel
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Sem Sælands Vei 9
Trondheim, Norway
ole.j.mengshoel@ntnu.no

Abstract
Among United Nations’ 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), we highlight
SDG 8 on Decent Work and Economic Growth. Specifically, we consider how to
achieve subgoal 8.8, “protect labour rights and promote safe working environments
for all workers [. . . ]”, in light of poor health, safety and environment (HSE) conditions being a widespread problem at workplaces. In EU alone, it is estimated that
more than 4000 deaths occur each year due to poor working conditions. To handle
the problem and achieve SDG 8, governmental agencies conduct labour inspections
and it is therefore essential that these are carried out efficiently. Current research
suggests that machine learning (ML) can be used to improve labour inspections, for
instance by selecting organisations for inspections more effectively. However, the
research in this area is very limited, in part due to a lack of publicly available data.
Consequently, we introduce a new dataset called the Labour Inspection Checklists
Dataset (LICD), which we have made publicly available.1 LICD consists of 63634
instances where each instance is an inspection conducted by the Norwegian Labour
Inspection Authority. LICD has 577 features and labels. The dataset provides
several ML research opportunities; we discuss two demonstration experiments.
One experiment deals with the problem of selecting a relevant checklist for inspecting a given target organisation. The other experiment concerns the problem of
predicting HSE violations, given a specific checklist and a target organisation. Our
experimental results, while promising, suggest that achieving good ML classification performance is difficult for both problems. This motivates future research
to improve ML performance, inspire other data analysis efforts, and ultimately
achieve SDG 8.

1

Introduction

Background. Poor health, safety and environment (HSE) conditions in workplaces is a widespread
problem that negatively affects both individuals and society. Every year in EU alone, more than three
million workers are victims of serious accidents causing more than 4000 deaths due to poor working
conditions [1]. World-wide, it has been estimated that at least 9.8 million people are in forced labour
(2005) [2]. Labour inspections, a part of the International Labour Organization’s “Decent Work
Agenda,” seek to preventing this and enforce regulations that protect workers’ health, environment and
safety [3]. Labour inspections are also important to globally achieve UN’s Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 8.8, “protect labour rights and promote safe working environments for all workers [. . . ].”
1

The LICD dataset is located at https://doi.org/10.18710/7U6TZP.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

