Revisiting Optimal Convergence Rate for Smooth and
Non-convex Stochastic Decentralized Optimization

Kun Yuan1,3∗, Xinmeng Huang2∗ , Yiming Chen1,4∗ , Xiaohan Zhang2 , Yingya Zhang1 , Pan Pan1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 2 University of Pennsylvania
3
Peking University 4 MetaCarbon
{kun.yuan, yingya.zyy, panpan.pp}@alibaba-inc.com
xinmengh@sas.upenn.edu yiming@metacarbon.vip
zxiaohan@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Decentralized optimization is effective to save communication in large-scale machine learning. Although numerous algorithms have been proposed with theoretical
guarantees and empirical successes, the performance limits in decentralized optimization, especially the influence of network topology and its associated weight
matrix on the optimal convergence rate, have not been fully understood. While
Lu and Sa [44] have recently provided an optimal rate for non-convex stochastic
decentralized optimization with weight matrices defined over linear graphs, the
optimal rate with general weight matrices remains unclear.
This paper revisits non-convex stochastic decentralized optimization and establishes
an optimal convergence rate with general weight matrices. In addition, we also
establish the optimal rate when non-convex loss functions further satisfy the PolyakLojasiewicz (PL) condition. Following existing lines of analysis in literature cannot
achieve these results. Instead, we leverage the Ring-Lattice graph to admit general
weight matrices while maintaining the optimal relation between the graph diameter
and weight matrix connectivity. Lastly, we develop a new decentralized algorithm
to nearly attain the above two optimal rates under additional mild conditions.

1

Introduction

1.1 Motivation. Decentralized optimization is an emerging paradigm for large-scale machine learning.
By letting each node average with its neighbors, decentralized algorithms save great communication
overhead compared to traditional approaches with a central server. While numerous effective
decentralized algorithms (see, e.g., [51, 11, 62, 39, 5, 41, 78]) have been proposed in literature
showing both theoretical guarantees and empirical successes, the performance limits in decentralized
optimization have not been fully clarified. This paper provides further understandings in optimal
convergence rate in decentralized optimization and develops algorithms to achieve these rates.
Weight matrix and connectivity measure. Assume n computing nodes are connected by some
network topology (graph). We associate the topology with a weight matrix W = [wij ]ni,j=1 ∈ Rn×n
in which wij ∈ (0, 1) if node j is connected to node i otherwise wij = 0. We introduce β :=
∥W − n1 1n 1Tn ∥ ∈ (0, 1), where 1n = (1, . . . , 1)T ∈ Rn has all entries being 1, as the connectivity
measure to gauge how well the network topology is connected. Quantity β → 0 (which implies
W → n1 1n 1Tn ) indicates a well-connected topology while β → 1 (which implies W → I) indicates
a badly-connected topology. It is the weight matrix W and its connectivity measure β that bring
major challenges to convergence analysis in decentralized optimization.
∗

Equal Contribution. Corresponding Author: Kun Yuan

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

