Signal Processing for Implicit Neural Representations
Dejia Xu⇤
dejia@utexas.edu
Yifan Jiang
yifanjiang97@utexas.edu

Peihao Wang⇤
peihaowang@utexas.edu
Zhiwen Fan
zhiwenfan@utexas.edu

Zhangyang Wang
atlaswang@utexas.edu

The University of Texas at Austin
https://vita-group.github.io/INSP/

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) encoding continuous multi-media data
via multi-layer perceptrons has shown undebatable promise in various computer
vision tasks. Despite many successful applications, editing and processing an
INR remains intractable as signals are represented by latent parameters of a neural
network. Existing works manipulate such continuous representations via processing
on their discretized instance, which breaks down the compactness and continuous
nature of INR. In this work, we present a pilot study on the question: how to directly
modify an INR without explicit decoding? We answer this question by proposing
an implicit neural signal processing network, dubbed INSP-Net, via differential
operators on INR. Our key insight is that spatial gradients of neural networks can
be computed analytically and are invariant to translation, while mathematically
we show that any continuous convolution filter can be uniformly approximated by
a linear combination of high-order differential operators. With these two knobs,
INSP-Net instantiates the signal processing operator as a weighted composition of
computational graphs corresponding to the high-order derivatives of INRs, where
the weighting parameters can be data-driven learned. Based on our proposed INSPNet, we further build the first Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) that implicitly
runs on INRs, named INSP-ConvNet. Our experiments validate the expressiveness
of INSP-Net and INSP-ConvNet in fitting low-level image and geometry processing
kernels (e.g. blurring, deblurring, denoising, inpainting, and smoothening) as well
as for high-level tasks on implicit fields such as image classification.

1

Introduction

The idea that our visual world can be represented continuously has attracted increasing popularity
in the field of implicit neural representations (INR). Also known as coordinate-based neural representations, INRs learn to encode a coordinate-to-value mapping for continuous multi-media data.
Instead of storing the discrete signal values in a grid of pixels or voxels, INRs represent discrete
data as samples of a continuous manifold. Using multi-layer perceptrons, INRs bring practical
benefits to various computer vision applications, such as image and video compression [1, 2, 3],
3D shape representation [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11], inverse problems [12, 2, 13, 14], and generative
models [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22].
Despite their recent success, INRs are not yet amenable to flexible editing and processing as the
standard images could do. The encoded coordinate-to-value mapping is too complex to comprehend
and the parameters stored in multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) remains less explored. One direction of
existing approaches enables editing on INRs by training them with conditional input. For example,
⇤

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

