Block-Recurrent Transformers
DeLesley Hutchins∗1 , Imanol Schlag∗3† , Yuhuai Wu1 , Ethan Dyer2 , Behnam Neyshabur2
1

2
Google Research
Google Research, Blueshift Team
3
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, SUPSI & USI
{delesley, yuhuai, edyer, neyshabur}@google.com
imanol@idsia.ch

Abstract
We introduce the Block-Recurrent Transformer, which applies a transformer layer
in a recurrent fashion along a sequence, and has linear complexity with respect to
sequence length. Our recurrent cell operates on blocks of tokens rather than single
tokens during training, and leverages parallel computation within a block in order
to make efficient use of accelerator hardware. The cell itself is strikingly simple. It
is merely a transformer layer: it uses self-attention and cross-attention to efficiently
compute a recurrent function over a large set of state vectors and tokens. Our design
was inspired in part by LSTM cells, and it uses LSTM-style gates, but it scales
the typical LSTM cell up by several orders of magnitude. Our implementation
of recurrence has the same cost in both computation time and parameter count
as a conventional transformer layer, but offers dramatically improved perplexity
in language modeling tasks over very long sequences. Our model out-performs
a long-range Transformer XL baseline by a wide margin, while running twice as
fast. We demonstrate its effectiveness on PG19 (books), arXiv papers, and GitHub
source code. Our code has been released as open source [1].

1

Introduction

Transformers have mostly replaced recurrent neural networks (RNNs), such as LSTMs [2], on tasks
that involve sequential data, especially natural language. There are several reasons for their success.
First, transformers process all elements of the sequence in parallel, and are thus faster to train on
modern accelerator hardware. In contrast, an RNN must process tokens sequentially, which leads to
slow step times during training, and large batch sizes in order to fully saturate GPUs or TPUs.
Second, an RNN must summarize and compress the entire previous sequence into a single state
vector which is passed from one token to the next. The size of the state vector limits the amount
of information that the RNN can encode about the previous tokens in the sequence. In contrast, a
transformer can attend directly to past tokens, and does not suffer from this limitation.
Third, attention operates effectively over longer distances. The forget gate in an LSTM discards
information moving forward, and causes vanishing gradients during backpropagation. In practice,
this means that LSTMs struggle to send a clear signal over more than a few hundred tokens, far less
than the typical size of the attention window in a transformer [3].
Despite these advantages, transformers also have a disadvantage. The computational complexity
of self-attention is quadratic with respect to the sequence length, which is a limiting factor when
attempting to process long documents, such as books, technical articles, or source code repositories.
Moreover, a transformer has no memory of past context; any tokens that it cannot attend to are
“invisible” to the model.
∗
Equal Contribution
† Work done partially while interning at Google Research (Blueshift Team) and
partially funded by ERC Advanced grant no: 742870 to J.Schmidhuber.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

