Inducing Equilibria via Incentives: Simultaneous
Design-and-Play Ensures Global Convergence
Boyi Liu⇤ , Jiayang Li⇤
Northwestern University
{boyiliu2018,jiayangli2024}@u.northwestern.edu
Zhuoran Yang
Yale University
zhuoran.yang@yale.edu
Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota
mhong@umn.edu

Hoi-To Wai
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
htwai@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Yu (Marco) Nie, Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
{y-nie,zhaoran.wang}@northwestern.edu

Abstract
To regulate a social system comprised of self-interested agents, economic incentives
are often required to induce a desirable outcome. This incentive design problem
naturally possesses a bilevel structure, in which a designer modifies the rewards
of the agents with incentives while anticipating the response of the agents, who
play a non-cooperative game that converges to an equilibrium. The existing bilevel
optimization algorithms raise a dilemma when applied to this problem: anticipating
how incentives affect the agents at equilibrium requires solving the equilibrium
problem repeatedly, which is computationally inefficient; bypassing the timeconsuming step of equilibrium-finding can reduce the computational cost, but
may lead the designer to a sub-optimal solution. To address such a dilemma, we
propose a method that tackles the designer’s and agents’ problems simultaneously
in a single loop. Specifically, at each iteration, both the designer and the agents
only move one step. Nevertheless, we allow the designer to gradually learn the
overall influence of the incentives on the agents, which guarantees optimality after
convergence. The convergence rate of the proposed scheme is also established for
a broad class of games.

1

Introduction

A common thread in human history is how to "properly" regulate a social system comprised of
self-interested individuals. In a laissez-faire economy, for example, the competitive market itself is
the primary regulatory mechanism [47, 16]. However, a laissez-faire economy may falter due to the
existence of significant "externalities" [8, 18], which may arise wherever the self-interested agents
do not bear the external cost of their behaviors in the entirety. The right response, many argue, is
to introduce corrective policies in the form of economic incentives (e.g., tolls, taxes, and subsidies)
[32]. By modifying the rewards of the agents, these incentives can encourage (discourage) the agents
to engage in activities that create positive (negative) side effects for the society, and thus guide the
self-interests of the agents towards a socially desirable end. For example, carbon taxes can be levied
on carbon emissions to protect the environment during the production of goods and services [35].
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

