Mesoscopic modeling of hidden spiking neurons
Shuqi Wang⇤, Valentin Schmutz⇤, Guillaume Bellec, Wulfram Gerstner
Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
first.lastname@epfl.ch

Abstract
Can we use spiking neural networks (SNN) as generative models of multi-neuronal
recordings, while taking into account that most neurons are unobserved? Modeling
the unobserved neurons with large pools of hidden spiking neurons leads to severely
underconstrained problems that are hard to tackle with maximum likelihood estimation. In this work, we use coarse-graining and mean-field approximations to
derive a bottom-up, neuronally-grounded latent variable model (neuLVM), where
the activity of the unobserved neurons is reduced to a low-dimensional mesoscopic
description. In contrast to previous latent variable models, neuLVM can be explicitly mapped to a recurrent, multi-population SNN, giving it a transparent biological
interpretation. We show, on synthetic spike trains, that a few observed neurons are
sufficient for neuLVM to perform efficient model inversion of large SNNs, in the
sense that it can recover connectivity parameters, infer single-trial latent population
activity, reproduce ongoing metastable dynamics, and generalize when subjected
to perturbations mimicking optogenetic stimulation.

1

Introduction

The progress of large-scale electrophysiological recording techniques [1] begs the following question:
can we reverse engineer the probed neural microcircuit from the recorded data? If so, should we
try to design large spiking neural networks (SNN), representing the whole microcircuit, capable
of generating the recorded spike trains? Such networks would constitute fine-grained mechanistic
models and would make in silico experiments possible. However appealing this endeavor may
appear, it faces a major obstacle – that of unobserved neurons. Indeed, despite the large number
of neurons that can be simultaneously recorded, they add up to a tiny fraction of the total number
of neurons involved in any given task [2], making the problem largely underdetermined. Training
SNNs with large numbers of hidden neurons is challenging because a huge number of possible latent
spike patterns result in the same recurrent input to the recorded neurons, making training algorithms
nontrivial [3–6].
From the perspective of a single recorded neuron, the spike activity of all the other neurons can
be reduced to a single causal variable – the total recurrent input (Figure 1A). Hence, we argue
that fine-grained SNNs are not necessary to model the inputs from hidden neurons but can be
replaced by a coarse-grained model of the sea of unobserved neurons. One possible coarse-graining
scheme consists in clustering neurons into homogeneous populations with uniform intra- and interpopulation connectivity. With the help of mean-field neuronal population equations [7–10], this
approach enables the reduction of large SNNs to low-dimensional mesoscopic models composed
of neuronal populations interacting with each other [11–13]. Clusters can reflect the presence of
different cell-types [11, 14, 15] or groups of highly interconnected excitatory neurons [16–21]. From
a computational point of view, coarse-grained SNNs offer biologically plausible implementations of
⇤

Equal contributions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

