Monte Carlo Augmented Actor-Critic for Sparse
Reward Deep Reinforcement Learning from
Suboptimal Demonstrations

Albert Wilcox
UC Berkeley
albertwilcox@berkeley.edu

Ashwin Balakrishna
UC Berkeley
ashwin_balakrishna@berkeley.edu

Jules Dedieu
UC Berkeley
jules_dedieu@berkeley.edu

Wyame Benslimane
UC Berkeley
wyame.benslimane@berkeley.edu

Daniel S. Brown
University of Utah
dsbrown@cs.utah.edu

Ken Goldberg
UC Berkeley
goldberg@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Providing densely shaped reward functions for RL algorithms is often exceedingly
challenging, motivating the development of RL algorithms that can learn from
easier-to-specify sparse reward functions. This sparsity poses new exploration
challenges. One common way to address this problem is using demonstrations to
provide initial signal about regions of the state space with high rewards. However,
prior RL from demonstrations algorithms introduce significant complexity and
many hyperparameters, making them hard to implement and tune. We introduce
Monte Carlo augmented Actor-Critic (MCAC), a parameter free modification to
standard actor-critic algorithms which initializes the replay buffer with demonstrations and computes a modified Q-value by taking the maximum of the standard
temporal distance (TD) target and a Monte Carlo estimate of the reward-to-go.
This encourages exploration in the neighborhood of high-performing trajectories
by encouraging high Q-values in corresponding regions of the state space. Experiments across 5 continuous control domains suggest that MCAC can be used to
significantly increase learning efficiency across 6 commonly used RL and RL-fromdemonstrations algorithms. See https://sites.google.com/view/mcac-rl
for code and supplementary material.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has been successful in learning complex skills in many environments [Mnih
et al., 2015, Silver et al., 2016, Schulman et al., 2017], but providing dense, informative reward
functions for RL agents is often very challenging [Xie et al., 2019, Krakovna et al., 2020, Wu et al.,
2020]. This is particularly challenging for high-dimensional control tasks, in which there may be
a large number of factors that influence the agent’s objective. In many settings, it may be much
easier to provide sparse reward signals that simply convey high-level information about task progress,
such as whether an agent has completed a task or has violated a constraint. However, optimizing RL
policies given such reward signals can be exceedingly challenging, as sparse reward functions may
not be able to meaningfully distinguish between a wide range of different policies.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

