The Query Complexity of Cake Cutting

Simina Brânzei
Purdue University, USA
simina.branzei@gmail.com

Noam Nisan
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
noam@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the query complexity of cake cutting in the standard query model
and give lower and upper bounds for computing approximately envy-free, perfect,
and equitable allocations with the minimum number of cuts. The lower bounds
are tight for computing contiguous envy-free allocations among n = 3 players
and for computing perfect and equitable allocations with minimum number of cuts
between n = 2 players. For ϵ-envy-free allocations with contiguous pieces, we
also give an upper bound of O(n/ϵ) and lower bound of Ω(log(1/ϵ)) queries for
any number n ≥ 3 of players.
We also formalize moving knife procedures and show that a large subclass of this
family, which captures all the known moving knife procedures, can be simulated
efficiently with arbitrarily small error in the Robertson-Webb query model.

1

Introduction

We consider the classical cake cutting problem due to Steinhaus [62], which captures the fair division
of a heterogeneous resource—such as land, time, mineral deposits, fossil fuels, and clean water
[56]—among several parties with equal rights but different interests over the resource. This model
has inspired a rich body of literature in mathematics, political science, economics [58, 11, 49], and
computer science [15, 27]. Implementations of fair division algorithms can be found on Spliddit [45].
Mathematically, the cake is represented as the unit interval [0, 1]. There is a set of n players with
valuation functions induced by probability measures over [0, 1]. Given such a resource, the goal is to
compute an allocation of the cake in which every player is content with the piece received. A major
challenge for a mediator trying to compute a desirable allocation is that the preferences of the players
are private. Discrete cake cutting protocols operate in a query model, due to Robertson and Webb
[68], in which a center that does not know the players asks them cut and evaluate queries until it
manages to extract enough information about their preferences to determine a fair allocation.
An example of a cake cutting protocol is Cut-and-Choose, which dates back to more than 2500 years
ago when it appeared in written records in the context of land division. Cut-and-Choose can be used
to obtain an envy-free allocation among two players, Alice and Bob, trying to divide a heterogeneous
resource (e.g. a birthday cake with different toppings): First Alice cuts the cake in two pieces of
equal value to her, then Bob picks his favorite and Alice takes the remainder.
Fairness Notions. Two of the prominent fairness notions, envy-freeness and proportionality, have
been the subject of in depth study from a computational point of view. Proportionality requires that
each player gets their fair share of the resources, which is their total value for the whole cake divided
by the number of players, while envy-freeness is based on social comparison and means no player
should want to swap their piece with anyone else’s. The two notions are not necessarily comparable,
since envy-freeness can be trivially achieved by throwing away the entire resource, which is not
true for proportionality. However, when the entire cake must be allocated, envy-freeness implies
proportionality and can be surprisingly hard to reach.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

