Near-Optimal Regret for Adversarial MDP with
Delayed Bandit Feedback

Tiancheng Jin
University of Southern California
tiancheng.jin@usc.edu
Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Tal Lancewicki
Tel Aviv University
lancewicki@mail.tau.ac.il
Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Aviv Rosenberg∗
Amazon
avivros@amazon.com

Abstract
The standard assumption in reinforcement learning (RL) is that agents observe
feedback for their actions immediately. However, in practice feedback is often
observed in delay. This paper studies online learning in episodic Markov decision
process (MDP) with unknown transitions, adversarially changing costs, and unrestricted delayed bandit feedback. More precisely, the feedback for the agent in
episode k is revealed only in the end of episode k + dk , where the delay dk can
be changing over episodes and chosen by√an oblivious adversary. We present the
first algorithms that achieve near-optimal K + D regret, where K is the number
PK
of episodes and D = k=1 dk is the total delay, significantly improving upon the
best known regret bound of (K + D)2/3 .

1

Introduction

Delayed feedback has become a fundamental challenge that sequential decision making algorithms
must face in almost every real-world application. Notable examples include communication between
agents [9], video streaming [8] and robotics [32]. Broadly, delays occur either for computational
reasons, e.g., in autonomous vehicles and wearable technology, or when they are an inherent part of
the environment like healthcare, finance and recommendation systems.
Although a prominent challenge in practice, there is only limited theoretical literature on delays in
reinforcement learning (RL). Recently, [18] studied regret minimization in episodic Markov decision
processes (MDPs) but assume that the delays (and costs) are stochastic, i.e., sampled i.i.d from a fixed
(unknown) distribution, which is a limiting assumption since it does not allow dependencies between
costs and delays that are very common in practice. The case of adversarial delays and costs was also
studied recently [28]. However, they focus on full-information feedback where the learner observes
the entire cost function, which is not realistic in many applications, and obtain only sub-optimal regret
bounds for bandit feedback (where the learner observes only the costs on the traversed trajectory).
In this paper we significantly advance our understanding of delayed feedback in adversarial MDPs
with bandit feedback. More precisely, we consider episodic MDPs with unknown transition function,
∗

Research conducted while the author was a student at Tel Aviv University.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

