Continuous Deep Q-Learning in Optimal Control
Problems: Normalized Advantage Functions Analysis

Anton Plaksin
IMM UB RAS, Ural Federal University
Yekaterinburg, Russia
a.r.plaksin@gmail.com

Stepan Martyanov
IMM UB RAS, Ural Federal University
Yekaterinburg, Russia
martyanovst@gmail.com

Abstract
One of the most effective continuous deep reinforcement learning algorithms is
normalized advantage functions (NAF). The main idea of NAF consists in the
approximation of the Q-function by functions quadratic with respect to the action
variable. This idea allows to apply the algorithm to continuous reinforcement
learning problems, but on the other hand, it brings up the question of classes
of problems in which this approximation is acceptable. The presented paper
describes one such class. We consider reinforcement learning problems obtained
by the time-discretization of certain optimal control problems. Based on the idea
of NAF, we present a new family of quadratic functions and prove its suitable
approximation properties. Taking these properties into account, we provide several
ways to improve NAF. The experimental results confirm the efficiency of our
improvements.

1

Introduction

The standard reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton and Barto, 2018] setup consists of an agent
interacting with an environment. At each step of the interaction, the agent determines an action based
on its policy and its current state, gets a reward, and makes a transition to the next state. The aim of
the agent is to learn the policy that maximizes the sum of rewards.
One of the most widespread approach for solving RL problems is Q-learning [Watkins and Dayan,
1992], which consist in seeking the optimal action-value function (Q-function) as a solution of the
Bellman optimality equation. After the learning, the agent can act optimally by the found Q-function.
Initially, Q-learning approach was applied for solving RL problems with finite state and action spaces.
In this case, Q-function can be represented by a finite table. For the case of a large or continuous state
space, Q-learning has later been extended to Deep Q-learning algorithm [Mnih et al., 2015] which
allows to seek the approximations of Q-function in the class of neural networks by means of the
stochastic gradient descent. Deep Q-learning and its modifications have shown efficiency for a range
of challenging tasks [Wang et al., 2016, van Hasselt et al., 2016, Schaul et al., 2016, Hessel et al.,
2018]. However, this algorithm can not be directly applied for solving RL problems with continuous
action spaces. The reason is that Deep Q-learning involves maximizing of approximate Q-function by
the action variable on each step of the learning, which is a complex procedure for continuous action
spaces. Among various approaches to overcome this problem [Lillicrap et al., 2016, Haarnoja et al.,
2017, Wu et al., 2017, Kalashnikov et al., 2018, Nachum et al., 2018, Fujimoto et al., 2018, Lim
et al., 2019, Ryu et al., 2020, Lutter et al., 2021], we focus on the idea of the normalized advantage
functions (NAF) algorithm [Gu et al., 2016], which consists in the approximation of Q-function by
the function quadratic with respect to the action variable. It allows to calculate the maximum quite
fast and precisely and solve some challenging control problems [Gu et al., 2017, Dong et al., 2018,
Ikemoto and Ushio, 2021], but on the other hand, it brings up the question of classes of RL problems
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

