Resolving the data ambiguity for periodic crystals

Daniel E Widdowson
Department of Computer Science
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX
D.E.Widdowson@liverpool.ac.uk

Vitaliy A Kurlin
Department of Computer Science
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3BX
vitaliy.kurlin@gmail.com

Abstract
The fundamental model of all solid crystalline materials is a periodic set of atomic
centers considered up to rigid motion in Euclidean space. The major obstacle to
materials discovery was highly ambiguous representations of periodic crystals that
didn’t allow fast and reliable comparisons and led to numerous (near-) duplicates
in many databases of experimental and simulated crystals. This paper exemplarily
resolves the ambiguity by invariants, which are descriptors without false negatives.
The new Pointwise Distance Distributions (PDD) is a numerical matrix with a nearlinear time complexity and an exactly computable metric. The strongest theoretical
result is generic completeness (absence of false positives) for all finite and periodic
sets of points in any dimension. The strength of PDD is shown by 200B+ pairwise
comparisons of all periodic structures in the world’s largest collection (Cambridge
Structural Database) of existing materials over two days on a modest desktop.

1

Motivations for resolving the ambiguity challenge for periodic crystals

This paper resolves the long-standing challenge of ambiguous data representation for periodic
structures that model all solid crystalline materials (periodic crystals). Any real crystal is best
modeled as a periodic set S ⊂ Rn of points at all atomic centers, whose positions have a physical
meaning and are determined via diffraction patterns. Edges between points are excluded because they
only abstractly represent inter-atomic bonds depending on thresholds for distances and angles [29].
The simplest example is a lattice Λ ⊂ Rn consisting of all integer linear combinations of a basis
whose vectors span a unit cell U . Fig. 1 shows omly a few of infinitely many possible choices of U .

Figure 1: These isometric lattices are given by different cells and motifs. 1st: U = ⟨(1, 0), (0, 1)⟩,
M = {(0, 0)}. 2nd: U = ⟨(1, 0), (0, 1)⟩, M = {( 12 , 21 )}. 3rd: U = ⟨(1, 0), (1, 1)⟩, M = {(0, 0)}.
√
4th: U = ⟨( √12 , √12 ), (− √12 , √12 )⟩, M = {( 21 , 12 )}. 5th: U = ⟨( 2, 0), ( √12 , √12 )⟩, M = {(0, 0)}.
Materials discovery still relies on trial-and-error because periodic crystals are traditionally represented
by non-invariants (descriptors with false negatives) or discontinuous invariants such as symmetry
groups that break down under tiny perturbations. These conventional descriptions cannot identify
fraudulent structures in experimental datasets that keep depositing numerous (near-) duplicates
without reliable tools for justified comparisons [30]. The ambiguity challenge will be rigorously
stated in Problem 1.1 as a classification of periodic sets up to isometry preserving the crystal rigidity.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

