Local Metric Learning for Off-Policy Evaluation in
Contextual Bandits with Continuous Actions
Haanvid Lee1 , Jongmin Lee2 , Yunseon Choi1 , Wonseok Jeon† ,
Byung-Jun Lee3,4 , Yung-Kyun Noh5,6 , Kee-Eung Kim1
1
2
KAIST, UC Berkeley, 3 Korea Univ., 4 Gauss Labs Inc., 5 Hanyang Univ., 6 KIAS
haanvid@kaist.ac.kr, jongmin.lee@berkeley.edu, cys9506@kaist.ac.kr
byungjunlee@korea.ac.kr, nohyung@hanyang.ac.kr, kekim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We consider local kernel metric learning for off-policy evaluation (OPE) of deterministic policies in contextual bandits with continuous action spaces. Our work is
motivated by practical scenarios where the target policy needs to be deterministic
due to domain requirements, such as prescription of treatment dosage and duration
in medicine. Although importance sampling (IS) provides a basic principle for
OPE, it is ill-posed for the deterministic target policy with continuous actions.
Our main idea is to relax the target policy and pose the problem as kernel-based
estimation, where we learn the kernel metric in order to minimize the overall mean
squared error (MSE). We present an analytic solution for the optimal metric, based
on the analysis of bias and variance. Whereas prior work has been limited to
scalar action spaces or kernel bandwidth selection, our work takes a step further
being capable of vector action spaces and metric optimization. We show that our
estimator is consistent, and significantly reduces the MSE compared to baseline
OPE methods through experiments on various domains.

1

Introduction

In order to deploy a contextual bandit policy to a real-world environment, such as personalized
pricing[1], treatments [2], recommendation [3], and advertisements [4], the performance of the policy
should be evaluated prior to the deployment to decide whether the trained policy is suitable for
deployment. This is because the interaction of the policy with the environment could be costly and/or
dangerous. For example, using an erroneous medical treatment policy to prescribe drugs for patients
could result in dire consequences. There then emerges a necessity for an algorithm that can evaluate
a policy’s performance without having it interact with the environment in an online manner. Such
algorithms are called “off-policy evaluation” (OPE) algorithms [5]. OPE algorithms for contextual
bandits evaluate a target policy by estimating its expected reward from the data sampled by a behavior
policy and without the target policy interacting with the environment.
Previous works on OPE for contextual bandits have mainly focused on environments with finite
actions [4, 6–10]. The works can be largely divided into three approaches [6, 9, 11]. The first
approach is the direct method (DM) which learns an environment model for policy evaluation. DM
is known to have low variance [9]. However, since the environment model is learned with function
approximation, the estimator is biased. The second approach is importance sampling (IS) which
corrects the data distribution induced by a behavior policy to that of a target policy [12], and uses
the corrected distribution to approximate the expected reward of the target policy. IS estimates are
unbiased when the behavior and target policies are given. However, IS estimates can have large
†
The research was done while in Mila/McGill University, but the author is currently employed by Qualcomm
Technologies Inc.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

