Learning to Navigate Wikipedia
by Taking Random Walks

Manzil Zaheer∗ , Kenneth Marino∗ , Will Grathwohl∗ , John Schultz∗ , Wendy Shang,
Sheila Babayan, Arun Ahuja, Ishita Dasgupta, Christine Kaeser-Chen, Rob Fergus
DeepMind New York
{manzilzaheer, kmarino, wgrathwohl, jhtschultz, wendyshang,
sbabayan, arahuja, idg, christinech, robfergus}@google.com

Abstract
A fundamental ability of an intelligent web-based agent is seeking out and acquiring
new information. Internet search engines reliably find the correct vicinity but the
top results may be a few links away from the desired target. A complementary
approach is navigation via hyperlinks, employing a policy that comprehends local
content and selects a link that moves it closer to the target. In this paper, we show
that behavioral cloning of randomly sampled trajectories is sufficient to learn an
effective link selection policy. We demonstrate the approach on a graph version
of Wikipedia with 38M nodes and 387M edges. The model is able to efficiently
navigate between nodes 5 and 20 steps apart 96% and 92% of the time, respectively.
We then use the resulting embeddings and policy in downstream fact verification
and question answering tasks where, in combination with basic TF-IDF search and
ranking methods, they are competitive results to the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The ability to gather new knowledge about the world is a fundamental aspect of intelligence. Based
only on a few words, a fact, question, or even vague idea, humans have the ability to use the internet
to find extremely specific information about the world. From the important (how to administer CPR)
to the trivial (the LA Raiders won the 1983 SuperBowl), virtually any knowledge is a click away.
In this work, we focus in one particular aspect of this ability: web navigation. In general, navigation
is a key component of an embodied agent: the ability to move efficiently toward a target. In known
environments, where map information is available, shortest-path algorithms provide a viable solution.
However, in novel settings, the agent lacks such global information and must instead navigate to the
target, using its understanding of the local environment to select actions.
Other approaches to web agents have focused mostly on retrieval or search engines. These, however,
only provide a partial solution, typically getting close to a desired target but often not exactly to the
right page. In this work, we present an approach for navigation on graph-structured web data that
uses hyperlinks within articles to navigate toward a target. It complements search engines, using them
to provide a sensible starting point for a local search for specific information.
To be able to navigate on the web effectively, we must read the text of the page, see how concepts
in the current page are related to a possible next page, and use our understanding to learn a policy
to make the right navigation decision. Consider the scenario shown in Figure 1. The agent is trying
to navigate to the target node N ORTH A MERICA while currently at the node P RESIDENTS OF THE
U NITED S TATES containing two hyperlinks: BARACK O BAMA and USA. Our approach learns an
*

Denotes equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

