Learning Latent Seasonal-Trend Representations for
Time Series Forecasting

Zhiyuan Wang1 , Xovee Xu1 , Weifeng Zhang1 , Goce Trajcevski2 , Ting Zhong1 , Fan Zhou1∗
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Iowa State University
zhy.wangcs@gmail.com, xovee@live.com, weifzh@outlook.com,
gocet25@iastate.edu, {tingzhong, fan.zhou}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Forecasting complex time series is ubiquitous and vital in a range of applications
but challenging. Recent advances endeavor to achieve progress by incorporating
various deep learning techniques (e.g., RNN and Transformer) into sequential
models. However, clear patterns are still hard to extract since time series are
often composed of several intricately entangled components. Motivated by the
success of disentangled variational autoencoder in computer vision and classical
time series decomposition, we plan to infer a couple of representations that depict
seasonal and trend components of time series. To achieve this goal, we propose
LaST, which, based on variational inference, aims to disentangle the seasonal-trend
representations in the latent space. Furthermore, LaST supervises and disassociates
representations from the perspectives of themselves and input reconstruction, and
introduces a series of auxiliary objectives. Extensive experiments prove that
LaST achieves state-of-the-art performance on time series forecasting task against
the most advanced representation learning and end-to-end forecasting models. For
reproducibility, our implementation is publicly available on Github1 .

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting plays a significant role in plethora of modern applications, ranging from
climate analysis [1], energy production [2], traffic flows [3] to financial markets and various industrial
systems [4]. The ubiquity and importance of time series data have recently attracted researcher
efforts resulting in a myriad of deep learning forecasting models [5, 6] ameliorating the time series
forecasting. Based on advanced techniques such as RNN and Transformer [7]), these methods usually
learn latent representations to epitomize every instant of the signals, and then derive forecasting
results by a predictor, achieving great progress on forecasting tasks.
However, these models have difficulties to extract exact/clear information related to temporal patterns
(e.g., seasonality, trend, and level), especially in supervised end-to-end architecture without any
constraint on representations [8]. As a consequence, efforts have been made to apply the variational
inference into time series modeling [9, 10, 11], where improved guidance for latent representations
with probabilistic form has been proved beneficial to downstream time series tasks [12]. However,
when various intricately co-evolving constituents exist a time series data, analyzing with a single
representation will result in superficial variable and models’ non-reusability and lack of interpretability, due to the highly entangled nature of neural networks [13, 14]. Thus, while providing efficiency
and effectiveness, existing approaches with a single high-dimensional representation sacrifice the
∗
1

Corresponding author.
https://github.com/zhycs/LaST

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

