Order-Invariant Cardinality Estimators Are
Differentially Private
Charlie Dickens
Yahoo
charlie.dickens@yahooinc.com

Justin Thaler
Georgetown University
justin.thaler@georgetown.edu

Daniel Ting
Meta∗
dting@meta.com

Abstract
We consider privacy in the context of streaming algorithms for cardinality estimation. We show that a large class of algorithms all satisfy -differential privacy, so
long as (a) the algorithm is combined with a simple down-sampling procedure, and
(b) the input stream cardinality is Ω(k/). Here, k is a certain parameter of the
sketch that is always at most the sketch size in bits, but is typically much smaller.
We also show that, even with no modification, algorithms in our class satisfy
(, δ)-differential privacy, where δ falls exponentially with the stream cardinality.
Our analysis applies to essentially all popular cardinality estimation algorithms,
and substantially generalizes and tightens privacy bounds from earlier works. Our
approach is faster and exhibits a better utility-space tradeoff than prior art.

1

Introduction

Cardinality estimation, or the distinct counting problem, is a fundamental data analysis task. Typical
applications are found in network traffic monitoring [9], query optimization [20], and counting
unique search engine queries [14]. A key challenge is to perform this estimation in small space
while processing each data item quickly. Typical approaches for solving this problem at scale involve
data sketches such as the Flajolet-Martin (FM85) sketch [12], HyperLogLog (HLL) [11], Bottom-k
[2, 6, 3]. All these provide approximate cardinality estimates but use bounded space.
While research has historically focused on the accuracy, speed, and space usage of these sketches,
recent work examines their privacy guarantees. These privacy-preserving properties have grown in
importance as companies have built tools that can grant an appropriate level of privacy to different
people and scenarios. The tools aid in satisfying users’ demand for better data stewardship, while
also ensuring compliance with regulatory requirements.
We show that all cardinality estimators in a class of hash-based, order-invariant sketches with
bounded size are -differentially private (DP) so long as the algorithm is combined with a simple
down-sampling procedure and the true cardinality satisfies a mild lower bound. This lower bound
requirement can be guaranteed to hold by inserting sufficiently many “phantom elements” into the
stream when initializing the sketch. We also show that, even with no modification, algorithms in our
class satisfy (, δ)-differential privacy, where δ falls exponentially with the stream cardinality.
Our novel analysis has significant benefits. First, prior works on differentially private cardinality
estimation have analyzed only specific sketches [23, 25, 5, 22]. Moreover, many of the sketches
analyzed (e.g., [23, 22]), while reminiscent of sketches used in practice, in fact differ from practical
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

