Muffliato: Peer-to-Peer Privacy Amplification for
Decentralized Optimization and Averaging

Edwige Cyffers 1,⋆ Mathieu Even2,⋆ , Aurélien Bellet 1 , Laurent Massoulié 2
⋆
1
2

Equal contribution

Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille

Inria Paris - Département d’informatique de l’ENS, PSL Research University, Paris, France

Abstract
Decentralized optimization is increasingly popular in machine learning for its
scalability and efficiency. Intuitively, it should also provide better privacy guarantees, as nodes only observe the messages sent by their neighbors in the network
graph. But formalizing and quantifying this gain is challenging: existing results are
typically limited to Local Differential Privacy (LDP) guarantees that overlook the
advantages of decentralization. In this work, we introduce pairwise network differential privacy, a relaxation of LDP that captures the fact that the privacy leakage
from a node u to a node v may depend on their relative position in the graph. We
then analyze the combination of local noise injection with (simple or randomized)
gossip averaging protocols on fixed and random communication graphs. We also
derive a differentially private decentralized optimization algorithm that alternates
between local gradient descent steps and gossip averaging. Our results show that
our algorithms amplify privacy guarantees as a function of the distance between
nodes in the graph, matching the privacy-utility trade-off of the trusted curator, up
to factors that explicitly depend on the graph topology. Remarkably, these factors
become constant for expander graphs. Finally, we illustrate our privacy gains with
experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Training machine learning models traditionally requires centralizing data in a single server, raising
issues of scalability and privacy. An alternative is to use Federated Learning (FL), where each
user keeps her data on device [44, 36]. In fully decentralized FL, the common hypothesis of a
central server is also removed, letting users, represented as nodes in a graph, train the model via
peer-to-peer communications along edges. This approach improves scalability and robustness to
central server failures, enabling lower latency, less power consumption and quicker deployment
[43, 11, 54, 50, 1, 42, 39].
Another important dimension is privacy, as a wide range of applications deal with sensitive and
personal data. The gold standard to quantify the privacy leakage of algorithms is Differential Privacy
(DP) [20]. DP typically requires to randomly perturb data-dependent computations to prevent
the final model from leaking too much information about any individual data point (e.g., through
data memorization). However, decentralized algorithms do not only reveal the final model to the
participating nodes, but also the results of some intermediate computations. A standard solution is to
use Local Differential Privacy (LDP) [37, 19], where random perturbations are performed locally by
each user, thus protecting against an attacker that would observe everything that users share. From the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

