SoftPatch: Unsupervised Anomaly Detection with
Noisy Data

Xi Jiang1
jiangx2020@mail.sustech.edu.cn
Jinbao Wang1∗
wangjb@sustech.edu.cn
Yong Liu2
choasliu@tencent.com

Jianlin Liu2
jenningsliu@tencent.com

Qian Nie2
stephennie@tencent.com

Kai Wu2
lloydwu@tencent.com

Chengjie Wang2
jasoncjwang@tencent.com

Feng Zheng1∗
zhengf@sustech.edu.cn

1

Southern University of Science and Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
2
Tencent, Youtu Lab

Abstract
Although mainstream unsupervised anomaly detection (AD) algorithms perform
well in academic datasets, their performance is limited in practical application due
to the ideal experimental setting of clean training data. Training with noisy data
is an inevitable problem in real-world anomaly detection but is seldom discussed.
This paper considers label-level noise in image sensory anomaly detection for
the first time. To solve this problem, we proposed a memory-based unsupervised
AD method, SoftPatch, which efficiently denoises the data at the patch level.
Noise discriminators are utilized to generate outlier scores for patch-level noise
elimination before coreset construction. The scores are then stored in the memory
bank to soften the anomaly detection boundary. Compared with existing methods,
SoftPatch maintains a strong modeling ability of normal data and alleviates the
overconfidence problem in coreset. Comprehensive experiments in various noise
scenes demonstrate that SoftPatch outperforms the state-of-the-art AD methods on
the MVTecAD and BTAD benchmarks and is comparable to those methods under
the setting without noise.

1

Introduction

Detecting anomalies by only nominal images without annotation is an appealing topic, especially in
industrial applications where defects can be extremely tiny and hard to collect. Unsupervised sensory
anomaly detection, also called covariate shift detection [1; 2], is proposed to solve this problem
and has been largely explored. Recent deep learning methods [3; 4; 5; 6; 7] usually model the AD
problem as a one-class learning problem and employ computer visual tricks to improve the perception
where a clean nominal training set is provided to extract representative features. Most previous
unsupervised AD methods have to measure the distance between the test sample and the standard
dataset distribution to determine whether a sample differs from the standard dataset. Even though
recent methods have achieved excellent performance, they all rely on the clean training set to extract
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

