TVLT: Textless Vision-Language Transformer

Zineng Tang∗ Jaemin Cho∗ Yixin Nie∗ Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{terran, jmincho, yixin1, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
In this work, we present the Textless Vision-Language Transformer (TVLT), where
homogeneous transformer blocks take raw visual and audio inputs for vision-andlanguage representation learning with minimal modality-specific design, and do
not use text-specific modules such as tokenization or automatic speech recognition
(ASR). TVLT is trained by reconstructing masked patches of continuous video
frames and audio spectrograms (masked autoencoding) and contrastive modeling
to align video and audio. TVLT attains performance comparable to its text-based
counterpart on various multimodal tasks, such as visual question answering, image
retrieval, video retrieval, and multimodal sentiment analysis, with 28x faster inference speed and only 1/3 of the parameters. Our findings suggest the possibility
of learning compact and efficient visual-linguistic representations from low-level
visual and audio signals without assuming the prior existence of text.1

1

Introduction

Humans perceive and learn the external world through signals from multiple modalities. To embody
such human learning in machines, substantial research efforts are dedicated to developing visionand-language (VL) models that can understand the joint semantics between visual and linguistic
modalities and solve tasks such as visual question answering [4]. Although most such VL models use
written language rather than spoken language as the main verbal communication channel, the default
communication modality among humans has been speech, since circa 100,000 BCE [77]. Written
language is relatively recent; cuneiform script, the earliest writing system, was developed circa 3,200
BCE [65]. Moreover, we have witnessed an increasing usage of AI models in real-world products
such as virtual assistants and smart speakers [40], where perception-level signals such as video and
audio are the natural form of input. Intuitively, direct modeling of such signals will potentially yield
more compact and efficient representations.
Transformers [80] have recently achieved great success in vision-language representation learning [75;
10; 48; 73; 86; 85] by using text-based modules [15] on text-annotated images or videos. However,
it is non-trivial to learn VL representations using transformers that take only low-level visual and
acoustic inputs without the prior existence of written language. The challenge lies in the difference
between text and acoustic signals; text is discrete and dense in information, while acoustic signals
are continuous and sparse in information [26; 7]. Therefore, modality-specific architectures have
been used to model data from different modalities. It is only recently that researchers started using
modality-agnostic transformer architecture to learn representations of different unimodal [17; 19; 8],
vision-text [32; 54], or vision-audio-text [2] data. However, to the best of our knowledge, no previous
work has explored a single homogeneous (modality-agnostic) minimalist transformer that learns
visual-linguistic representations directly from visual and acoustic input at the perception level (without
relying on text), and also makes the textless VL model more compact and efficient than the existing
text-based VL models (see Sec. 2 for details).
∗
1

equal contribution
Our code and checkpoints are available at: https://github.com/zinengtang/TVLT

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

