Learning to Find Proofs and Theorems by
Learning to Refine Search Strategies
The Case of Loop Invariant Synthesis

Jonathan Laurent
Carnegie Mellon University
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

André Platzer
Carnegie Mellon University
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

Abstract
We propose a new approach to automated theorem proving where an AlphaZerostyle agent is self-training to refine a generic high-level expert strategy expressed as
a nondeterministic program. An analogous teacher agent is self-training to generate
tasks of suitable relevance and difficulty for the learner. This allows leveraging
minimal amounts of domain knowledge to tackle problems for which training data
is unavailable or hard to synthesize. As a specific illustration, we consider loop
invariant synthesis for imperative programs and use neural networks to refine both
the teacher and solver strategies.

1

Introduction

Augmenting tactic-based interactive theorem provers with neural guidance has been the focus of
increased attention in recent years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The dominant approach uses imitation learning
on corpora of formalized mathematics. However, despite recent efforts involving self-supervised
pre-training [5] or data-augmentation [6], this approach is limited by the conspicuous scarcity of
human-produced training data. An alternative approach inspired by the success of AlphaZero [7] is
to use reinforcement learning and let an agent self-train to interact with a theorem prover via trial and
error [8, 9]. However, previous attempts of doing so have been hampered by two fundamental issues:
• First, existing tactic-based theorem provers offer infinite action spaces not amenable to
random exploration. Also, they are optimized for formalizing the outcome of human insights
concisely but often fail to define a tractable search space for deriving those insights in the
first place [10]. For example, using tactics effectively often requires providing insights in
advance that are more easily found later in the search process (e.g. constructing a term to
instantiate an existential quantifier [11]). More generally, most of the human process of
discovering proofs, which involves trial and error, sketching, and abductive reasoning is not
captured by standard prover tactics and so we can hardly expect a reinforcement learning
agent to learn this process through sheer interaction with a tactic-based prover.
• Second, although reinforcement learning alleviates the need for human proofs during training,
the agent must still be provided learning tasks of suitable relevance, diversity, difficulty, and
generalizability in the form of theorem statements to be proved. This is in contrast with
applications of AlphaZero in board games, where the symmetric nature of games such as
Chess or Go enables leveraging symmetric self-play as an infinite source of training tasks.
In this paper, we suggest a novel approach to learning automated theorem proving that does not rely
on human-provided proofs and theorems. Instead, a teacher agent is trained to generate interesting and
relevant tasks while a solver agent is co-trained to solve them. Our core insight is that both agents can
be implemented by using reinforcement learning to refine high-level search strategies [10] written by
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

