Characterizing Datapoints via Second-Split Forgetting

arXiv:2210.15031v1 [cs.LG] 26 Oct 2022

Pratyush Maini1
Saurabh Garg1
Zachary C. Lipton1
J. Zico Kolter1,2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Center for AI
{pratyushmaini,zlipton}@cmu.edu; {sgarg2, zkolter}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Researchers investigating example hardness have increasingly focused on the dynamics by which neural networks learn and forget examples throughout training.
Popular metrics derived from these dynamics include (i) the epoch at which examples are first correctly classified; (ii) the number of times their predictions flip during training; and (iii) whether their prediction flips if they are held out. However,
these metrics do not distinguish among examples that are hard for distinct reasons,
such as membership in a rare subpopulation, being mislabeled, or belonging to
a complex subpopulation. In this paper, we propose second-split forgetting time
(SSFT), a complementary metric that tracks the epoch (if any) after which an original training example is forgotten as the network is fine-tuned on a randomly held
out partition of the data. Across multiple benchmark datasets and modalities, we
demonstrate that mislabeled examples are forgotten quickly, and seemingly rare
examples are forgotten comparatively slowly. By contrast, metrics only considering the first split learning dynamics struggle to differentiate the two. At large learning rates, SSFT tends to be robust across architectures, optimizers, and random
seeds. From a practical standpoint, the SSFT can (i) help to identify mislabeled
samples, the removal of which improves generalization; and (ii) provide insights
about failure modes. Through theoretical analysis addressing overparameterized
linear models, we provide insights into how the observed phenomena may arise.1

1

Introduction

A growing literature has investigated metrics for characterizing the difficulty of training examples,
driven by such diverse motivations as (i) deriving insights for how to reconcile the ability of deep
neural networks to generalize [30] with their ability to memorize noise [15, 48]; (ii) identifying
potentially mislabeled examples; and (iii) identifying notably challenging or rare sub-populations of
examples. Some of these efforts have turned towards learning dynamics, with researchers noting that
neural networks tend to learn cleanly labeled examples before mislabeled examples [17, 18, 33], and
more generally tend to learn simpler patterns sooner—for several intuitive notions of simplicity [19,
35, 43]. Broadly, works in this area tend to characterize examples as belonging either to prototypical
groups or memorized exceptions [7, 16, 25]. Adapting these intuitions to real datasets, Feldman
[15] propose rating the degree to which an example is memorized based on whether its predicted
class flips when it is excluded from the training set. These, and other works [8, 21, 35, 43, 47] have
proposed many metrics for characterizing example difficulty with Carlini et al. [7] comparing five
such metrics. However, while many of these works distinguish some notion of easy versus hard
samples, they seldom (i) offer tools for distinguishing among different types of hard examples; (ii)
explain theoretically why these metrics might be useful for distinguishing easy versus hard samples.
Moreover, existing metrics tend to give similar scores to examples that are difficult for distinct reasons,
e.g, membership in rare, complex, or mislabeled sub-populations.
1

Code for reproducing our experiments can be found at https://github.com/pratyushmaini/ssft.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

