LASSIE: Learning Articulated Shapes from Sparse
Image Ensemble via 3D Part Discovery

Chun-Han Yao1
1

Wei-Chih Hung2 Yuanzhen Li3 Michael Rubinstein3
Ming-Hsuan Yang134 Varun Jampani3

UC Merced

2

Waymo

3

Google Research

4

Yonsei University

Abstract
Creating high-quality articulated 3D models of animals is challenging either via
manual creation or using 3D scanning tools. Therefore, techniques to reconstruct
articulated 3D objects from 2D images are crucial and highly useful. In this
work, we propose a practical problem setting to estimate 3D pose and shape
of animals given only a few (10-30) in-the-wild images of a particular animal
species (say, horse). Contrary to existing works that rely on pre-defined template
shapes, we do not assume any form of 2D or 3D ground-truth annotations, nor
do we leverage any multi-view or temporal information. Moreover, each input
image ensemble can contain animal instances with varying poses, backgrounds,
illuminations, and textures. Our key insight is that 3D parts have much simpler
shape compared to the overall animal and that they are robust w.r.t. animal pose
articulations. Following these insights, we propose LASSIE, a novel optimization
framework which discovers 3D parts in a self-supervised manner with minimal
user intervention. A key driving force behind LASSIE is the enforcing of 2D-3D
part consistency using self-supervisory deep features. Experiments on Pascal-Part
and self-collected in-the-wild animal datasets demonstrate considerably better 3D
reconstructions as well as both 2D and 3D part discovery compared to prior arts.
Project page: https://chhankyao.github.io/lassie/

1

Introduction

The last decade has witnessed significant advances in estimating human body pose and shape from
images [26, 2, 15, 19, 18, 34, 17]. Much progress is fueled by the availability of rich datasets [14, 29,
39] with 3D human scans in a variety of shapes and poses. In contrast, 3D scanning wild animals
is quite challenging, and existing animal datasets such as SMALR [48] rely on man-made animal
shapes. Manually creating realistic animal models for a wide diversity of animals (e.g. mammals and
birds) is also challenging and time-consuming. In this work, we propose to automatically estimate
3D shape and articulation (pose) of animals from only a sparse set of image ensemble (collection)
without using any 2D or 3D ground-truth annotations. Our problem setting is highly practical as each
image ensemble consists of only a few (10-30) in-the-wild images of a specific animal species. Fig. 1
shows sample zebra images which forms our input. In addition, we assume a human-specified 3D
skeleton (left in Fig. 1) that can be quite rough with incorrect bone lengths and this mainly provides
the connectivity of animal parts. For instance, we use the same 3D skeleton for all the quadruped
animals despite considerable shape variations across species, e.g., giraffe vs. zebra vs. elephant.
Manually specifying a rough skeleton is a trivial task which only takes a few minutes.
Estimating articulated 3D shapes from in-the-wild image ensemble is a highly ambiguous and
challenging problem. There are several varying factors across images: backgrounds; lighting; camera
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

