Identifiability of deep generative models
without auxiliary information
Bohdan Kivva⇤
University of Chicago
bkivva@uchicago.edu

Goutham Rajendran⇤
University of Chicago
goutham@uchicago.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon University
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Bryon Aragam
University of Chicago
bryon@chicagobooth.edu

Abstract
We prove identifiability of a broad class of deep latent variable models that (a) have
universal approximation capabilities and (b) are the decoders of variational autoencoders that are commonly used in practice. Unlike existing work, our analysis does
not require weak supervision, auxiliary information, or conditioning in the latent
space. Specifically, we show that for a broad class of generative (i.e. unsupervised)
models with universal approximation capabilities, the side information u is not
necessary: We prove identifiability of the entire generative model where we do not
observe u and only observe the data x. The models we consider match autoencoder
architectures used in practice that leverage mixture priors in the latent space and
ReLU/leaky-ReLU activations in the encoder, such as VaDE and MFC-VAE. Our
main result is an identifiability hierarchy that significantly generalizes previous
work and exposes how different assumptions lead to different “strengths” of identifiability, and includes certain “vanilla” VAEs with isotropic Gaussian priors as a
special case. For example, our weakest result establishes (unsupervised) identifiability up to an affine transformation, and thus partially resolves an open problem
regarding model identifiability raised in prior work. These theoretical results are
augmented with experiments on both simulated and real data.

1

Introduction

One of the key paradigm shifts in machine learning (ML) over the past decade has been the transition
from handcrafted features to automated, data-driven representation learning, typically via deep neural
networks. One complication of automating this step in the ML pipeline is that it is difficult to provide
guarantees on what features will (or won’t) be learned. As these methods are being used in high
stakes settings such as medicine, health care, law, and finance where accountability and transparency
are not just desirable but often legally required, it has become necessary to place representation
learning on a rigourous scientific footing. In order to do this, it is crucial to be able to discuss ideal,
target features and the underlying representations that define these features. As a result, the ML
literature has begun to move beyond consideration solely of downstream tasks (e.g. classification,
prediction, sampling, etc.) in order to better understand the structural foundations of deep models.
Deep generative models (DGMs) such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) [37, 56] are a prominent
example of such a model, and are a powerful tool for unsupervised learning of latent representations,
useful for a variety of downstream tasks such as sampling, prediction, classification, and clustering.
⇤

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

