Self-Supervised Learning with an Information
Maximization Criterion
Serdar Ozsoy1,2 Shadi Hamdan1,3 Sercan Ö. Arik4 Deniz Yuret1,3 Alper T. Erdogan1,2
1
KUIS AI Center, Koc University, Turkey 2 EEE Department, Koc University, Turkey
3
CE Department, Koc University, Turkey 4 Google Cloud AI Research, Sunnyvale, CA
{sozsoy19, shamdan17, dyuret, alperdogan}@ku.edu.tr soarik@google.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning allows AI systems to learn effective representations from
large amounts of data using tasks that do not require costly labeling. Mode collapse, i.e., the model producing identical representations for all inputs, is a central
problem to many self-supervised learning approaches, making self-supervised
tasks, such as matching distorted variants of the inputs, ineffective. In this article,
we argue that a straightforward application of information maximization among
alternative latent representations of the same input naturally solves the collapse
problem and achieves competitive empirical results. We propose a self-supervised
learning method, CorInfoMax, that uses a second-order statistics-based mutual
information measure that reflects the level of correlation among its arguments.
Maximizing this correlative information measure between alternative representations of the same input serves two purposes: (1) it avoids the collapse problem
by generating feature vectors with non-degenerate covariances; (2) it establishes
relevance among alternative representations by increasing the linear dependence
among them. An approximation of the proposed information maximization objective simplifies to a Euclidean distance-based objective function regularized by the
log-determinant of the feature covariance matrix. The regularization term acts as a
natural barrier against feature space degeneracy. Consequently, beyond avoiding
complete output collapse to a single point, the proposed approach also prevents
dimensional collapse by encouraging the spread of information across the whole
feature space. Numerical experiments demonstrate that CorInfoMax achieves better
or competitive performance results relative to the state-of-the-art SSL approaches.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is an important paradigm with significant impact in artificial intelligence [1–6]. In particular, SSL can significantly reduce the need for expensively-obtained labeled
data. Furthermore, the internal representations learned by SSL approaches are more suitable for
task generalization in transfer learning applications [7]. Recently, SSL methods have even been
demonstrated to achieve comparable performance to their supervised counterparts [8, 9].
The primary approach for SSL is to define a pretext objective based on unlabeled data, whose
optimization leads to rich and useful representations for downstream applications. For example, for
visual processing, a common way to construct a pretext task is to obtain similar features for two
different augmentations of the same input, which exploits the expected invariance of representations
to particular transformations of the input. However, the corresponding optimization setting should
avoid the (total) “collapse problem,” which is described as generating the same feature output for
all inputs. Figure 1.(a) illustrates a toy view of the total collapse problem, where all latent vector
outputs converge to a single point during training. We can also define its less severe version, which
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

