Natural image synthesis for the retina with variational
information bottleneck representation

Babak Rahmani
rahmani.b91@gmail.com

Demetri Psaltis
EPFL
demetri.psaltis@epfl.ch

Christophe Moser
EPFL
christophe.moser@epfl.ch

Abstract
In the early visual system, high dimensional natural stimuli are encoded into the
trains of neuronal spikes that transmit the information to the brain to produce
perception. However, is all the visual scene information required to explain the
neuronal responses? In this work, we search for answers to this question by
developing a joint model of the natural visual input and neuronal responses using
the Information Bottleneck (IB) framework that can represent features of the input
data into a few latent variables that play a role in the prediction of the outputs. The
correlations between data samples acquired from published experiments on ex-vivo
retinas are accounted for in the model by a Gaussian Process (GP) prior. The
proposed IB-GP model performs competitively to the state-of-the-art feedforward
convolutional networks in predicting spike responses to natural stimuli. Finally,
the IB-GP model is used in a closed-loop iterative process to obtain reducedcomplexity inputs that elicit responses as elicited by the original stimuli. We found
three properties of the retina’s IB-GP model. First, the reconstructed stimuli from
the latent variables show robustness in spike prediction across models. Second,
surprisingly the dynamics of the high-dimensional stimuli and RGCs’ responses are
very well represented in the embeddings of the IB-GP model. Third, the minimum
stimuli consist of different patterns: Gabor-type locally high-frequency filters, onand off-center Gaussians, or a mixture of both. Overall, this work demonstrates that
the IB-GP model provides a principled approach for joint learning of the stimuli
and retina codes, capturing dynamics of the stimuli-RGCs in the latent space which
could help better understand the computation of the early visual system.

1

Introduction

A fundamental challenge in neuroprosthetics is finding the proper input to a sensory or motor system
that yields a desired functional output. This is achieved naturally by the underlying physiological
circuit in an unimpaired system. For example, in the vision system, when an image is formed onto
the photoreceptors, the electrical neural activity is processed by several layers of neurons within the
retina, and a train of electrical neural spikes is sent to the visual cortex via the optic nerve producing
a perception of the visual scene. However, one can ask: is it possible to reduce the complexity of
the input stimuli and still obtain the same functional behavior? In other words, what are the reduced
spatiotemporal stimuli that elicit the same responses as those of the higher-dimensional original
inputs? These are important questions both for understanding the neural computations of the retina
and possibly for designing visual prosthesis in which minimal information stimuli that optimally
drive neurons may prove beneficial [36, 18, 22].
In this work, we focus on the natural vision system and search for answers to these questions. Our
system consists of the spatiotemporal stimuli impinging on the photoreceptors in the retina up to the
spiking responses emitted by the Retinal Ganglion Cells (RGCs). Linear-nonlinear (LN) [11] and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

