Searching for Better Spatio-temporal Alignment in
Few-Shot Action Recognition

Yichao Cao1∗ , Xiu Su2∗, Qingfei Tang3 , Shan You4 , Xiaobo Lu1 , Chang Xu2†
1
School of Automation, Southeast University,
2
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney,
3
Enbo Technology Co.,Ltd., China,
4
SenseTime Research
caoyichao@seu.edu.cn, xisu5992@uni.sydney.edu.au, qingfeitang@gmail.com
youshan@sensetime.com, xblu@seu.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Spatio-Temporal feature matching and alignment are essential for few-shot action
recognition as they determine the coherence and effectiveness of the temporal
patterns. Nevertheless, this process could be not reliable, especially when dealing
with complex video scenarios. In this paper, we propose to improve the performance
of matching and alignment from the end-to-end design of models. Our solution
comes at two-folds. First, we encourage to enhance the extracted Spatio-Temporal
representations from few-shot videos in the perspective of architectures. With this
aim, we propose a specialized transformer search method for videos, thus the spatial
and temporal attention can be well-organized and optimized for stronger feature
representations. Second, we also design an efficient non-parametric spatio-temporal
prototype alignment strategy to better handle the high variability of motion. In
particular, a query-specific class prototype will be generated for each query sample
and category, which can better match query sequences against all support sequences.
By doing so, our method SST enjoys significant superiority over the benchmark
UCF101 and HMDB51 datasets. For example, with no pretraining, our method
achieves 17.1% Top-1 accuracy improvement than the baseline TRX on UCF101
5-way 1-shot setting but with only 3x fewer FLOPs.

1

Introduction

One of the most important tasks in video understanding is to understand human actions, which is
one of the representative tasks for video understanding [54]. In recent years, video understanding
and action recognition have been witnessing remarkable progress with the emergence of high-quality
large-scale video datasets [5, 15, 10]. However, this success relies quite heavily on a large amount
of manually labeled samples. The dataset annotation process is laborious, cumbersome, and timeconsuming and restricts practical algorithm applications. Therefore, how to classify unseen action
classes with extremely few annotated samples gives rise to the investigation of few-shot (FS) action
recognition [52, 4].
Compared with the image task [49, 46, 48, 8, 50, 45], introducing temporal dimension makes the
video task more complicated. For example, actions in videos are often performed at various speeds
and occur at different time points. Further, action recognition usually needs to integrate multiple
distinctive sub-action information to generate corresponding temporal representations, which are
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

