Solving Quantitative Reasoning Problems with
Language Models
Aitor Lewkowycz⇤, Anders Andreassen†, David Dohan† , Ethan Dyer† ,
Henryk Michalewski† , Vinay Ramasesh† , Ambrose Slone,
Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo Gutman-Solo, Yuhuai Wu,
Behnam Neyshabur⇤ , Guy Gur-Ari⇤ , Vedant Misra⇤
Google Research

Abstract
Language models have achieved remarkable performance on a wide range of tasks
that require natural language understanding. Nevertheless, state-of-the-art models
have generally struggled with tasks that require quantitative reasoning, such as
solving mathematics, science, and engineering problems at the college level. To
help close this gap, we introduce Minerva, a large language model pretrained on
general natural language data and further trained on technical content. The model
achieves state-of-the-art performance on technical benchmarks without the use of
external tools. We also evaluate our model on over two hundred undergraduatelevel problems in physics, biology, chemistry, economics, and other sciences that
require quantitative reasoning, and find that the model can correctly answer nearly
a third of them.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks have seen remarkable success in a variety of domains including computer
vision, speech recognition, audio and image generation, translation, game playing, and robotics. In
particular, large language models have achieved excellent performance across a variety of natural
language tasks including common-sense reasoning, question answering, and summarization [1, 2, 3,
4, 5]. However, these models have struggled with tasks that require quantitative reasoning, such as
solving mathematics, science, and engineering problems [6, 7, 8].
Quantitative reasoning problems are an interesting domain of application for language models because
they test the capability of models on several fronts. They require the solver to correctly parse a
natural language input, potentially recall world knowledge that pertains to the problem, and apply
an algorithm or series of computations to the information provided in order to arrive at a correct
solution. They also require that the solver is able to correctly parse and generate precise sequences
of mathematical tokens, as well as apply a computational procedure to tokens via symbolic and
numerical manipulation. Finally, such problems are a proving ground for research toward robust
quantitative reasoning solvers that are useful in supporting the work of humans in scientific and
technical fields.
Previous research has shown that large language models achieve impressive performance on math and
programming questions after training on domain specific datasets [9, 10, 11]. In this work, we apply
this approach to quantitative reasoning problems, in which the model is required to provide a complete
and self-contained solution, without relying on external tools. Such tasks include mathematics word
problems, competition mathematics evaluations, and many problems in science and engineering.
⇤
†

Equal leadership and advising contribution
Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

