UViM: A Unified Modeling Approach for Vision
with Learned Guiding Codes

Alexander Kolesnikov∗ † André Susano Pinto∗ †
Lucas Beyer∗ Xiaohua Zhai∗ Jeremiah Harmsen∗ Neil Houlsby∗
Google Research, Brain Team Zürich
{akolesnikov,andresp,lbeyer,xzhai,jeremiah,neilhoulsby}@google.com

Abstract
We introduce UViM, a unified approach capable of modeling a wide range of computer vision tasks. In contrast to previous models, UViM has the same functional
form for all tasks; it requires no task-specific modifications which require extensive
human expertise. The approach involves two components: (I) a base model (feedforward) which is trained to directly predict raw vision outputs, guided by a learned
discrete code and (II) a language model (autoregressive) that is trained to generate
the guiding code. These components complement each other: the language model
is well-suited to modeling structured interdependent data, while the base model is
efficient at dealing with high-dimensional outputs. We demonstrate the effectiveness of UViM on three diverse and challenging vision tasks: panoptic segmentation,
depth prediction and image colorization, where we achieve competitive and near
state-of-the-art results. Our experimental results suggest that UViM is a promising
candidate for a unified modeling approach in computer vision.

1

Introduction

Many computer vision tasks require producing high-dimensional structured outputs. Examples
include various types of image segmentation, monocular depth estimation, surface normal estimation,
colorization, object detection, image super-resolution, etc. By handcrafting architectures and training
procedures specific to each task, the structure of those target outputs can be exploited to learn better
models. However, this fragmented approach impedes the ability to build a general solution ready to
be applied to any task.
For the tasks above, that require predicting high-dimensional structured outputs, direct use of powerful
parametric models such as CNNs [27, 44, 16] and Vision Transformers [9], trained with decomposable
(e.g. pixel-wise) loss is not sufficient, as this basic approach lacks the ability to model the structure
of the output. To address this shortcoming, standard approaches turn to using additional modeling
components such as, for example, anchor boxes [37, 30], non-maximal suppression [37, 30], matching
losses [2, 5, 6] or conditional random fields [3, 55].
Recently, there have been significant advances in the modeling of complex structured outputs in the
context of language generation and (conditional) image generation: autoregressive models [49, 41, 25],
GANs [13], VAE [22], VQVAE [51], diffusion models [45, 18]. However, using such techniques to
tackle discriminative problems in a unified way remains under-explored.
In this work, we propose a new approach, UViM, capable of modeling many vision tasks, leveraging
recent advances in discrete representation learning [51] and language modeling [52]. We show
competitive results in three diverse tasks: panoptic segmentation [23], depth prediction [43] and
colorization [57]. Crucially, there are no task-specific components required for each task. All of the
tasks use the same model and are amenable to transfer learning from standard pre-trained models.
∗

Significant technical contribution. † Shared first authorship.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

