Descent Steps of a Relation-Aware Energy Produce
Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks

1

Hongjoon Ahn1∗, Yongyi Yang2∗, Quan Gan 3 , Taesup Moon 1† and David Wipf 3†
ECE/IPAI/ASRI/INMC, Seoul National University, 2 University of Michigan, 3 Amazon Web Services
{hong0805, tsmoon}@snu.ac.kr, yongyi@umich.edu,
quagan@amazon.com, davidwipf@gmail.com

Abstract
Heterogeneous graph neural networks (GNNs) achieve strong performance on
node classification tasks in a semi-supervised learning setting. However, as in the
simpler homogeneous GNN case, message-passing-based heterogeneous GNNs
may struggle to balance between resisting the oversmoothing that may occur in deep
models, and capturing long-range dependencies of graph structured data. Moreover,
the complexity of this trade-off is compounded in the heterogeneous graph case
due to the disparate heterophily relationships between nodes of different types. To
address these issues, we propose a novel heterogeneous GNN architecture in which
layers are derived from optimization steps that descend a novel relation-aware
energy function. The corresponding minimizer is fully differentiable with respect
to the energy function parameters, such that bilevel optimization can be applied
to effectively learn a functional form whose minimum provides optimal node
representations for subsequent classification tasks. In particular, this methodology
allows us to model diverse heterophily relationships between different node types
while avoiding oversmoothing effects. Experimental results on 8 heterogeneous
graph benchmarks demonstrate that our proposed method can achieve competitive
node classification accuracy. The source code of our algorithm is available at
https://github.com/hongjoon0805/HALO.

1

Introduction

Graph structured data, which contains information related to entities as well as the interactions
between them, arise in various applications such as social networks or movie recommendations. In
a real world scenario, these entities and interactions are often multi-typed, such as actor, director,
keyword, and movie in a movie review graph [20] or authors, papers, terms, and venue in an academic
network [31]. Hence the relationships between entities can potentially be much more complex than
within a traditional homogeneous graph scenario, in which only a single node and edge type exists. To
this end, heterogeneous graphs have been proposed as a practical and effective tool to systematically
deal with such multi-typed graph-structured data. With the advent of graph neural networks (GNN)
for instantiating deep models that are sensitive to complex relationships between data instances, it
is natural that numerous variants have been developed to explicitly handle heterogeneous graphs
[2, 5, 7, 10, 17, 18, 29, 33, 37], with promising performance on downstream tasks such as node
classification or link prediction.
In this vein, message-passing GNNs represent one of the most widely-adopted heterogeneous
architectures, whereby a sequence of type-specific graph propagation operators allow neighboring
nodes to share and aggregate heterogeneous information [7, 29, 33]. However, in some cases where
∗
†

Work completed during an internship at the AWS Shanghai AI Lab.
Co-corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

