Modeling Transitivity and Cyclicity in Directed
Graphs via Binary Code Box Embeddings
Dongxu Zhang, Michael Boratko, Cameron Musco, Andrew McCallum
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{dongxuzhang, mboratko, cmusco, mccallum}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Modeling directed graphs with differentiable representations is a fundamental
requirement for performing machine learning on graph-structured data. Geometric
embedding models (e.g. hyperbolic, cone, and box embeddings) excel at this task,
exhibiting useful inductive biases for directed graphs. However, modeling directed
graphs that both contain cycles and some element of transitivity, two properties
common in real-world settings, is challenging. Box embeddings, which can be
thought of as representing the graph as an intersection over some learned supergraphs, have a natural inductive bias toward modeling transitivity, but (as we prove)
cannot model cycles. To this end, we propose binary code box embeddings, where
a learned binary code selects a subset of graphs for intersection. We explore several
variants, including global binary codes (amounting to a union over intersections)
and per-vertex binary codes (allowing greater flexibility) as well as methods of
regularization. Theoretical and empirical results show that the proposed models
not only preserve a useful inductive bias of transitivity but also have sufficient
representational capacity to model arbitrary graphs, including graphs with cycles.

1

Introduction

Many real-world networks, such as social media interactions, paper citations, web links, and ontologies, are naturally represented as directed graphs [14, 6]. Two common properties of these graphs
are transitivity and cyclicity. A cycle in a directed graph is a directed path starting from a vertex and
traversing back to itself. For example, “organic matter” ! “worm” ! “fish” ! “cat” ! “organic
matter” is a food cycle. Transitivity in a directed graph is the property that if there exists a directed
path from u to v, then edge (u, v) also exists. For example, if “cat is mammal” and “mammal is
animal” are true, “cat is animal” is true.
In the age of deep learning, it is necessary to determine a way to capture the salient information from
a graph via some differentiable parameterization. To this end, various graph embedding methods have
been proposed. Some work, such as DeepWalk [17] and Node2vec [8], maps each vertex to a vector
in Euclidean space. These methods perform a low-rank factorization of the adjacency matrix or the
graph Laplacian [18] and are designed to model undirected graphs. These can be extended to capture
edge asymmetry in directed graphs by using two separate representations - one for source, and one
for target - either unconstrained or related with one another via some function. It has been proven
that using a dot product or distance-based energy function, separate source and target vectors can
encode any graph (given sufficient dimension) [1], including graphs with cycles. When the source
and target representations live in separate spaces, however, relationships which result from following
directed paths (e.g., transitivity) are harder to encode. For example, given edge (i, j) and (j, k), a
vector model can learn to make |si tj |2 ⇡ 0 and |sj tk |2 ⇡ 0, where si , sj are source vectors and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

