DNA: Proximal Policy Optimization with a Dual
Network Architecture
Matthew Aitchison
The Australian National University
matthew.aitchison@anu.edu.au

Penny Sweetser
The Australian National University

Abstract
This paper explores the problem of simultaneously learning a value function and
policy in deep actor-critic reinforcement learning models. We find that the common
practice of learning these functions jointly is sub-optimal due to an order-ofmagnitude difference in noise levels between the two tasks. Instead, we show
that learning these tasks independently, but with a constrained distillation phase,
significantly improves performance. Furthermore, we find that policy gradient
noise levels decrease when using a lower variance return estimate. Whereas,
value learning noise level decreases with a lower bias estimate. Together these
insights inform an extension to Proximal Policy Optimization we call Dual Network
Architecture (DNA), which significantly outperforms its predecessor. DNA also
exceeds the performance of the popular Rainbow DQN algorithm on four of the
five environments tested, even under more difficult stochastic control settings.

1

Introduction

Combining deep neural networks with reinforcement learning has produced impressive results on
challenging problems, such as playing Chess [32], Atari games [25], and robotics tasks [31]. However,
results have bifurcated between two competing approaches: Q-learning-based approaches that require
learning an (action conditioned) value estimate and actor-critic policy gradient (AC-PG, or just PG)1
approaches that learn both a policy and value estimate. PG offers many theoretical advantages over
Q-learning, such as natural support for continuous control problems and the ability to learn stochastic
policies. Until recently, PG approaches [24, 31, 11], while strong on continuous control problems,
have under-performed Q-learning approaches on vision-based tasks [25, 16, 4], restricting the use of
PG in this domain.
This paper aims to close the gap between PG and Q-learning methods by showing that the common
practice of jointly learning value and policy with shared features negatively affects the algorithm’s
performance.2 We also demonstrate an order-of-magnitude difference in noise levels between these
two tasks and argue that this makes these two tasks poorly aligned.
In light of this result, we introduce a new algorithm, based on Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
[31], called Dual Network Architecture (DNA). We test DNA empirically on a subset of the Arcade
Learning Environment (ALE) [6], Atari-5 [2]. Our results show a strong increase in performance
on this benchmark compared to both PPO and another dual network model Phasic Policy Gradient
(PPG) [11]. Our model also outperforms Rainbow DQN [16] on four of the five games tested, even
under more challenging environmental settings.
1

For simplicity, we refer to actor-critic policy gradient as policy gradient, even though some early policy
gradient approaches, such as REINFORCE [36], do not learn a value function.
2
PPO [31], A3C [24], and Muslie [15] all use a joint network when training on vision-based discrete action
environments. PPG [11] uses a dual network with an auxiliary task, which we discuss in more detail in Section 2
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

