Score-based Generative Modeling Secretly Minimizes
the Wasserstein Distance
Dohyun Kwon, Ying Fan, Kangwook Lee
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Score-based generative models are shown to achieve remarkable empirical performances in various applications such as image generation and audio synthesis.
However, a theoretical understanding of score-based diffusion models is still incomplete. Recently, Song et al. showed that the training objective of score-based
generative models is equivalent to minimizing the Kullback–Leibler divergence of
the generated distribution from the data distribution. In this work, we show that
score-based models also minimize the Wasserstein distance between them under
suitable assumptions on the model. Specifically, we prove that the Wasserstein
distance is upper bounded by the square root of the objective function up to multiplicative constants and a fixed constant offset. Our proof is based on a novel
application of the theory of optimal transport, which can be of independent interest
to the society. Our numerical experiments support our findings. By analyzing our
upper bounds, we provide a few techniques to obtain tighter upper bounds.

1

Introduction

The idea of gradually perturbing the data distribution to define the forward process and learning
the reverse process has recently demonstrated remarkable performances in generative modeling.
Score-based generative models [33, 34, 35] and diffusion probabilistic models [30, 17] have been
used in numerous applications, including image generation [26, 12], and audio synthesis [9, 21].
Both model families have the following two processes. The given data distribution is incrementally
perturbed by adding small noise in the forward process. This forward process can be understood as
the standard diffusion process [35]. The reverse process requires the so-called score function [2],
the gradient of the log probability density function. We minimize a weighted combination of score
matching losses to approximate the score function. Once the score function is approximated, one can
generate samples from randomly generated noise by applying the learned reverse process.
Note that score-based models do not explicitly minimize any sort of similarity between the model
distribution (the distribution of the generated samples) and the data distribution. Therefore, it
is unclear whether or not scored-based generative models can minimize divergence (or distance)
between the model distribution and the data distribution. In very recent work [32], the authors show
that optimizing the score matching loss is indeed equivalent to minimizing an upper bound on the
Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL divergence). Therefore, it is expected that the model distribution is
similar (in the sense of the KL divergence) to the data distribution if the score matching loss is small.
A natural question follows – do score-based models minimize any other divergence or distance
than the KL divergence? At first glance, this seems unlikely. For instance, Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [16] were shown to minimize different divergences depending on the choice
of the loss function. The original GAN loss function turns out to capture the Jensen–Shannon
Emails: dkwon7@wisc.edu, yfan87@wisc.edu, kangwook.lee@wisc.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

