K-L ITE: Learning Transferable Visual Models with
External Knowledge
Sheng Shen⇤\ , Chunyuan Li⇤† , Xiaowei Hu⇤† , Jianwei Yang† , Yujia Xie† ,
Pengchuan Zhang† , Zhe Gan† , Lijuan Wang† , Lu Yuan†
†
Ce Liu , Kurt Keutzer\ , Trevor Darrell\ , Anna Rohrbach\ , Jianfeng Gao†
†
Microsoft \ University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
The new generation of state-of-the-art computer vision systems are trained from
natural language supervision, ranging from simple object category names to descriptive captions. This form of supervision ensures high generality and usability
of the learned visual models, due to the broad concept coverage achieved via largescale data collection process. Alternatively, we argue that learning with external
knowledge is a promising way which leverages a much more structured source of
supervision and offers sample efficiency. We propose K-L ITE 1 , a simple strategy
to leverage external knowledge for building transferable visual systems: In training, it enriches entities in text with WordNet and Wiktionary knowledge, leading
to an efficient and scalable approach to learning image representations that uses
knowledge about the visual concepts. In evaluation, the text is also augmented with
external knowledge and then used to reference learned visual concepts (or describe
new ones) to enable zero-shot and few-shot transfer of the pre-trained models. We
study the performance of K-L ITE on two important computer vision problems,
image classification and object detection, benchmarking on 20 and 13 different
existing datasets, respectively. The proposed knowledge-augmented models show
significant improvement in transfer learning performance over existing methods. 2

1

Introduction

One of the core aspirations in computer vision (CV) is to develop systems that endow computers with
the ability to effectively learn general visual representations, which can be transferred to a variety
of downstream recognition datasets with arbitrary visual concepts in the wild. Though excellent
performance has been achieved on standard benchmarks, the traditional supervised approaches are
limited to learning a fixed set of concepts, e.g., 22K concepts on ImageNet [15] or 18K concepts on
JFT-300M [82]. This leads to a few issues: (i) Annotating each individual vision dataset is not only
labor intensive, but also results in a narrow set of visual concepts; (ii) Visual models trained on such
datasets are good at one task (with the given concept set) and this task only, and show poor transfer
learning performance to customized datasets that usually come with a different set of concepts [27].
To tackle this problem, recent large-scale language-augmented visual models, such as CLIP [71],
ALIGN [36] and Florence [101], are trained on a wide variety of images with natural language
supervision that is abundantly available on the Internet. These models demonstrate strong zero-shot
transfer capabilities, since they acquire open-set recognition abilities through problem reformulation
from classification to retrieval. Moreover, model generalization is improved as natural language
Equal Technical Contribution  Project Lead
Knowledge-augmented Language Image Training and Evaluation
2
Our code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/klite.
1

⇤

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

