Unsupervised Adaptation from Repeated Traversals
for Autonomous Driving

Yurong You∗†1 Cheng Perng Phoo∗1 Katie Z Luo∗1 Travis Zhang1
Wei-Lun Chao2
Bharath Hariharan1 Mark Campbell1 Kilian Q. Weinberger1
1
2
Cornell University, Ithaca NY
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH

Abstract
For a self-driving car to operate reliably, its perceptual system must generalize
to the end-user’s environment — ideally without additional annotation efforts.
One potential solution is to leverage unlabeled data (e.g., unlabeled LiDAR point
clouds) collected from the end-users’ environments (i.e. target domain) to adapt
the system to the difference between training and testing environments. While
extensive research has been done on such an unsupervised domain adaptation
problem, one fundamental problem lingers: there is no reliable signal in the target
domain to supervise the adaptation process. To overcome this issue we observe
that it is easy to collect unsupervised data from multiple traversals of repeated
routes. While different from conventional unsupervised domain adaptation, this
assumption is extremely realistic since many drivers share the same roads. We
show that this simple additional assumption is sufficient to obtain a potent signal
that allows us to perform iterative self-training of 3D object detectors on the target
domain. Concretely, we generate pseudo-labels with the out-of-domain detector
but reduce false positives by removing detections of supposedly mobile objects that
are persistent across traversals. Further, we reduce false negatives by encouraging
predictions in regions that are not persistent. We experiment with our approach on
two large-scale driving datasets and show remarkable improvement in 3D object
detection of cars, pedestrians, and cyclists, bringing us a step closer to generalizable
autonomous driving. Code is available at https://github.com/YurongYou/
Rote-DA.

1

Introduction

Autonomous vehicles and driver-assist systems require 3D object detectors to accurately identify
and locate other traffic participants (cars, pedestrians and so on) to drive safely [26, 31, 12, 25, 21].
Modern 3D object detectors achieve high accuracy on benchmark datasets [9, 11, 41, 35, 36, 33, 42].
However, most benchmark data sets train and test classifiers on essentially the same locations (city,
country), time, and weather conditions, and therefore represent the “best case” of an end-user using
the self-driving car in precisely the same conditions it was trained on. A more realistic scenario is
that self-driving cars trained in, for example, Germany will be driven in the USA. Unfortunately,
past work has shown that this domain gap results in a catastrophic drop in accuracy [32]. Given that
an end-user may choose to operate their car wherever they please, adapting the perception pipeline
effectively to such domain shifts is a critical challenge.
An obvious solution is to retrain the detector in the target domain (i.e., the end-user’s location/environment). Unfortunately, this requires large amounts of labeled data, where expert human
∗
†

Denotes equal contribution.
Correspondences could be directed to yy785@cornell.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

