Decentralized Training of Foundation Models in
Heterogeneous Environments

Binhang Yuan1∗, Yongjun He1∗, Jared Quincy Davis2 , Tianyi Zhang2 , Tri Dao2 ,
Beidi Chen34 , Percy Liang2 , Christopher Re2 , Ce Zhang1
1
ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 Stanford University, USA 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 Meta AI
{binhang.yuan, yongjun.he, ce.zhang}@inf.ethz.ch
{jaredq, tz58, trid, beidic, pliang, chrismre}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Training foundation models, such as GPT-3 and PaLM, can be extremely expensive,
often involving tens of thousands of GPUs running continuously for months. These
models are typically trained in specialized clusters featuring fast, homogeneous
interconnects and using carefully designed software systems that support both
data parallelism and model/pipeline parallelism. Such dedicated clusters can be
costly and difficult to obtain. Can we instead leverage the much greater amount of
decentralized, heterogeneous, and lower-bandwidth interconnected compute? Previous works examining the heterogeneous, decentralized setting focus on relatively
small models that can be trained in a purely data parallel manner. State-of-the-art
schemes for model parallel foundation model training, such as Megatron and Deepspeed, only consider the homogeneous data center setting. In this paper, we present
the first study of training large foundation models with model parallelism in a
decentralized regime over a heterogeneous network. Our key technical contribution
is a scheduling algorithm that allocates different computational “tasklets” in the
training of foundation models to a group of decentralized GPU devices connected
by a slow heterogeneous network. We provide a formal cost model and further
propose an efficient evolutionary algorithm to find the optimal allocation strategy.
We conduct extensive experiments that represent different scenarios for learning
over geo-distributed devices simulated using real-world network measurements. In
the most extreme case, across 8 different cities spanning 3 continents, our approach
is 4.8× faster than prior state-of-the-art training systems.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of deep learning models, particularly foundation
models (FMs) [1] such as GPT-3 [2] and PaLM [3]. Along with these rapid advancements, however,
comes computational challenges in training these models: the training of these FMs can be very
expensive — a single GPT3-175B training run takes 3.6K Petaflops-days [2]— this amounts to $4M
on today’s AWS on demand instances, even assuming 50% device utilization (V100 GPUs peak at
125 TeraFLOPS)! Even the smaller scale language models, e.g., GPT3-1.3B (1.3 billion parameters),
on which this paper evaluates, require 64 Tesla V100 GPUs to run for one week, costing $32K on
AWS. As a result, speeding up training and decreasing the cost of FMs have been active research
areas. Due to their vast number of model parameters, state-of-the-art systems (e.g., Megatron[4],
Deepspeed[5], Fairscale[6]) leverage multiple forms of parallelism [4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. However, their
design is only tailored to fast, homogeneous data center networks.
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

