Using Embeddings for Causal Estimation of Peer
Influence in Social Networks
Irina Cristali1
1

Victor Veitch1,2

Department of Statistics, The University of Chicago
2
Google Research

Abstract
We address the problem of using observational data to estimate peer contagion
effects, the influence of treatments applied to individuals in a network on the outcomes of their neighbors. A main challenge to such estimation is that homophily—
the tendency of connected units to share similar latent traits—acts as an unobserved confounder for contagion effects. Informally, it’s hard to tell whether your
friends have similar outcomes because they were influenced by your treatment,
or whether it’s due to some common trait that caused you to be friends in the
first place. Because these common causes are not usually directly observed, they
cannot be simply adjusted for. We describe an approach to perform the required
adjustment using node embeddings learned from the network itself. The main aim
is to perform this adjustment nonparametrically, without functional form assumptions on either the process that generated the network or the treatment assignment
and outcome processes. The key contributions are to nonparametrically formalize
the causal effect in a way that accounts for homophily, and to show how embedding methods can be used to identify and estimate this effect. Code is available at
https://github.com/IrinaCristali/Peer-Contagion-on-Networks.

1

Introduction

We are interested in estimating peer effects, the causal influence of individuals on their neighbors.
Example. We want to infer the effect that social pressure has on vaccination. Suppose we observe
data from a population where each unit i is a person in an interconnected social network, and for
each unit we know whether they were vaccinated at the beginning of the study period, Ti , and
whether they were vaccinated at the end of the study period, Yi . We are interested in estimating the
effects of the treatment Ti of person i on the outcome Yj of person j. In addition to their vaccination
status, each unit has attributes Ci that act as (proxies for) causes of both the particular network ties
they form, and their vaccination behavior. For instance, Ci may include age, race, education status,
income level, political affiliation, and so forth.
The core challenge here is that we want to estimate a causal effect (e.g., what would happen if we
intervened by vaccinating popular people?), but the variables Ci , Cj act as confounders between the
treatment Tj and outcome Yi . The reason is that when defining a contagion effect from j to i we
must condition on the presence of an edge between (i, j). The edge is causally influenced by both Ci
and Cj , so the conditioning creates a dependency between these variables (it acts as a collider). For
example, if we learn that Alice and Bob are friends then we can infer that they likely live in the same
city. Accordingly, the association between Tj and Yi may be either due to contagion: the causal
influence of Tj on Yi (Bob got vaccinated because Alice did), or due to homophily: the tendency of
similar people to be connected in a network (e.g., Alice and Bob got vaccinated because they both
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

