Beyond Adult and COMPAS:
Fair Multi-Class Prediction via Information Projection

Wael Alghamdi1∗ , Hsiang Hsu1∗ , Haewon Jeong1∗ ,
Hao Wang , P. Winston Michalak1 , Shahab Asoodeh2 , Flavio P. Calmon1
1
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
2
Department of Computing and Software, McMaster University
1

Abstract
We consider the problem of producing fair probabilistic classifiers for multi-class
classification tasks. We formulate this problem in terms of “projecting” a pretrained (and potentially unfair) classifier onto the set of models that satisfy target
group-fairness requirements. The new, projected model is given by post-processing
the outputs of the pre-trained classifier by a multiplicative factor. We provide a
parallelizable, iterative algorithm for computing the projected classifier and derive
both sample complexity and convergence guarantees. Comprehensive numerical
comparisons with state-of-the-art benchmarks demonstrate that our approach maintains competitive performance in terms of accuracy-fairness trade-off curves, while
achieving favorable runtime on large datasets. We also evaluate our method at scale
on an open dataset with multiple classes, multiple intersectional groups, and over
1M samples.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly used to automate decisions that have significant
social consequences. This trend has led to a surge of research on designing and evaluating fairness
interventions that prevent discrimination in ML models. When dealing with group fairness, fairness
interventions aim to ensure that a ML model does not discriminate against different groups determined
by, for example, race, sex, and/or nationality. Extensive comparisons between discrimination control
methods can be found in [BDH+ 18, FSV+ 19, WRC21]. As these studies demonstrate, there is still
no “best” fairness intervention for ML, and the majority of existing approaches are tailored to either
binary classification tasks, binary population groups, or both.2 Moreover, discrimination control
methods are often tested on overused datasets of modest sizes collected in either the US or Europe
(e.g., UCI Adult [Lic13] and COMPAS [ALMK16]).
Most fairness interventions in ML focus on binary outcomes. In this case, the classification output is
either positive or negative, and group-fairness metrics are tailored to binary decisions [HPS16]. While
binary classification covers a range of ML tasks of societal importance (e.g., whether to approve a
loan, whether to admit a student), there are many cases where the predicted variable is not binary. For
example, in education, grading algorithms assign one out of several grades to students. In healthcare,
predicted outcomes are frequently not binary (e.g., severity of disease).
We introduce a theoretically-grounded discrimination control method called FairProjection. This
method ensures group fairness in multi-class classification for several, potentially overlapping population groups. We consider group fairness metrics that are natural multi-class extensions of their binary
∗
Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Wael Alghamdi and Flavio P. Calmon (alghamdi@g.harvard.edu
and flavio@seas.harvard.edu).
2
See Related Work and Table 1 for notable exceptions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

