CS-S HAPLEY: Class-wise Shapley Values for Data
Valuation in Classification

⇤

Stephanie Schoch⇤ Haifeng Xu† Yangfeng Ji⇤
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904
†
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637

Abstract
Data valuation, or the valuation of individual datum contributions, has seen growing
interest in machine learning due to its demonstrable efficacy for tasks such as noisy
label detection. In particular, due to the desirable axiomatic properties, several
Shapley value approximation methods have been proposed. In these methods,
the value function is typically defined as the predictive accuracy over the entire
development set. However, this limits the ability to differentiate between training
instances that are helpful or harmful to their own classes. Intuitively, instances
that harm their own classes may be noisy or mislabeled and should receive a lower
valuation than helpful instances. In this work, we propose CS-S HAPLEY, a Shapley
value with a new value function that discriminates between training instances’ inclass and out-of-class contributions. Our theoretical analysis shows the proposed
value function is (essentially) the unique function that satisfies two desirable
properties for evaluating data values in classification. Further, our experiments on
two benchmark evaluation tasks (data removal and noisy label detection) and four
classifiers demonstrate the effectiveness of CS-S HAPLEY over existing methods.
Lastly, we evaluate the “transferability” of data values estimated from one classifier
to others, and our results suggest Shapley-based data valuation is transferable for
application across different models.

1

Introduction

Data valuation methods aim to quantify the contribution of each datum to the predictive performance
of a learning model. Among these, Shapley values have been proposed as a means to identify helpful
or harmful data [3, 10]. A number of approximations and extensions for Shapley-based data valuation
have been developed, with demonstrable efficacy for tasks such as mislabeled or noisy example
detection and data selection [3, 10, 14, 4, 11]. The performance gains of Shapley-based approaches
over alternative data valuation methods have typically been attributed to the axiomatic basis of
Shapley values that satisfies fairness guarantees from cooperative game theory. Importantly, Shapley
values rest on an underlying assumption that a game is well-represented by its value function [21].
The value function of prior Shapley-based data valuation methods has typically been defined as
the predictive accuracy over the entire development set. However, in the context of valuing data
for learning models on classification tasks, this may have limited ability to differentiate helpful or
harmful training instances. Consider the case where we want to evaluate the value of data points i
and j for a binary classification task, where both points belong to class 1. As shown in the real world
example provided in Figure 1, if the predictive accuracy on the development set is the same when
adding each point individually, then the contribution of these two data points is considered to be
equivalent. However, how i and j contribute to the classifier differs. To be specific, the contribution of
data point i to class 1 is positive (helpful), while the contribution of j to class 1 is negative (harmful).
Similar distinction between training instances that are “helpful” and “harmful” to their own class
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

