Increasing Confidence in Adversarial
Robustness Evaluations
Roland S. Zimmermann∗
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center

Wieland Brendel
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center

Florian Tramèr
Google

Nicholas Carlini
Google

Abstract
Hundreds of defenses have been proposed to make deep neural networks robust
against minimal (adversarial) input perturbations. However, only a handful of these
defenses held up their claims because correctly evaluating robustness is extremely
challenging: Weak attacks often fail to find adversarial examples even if they
unknowingly exist, thereby making a vulnerable network look robust.
In this paper, we propose a test to identify weak attacks and, thus, weak defense
evaluations. Our test slightly modifies a neural network to guarantee the existence
of an adversarial example for every sample. Consequentially, any correct attack
must succeed in breaking this modified network.
For eleven out of thirteen previously-published defenses, the original evaluation of
the defense fails our test, while stronger attacks that break these defenses pass it.
We hope that attack unit tests — such as ours — will be a major component in future
robustness evaluations and increase confidence in an empirical field that is currently
riddled with skepticism. Online version & code: zimmerrol.github.io/active-tests/

1

Introduction

Suppose that someone presents you with a purported proof that P6=NP. The proof is long, complicated,
and difficult to follow. How would you go about checking if this proof is correct?
One cumbersome way would be to directly refute the proof’s claim, e.g., to demonstrate that actually
P=NP by designing an algorithm that solves 3-SAT in polynomial time. While this would definitely
refute the proof, it is likely orders of magnitude more difficult than simply showing that the proof is
incorrect. Accordingly, researchers typically refute incorrect proofs by studying proofs line-by-line,
until they identify some major flaw in the reasoning.
Evaluating adversarial example defenses is somewhat similar to proving a theorem: It is difficult to
estimate the robustness of a neural network correctly (just as it is difficult to write down a correct
proof), but relatively easy to severely overestimate its robustness (just as it is easy to write down a
wrong proof). This contrasts with other areas of machine learning, where performance evaluations
are often trivial, e.g., by computing accuracy on some held-out test set. However, evaluating defense
robustness necessarily involves reasoning over all possible adversaries and showing none can succeed.
That is, a defense evaluation aims to prove that something is impossible. As a result, despite significant
evaluation effort, most published defenses are later broken by stronger attacks [10, 3, 11, 38, 14].
In this light, we here argue for viewing defense proposals as theorem statements, and the corresponding evaluations as proofs. The purpose of a defense evaluation, then, is to provide a convincing and
rigorous argument that the defense is correct. Currently, for an adversary to claim to have a “break”
of a defense, it is necessary to actually produce the adversarial examples that cause the model to
∗

Work done while at Google. Correspondence to: research@rzrimmermann.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

