Robust On-Policy Sampling for Data-Efficient Policy
Evaluation in Reinforcement Learning
Rujie Zhong1 , Duohan Zhang2,? , Lukas Schäfer1 , Stefano V. Albrecht1 , Josiah P. Hanna3,?
1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2
Statistics Department, University of Wisconsin – Madison
3
Computer Sciences Department, University of Wisconsin – Madison
?
Correspondence to {dzhang357, jphanna}@wisc.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are often categorized as either on-policy
or off-policy depending on whether they use data from a target policy of interest
or from a different behavior policy. In this paper, we study a subtle distinction between on-policy data and on-policy sampling in the context of the RL sub-problem
of policy evaluation. We observe that on-policy sampling may fail to match the
expected distribution of on-policy data after observing only a finite number of trajectories and this failure hinders data-efficient policy evaluation. Towards improved
data-efficiency, we show how non-i.i.d., off-policy sampling can produce data that
more closely matches the expected on-policy data distribution and consequently
increases the accuracy of the Monte Carlo estimator for policy evaluation. We introduce a method called Robust On-Policy Sampling and demonstrate theoretically
and empirically that it produces data that converges faster to the expected on-policy
distribution compared to on-policy sampling. Empirically, we show that this faster
convergence leads to lower mean squared error policy value estimates.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are often categorized using the dichotomy of on-policy
versus off-policy. On-policy algorithms learn about a particular target policy using data collected
by behaving according to the target policy. Off-policy algorithms use data collected by behaving
according to a different behavior policy. We study a subtle distinction between on-policy data versus
on-policy sampling as a step towards more data-efficient RL algorithms. To better understand this
distinction, consider a simple example. In this example, a certain target policy repeatedly visits a state
in which it takes action A with probability 0.2 and action B with probability 0.8. Under on-policy
sampling, after five visits to this state, we might actually observe action A 2 times and action B
3 times instead of the expected 1 and 4 times. Alternatively, we could collect data off-policy by
deterministically tracking the expected target policy action proportions; doing so results in observing
the exact expected action frequencies. Though the latter case uses off-policy sampling, it produces
data that is arguably more on-policy than the data produced by on-policy sampling.
In this paper, we study the distinction between on-policy sampling and on-policy data in the context
of the RL sub-problem of policy evaluation [Zinkevich et al., 2006]. In policy evaluation, we are given
an evaluation policy and asked to estimate the expected return that would be accrued when running
the evaluation policy on a task of interest. This problem is important for high confidence deployment
of RL-trained policies. In RL applications, such as robotics, data-efficient policy evaluation is of the
utmost importance – we desire the most accurate estimate with minimal collected data. While much
research has gone into how to most efficiently use a set of already collected data, i.e., the off-policy
policy evaluation problem [Jiang and Li, 2016, Thomas and Brunskill, 2016], an implicit assumption
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

