Adaptation Accelerating Sampling-based Bayesian
Inference in Attractor Neural Networks
Xingsi Dong1
dxs19980605@pku.edu.cn
Tiejun Huang4
tjhuang@pku.edu.cn

Zilong Ji1,3
zilong.ji@ucl.ac.uk

Tianhao Chu1
chutianhao@stu.pku.edu.cn

Wen-Hao Zhang2,†
wenhao.zhang@utsouthwestern.edu

Si Wu1,†
siwu@pku.edu.cn

1, School of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
PKU-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies,
Center of Quantitative Biology, Peking University.
2. Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, O’Donnell Brain Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center.
3. Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London
4. School of Computer Science, Peking University.
†
: Corresponding authors.

Abstract
The brain performs probabilistic Bayesian inference to interpret the external world.
The sampling-based view assumes that the brain represents the stimulus posterior
distribution via samples of stochastic neuronal responses. Although the idea of
sampling-based inference is appealing, it faces a critical challenge of whether
stochastic sampling is fast enough to match the rapid computation of the brain. In
this study, we explore how latent feature sampling can be accelerated in neural
circuits. Specifically, we consider a canonical neural circuit model called continuous attractor neural networks (CANNs) and investigate how sampling-based
inference of latent continuous variables is accelerated in CANNs. Intriguingly, we
find that by including noisy adaptation in the neuronal dynamics, the CANN is
able to speed up the sampling process significantly. We theoretically derive that
the CANN with noisy adaptation implements the efficient sampling method called
Hamiltonian dynamics with friction, where noisy adaption effectively plays the
role of momentum. We theoretically analyze the sampling performances of the
network and derive the condition when the acceleration has the maximum effect.
Simulation results validate our theoretical analyses. We further extend the model to
coupled CANNs and demonstrate that noisy adaptation accelerates the sampling of
the posterior distribution of multivariate stimuli. We hope that this study enhances
our understanding of how Bayesian inference is realized in the brain.

1

Introduction

A large volume of human behavioral [1–3] and animal neurophysiological studies [4, 5] have suggested that the brain performs statistically optimal Bayesian inference to interpret the external
world [6–8]. Yet, exactly how neural circuits in the brain implement probabilistic inference (algorithm) and how neuronal responses represent the stimulus posterior distribution (representation)
remain debated. Among the proposed models in the literature [9–15], the sampling-based view
is promising [6, 12–19], which considers that the stimulus posterior distribution is approximately
represented by samples generated by the neural system over time, with each sample coming from the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

