A Greek Parliament Proceedings Dataset for
Computational Linguistics and Political Analysis
Konstantina Dritsa1 , Kaiti Thoma2 , John Pavlopoulos3 , and Panos Louridas4
1,2,3,4

Athens University of Economics & Business, Greece, 3 Stockholm University, Sweden,
dritsakon@aueb.gr, 2 aikelthoma@gmail.com, 3 annis@aueb.gr, 4 louridas@aueb.gr

1

Abstract
Large, diachronic datasets of political discourse are hard to come across, especially
for resource-lean languages such as Greek. In this paper, we introduce a curated
dataset of the Greek Parliament Proceedings that extends chronologically from
1989 up to 2020. It consists of more than 1 million speeches with extensive
metadata, extracted from 5,355 parliamentary record files. We explain how it was
constructed and the challenges that we had to overcome. The dataset can be used for
both computational linguistics and political analysis—ideally, combining the two.
We present such an application, showing (i) how the dataset can be used to study
the change of word usage through time, (ii) between significant historical events
and political parties, (iii) by evaluating and employing algorithms for detecting
semantic shifts.

1

Introduction

The meanings of words change continuously through time, reflecting the evolution of societies and
ideas. For example the word “gay” originally meant “joyful” but gradually changed its usage to
refer to sexual orientation [22]. Perhaps less well-known, but probably more relevant to our subject,
in 1850 rubbish-tip pickers were using the term “soft-ware” for material that will decompose and
“hard-ware” for the rest [8, p. 380]. The availability of large corpora and advances in computational
semantics have formed fertile ground for the study of semantic shifts. When these advances are
applied to parliamentary corpora, they can provide useful insights into language change1 , different
political views, and the effect of historical events to the use of a language.
In this paper, we present a curated diachronic Greek language dataset, extracted from the proceedings
of the Greek Parliament and spanning 31 years. It consists of more than 1 million speeches in
chronological debate order, with extensive metadata about the speakers, such as gender, political
affiliation, and political role. To our knowledge, it is the only freely available dataset covering a
comparable length of time in the Greek language. Moreover, by its nature as a record of the country’s
parliament, it is again to our knowledge the only dataset that captures more than a quarter century of
the recent Greek political history. We demonstrate the value of the dataset by using it to evaluate four
state of the art word usage change detection approaches and select the most appropriate among them
to compute word usage changes across time and among political parties.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the approaches for word usage change
detection. Section 3 presents our dataset and its construction process. In Section 4 we evaluate four
state of the art word usage change detection algorithms. In Section 5 we examine how word usage
changes reflect political events in Greece. Section 6 presents our conclusions and further discussion.
1

“Language evolution”, “lexical semantic change”, “terminology evolution”, “semantic change”, “semantic
shift”, and “semantic drift” are also all terms used for the same concept.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

