New Lower Bounds for Private Estimation and
a Generalized Fingerprinting Lemma∗

Gautam Kamath
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
g@csail.mit.edu

Argyris Mouzakis
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
amouzaki@uwaterloo.ca

Vikrant Singhal
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
vikrant.singhal@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We prove new lower bounds for statistical estimation tasks under the constraint
of (ε, δ)-differential privacy. First, we provide tight lower bounds for private
covariance estimation of Gaussian distributions. We show that estimating the
covariance matrix in Frobenius norm requires Ω(d2 ) samples, and in spectral norm
requires Ω(d3/2 ) samples, both matching upper bounds up to logarithmic factors.
We prove these bounds via our main technical contribution, a broad generalization
of the fingerprinting method [BUV14] to exponential families. Additionally, using
the private Assouad method of Acharya, Sun, and Zhang [ASZ21], we show a tight
Ω(d/(α2 ε)) lower bound for estimating the mean of a distribution with bounded
covariance to α-error in ℓ2 -distance. Prior known lower bounds for all these
problems were either polynomially weaker or held under the stricter condition of
(ε, 0)-differential privacy.

1

Introduction

The last several years have seen a surge of interest in algorithms for statistical estimation under the
constraint of Differential Privacy (DP) [DMNS06]. We now have a rich algorithmic toolbox for
private estimation of mean, covariance, and entire distributions, in a variety of settings.
While the community has enjoyed much success designing algorithms for estimation tasks, lower
bounds have been much harder to come by, and consequently, the existing literature lacks a rigorous
understanding of some core problems. Lower bounds against the strong privacy constraint of pure DP
(i.e., (ε, 0)-DP) are generally not too challenging to prove, most often relying upon the well-known
packing technique [HT10]. Such packing lower bounds are optimal in a broad range of settings (see,
e.g., [BKSW19]), and thus are frequently effective at providing tight minimax sample complexity
lower bounds.
However, pure DP is a very strong privacy constraint: in most practical circumstances, it suffices
to only require the weaker privacy notion of approximate DP (i.e., (ε, δ)-DP) [DKM+ 06], in which
case packing lower bounds are no longer applicable. Proving lower bounds under approximate DP
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

