Dual-Curriculum Contrastive Multi-Instance
Learning for Cancer Prognosis Analysis with Whole
Slide Images
Chao Tu1,2,3 , Yu Zhang1,2,3,∗ , Zhenyuan Ning1,2,3,∗
School of Biomedical Engineering, 2 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Image
Processing, 3 Guangdong Province Engineering Laboratory for Medical Imaging and Diagnostic
Technology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China
{tchaoc17@smu.edu.cn, yuzhang@smu.edu.cn, jonnyning@foxmail.com}
*
Corresponding authors.
1

Abstract
The multi-instance learning (MIL) has advanced cancer prognosis analysis with
whole slide images (WSIs). However, current MIL methods for WSI analysis still
confront unique challenges. Previous methods typically generate instance representations via a pre-trained model or a model trained by the instances with bag-level
annotations, which, however, may not generalize well to the downstream task due
to the introduction of excessive label noises and the lack of fine-grained information across multi-magnification WSIs. Additionally, existing methods generally
aggregate instance representations as bag ones for prognosis prediction and have
no consideration of intra-bag redundancy and inter-bag discrimination. To address
these issues, we propose a dual-curriculum contrastive MIL method for cancer
prognosis analysis with WSIs. The proposed method consists of two curriculums,
i.e., saliency-guided weakly-supervised instance encoding with cross-scale tiles and
contrastive-enhanced soft-bag prognosis inference. Extensive experiments on three
public datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in this field. The code is available at https://github.com/YuZhang-SMU/CancerPrognosis-Analysis/tree/main/DC_MIL%20Code.

1

Introduction

Cancer prognosis analysis is of great significance for risk-benefit assessment and clinical decision [1].
Computational whole slide image (WSI), which entails the quantitative profiling of spatial patterns
and tumor microenvironments in tissue slides, has advanced the application of deep learning in cancer
prognosis analysis [2, 3]. However, deep learning in WSIs is often hindered by the gigapixel size
and the lack of pixel-level annotations [4]. Recently, multi-instance learning (MIL) methods have
attracted increasing attention to performing inference in a weakly-supervised manner and have been
successfully applied to WSI analysis [5, 6, 7].
In general, the MIL consists of two stages, i.e., instance encoding stage and instance aggregation
stage [8, 9]. In the encoding stage, several methods have utilized the pre-trained model (e.g., ResNet
on ImageNet) to extract instance representations in an unsupervised way (i.e., without the reference
of outcome labels) [10, 11, 12]. However, recent studies have demonstrated that the pre-trained
model may not generalize well to the downstream tasks as it is task-agnostic1 and inclined to overfit
1

The "task-specific" and "task-agnostic" refer to a training manner that is oriented by the task target or not.
This work aims to conduct cancer prognosis. The "task-specific" means using prognosis labels (e.g., survival
time or death risk) as supervision to train the model, while the "task-agnostic" means unsupervised or using
prognosis-irrelevant annotations as supervision.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

