Counterfactual Temporal Point Processes

Kimia Noorbakhsh∗
Sharif University of Technology
kimianoorbakhsh@gmail.com

Manuel Gomez Rodriguez
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Machine learning models based on temporal point processes are the state of the
art in a wide variety of applications involving discrete events in continuous time.
However, these models lack the ability to answer counterfactual questions, which
are increasingly relevant as these models are being used to inform targeted interventions. In this work, our goal is to fill this gap. To this end, we first develop a causal
model of thinning for temporal point processes that builds upon the Gumbel-Max
structural causal model. This model satisfies a desirable counterfactual monotonicity condition, which is sufficient to identify counterfactual dynamics in the process
of thinning. Then, given an observed realization of a temporal point process with
a given intensity function, we develop a sampling algorithm that uses the above
causal model of thinning and the superposition theorem to simulate counterfactual
realizations of the temporal point process under a given alternative intensity function. Simulation experiments using synthetic and real epidemiological data show
that the counterfactual realizations provided by our algorithm may give valuable
insights to enhance targeted interventions.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning models based on temporal point processes have become increasingly
popular for modeling discrete event data in continuous time [1, 2]. This type of data is ubiquitous in a
wide range of application domains, from social and information networks to finance or epidemiology.
For example, in social and information networks, events may represent users’ posts, clicks or
likes [3, 4]; in finance, they may represent buying and selling orders [5]; or, in epidemiology, they
may represent when an individual gets infected or recovers [6]. In many of these domains, these
models have become state of the art at predicting future events given a sequence of past events [7].
Building upon the above models, a recent line of work [8–11] has developed machine learning methods
to automate online, adaptive targeted interventions using reinforcement learning and stochastic
optimal control. While this line of work has shown early promise, particularly in personalized
teaching and viral marketing, there are many high-stakes application in which targeted interventions
are unlikely to be automated. For example, in epidemiology, fine-grained interventions that are
targeted at particular sites or individuals (e.g., hygienic measures at work places, closures of schools,
or contact tracing) are likely to be decided by governments, policy makers and health authorities, at
least in the foreseeable future. In this work, our goal is to develop machine learning methods that,
given the outcome of an intervention implemented in the past, are able to assist decision makers at
implementing better interventions in these high-stakes applications.
More specifically, we focus on facilitating counterfactual thinking, a type of thinking that has been
argued to help humans correct and improve behavior that has been unsuccessful in the past [12, 13].
In counterfactual thinking, given a history of past events that have already occurred, one asks what
past events would have instead occurred if certain intervention had been in place. For example,
in epidemiology, assume that, during a pandemic, a government decides to implement business
∗

This work was done during Kimia Noorbakhsh’s internship at MPI-SWS.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

