K-Radar: 4D Radar Object Detection for Autonomous
Driving in Various Weather Conditions

Dong-Hee Paek1∗
Seung-Hyun Kong1∗†
Kevin Tirta Wijaya2
1
2
CCS Graduate School of Mobility
Robotics Program
KAIST
{donghee.paek, skong, kevin.tirta}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Unlike RGB cameras that use visible light bands (384∼769 THz) and Lidars that
use infrared bands (361∼331 THz), Radars use relatively longer wavelength radio bands (77∼81 GHz), resulting in robust measurements in adverse weathers.
Unfortunately, existing Radar datasets only contain a relatively small number of
samples compared to the existing camera and Lidar datasets. This may hinder the
development of sophisticated data-driven deep learning techniques for Radar-based
perception. Moreover, most of the existing Radar datasets only provide 3D Radar
tensor (3DRT) data that contain power measurements along the Doppler, range,
and azimuth dimensions. As there is no elevation information, it is challenging
to estimate the 3D bounding box of an object from 3DRT. In this work, we introduce KAIST-Radar (K-Radar), a novel large-scale object detection dataset and
benchmark that contains 35K frames of 4D Radar tensor (4DRT) data with power
measurements along the Doppler, range, azimuth, and elevation dimensions, together with carefully annotated 3D bounding box labels of objects on the roads.
K-Radar includes challenging driving conditions such as adverse weathers (fog,
rain, and snow) on various road structures (urban, suburban roads, alleyways, and
highways). In addition to the 4DRT, we provide auxiliary measurements from carefully calibrated high-resolution Lidars, surround stereo cameras, and RTK-GPS. We
also provide 4DRT-based object detection baseline neural networks (baseline NNs)
and show that the height information is crucial for 3D object detection. And by comparing the baseline NN with a similarly-structured Lidar-based neural network, we
demonstrate that 4D Radar is a more robust sensor for adverse weather conditions.
All codes are available at https://github.com/kaist-avelab/k-radar.

1

Introduction

An autonomous driving system generally consists of sequential modules of perception, planning, and
control. As the planning and control modules rely on the output of the perception module, it is crucial
for the perception module to be robust even under adverse driving conditions.
Recently, various works have proposed deep learning-based autonomous driving perception modules
that demonstrate remarkable performances in lane detection (Paek et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021),
object detection (Wang et al., 2021a; Lang et al., 2019; Major et al., 2019), and other tasks (Ranftl
et al., 2021; Teed and Deng, 2021). These works often use RGB images as the inputs to the neural
networks due to the availability of numerous public large-scale datasets for camera-based perception.
Moreover, an RGB image has a relatively simple data structure, where the data dimensionality is
∗
†

co-first authors
corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

