Towards Consistency in Adversarial Classification
Laurent Meunier1,2 Raphaël Ettedgui1 Rafael Pinot3
Yann Chevaleyre1 Jamal Atif1
1

Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL Research University, CNRS, LAMSADE, Paris, France
2
Meta AI Research, Paris, France
3
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of consistency in the context of adversarial
examples. Specifically, we tackle the following question:
Can surrogate losses still be used as a proxy for minimizing the 0/1 loss in the
presence of an adversary that alters the inputs at test-time?
Different from the standard classification task, this question cannot be reduced to
a point-wise minimization problem, and calibration needs not to be sufficient to
ensure consistency. In this paper, we expose some pathological behaviors specific
to the adversarial problem, and show that no convex surrogate loss can be consistent
or calibrated in this context. It is therefore necessary to design another class of
surrogate functions that can be used to solve the adversarial consistency issue. As
a first step towards designing such a class, we identify sufficient and necessary
conditions for a surrogate loss to be calibrated in both the adversarial and standard
settings. Finally, we give some directions for building a class of losses that could
be consistent in the adversarial framework.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art machine learning classifiers are known to be vulnerable to adversarial example attacks [9, 18], i.e., perturbation of the input data at test time that, while imperceptible, can significantly
influence the classifier’s output. This can have extreme consequences in real-life scenarios such as
autonomous cars [19]. Therefore, it is necessary to design robust classifiers that present worst-case
guarantees against a range of possible perturbations. To account for the possibility of an adversary
manipulating the inputs at test time, we need to revisit the standard risk minimization problem by
penalizing any classification model that might change its decision when the point of interest is slightly
changed. Essentially, this is done by replacing the standard (pointwise) 0/1 loss with an adversarial
version that mimics its behavior locally but also penalizes any error in a given region around the point
on which it is evaluated.
Yet, just like the 0/1 loss, its adversarial counterpart is not convex, which renders the risk minimization
difficult. To circumvent this limitation, we take inspiration from the standard learning theory approach
which consists in solving a simpler optimization problem where the non-convex loss function is
replaced by a convex surrogate. In general, the surrogate loss is chosen to have a property called
consistency [20, 6, 17], which essentially guarantees that any sequence of classifiers that minimizes
the surrogate objective must also be a sequence that minimizes the Bayes risk. In the context of
standard classification, a large family of convex losses, called classifier-consistent, exhibits this
property. This class notoriously includes the hinge loss, the logistic loss and the square loss.
However, the adversarial version of these surrogate losses need not to exhibit the same consistency
properties with respect to the adversarial 0/1 loss. In fact, most existing results in the standard
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

