SI O: Smoothing Inference with Twisted Objectives
Dieterich Lawson⇤, Allan Raventós⇤, Andrew Warrington⇤, Scott Linderman
{jdlawson, aravento, awarring, scott.linderman}@stanford.edu
Stanford University

Abstract
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) is an inference algorithm for state space models
that approximates the posterior by sampling from a sequence of target distributions.
The target distributions are often chosen to be the filtering distributions, but these
ignore information from future observations, leading to practical and theoretical
limitations in inference and model learning. We introduce SIXO, a method that
instead learns target distributions that approximate the smoothing distributions,
incorporating information from all observations. The key idea is to use density ratio
estimation to fit functions that warp the filtering distributions into the smoothing
distributions. We then use SMC with these learned targets to define a variational
objective for model and proposal learning. SIXO yields provably tighter log
marginal lower bounds and offers more accurate posterior inferences and parameter
estimates in a variety of domains.

1

Introduction

In this work we consider model learning and approximate posterior inference in probabilistic state
space models. Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) is a general-purpose method for these problems [1–3]
that produces an unbiased estimate of the marginal likelihood as well as latent state trajectories (i.e.
particles) that can be used to approximate posterior expectations. SMC can facilitate model learning
via expectation-maximization or direct maximization of the marginal likelihood estimate [4, 5]. It can
also be cast in a variational framework [6, 7] as a rich family of approximate posterior distributions
that can be fit using stochastic gradient ascent and modern automatic differentiation methods [8–12].
The quality of SMC’s marginal likelihood and posterior estimates is driven by two design decisions:
the choice of proposal distributions and target distributions. The proposal distributions specify how
particles propagate from one time step to the next, while the target distributions specify how those
particles are weighted and which ones survive to future time steps. The most common SMC variant,
filtering SMC, sets the targets to the filtering distributions, the conditional distributions over latent
states x1:t = (x1 , . . . , xt ) given observations y1:t = (y1 , . . . , yt ). The central issue is that the
filtering distributions do not incorporate information from future observations yt+1:T .
Figure 1 illustrates why setting the target distributions to the filtering distributions can be problematic.
In this example, the latent states follow a simple Gaussian random walk, but only the last step is
observed. Thus, the filtering distributions reduce to the prior, a series of mean zero Gaussians, shown
in Figure 1a. If the observation is far from the prior, the filtering distribution suddenly jumps at time
T = 10. This is a recipe for disaster in SMC: the particles at time T 1 will be distributed according
to a mean zero Gaussian and very few will survive to the next time step, causing the variance of the
SMC estimator to explode. Even if the proposals incorporate smoothing information, using filtering
targets can cause particle degeneracy by resampling away high-quality particles, as seen in Figure 1c.
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

