Category-Level 6D Object Pose Estimation in the Wild:
A Semi-Supervised Learning Approach and
A New Dataset
Yang Fu
Xiaolong Wang
UC San Diego

Abstract
6D object pose estimation is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision
and robotics research. While a lot of recent efforts have been made on generalizing
pose estimation to novel object instances within the same category, namely categorylevel 6D pose estimation, it is still restricted in constrained environments given
the limited number of annotated data. In this paper, we collect Wild6D, a new
unlabeled RGBD object video dataset with diverse instances and backgrounds. We
utilize this data to generalize category-level 6D object pose estimation in the wild
with semi-supervised learning. We propose a new model, called Rendering for
Pose estimation network (RePoNet), that is jointly trained using the free groundtruths with the synthetic data, and a silhouette matching objective function on
the real-world data. Without using any 3D annotations on real data, our method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the previous dataset and our Wild6D test
set (with manual annotations for evaluation) by a large margin. Project page with
Wild6D data: https://oasisyang.github.io/semi-pose/.

1

Introduction

Estimating the 6D object pose is one of the core problems in computer vision and robotics. It
predicts the full configurations of rotation, translation and size of a given object, which has wide
applications including Virtual Reality (VR) [2], scene understanding [30], and [42, 57, 31, 49].
There are two directions in 6D object pose estimation. One is performing instance-level 6D pose
estimation, where a model is trained to estimate the pose of one exact instance with an existing 3D
model [13, 34, 22, 50, 32, 5, 14]. However, learning instance-level model restricts its generalization
ability to unseen objects. To achieve generalization to unseen instance, another direction is recently
proposed to perform category-level 6D pose estimation using one model [48, 3, 41, 29, 6]. However,
the large appearance and shape variance across instances largely increase the difficulty in learning.
To overcome this limitation, Wang et al. [48] take the initial step to collect real-world dataset and
annotations for category-level 6D pose estimation. Combining synthetic data with free ground-truth
annotations, they show the learned model can be generalized to unseen objects within the same
category. While this result is encouraging, the generalization ability of the model is still limited by the
number and the diversity of the data due to the challenges in annotating 6D object poses. Specifically,
only 8,000 images across 13 scenes are collected and annotated from the dataset proposed in [48].
Thus it is still very challenging to generalize 6D pose estimation on diverse objects in complex scenes.
In this paper, we propose to generalize category-level 6D object pose estimation in the wild. To
achieve this goal, we introduce a new dataset and a new semi-supervised learning approach. Our key
insight is that, while annotating the 6D object pose is challenging, collecting the RGBD videos for
these objects without labels is much easier and more affordable. On the other hand, there are infinite
ground-truth annotations for synthetic data which come for free. We propose to leverage the benefits
from both sides. We first collect a rich object-centric video dataset with diverse backgrounds and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

