Molecule Generation by Principal Subgraph Mining
and Assembling

Xiangzhe Kong1 Wenbing Huang4,5∗ Zhixing Tan 1 Yang Liu1,2,3∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for AIR, Tsinghua University 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
5
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
Jackie_KXZ@outlook.com, hwenbing@126.com, {zxtan, liuyang2011}@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Molecule generation is central to a variety of applications. Current attention has
been paid to approaching the generation task as subgraph prediction and assembling.
Nevertheless, these methods usually rely on hand-crafted or external subgraph
construction, and the subgraph assembling depends solely on local arrangement.
In this paper, we define a novel notion, principal subgraph that is closely related to
the informative pattern within molecules. Interestingly, our proposed merge-andupdate subgraph extraction method can automatically discover frequent principal
subgraphs from the dataset, while previous methods are incapable of. Moreover,
we develop a two-step subgraph assembling strategy, which first predicts a set of
subgraphs in a sequence-wise manner and then assembles all generated subgraphs
globally as the final output molecule. Built upon graph variational auto-encoder,
our model is demonstrated to be effective in terms of several evaluation metrics
and efficiency, compared with state-of-the-art methods on distribution learning and
(constrained) property optimization tasks.

1

Introduction

Generating chemically valid molecules with desired properties is central to a variety of applications in
drug discovery and material science. In contrast to searching countless potential candidates by expert
chemists or pharmacologists, designing generative models that can produce molecules automatically
is more efficient and now a prevailing topic in machine learning. Recently, there have been various
works[18, 26, 47, 24, 9, 39, 20] utilizing graphs to characterize the distribution of molecules.

83.9%

60.5%

41.3%

32.6%

27.5%

Figure 1: Five frequent subgraphs in ZINC250K [16, 23] marked with their frequencies of occurrence.
In general, these graph-based generation methods can be clustered into two categories: the atom
level [25, 47, 26, 20] and the subgraph level [18, 19, 46], in terms of what the basic generation
unit is. Compared with the atom-level methods, exploring subgraphs for generating molecules (as
illustrated in Figure 1) exhibits three potential benefits. First, it can capture the regularities of atomic
combinations and discover repetitive patterns in molecules, thus more capable of generating realistic
molecules. Second, it is able to reflect chemical properties, since it has been revealed that the chemical
properties are closely related to certain substructures (i.e., subgraphs) [31, 20]. Finally, leveraging
subgraphs as the building blocks enables efficient training and inference, as the searching time is
remarkably reduced by representing a molecule as a set of subgraphs other than atoms.
∗

Wenbing Huang and Yang Liu are corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

