ResQ: A Residual Q Function-based Approach for
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Value
Factorization

†

Siqi Shen† , Mengwei Qiu† , Jun Liu† , Weiquan Liu† , Yongquan Fu‡∗, Xinwang Liu‡ , Cheng Wang†
Fujian Key Lab of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
‡
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China
{siqishen,wqliu,cwang}@xmu.edu.cn, {yongquanf,xinwangliu}@nudt.edu.cn
{mengweiqiu,junliu}@stu.xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
The factorization of state-action value functions for Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning (MARL) is important. Existing studies are limited by their representation
capability, sample efficiency, and approximation error. To address these challenges,
we propose, ResQ, a MARL value function factorization method, which can find the
optimal joint policy for any state-action value function through residual functions.
ResQ masks some state-action value pairs from a joint state-action value function,
which is transformed as the sum of a main function and a residual function. ResQ
can be used with mean-value and stochastic-value RL. We theoretically show that
ResQ can satisfy both the individual global max (IGM) and the distributional IGM
principle without representation limitations. Through experiments on matrix games,
the predator-prey, and StarCraft benchmarks, we show that ResQ can obtain better
results than multiple expected/stochastic value factorization methods.

1

Introduction

Many real-world tasks involve multiple agents acting together, such as robot control [1]. Such tasks
can be modelled as Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) problems where a group of agents
must cooperate to achieve a common goal. MARL has attracted great research interest because of
its social and economic impact. However, MARL is highly stochastic and hard to learn due to the
partial-observability [2] and changing policies of agents. To address these issues, many approaches
adopt the Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution paradigm (CTDE) [3].
In the CTDE paradigm, value factorization approaches [4] are widely adopted due to their remarkable
performance and sample efficiency. A joint state-action value function is factorized into per-agent
utilities Qi , and each agent i acts greedily according to Qi . To enable effective CTDE, it is critical
to ensure the Individual-Global-Max (IGM) principle [5] that the optimal joint action should be
equivalent to the collection of each agent’s greedy actions. VDN [6] and QMIX [4] are two popular
value factorization methods, which satisfy the IGM principle.
Most value factorization approaches focus on the deterministic state-action value functions. Albeit
MARL is highly stochastic, the full distribution of per-agent utilities and the multi-agent system
are overlooked and represented only as expected value of the full distribution. Such distributional
information could be beneficial for policy learning. DMIX and DDN [7] extend QMIX and VDN with
distributional RL. They can factorize stochastic joint state-action value pairs into stochastic per-agent
utilities, and satisfy the distributional individual-global-max(DIGM) principle [7]. However, because
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

