STNDT: Modeling Neural Population Activity with
Spatiotemporal Transformers

Trung Le
University of Washington
Seattle, WA
tle45@uw.edu

Eli Shlizerman
University of Washington
Seattle, WA
shlizee@uw.edu

Abstract
Modeling neural population dynamics underlying noisy single-trial spiking activities is essential for relating neural observation and behavior. A recent non-recurrent
method - Neural Data Transformers (NDT) - has shown great success in capturing
neural dynamics with low inference latency without an explicit dynamical model.
However, NDT focuses on modeling the temporal evolution of the population activity while neglecting the rich covariation between individual neurons. In this paper
we introduce SpatioTemporal Neural Data Transformer (STNDT), an NDT-based
architecture that explicitly models responses of individual neurons in the population
across time and space to uncover their underlying firing rates. In addition, we
propose a contrastive learning loss that works in accordance with mask modeling
objective to further improve the predictive performance. We show that our model
achieves state-of-the-art performance on ensemble level in estimating neural activities across four neural datasets, demonstrating its capability to capture autonomous
and non-autonomous dynamics spanning different cortical regions while being
completely agnostic to the specific behaviors at hand. Furthermore, STNDT spatial
attention mechanism reveals consistently important subsets of neurons that play a
vital role in driving the response of the entire population, providing interpretability
and key insights into how the population of neurons performs computation.1

1

Introduction

One of the most prominent questions in systems neuroscience is how neurons perform computations
that give rise to behaviors. Recent evidence suggests that computation in the brain could be governed
at the population level [1, 2]. Population of neurons are proposed to obey an internal dynamical rule
that drives their activities over time [3, 4]. Inferring these dynamics on a single trial basis is crucial
for understanding the relationship between neural population responses and behavior, subsequently
enabling the development of robust decoding schemes with wide applicability in brain-computer
interfaces (BCI) [5–7]. However, modeling population dynamics on single trials is challenging due to
the stochasticity of individual neurons making their spiking activity vary from trial to trial even when
they are subject to identical stimuli or recorded under repeated behavior conditions.
A direct approach to reduce the trial-to-trial variability of neural responses could be to average
responses over repeated trials of the same behavior [8, 9], to convolve the neural response with a
Gaussian kernel [10], or in general, to define a variety of neural activity measures [11]. However,
more success was found in approaches that explicitly model neural responses as a dynamical system,
including methods treating the population dynamics as being linear [12, 13], switched linear [14],
non-linear [15, 16], or reduced projected nonlinear models [11]. Recent approaches leveraging
1

Code is available at https://github.com/shlizee/STNDT

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

