Bring Your Own Algorithm for Optimal Differentially
Private Stochastic Minimax Optimization
Liang Zhang
ETH Zurich & Max Planck Institute
liang.zhang@inf.ethz.ch
Sewoong Oh
University of Washington
sewoong@cs.washington.edu

Kiran Koshy Thekumparampil
Amazon Search & UIUC
thekump2@illinois.edu
Niao He
ETH Zurich
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We study differentially private (DP) algorithms for smooth stochastic minimax
optimization, with stochastic minimization as a byproduct. The holy grail of these
settings is to guarantee the optimal trade-off between the privacy and the excess
population loss, using an algorithm with a linear time-complexity in the number
of training samples. We provide a general framework for solving differentially
private stochastic minimax optimization (DP-SMO) problems, which enables
the practitioners to bring their own base optimization algorithm and use it as a
black-box to obtain the near-optimal privacy-loss trade-off. Our framework is
inspired from the recently proposed Phased-ERM method [22] for nonsmooth
differentially private stochastic convex optimization (DP-SCO), which exploits
the stability of the empirical risk minimization (ERM) for the privacy guarantee.
The flexibility of our approach enables us to sidestep the requirement that the base
algorithm needs to have bounded sensitivity, and allows the use of sophisticated
variance-reduced accelerated methods to achieve near-linear time-complexity. To
the best of our knowledge, these are the first near-linear time algorithms with
near-optimal guarantees on the population duality gap for smooth DP-SMO, when
the objective is (strongly-)convex–(strongly-)concave. Additionally, based on our
flexible framework, we enrich the family of near-linear time algorithms for smooth
DP-SCO with the near-optimal privacy-loss trade-off.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are nowadays trained using large corpora of data samples collected from
many different entities, e.g., from users of a large software service [28]. However, it has been
empirically shown that these models can be exploited to reveal private information about these
contributing entities. For example, Carlini et al. [13] attacked the large language model, GPT-2, to
reveal hundreds of verbatim text samples used to train these models. These attacks violate the privacy
of the contributing entities, but naturally they expect that no private information about them can be
revealed through these models. Over the last decade, this expectation was even legislated into laws
such as GDPR in EU [15]. There are many mathematical frameworks formalizing this expectation
of privacy, but the most widely accepted one is that of Differential Privacy (DP) [18]. With high
probability, models satisfying DP cannot be attacked by any adversary to identify that a particular
training sample was used in its training. Hence, DP provides any entity plausible deniability that they
contributed to the training set. However, optimization algorithms for training such models under DP
require careful design choices to ensure privacy while preventing the degradation of convergence
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

