A Few Expert Queries Suffices for Sample-Efficient RL
with Resets and Linear Value Approximation

Philip Amortilaα∗
Nan Jiangα
Dhruv Madekaβ
Dean P. Fosterβ
α
β
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Amazon, NYC

Abstract
The current paper studies sample-efficient Reinforcement Learning (RL) in settings
where only the optimal value function is assumed to be linearly-realizable. It has
recently been understood that, even under this seemingly strong assumption and
access to a generative model, worst-case sample complexities can be prohibitively
(i.e., exponentially) large. We investigate the setting where the learner additionally
has access to interactive demonstrations from an expert policy, and we present
a statistically and computationally efficient algorithm (D ELPHI) for blending exploration with expert queries. In particular, D ELPHI requires Õ(d) expert queries
and a poly(d, H, |A|, 1/ε) amount of exploratory samples to provably recover an
ε-suboptimal policy. Compared to pure RL approaches, this corresponds to an
exponential improvement in sample complexity with surprisingly-little expert input.
Compared to prior imitation learning (IL) approaches, our required number of expert demonstrations is independent of H and logarithmic in 1/ε, whereas all prior
work required at least linear factors of both in addition to the same dependence on d.
Towards establishing the minimal amount of expert queries needed, we show that,
in the same setting, any learner whose exploration budget
√ is polynomially-bounded
(in terms of d, H, and |A|) will require at least Ω̃( d) oracle calls to recover a
policy competing with the expert’s value function. Under the weaker assumption
that the expert’s policy is linear (rather than their value function), we show that the
lower bound increases to Ω(d).

1

Introduction

Many potential applications of reinforcement learning (RL) have intractably-large state spaces.
Thus, we seek provably-correct methods which have statistical and computational requirements that
are independent of the size of the state space. This requires some modelling assumptions. One
dominating approach has been to introduce function approximation, and to posit that the MDP or
its value functions are well-represented by the function approximation scheme which is employed.
A basic starting point which still lacks comprehensive understanding is the case of linear value
function approximation, which models value functions as lying in the span of a known d-dimensional
feature mapping and asks for methods which have sample complexities that are polynomial only
in d, H, and possibly |A| (H and A are the horizon and action sets of the MDP, respectively).
This desideratum was recently understood to be impossible for the “minimal” case where only
the optimal value function (or optimal action-value function) is assumed to be linear – i.e. there
exist MDPs satisfying this assumption where the statistical complexity of any algorithm will be
exponentially large, either in d or in H [WAS21; WSG21; WWK21; FKQR21]. Furthermore, this
also holds in the case where the learner is equipped with a generative model (or simulator), allowing
them to sample transitions from any state-action pair of the MDP. In recent years much has been
said about linear value approximation under stronger assumptions, for example under determinism
∗

philipa4@illinois.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

