Revisiting Active Sets for Gaussian Process Decoders

Pablo Moreno-Muñoz∗
Cilie W. Feldager∗
Søren Hauberg
Section for Cognitive Systems
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
{pabmo,cife,sohau}@dtu.dk

Abstract
Decoders built on Gaussian processes (GPs) are enticing due to the marginalisation
over the non-linear function space. Such models (also known as GP-LVMs) are
often expensive and notoriously difficult to train in practice, but can be scaled using
variational inference and inducing points. In this paper, we revisit active set approximations. We develop a new stochastic estimate of the log-marginal likelihood based
on recently discovered links to cross-validation, and we propose a computationally
efficient approximation thereof. We demonstrate that the resulting stochastic active
sets (SAS) approximation significantly improves the robustness of GP decoder
training, while reducing computational cost. The SAS-GP obtains more structure
in the latent space, scales to many datapoints, and learns better representations than
variational autoencoders, which is rarely the case for GP decoders.

1

Introduction

Generative models can be viewed as regression models from unknown inputs. That is, we assume
x = f (z), where f is an unknown mapping from latent variables z to observations x. Given the
inherent difficulty of this task, it is perhaps sensible to marginalize the unknown mapping f to avoid
the brittleness of point estimates. This is the driving idea in the Gaussian process latent variable
(GP-LVM) (Lawrence, 2005), which places a Gaussian process (GP) prior over the unknown mapping
f and marginalizes accordingly. This contrasts contemporary generative models that predominantly
operate with point-estimates of f (Kingma and Welling, 2013; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015). While
conceptually elegant, the GP-LVM is, however, notoriously difficult to train and the conceptual
benefits are often not realized in practice.
Exact inference involves computing the marginal likelihood, but (like other GP methods) its cubic
complexity in the number of observations O(N 3 ) limits the scalability of the GP-LVM. However, the
idea of marginalizing the decoder is sufficiently attractive to motivate the development of scalable
and reliable training techniques: Its Bayesian formulation (Titsias and Lawrence, 2010) variationally
integrates out the latent variables z to obtain an evidence lower bound. Using auxiliary inducing
variables, Snelson and Ghahramani (2006) expanded GP regression, which is also applicable in the
unsupervised learning setting (i.e. the GP-LVM).
However, considering inducing variables here involves dangers. First, the convergence of inducing
points is well-studied in the supervised GP scenario, where inputs are fixed, but it differs from the
unsupervised case where the inputs are estimated. Bauer et al. (2016) notes that even in the supervised
setting, inducing points are “not completely trivial to optimise, and often tricks [...] are required”,
and we hypothesize that this is further complicated in the unsupervised setting where we optimize
both latent and inducing variables while they interact.
In this paper, we revisit active sets for scaling GP decoders, a sparse approximation predominantly
used before the seminal work of Snelson and Ghahramani (2006). From a practical viewpoint, active
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

