On the Robustness of Deep Clustering Models:
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses
Anshuman Chhabra∗, Ashwin Sekhari* , and Prasant Mohapatra
Department of Computer Science
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
{chhabra,asekhari,pmohapatra}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Clustering models constitute a class of unsupervised machine learning methods
which are used in a number of application pipelines, and play a vital role in
modern data science. With recent advancements in deep learning– deep clustering
models have emerged as the current state-of-the-art over traditional clustering
approaches, especially for high-dimensional image datasets. While traditional
clustering approaches have been analyzed from a robustness perspective, no prior
work has investigated adversarial attacks and robustness for deep clustering models
in a principled manner. To bridge this gap, we propose a blackbox attack using
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) where the adversary does not know
which deep clustering model is being used, but can query it for outputs. We
analyze our attack against multiple state-of-the-art deep clustering models and realworld datasets, and find that it is highly successful. We then employ some natural
unsupervised defense approaches, but find that these are unable to mitigate our
attack. Finally, we attack Face++, a production-level face clustering API service,
and find that we can significantly reduce its performance as well. Through this
work, we thus aim to motivate the need for truly robust deep clustering models.

1

Introduction

Clustering models are utilized in many data-driven applications to group similar samples together, and
dissimilar samples separately. They constitute a powerful class of unsupervised Machine Learning
(ML) models which can be employed in many cases where labels for data samples are either hard (or
impossible) to obtain. Note that there are a multitude of different approaches to accomplishing the
aforementioned clustering task, and an important differentiation can be made between traditional and
deep clustering approaches.
Traditional clustering generally aims to minimize a clustering objective function defined using a given
distance metric [1]. These include approaches such as k-means [2], DBSCAN [3], spectral methods
[4], among others. Such models generally fail to perform satisfactorily on high-dimensional data (i.e.,
image datasets), or incur huge computational costs that make the problem intractable [5]. To improve
upon these approaches, initial deep clustering models sought to decompose the high-dimensional data
to a cluster-friendly low-dimensional representation using deep neural networks. Clustering was then
undertaken on this latent space representation [6, 7]. Since then, deep clustering models have become
considerably advanced, with state-of-the-art models outperforming traditional clustering models by
significant margins on a number of real-world datasets [8, 9].
Despite these successes, deep clustering models have not been sufficiently analyzed from a robustness
perspective. Recently, traditional clustering models have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

