Is a Modular Architecture Enough?

Sarthak Mittal†, Yoshua Bengio, Guillaume Lajoie
Mila, Université de Montréal

Abstract
Inspired from human cognition, machine learning systems are gradually revealing
advantages of sparser and more modular architectures. Recent work demonstrates
that not only do some modular architectures generalize well, but they also lead to
better out-of-distribution generalization, scaling properties, learning speed, and
interpretability. A key intuition behind the success of such systems is that the data
generating system for most real-world settings is considered to consist of sparsely
interacting parts, and endowing models with similar inductive biases will be helpful.
However, the field has been lacking in a rigorous quantitative assessment of such
systems because these real-world data distributions are complex and unknown. In
this work, we provide a thorough assessment of common modular architectures,
through the lens of simple and known modular data distributions. We highlight
the benefits of modularity and sparsity and reveal insights on the challenges faced
while optimizing modular systems. In doing so, we propose evaluation metrics
that highlight the benefits of modularity, the regimes in which these benefits are
substantial, as well as the sub-optimality of current end-to-end learned modular
systems as opposed to their claimed potential.1

1

Introduction

Deep learning research has an established history of drawing inspiration from neuroscience and
cognitive science. From the way hidden units combine afferent inputs, to how connectivity and
network architectures are designed, many breakthroughs have relied on mimicking brain strategies.
It is no surprise then that modularity and attention have been leveraged, often together, in artificial
networks in recent years (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Andreas et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2017; Vaswani et al.,
2017; Kipf et al., 2018; Battaglia et al., 2018; Goyal et al., 2019, 2021), with impressive results.
Indeed, work from cognitive neuroscience (Baars, 1997; Dehaene et al., 2017) suggests that cortex
represents knowledge in a modular way, with different such modules communicating through the
bottleneck of working memory (where very few items can simultaneously be represented), in which
content is selected by attention mechanisms. In recent work from the AI community (Bengio, 2017;
Goyal & Bengio, 2020), it was proposed that these characteristics could correspond to meaningful
inductive biases for deep networks, i.e., statistical assumptions about the dependencies between
concepts manipulated at the higher levels of cognition. Both sparsity of the dependencies between
these high-level variables and the decomposition of knowledge into recomposable pieces that are
as independent as possible (Peters et al., 2017; Bengio et al., 2019; Goyal & Bengio, 2020; Ke
et al., 2021) would make learning more efficient. Out-of-distribution (OoD) generalization would
be facilitated by making it possible to sequentially compose the computations performed by these
modules where new situations can be explained by novel combinations of existing concepts.
Although a number of recent results hinge on such modular architectures (Graves et al., 2014; Andreas
et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017; Kipf et al., 2018; Santoro et al., 2018; Battaglia
et al., 2018; Goyal et al., 2019, 2021; Locatello et al., 2020; Mittal et al., 2020; Madan et al., 2021),
†
1

Correspondence authors sarthmit@gmail.com
Open-sourced implementation is available at https://github.com/sarthmit/Mod_Arch

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

