Local Spatiotemporal Representation Learning for
Longitudinally-consistent Neuroimage Analysis

Mengwei Ren
New York University
mengwei.ren@nyu.edu

Neel Dey
New York University
neel.dey@nyu.edu

Kelly N. Botteron
WUSTL School of Medicine
botteronk@wustl.edu

Martin A. Styner
UNC-Chapel Hill
styner@cs.unc.edu
Guido Gerig
New York University
gerig@nyu.edu

Abstract
Recent self-supervised advances in medical computer vision exploit the global
and local anatomical self-similarity for pretraining prior to downstream tasks
such as segmentation. However, current methods assume i.i.d. image acquisition,
which is invalid in clinical study designs where follow-up longitudinal scans track
subject-specific temporal changes. Further, existing self-supervised methods for
medically-relevant image-to-image architectures exploit only spatial or temporal
self-similarity and do so via a loss applied only at a single image-scale, with naive
multi-scale spatiotemporal extensions collapsing to degenerate solutions. To these
ends, this paper makes two contributions: (1) It presents a local and multi-scale
spatiotemporal representation learning method for image-to-image architectures
trained on longitudinal images. It exploits the spatiotemporal self-similarity of
learned multi-scale intra-subject image features for pretraining and develops several feature-wise regularizations that avoid degenerate representations; (2) During
finetuning, it proposes a surprisingly simple self-supervised segmentation consistency regularization to exploit intra-subject correlation. Benchmarked across
various segmentation tasks, the proposed framework outperforms both well-tuned
randomly-initialized baselines and current self-supervised techniques designed for
both i.i.d. and longitudinal datasets. These improvements are demonstrated across
both longitudinal neurodegenerative adult MRI and developing infant brain MRI
and yield both higher performance and longitudinal consistency.

1

Introduction

Tracking subject-specific anatomical trends over time is crucial to both clinical diagnostics and
large-scale biomedical science. Such longitudinal imaging is especially relevant to analyzing neurological patterns of growth and degeneration via brain imaging in pediatric and elderly populations,
respectively. As tracking individual structural changes requires precise and longitudinally-consistent
segmentation methods with scarce annotated training volumes, we identify two major bottlenecks in
existing self-supervised biomedical image analysis methods which we use to motivate our work.
Learning with few annotations. While modern imaging studies may scan hundreds to thousands
of individuals, manually outlining volumetric structures of interest across multiple individuals for
supervised segmentation training is prohibitively expensive. Therefore, current work focuses on
leveraging large sets of unlabeled images to pretrain image-to-image architectures (e.g., the UNet [48]), which can then be efficiently finetuned in the one or few-shot setting. These self-supervised
methods may handcraft pre-text training objectives [10, 19, 45, 65] or may attempt to pretrain the base
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

