Mutual Information Divergence: A Unified Metric for
Multimodal Generative Models
Jin-Hwa Kim⇤
NAVER AI Lab, SNU AIIS
Republic of Korea
j1nhwa.kim@navercorp.com

Yunji Kim Jiyoung Lee
NAVER AI Lab
Republic of Korea
{yunji.kim,lee.j}@navercorp.com

Kang Min Yoo
NAVER AI Lab, CLOVA, SNU AIIS
Republic of Korea
kangmin.yoo@navercorp.com

Sang-Woo Lee
NAVER CLOVA, AI Lab, KAIST AI
Republic of Korea
sang.woo.lee@navercorp.com

Abstract
Text-to-image generation and image captioning are recently emerged as a new
experimental paradigm to assess machine intelligence. They predict continuous
quantity accompanied by their sampling techniques in the generation, making
evaluation complicated and intractable to get marginal distributions. Based on a
recent trend that multimodal generative evaluations exploit a vison-and-language
pre-trained model, we propose the negative Gaussian cross-mutual information
using the CLIP features as a unified metric, coined by Mutual Information Divergence (MID). To validate, we extensively compare it with competing metrics using
carefully-generated or human-annotated judgments in text-to-image generation
and image captioning tasks. The proposed MID significantly outperforms the
competitive methods by having consistency across benchmarks, sample parsimony,
and robustness toward the exploited CLIP model. We look forward to seeing the
underrepresented implications of the Gaussian cross-mutual information in multimodal representation learning and future works based on this novel proposition.
The code is available at https://github.com/naver-ai/mid.metric.

1

Introduction

A multimodal generative model, including text-to-image generation [1] and image captioning [2]
models, is an emerging research topic showing interpretative multimodal understanding, text or image
retrieval, machine creativity, etc. The gist of learning multimodal generative models is to understand
how to connect one modality to the other and generate the corresponding representations following
the desired data distribution. However, measuring the distance or divergence between the model and
data distributions is generally intractable due to the finite data and generation cost. Therefore, the
proposed metrics attempt to approximate it with polynomial-sized data and generated samples [3].
For text-to-image generation, the widely-used metrics are Inception Score (IS) [4] and Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID) [5]. These metrics are originally proposed for non-conditional generative
models, which are repurposed to measure the distance between the data and model conditional
distributions using a validation split. This idea was supported by the effectiveness of deep features
as a perceptual metric [6], although these metrics use the Inception V3 [7]. Not surprisingly, there
are attempts to develop more robust metrics using multimodal pre-trained models, such as object
⇤

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

