Near-Optimal Regret Bounds for Multi-batch
Reinforcement Learning

Zihan Zhang˚

Yuhang Jiang:

Yuan Zhou;

Xiangyang Ji §

Abstract
In this paper, we study the episodic reinforcement learning (RL) problem modeled by finite-horizon Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with constraint on the
number of batches. The multi-batch reinforcement learning framework, where the
agent is required to provide a time schedule to update policy before everything,
which is particularly suitable for the scenarios where the agent suffers extensively
from changing the policy adaptively. Given a finite-horizon MDP with S states,
A actions and planning horizon H, weadesign a computational efficient algorithm
to achieve near-optimal regret of Õp SAH 3 K lnp1{δqq5 in K episodes using
O pH ` log2 log2 pKqq
? batches with confidence parameter δ. To our best of knowledge, it is the first Õp SAH 3 Kq regret bound with OpH ` log2 log2?pKqq batch
complexity. Meanwhile, we show that to achieve ÕppolypS, A, Hq Kq regret,
the number of batches is at least Ω pH{ logA pKq ` log2 log2 pKqq, which matches
our upper bound up to logarithmic terms.
Our technical contribution are two-fold: 1) a near-optimal design scheme to explore
over the unlearned states; 2) an computational efficient algorithm to explore certain
directions with an approximated transition model.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), the learning agent interacts with the environment to maximize the
total reward by making sequential decisions. The agent typically has to achieve two seemingly very
different goals: to try as many actions and reach as many states as possible so as to learn more
information about the environment (a.k.a. exploration) and to follow the policy that collects the
high rewards according to the learned information (a.k.a. exploitation). To address this explorationexploitation dilemma and achieve the near-optimal regret bounds, the agent usually needs to adjust
his/her strategies adaptively based on the historical trajectories and make frequent policy changes
[Azar et al., 2017, Zanette and Brunskill, 2019, Zhang et al., 2020].
On the other hand, however, too much adaptivity requirement usually leads to lower level of parallelism, impeding the large-scale deployment of the RL algorithms (which is often in a distributed
manner). Frequent policy updates also suffer the cost of re-deploying policies in many practical
applications. For example, in medical domains, it often requires complete discussion among many
experts to change the treatment plans, which is not affordable in terms of both time and monetary
cost [Lei et al., 2012, Almirall et al., 2012, 2014]; in RL for hardware placement [Mirhoseini et al.,
2017], rewriting the program into the hardware for too many times is strongly discouraged. Similar
˚

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, zihan-zh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, jiangyh19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
;
Yau Mathematical Sciences Center & Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University,
yuan-zhou@tsinghua.edu.cn
§
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn
5
Õp¨q hides logarithmic terms of pS, A, H, Kq
:

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

