Automatic Differentiation of Programs with
Discrete Randomness
Gaurav Arya
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
aryag@mit.edu

Moritz Schauer
Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
University of Gothenburg, Sweden
smoritz@chalmers.se

Frank Schäfer
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
University of Basel, Switzerland
franksch@mit.edu

Chris Rackauckas
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
Julia Computing Inc., USA
Pumas-AI Inc., USA
crackauc@mit.edu

Abstract
Automatic differentiation (AD), a technique for constructing new programs which
compute the derivative of an original program, has become ubiquitous throughout
scientific computing and deep learning due to the improved performance afforded
by gradient-based optimization. However, AD systems have been restricted to the
subset of programs that have a continuous dependence on parameters. Programs
that have discrete stochastic behaviors governed by distribution parameters, such as
flipping a coin with probability p of being heads, pose a challenge to these systems
because the connection between the result (heads vs tails) and the parameters (p)
is fundamentally discrete. In this paper we develop a new reparameterizationbased methodology that allows for generating programs whose expectation is
the derivative of the expectation of the original program. We showcase how
this method gives an unbiased and low-variance estimator which is as automated
as traditional AD mechanisms. We demonstrate unbiased forward-mode AD of
discrete-time Markov chains, agent-based models such as Conway’s Game of Life,
and unbiased reverse-mode AD of a particle filter. Our code package is available at
https://github.com/gaurav-arya/StochasticAD.jl.

1

Introduction

Automatic differentiation (AD) is a technique for taking a mathematical program X(p) and generating
e
a new program X(p)
= dX
dp for computing the derivative [1, 2]. AD is widely used throughout
machine learning and scientific computing due to the increased performance of gradient-based
optimization techniques compared to derivative-free methods [3]. However, if X(p) returns the flip
of a coin with probability p of receiving a 1 and probability 1 − p of receiving a 0, it is clear that dX
dp
is not defined in the classical sense. But when attempting to calibrate the parameter p to data, one
may wish to fit the model using statistical quantities, e.g. find p such that the average of X(p) is close
to the average sum of N real-world coin flips. Given this use case, can one automatically construct a
e
e
program X(p)
that computes the derivative of the statistical quantities, i.e. E[X(p)]
= dE[X(p)]
?
dp
A naïve solution to this problem would be to use finite differences, i.e.:
dE[X(p)]
E[X(p + ε)] − E[X(p)]
≈
.
dp
ε
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(1.1)

