Tight Mutual Information Estimation With
Contrastive Fenchel-Legendre Optimization

Qing Guo1,† , Junya Chen2 , Dong Wang2 , Yuewei Wang2 , Xinwei Deng1
Lawrence Carin2,3 , Fan Li2 , Jing Huang4 , Chenyang Tao2,4,†
1
Virginia Tech 2 Duke University 3 KAUST 4 Amazon
qguo0701@vt.edu, chenyang.tao@duke.edu

Abstract
Successful applications of InfoNCE (Information Noise-Contrastive Estimation)
and its variants have popularized the use of contrastive variational mutual information (MI) estimators in machine learning. While featuring superior stability,
these estimators crucially depend on costly large-batch training, and they sacrifice
bound tightness for variance reduction. To overcome these limitations, we revisit
the mathematics of popular variational MI bounds from the lens of unnormalized
statistical modeling and convex optimization. Our investigation yields a new unified theoretical framework encompassing popular variational MI bounds, and leads
to a new simple and powerful contrastive MI estimator we name FLO. Theoretically, we show that the FLO estimator is tight, and it converges under stochastic
gradient descent. Empirically, the FLO estimator overcomes the limitations of its
predecessors and learns more efficiently. The utility of FLO is verified using extensive benchmarks, and we further inspire the community with novel applications
in meta-learning. Our presentation underscores the foundational importance of
variational MI estimation in data-efficient learning.

1

Introduction

Assessing the dependence between pairs of variables is integral to many scientific and engineering
endeavors [66, 67]. Mutual information (MI) is a popular metric to quantify generic associations
[50], and its empirical estimators have been widely used in applications such as independent component analysis [3], fair learning [32], neuroscience [58], Bayesian optimization [43], among others.
Notably, the recent advances in deep self-supervised learning (SSL) heavily rely on nonparametric
MI optimization [76, 57, 35, 15, 29]. In this study we investigate the likelihood-free variational
approximation of MI using only paired samples, and improve the data-efficiency of current machine
learning practices.
MI estimation has been extensively studied [6, 51, 50, 59, 61, 77, 10]. While most classical estimators
work reasonably well for low-dimensional cases, they scale poorly to big datasets: naïve density-based
estimator(s) and k-nearest neighbor estimators [45, 60, 24] struggle with high-dimensional inputs,
while kernel estimators are slow, memory demanding and sensitive to hyperparameters [28, 27].
Moreover, these estimators are usually either non-differentiable or need to hold all data in memory.
Consequently, they are not well suited for emerging applications where the data representation needs
to be differentiably optimized based on small-batch estimation of MI [39]. Alternatively, one can
approach MI estimation through an estimated likelihood ratio [71, 39], but the associated numerical
instability has raised concerns [2].
To scale MI estimation to the growing size and complexity of modern datasets, and to accommodate
the need for representation optimization [8], variational objectives have been widely utilized recently
[57]. Instead of directly estimating data likelihoods, density ratios, or the corresponding gradients
[81], variational approaches appeal to mathematical inequalities to construct tractable lower or
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

