Amortized Mixing Coupling Processes for Clustering

1

Huafeng Liu1,2 , Liping Jing1
Beijing Key Lab of Trafﬁc Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
The Department of Mathematics, The University of HongKong, Hong Kong SAR, China
huafeng.liu@outlook.com, lpjing@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Considering the ever-increasing scale of data, which may contain tens of thousands of data points or complicated latent structures, the issue of scalability and
algorithmic efﬁciency becomes of vital importance for clustering. In this paper,
we propose cluster-wise amortized mixing coupling processes (AMCP), which
is able to achieve efﬁcient amortized clustering in a well-deﬁned non-parametric
Bayesian posterior. Speciﬁcally, AMCP learns clusters sequentially with the aid of
the proposed intra-cluster mixing (IntraCM) and inter-cluster coupling (InterCC)
strategies, which investigate the relationship between data points and reference distribution in a linear optimal transport mixing view, and coupling the unassigned
set and assigned set to generate new cluster. IntraCM and InterCC avoid pairwise
calculation of distances between clusters and reduce the computational complexity
from quadratic to linear in the current number of clusters. Furthermore, clusterwise sequential process is able to improve the quick adaptation ability for the
next cluster generation. In this case, AMCP simultaneously learns what makes a
cluster, how to group data points into clusters, and how to adaptively control the
number of clusters. To illustrate the superiority of the proposed method, we perform experiments on both synthetic data and real-world data in terms of clustering
performance and computational efﬁciency.

1

Introduction

Clustering aims to group samples into a certain number of clusters, such that similar samples belong
to the same cluster, while dissimilar ones to different clusters. Aside from its usefulness in many
downstream tasks, clustering is an important but challenging topic which has seen applications in
various settings including social-media recommendation [32], customer partitioning [5], discovering
social networks [7] and partitioning protein-protein interaction networks [3]. Among various clustering algorithms [37], probabilistic generative clustering models [39] have been widely concerned
because of its ﬂexibility and interpretability.
Probabilistic generative clustering models (as known as, mixture models) are a staple of statistical
modeling in which a discrete latent variable is introduced for each observation, indicating its mixture
component identity. These generative clustering models can be roughly divided into two categories:
ﬁnite mixture model [6] and inﬁnite mixture model [31]. In recent years, ﬁnite mixture models have
been increasingly applied in unsupervised learning problems with the aid of deep neural networks.
Instead of using an arbitrary prior for the latent variable, these methods adopted ﬁnite mixture prior,
such as Gaussian mixture model (GMM) [14, 38]. A ﬁnite mixture model with a ﬁxed number of
clusters may ﬁt the given dataset well, while it may be sub-optimal to use the same number of clusters if more data comes under a slightly changed distribution [31]. It would be ideal if the clustering
models can ﬁgure out the unknown number of clusters automatically. Alternatively, inﬁnite mixture
model is the application of nonparametric Bayesian techniques to mixture modeling, which allows
for the automatic determination of an appropriate number of mixture components. The prior dis36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

