Collaborative Linear Bandits with Adversarial Agents:
Near-Optimal Regret Bounds
Arman Adibi∗
George J. Pappas
Hamed Hassani
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
{amitra20, aadibi, hassani, pappasg}@seas.upenn.edu

Aritra Mitra∗

Abstract
We consider a linear stochastic bandit problem involving M agents that can collaborate via a central server to minimize regret. A fraction α of these agents are
adversarial and can act arbitrarily, leading to the following tension: while collaboration can potentially reduce regret, it can also disrupt the process of learning due to
adversaries. In this work, we provide a fundamental understanding of this tension
by designing new algorithms that balance the exploration-exploitation trade-off
via carefully constructed robust confidence intervals. We also complement our
algorithms with tight analyses. First,
a robust collaborative phased elim we develop
√ √
ination algorithm that achieves Õ α + 1/ M
dT regret for each good agent;
here, d is the model-dimension and T is the horizon. For small α, our result thus
reveals a clear benefit of collaboration despite adversaries. Using an informationtheoretic argument, we then prove a matching lower bound, thereby providing
the first set of tight, near-optimal regret bounds for collaborative linear bandits
with adversaries. Furthermore, by leveraging recent advances in high-dimensional
robust statistics, we significantly extend our algorithmic ideas and results to (i) the
generalized linear bandit model that allows for non-linear observation maps; and
(ii) the contextual bandit setting that allows for time-varying feature vectors.

1

Introduction

One of the primary challenges in modern large-scale computing systems is that of security. Given
that the individual agents in such large systems are often vulnerable to attacks, it is important to
understand how the overall system behaves in the face of adversarial corruptions. This observation
has spurred a line of research dedicated to the design and analysis of distributed algorithms that are
provably robust to a small fraction of adversarial agents; notably, motivated by emerging learning
paradigms such as federated learning [1–3], this body of work has focused primarily on empirical
risk minimization/stochastic optimization [4–14]. However, when it comes to multi-agent sequential
decision-making problems under uncertainty (e.g., bandits and reinforcement learning), our understanding of analogous questions is quite limited. Our goal in this paper is to bridge the above gap by
studying a collaborative linear bandit [15, 16] problem in the presence of adversaries.
In our model, M agents interact with the same linear bandit characterized by a d-dimensional
unknown parameter θ∗ , and a finite set of K arms. These agents can collaborate via a central server to
improve performance, as measured by cumulative regret. As examples, consider (i) a team of robots
exploring actions (arms) in a common environment and interacting with a central controller; and (ii)
a group of people exploring restaurants (arms) and writing reviews for a web-recommendation server.
In the absence of adversaries, there is a clear reason to collaborate in either case: by exchanging
information, each agent can reduce its uncertainty about the arms faster than it could when it acts
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

