Hierarchical Channel-spatial Encoding for
Communication-efficient Collaborative Learning

Qihua Zhou1 , Song Guo1∗ , Yi Liu1 , Jie Zhang1 , Jiewei Zhang1 ,
Tao Guo1 , Zhenda Xu1 , Xun Liu1 , Zhihao Qu2
1
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
School of Computer and Information, Hohai University
{csqzhou,csyiliu,csjwzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
{jieaa.zhang,cocotao.guo,jackal.xu,compxun.liu}@connect.polyu.hk
song.guo@polyu.edu.hk, quzhihao@hhu.edu.cn

Abstract
It witnesses that the collaborative learning (CL) systems often face the performance
bottleneck of limited bandwidth, where multiple low-end devices continuously
generate data and transmit intermediate features to the cloud for incremental
training. To this end, improving the communication efficiency by reducing traffic
size is one of the most crucial issues for realistic deployment. Existing systems
mostly compress features at pixel level and ignore the characteristics of feature
structure, which could be further exploited for more efficient compression. In
this paper, we take new insights into implementing scalable CL systems through
a hierarchical compression on features, termed Stripe-wise Group Quantization
(SGQ). Different from previous unstructured quantization methods, SGQ captures
both channel and spatial similarity in pixels, and simultaneously encodes features
in these two levels to gain a much higher compression ratio. In particular, we
refactor feature structure based on inter-channel similarity and bound the gradient
deviation caused by quantization, in forward and backward passes, respectively.
Such a double-stage pipeline makes SGQ hold a sublinear convergence order as the
vanilla SGD-based optimization. Extensive experiments show that SGQ achieves a
higher traffic reduction ratio by up to 15.97× and provides 9.22× image processing
speedup over the uniform quantized training, while preserving adequate model
accuracy as FP32 does, even using 4-bit quantization. This verifies that SGQ can
be applied to a wide spectrum of edge intelligence applications.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen great prospects of deploying vision tasks on tiny edge devices by using
their always-on microprocessors, embedded sensors and neural chips. Considering the realistic
environment that new data is continuously generated on user devices that cannot be aggregated at
once due to the privacy and energy concerns, it comes to the rise of collaborative learning (CL)
paradigm [1, 22, 15]. Considering the resource constraints in CL systems, it is expected to partition
the models between multiple edge devices and the cloud, and coordinate the two sides during the
training procedure [32, 7]. In the forward pass of CL, the shallow cut layers deployed on edge devices
are used for low-level feature extraction and the intermediate features will be transmitted to cloud for
the subsequent processing on deep remaining layers. Also, in the backward pass, the cloud returns
the derivative flows of the transmitted features to the devices for model updating. By adopting such a
learning paradigm, devices can update parameters and evolve models continuously.
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

