Oracle-Efficient Online Learning for Smoothed
Adversaries
Nika Haghtalab, Yanjun Han, Abhishek Shetty, and Kunhe Yang
University of California, Berkeley
{nika,yjhan,shetty,kunheyang}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the design of computationally efficient online learning algorithms under
smoothed analysis. In this setting, at every step an adversary generates a sample
from an adaptively chosen distribution whose density is upper bounded by 1/
times the uniform density. Given access to an offline optimization (ERM) oracle,
we give the first computationally efficient online algorithms whose sublinear regret
depends only on the pseudo/VC dimension d of the class and the smoothness
pap
1)
rameter . In particular, we achieve oracle-efficient
regret
bounds
of
O(
T
d
p
1
for learning real-valued functions and O( T d 2 ) for learning binary-valued
functions. Our results establish that online learning is computationally as easy
as offline learning, under the smoothed analysis framework. This contrasts the
computational separation between online learning with worst-case adversaries and
offline learning established by [HK16].
Our algorithms also achieve improved bounds for some settings with binary-valued
functions
oracle-efficient algorithm
pand worst-case adversaries. These include anp
with O( T (d|X |)1/2 ) regret that refines the earlier O( T |X |) bound of [DS16]
for finite domains, and an oracle-efficient algorithm with O(T 3/4 d1/2 ) regret for
the transductive setting.

1

Introduction

Adversarial online learning is a cornerstone of modern machine learning and has led to significant
advances in computer science broadly. A recent line of work on “beyond the worst-case analysis” of
online learning has brought into light the overly pessimistic nature of standard characterizations of
online learnability [RST11, GR17, HRS20, HRS22]. This is exemplified by the results of [HRS22]
showing that adversarial online learnability is statistically as easy as PAC learnability, in presence
of noise. That is, under smoothed analysis, online and offline learnability are both characterized by
the finiteness of the VC dimension of a hypothesis class as opposed to the much larger Littlestone
dimension that characterizes online learnability in the worst-case [BDPSS09]. However, to fully
deliver on the promise revealed by these statistical insights, there needs to be an algorithmic framework
for realizing this connection between online and offline learnability. In this paper, we ask
whether efficient offline learning algorithms lead to efficient online learning algorithms with comparable regret guarantees, under smoothed analysis?
In more detail, smoothed analysis is a perspective on algorithm design, introduced by [ST04] and
formalized for online learning by [RST11, HRS20], in which the adversary is restricted to generating
an instance at every round from a distribution that is not overly concentrated, i.e., a distribution whose
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

