SwinTrack: A Simple and Strong Baseline for
Transformer Tracking

Liting Lin1,2∗ Heng Fan3∗ Zhipeng Zhang4 Yong Xu1,2 Haibin Ling5
School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China Univ. of Tech., Guangzhou, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton, USA
4
DiDi Chuxing, Beijing, China
5
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, USA
l.lt@mail.scut.edu.cn, heng.fan@unt.edu, zhipeng.zhang.cv@outlook.com
yxu@scut.edu.cn, hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

1

Abstract
Recently Transformer has been largely explored in tracking and shown state-of-theart (SOTA) performance. However, existing efforts mainly focus on fusing and enhancing features generated by convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The potential
of Transformer in representation learning remains under-explored. In this paper, we
aim to further unleash the power of Transformer by proposing a simple yet efficient
fully-attentional tracker, dubbed SwinTrack, within classic Siamese framework.
In particular, both representation learning and feature fusion in SwinTrack leverage
the Transformer architecture, enabling better feature interactions for tracking than
pure CNN or hybrid CNN-Transformer frameworks. Besides, to further enhance
robustness, we present a novel motion token that embeds historical target trajectory
to improve tracking by providing temporal context. Our motion token is lightweight
with negligible computation but brings clear gains. In our thorough experiments,
SwinTrack exceeds existing approaches on multiple benchmarks. Particularly, on
the challenging LaSOT, SwinTrack sets a new record with 0.713 SUC score. It also
achieves SOTA results on other benchmarks. We expect SwinTrack to serve as a
solid baseline for Transformer tracking and facilitate future research. Our codes
and results are released at https://github.com/LitingLin/SwinTrack.

1

Introduction

Visual tracking has seen considerable progress since deep learning. In particular, the recent Transformer [30] has significantly pushed the state-of-the-art in tracking owing to its ability in modeling
long-range dependencies. However, existing methods usually leverage Transformer for fusing and
enhancing features generated from convolutional neural networks (CNNs), e.g., ResNet [14]. The
potential of exploiting Transformer for feature representation learning is largely under-explored.
Recently, Vision Transformer (ViT) [7] has exhibited great potential in robust feature representation
learning. Particularly, its extension Swin Transformer [23] has achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA)
results on multiple tasks. Taking inspiration from this, we argue, besides the feature fusion, the
representation learning in tracking can also benefit from Transformer via attention. Thus motivated, we propose to develop a fully attentional tracking framework based on Siamese architecture.
Specifically, both the feature representation learning and the feature fusion of template and search
region are realized by Transformer. More concretely, we borrow the architecture of the powerful
∗

Equal Contributions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

