Parameter-free Dynamic Graph Embedding
for Link Prediction
Jiahao Liu1,2 , Dongsheng Li3 , Hansu Gu4B , Tun Lu1,2B , Peng Zhang1,2 , Ning Gu1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
Microsoft Research Asia, Shanghai, China 4 Seattle, United States
jiahaoliu21@m.fudan.edu.cn, dongsli@microsoft.com, hansug@acm.org
{lutun, zhangpeng_, ninggu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Dynamic interaction graphs have been widely adopted to model the evolution of
user-item interactions over time. There are two crucial factors when modelling
user preferences for link prediction in dynamic interaction graphs: 1) collaborative
relationship among users and 2) user personalized interaction patterns. Existing
methods often implicitly consider these two factors together, which may lead to
noisy user modelling when the two factors diverge. In addition, they usually require
time-consuming parameter learning with back-propagation, which is prohibitive
for real-time user preference modelling. To this end, this paper proposes FreeGEM,
a parameter-free dynamic graph embedding method for link prediction. Firstly,
to take advantage of the collaborative relationships, we propose an incremental
graph embedding engine to obtain user/item embeddings, which is an OnlineMonitor-Offline architecture consisting of an Online module to approximately
embed users/items over time, a Monitor module to estimate the approximation
error in real time and an Offline module to calibrate the user/item embeddings
when the online approximation errors exceed a threshold. Meanwhile, we integrate
attribute information into the model, which enables FreeGEM to better model users
belonging to some under represented groups. Secondly, we design a personalized
dynamic interaction pattern modeller, which combines dynamic time decay with
attention mechanism to model user short-term interests. Experimental results on
two link prediction tasks show that FreeGEM can outperform the state-of-the-art
methods in accuracy while achieving over 36X improvement in efficiency. All code
and datasets can be found in https://github.com/FudanCISL/FreeGEM.

1

Introduction

Dynamic interaction graphs have been adopted in a wide range of link prediction tasks to model the
evolution of user-item interactions over time [12, 14, 37]. The evolution of a dynamic interaction
graph can be reflected by its historical interaction (edge) sequence, in which two crucial factors
should be explicitly considered for link prediction tasks: 1) collaborative relationship among users,
i.e., users with similar historical interactions will interact with similar items in the future, which is
also the basic assumption of collaborative filtering [7, 15, 20]; and 2) user personalized dynamic
interaction patterns, i.e., users could have unique short-term interaction patterns, which are not shared
among like-minded users but can only be reflected by their own interaction sequences.
Many existing methods learn user preferences from dynamic interaction graphs using temporal point
process (TPP) [28, 30, 41], recurrent neural network (RNN) [1, 14, 32] and graph neural network
(GNN) [4, 23, 37], etc., in which the following key challenges arise. Firstly, these methods do not
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

