Causal Discovery in Linear Latent Variable Models
Subject to Measurement Error
Yuqin Yang⇤
Georgia Institute of Technology

AmirEmad Ghassami
Johns Hopkins University

Mohamed Nafea
University of Detroit Mercy

Negar Kiyavash
École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne (EPFL)

Kun Zhang
Carnegie Mellon University
& MBZUAI

Ilya Shpitser
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
We focus on causal discovery in the presence of measurement error in linear systems where the mixing matrix, i.e., the matrix indicating the independent exogenous
noise terms pertaining to the observed variables, is identified up to permutation and
scaling of the columns. We demonstrate a somewhat surprising connection between
this problem and causal discovery in the presence of unobserved parentless causes,
in the sense that there is a mapping, given by the mixing matrix, between the underlying models to be inferred in these problems. Consequently, any identifiability
result based on the mixing matrix for one model translates to an identifiability
result for the other model. We characterize to what extent the causal models can
be identified under a two-part faithfulness assumption. Under only the first part of
the assumption (corresponding to the conventional definition of faithfulness), the
structure can be learned up to the causal ordering among an ordered grouping of
the variables but not all the edges across the groups can be identified. We further
show that if both parts of the faithfulness assumption are imposed, the structure can
be learned up to a more refined ordered grouping. As a result of this refinement,
for the latent variable model with unobserved parentless causes, the structure can
be identified. Based on our theoretical results, we propose causal structure learning
methods for both models, and evaluate their performance on synthetic data.

1

Introduction

Learning causal structure among the variables of a system from observational data has received
considerable attention in the literature, since subject matter knowledge on causal relationships is often
incomplete or impossible to obtain in many applications [24, 16]. In many real-life systems, not all
variables of interest or all direct common causes of those variables can be observed. This necessitates
approaches for structure learning capable of dealing with latent variables. For the case that no a-priori
restrictions on the functional form of causal mechanisms are imposed, constraint-based algorithms
such as the Fast Causal Inference (FCI) algorithm have been proposed [24]. Such approaches are
often unable to identify the direction of the majority of causal connections in the system, which
motivates placing additional, often parametric, restrictions on the generating model. One of the most
commonly used restrictions is to assume that the model is linear with non-Gaussian exogenous noise
terms [21, 22, 12, 10]. This generating model leads to identification of the existence and orientation
of all edges in a causal model, assuming that no latent variables that are common causes of two or
more variables exist [21, 22]. Moreover, in such models even when latent variable common causes
exist, it is still possible to orient additional edges compared to algorithms such as FCI [12, 19, 1].
⇤

Correspondence to: yuqinyang@gatech.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

