MissDAG: Causal Discovery in the Presence of Missing
Data with Continuous Additive Noise Models
Erdun Gao1∗ † Ignavier Ng2∗ Mingming Gong1 Li Shen3 Wei Huang1
Tongliang Liu4 Kun Zhang2,5 Howard Bondell1
1
The University of Melbourne, 2 Carnegie Mellon University,
3
JD Explore Academy, 4 The University of Sydney
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
erdun.gao@student.unimelb.edu.au, {ignavierng, kunz1}@cmu.edu
{mingming.gong, wei.huang, howard.bondell}@unimelb.edu.au
shenli100@jd.com, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
State-of-the-art causal discovery methods usually assume that the observational
data is complete. However, the missing data problem is pervasive in many practical
scenarios such as clinical trials, economics, and biology. One straightforward way
to address the missing data problem is first to impute the data using off-the-shelf
imputation methods and then apply existing causal discovery methods. However,
such a two-step method may suffer from suboptimality, as the imputation algorithm
may introduce bias for modeling the underlying data distribution. In this paper, we
develop a general method, which we call MissDAG, to perform causal discovery
from data with incomplete observations. Focusing mainly on the assumptions of ignorable missingness and the identifiable additive noise models (ANMs), MissDAG
maximizes the expected likelihood of the visible part of observations under the
expectation-maximization (EM) framework. In the E-step, in cases where computing the posterior distributions of parameters in closed-form is not feasible, Monte
Carlo EM is leveraged to approximate the likelihood. In the M-step, MissDAG
leverages the density transformation to model the noise distributions with simpler
and specific formulations by virtue of the ANMs and uses a likelihood-based causal
discovery algorithm with directed acyclic graph constraint. We demonstrate the
flexibility of MissDAG for incorporating various causal discovery algorithms and
its efficacy through extensive simulations and real data experiments.

1

Introduction

Discovering the underlying causal relations among variables of interest often occupies a prominent
position for supporting stable inference and rational decisions [42] in many applications such as
medical diagnostics [48], recommendation systems [64] and economics [27]. To achieve this goal,
conducting randomized controlled trials or using interventions is often acknowledged as the golden
rule, which is effective but challenging in practice owing to high costs, ethical issues, or difficulties
in obtaining compliance [47]. To address this issue, causal discovery from purely observational data,
which may be more realistic in specific settings, has drawn considerable attention in both academic
and industrial fields [58, 24, 23, 21].
Existing causal discovery methods, such as constraint-based methods [57, 13], score-based methods
[12, 46], and methods based on functional causal models [53, 25, 72, 44], typically focus on the
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work was done during an internship at JD Explore Academy.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

