On Kernelized Multi-Armed Bandits with Constraints
Xingyu Zhou
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Wayne State University
Detroit, MI, USA
xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu

Bo Ji
Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA, USA
boji@vt.edu

Abstract
We study a stochastic bandit problem with a general unknown reward function and
a general unknown constraint function. Both functions can be non-linear (even
non-convex) and are assumed to lie in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)
with a bounded norm. In contrast to safety-type hard constraints studied in prior
works, we consider soft constraints that may be violated in any round as long as
the cumulative violations are small. Our ultimate goal is to study how to utilize the
nature of soft constraints to attain a finer complexity-regret-constraint trade-off in
the kernelized bandit setting. To this end, leveraging primal-dual optimization, we
propose a general framework for both algorithm design and performance analysis.
This framework builds upon a novel sufficient condition, which not only is satisfied
under general exploration strategies, including upper confidence bound (UCB),
Thompson sampling (TS), and new ones based on random exploration, but also
enables a unified analysis for showing both sublinear regret and sublinear or even
zero constraint violation. We demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed
algorithms via numerical experiments based on both synthetic and real-world
datasets. Along the way, we also make the first detailed comparison between two
popular methods for analyzing constrained bandits and Markov decision processes
(MDPs) by discussing the key difference and some subtleties in the analysis, which
could be of independent interest to the communities.

1

Introduction

Stochastic bandit optimization of an unknown function f has recently gained increasing popularity due
to its widespread real-life applications such as recommendations [1], cloud resource configurations [2],
and wireless power control [3]. At each time t, an action xt is selected and then a (noisy) bandit
reward feedback yt is observed. The goal is to maximize the cumulative reward, or equivalently
minimize the total regret due to not choosing the optimal action in hindsight. To capture a generic
function, researchers have turned to nonparametric models of f via Gaussian process or reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), which are able to uniformly approximate an arbitrary continuous
function over a compact set [4]. In this paper, as in [5, 6], we consider the agnostic setting (i.e.,
frequentist-type), where f is assumed to be a fixed function in an RKHS with a bounded norm (i.e., a
measure of smoothness). We call this setting frequentist-type kernelized bandits (KB).
In addition to a generic non-linear or even non-convex function f , another common feature in
practical applications is that there often exist additional constraints in the decision-making process
such as hard-constraint like safety or soft-constraint like cost. To this end, there have been exciting
recent advances in the theoretical analysis of constrained kernelized bandits. In particular, [7–9]
propose algorithms with convergence guarantees, while [10], to the best our knowledge, is the first

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

