AMOS: A Large-Scale Abdominal Multi-Organ
Benchmark for Versatile Medical Image Segmentation

Yuanfeng Ji1 , Haotian Bai2 , Chongjian Ge1 , Jie Yang2 , Ye Zhu2 , Ruimao Zhang2*
Zhen Li2* , Lingyan Zhang3 , Wanling Ma4 , Xiang Wan2 , Ping Luo1∗,
1
The University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
Longgang Central Hospital of Shenzhen, China
4
Longgang People Hospital of Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Despite the considerable progress in automatic abdominal multi-organ segmentation from CT/MRI scans in recent years, a comprehensive evaluation of the models’
capabilities is hampered by the lack of a large-scale benchmark from diverse clinical scenarios. Constraint by the high cost of collecting and labeling 3D medical
data, most of the deep learning models to date are driven by datasets with a limited
number of organs of interest or samples, which still limits the power of modern deep
models and makes it difficult to provide a fully comprehensive and fair estimate
of various methods. To mitigate the limitations, we present AMOS, a large-scale,
diverse, clinical dataset for abdominal organ segmentation. AMOS provides 500
CT and 100 MRI scans collected from multi-center, multi-vendor, multi-modality,
multi-phase, multi-disease patients, each with voxel-level annotations of 15 abdominal organs, providing challenging examples and test-bed for studying robust
segmentation algorithms under diverse targets and scenarios. We further benchmark several state-of-the-art medical segmentation models to evaluate the status of
the existing methods on this new challenging dataset. We have made our datasets,
benchmark servers, and baselines publicly available, and hope to inspire future research. Information can be found at https://jiyuanfeng.github.io/AMOS/.

1

Introduction

A dense and pixel-precise understanding of abdominal anatomy is of fundamental importance for
computer-aided clinical applications such as disease diagnosis and radiotherapy planning. Specifically,
accurate abdominal organ segmentation provides crucial information such as the interrelations among
the organs as well as individual positions and shapes in the standardized space, which is essential
for assisting clinical decision-making. With the development of related datasets [1, 11, 12, 5, 15],
significant progress has been made in this area.
Nevertheless, robust segmentation of abdominal organs remains challenging in a real-world clinical
setting because of the large variety of organ morphological structures, appearance, and imaging
qualities between images acquired from different patients by different scanners. Some challenges are
rooted in the gap between the recent benchmarks and the real-world clinic, which we summarized
as follow: (a) Small-Scale: Since the acquisition and annotation of 3D Medical data are incredibly
expensive, currently available benchmarks contain only a limited number of data samples or organ
annotations, or both. (b) Lack of Diversity: The tremendous cost also restricts previous works to only
acquiring data samples from a single-center, phase, scanner, and disease [1]. Models trained with
∗

Corresponding authors: pluo@cs.hku.hk & ruimao.zhang@ieee.org & lizhen@cuhk.edu.cn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

