Rare Gems: Finding Lottery Tickets at Initialization

Kartik Sreenivasan∗ w, Jy-yong Sohn∗ w, Liu Yangw, Matthew Grindew
Alliot Nagle,w Hongyi Wang,c Eric Xing,mcp Kangwook Lee,w Dimitris Papailiopoulosw
c

Carnegie Mellon University m Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
p
Petuum, Inc. w University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Large neural networks can be pruned to a small fraction of their original size,
with little loss in accuracy, by following a time-consuming “train, prune, re-train”
approach. Frankle & Carbin [9] conjecture that we can avoid this by training lottery
tickets, i.e., special sparse subnetworks found at initialization, that can be trained
to high accuracy. However, a subsequent line of work [11, 41] presents concrete
evidence that current algorithms for finding trainable networks at initialization, fail
simple baseline comparisons, e.g., against training random sparse subnetworks.
Finding lottery tickets that train to better accuracy compared to simple baselines
remains an open problem. In this work, we resolve this open problem by proposing
G EM -M INER which finds lottery tickets at initialization that beat current baselines.
G EM -M INER finds lottery tickets trainable to accuracy competitive or better than
Iterative Magnitude Pruning (IMP), and does so up to 19× faster.

1

Introduction

A large body of research since the 1980s empirically observed that large neural networks can be
compressed or sparsified to a small fraction of their original size while maintaining their predictive
accuracy [14–16, 20, 23, 29, 45]. Although several pruning methods have been proposed during the
past few decades, many of them follow the “train, prune, re-train” paradigm. Although the above
methods result in very sparse, accurate models, they typically require several rounds of re-training,
which is computationally intensive.
Frankle & Carbin [9] suggest that this computational burden may be avoidable. They conjecture
that given a randomly initialized network, one can find a sparse subnetwork that can be trained to
accuracy comparable to that of its fully trained dense counterpart. This trainable subnetwork found at
initialization is referred to as a lottery ticket. The study above introduced iterative magnitude pruning
(IMP) as a means of finding these lottery tickets. Their experimental findings laid the groundwork for
what is now known as the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH).
Although Frankle & Carbin [9] establish that the LTH is true for tasks like image classification on
MNIST, they were not able to get satisfactory results for more complex datasets like CIFAR-10 and
ImageNet when using deeper networks, such as VGG and ResNets [10]. In fact, subsequent work
brought the effectiveness of IMP into question. Su et al. [41] showed that even randomly sampled
sparse subnetworks at initialization can beat lottery tickets found by IMP as long as the layerwise
sparsities are chosen carefully. Gale et al. [12] showed that methods like IMP which train tickets
from initialization cannot compete with the accuracy of a model trained with pruning as part of the
optimization process.
Frankle et al. [10] explain the failures of IMP using the concept of linear mode connectivity which
measures the stability of these subnetworks to SGD noise. Extensive follow-up studies propose
∗

Authors contributed equally to this paper.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

