Decoupled Self-supervised Learning for Graphs
Teng Xiao1 , Zhengyu Chen2 , Zhimeng Guo1 , Zeyang Zhuang3 , Suhang Wang1
1
The Pennsylvania State University, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Tongji University
{tengxiao,zhimeng,szw494}@psu.edu,chenzhengyu@zju.edu.cn
zeyangzhuang0315@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of conducting self-supervised learning for node
representation learning on graphs. Most existing self-supervised learning methods
assume the graph is homophilous, where linked nodes often belong to the same
class or have similar features. However, such assumptions of homophily do not
always hold in real-world graphs. We address this problem by developing a decoupled self-supervised learning (DSSL) framework for graph neural networks. DSSL
imitates a generative process of nodes and links from latent variable modeling of
the semantic structure, which decouples different underlying semantics between
different neighborhoods into the self-supervised learning process. Our DSSL framework is agnostic to the encoders and does not need prefabricated augmentations,
thus is flexible to different graphs. To effectively optimize the framework, we
derive the evidence lower bound of the self-supervised objective and develop a
scalable training algorithm with variational inference. We provide a theoretical
analysis to justify that DSSL enjoys the better downstream performance. Extensive
experiments on various types of graph benchmarks demonstrate that our proposed
framework can achieve better performance compared with competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in the real world, such as social networks, knowledge graphs, and
molecular structures. In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) [16, 27, 52, 7, 60] have been
proven to be powerful in node representation learning over graph-structured data. Typically, GNNs
are trained with annotated labeled data in a supervised manner. However, collecting labeled data is
expensive and impractical in many applications, especially for those requiring domain knowledge,
such as medicine and chemistry [71, 20]. Moreover, supervised learning may suffer from problems
of less-transferrable, over-fitting, and poor generalization when the task labels are scarce [10, 64].
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) provides a promising learning paradigm that reduces the
dependence on manual labels in the image domain [5, 12, 13, 6]. Compared to image data, there
are unique challenges in designing self-supervised learning schemes for graph-structured data since
nodes in the graph are correlated with each other rather than completely independent, and geometric
structures are essential and heavily impact the performance in downstream tasks [27]. A number of
recent works [53, 18, 64, 69, 48, 65, 45] have studied graph self-supervised learning and confirm
that it can learn transferrable and generalizable node representations without any labels. Typically,
there are two main self-supervised schemes to capture structure information in graphs [53, 64, 45].
The first scheme is reconstructing the vertex adjacency following traditional network-embedding
methods [26, 14, 17, 16, 46], which learns an encoder that imposes the topological closeness of
nodes in the graph structure on latent representations. The key assumption behind this scheme is that
neighboring nodes have similar representations [53, 46]. However, this assumption over-emphasizes
proximity [53, 64, 47] and does not always hold true for heterophilic and non-homophilous (mixing)
graphs. In comparison, contrastive learning methods [53, 18, 64, 69, 48, 65] construct two graph
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

