The Franz–Parisi Criterion and
Computational Trade-offs
in High Dimensional Statistics

Afonso S. Bandeira
Department of Mathematics
ETH Zürich
bandeira@math.ethz.ch

Ahmed El Alaoui
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Cornell University
ae333@cornell.edu

Samuel B. Hopkins
MIT EECS
Cambridge, MA
samhop@mit.edu

Tselil Schramm
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
tselil@stanford.edu

Alexander S. Wein
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Davis
aswein@ucdavis.edu

Ilias Zadik
Department of Mathematics
MIT
izadik@mit.edu

Abstract
Many high-dimensional statistical inference problems are believed to possess
inherent computational hardness. Various frameworks have been proposed to give
rigorous evidence for such hardness, including lower bounds against restricted
models of computation (such as low-degree functions), as well as methods rooted
in statistical physics that are based on free energy landscapes. This paper aims
to make a rigorous connection between the seemingly different low-degree and
free-energy based approaches. We define a free-energy based criterion for hardness
and formally connect it to the well-established notion of low-degree hardness for a
broad class of statistical problems, namely all Gaussian additive models and certain
models with a sparse planted signal. By leveraging these rigorous connections
we are able to: establish that for Gaussian additive models the “algebraic” notion
of low-degree hardness implies failure of “geometric” local MCMC algorithms,
and provide new low-degree lower bounds for sparse linear regression which seem
difficult to prove directly. These results provide both conceptual insights into the
connections between different notions of hardness, as well as concrete technical
tools such as new methods for proving low-degree lower bounds.

1

Introduction

Many inference problems in high dimensional statistics appear to exhibit an information-computation
gap, wherein at some values of the signal-to-noise ratio, inference is information-theoretically
possible, but no (time-)efficient algorithm is known. Well-known problems that exhibit such gaps
include sparse linear regression, sparse principal component analysis (PCA), tensor PCA, planted
clique, community detection, graph coloring, and many others (we point the reader to the survey
references [ZK16a, BPW18, RSS19, KWB19, Gam21] and references therein for many examples).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

