Harmonizing the object recognition strategies of deep
neural networks with humans
Thomas Fel∗1,2 , Ivan Felipe∗1 , Drew Linsley∗1,3 , Thomas Serre1,2,3
{thomas_fel,ivan_felipe_rodriguez,drew_linsley}@brown.edu

Abstract
The many successes of deep neural networks (DNNs) over the past decade have
largely been driven by computational scale rather than insights from biological
intelligence. Here, we explore if these trends have also carried concomitant improvements in explaining the visual strategies humans rely on for object recognition.
We do this by comparing two related but distinct properties of visual strategies in
humans and DNNs: where they believe important visual features are in images and
how they use those features to categorize objects. Across 84 different DNNs trained
on ImageNet and three independent datasets measuring the where and the how of
human visual strategies for object recognition on those images, we find a systematic
trade-off between DNN categorization accuracy and alignment with human visual
strategies for object recognition. State-of-the-art DNNs are progressively becoming
less aligned with humans as their accuracy improves. We rectify this growing issue
with our neural harmonizer: a general-purpose training routine that both aligns
DNN and human visual strategies and improves categorization accuracy. Our work
represents the first demonstration that the scaling laws [1–3] that are guiding the
design of DNNs today have also produced worse models of human vision. We
release our code and data at https://serre-lab.github.io/Harmonization
to help the field build more human-like DNNs.

1

Introduction

Rich Sutton stated [4] that the bitter lesson “from 70 years of AI research is that general methods
that leverage computation are ultimately the most effective, and by a large margin.” Deep learning
has been the standard approach to object categorization problems ever since the paradigm shifting
success of AlexNet [5] on the ImageNet [6] benchmark a decade ago. As deep neural network (DNN)
performance has continued to improve in the intervening years, Sutton’s lesson has become more
fitting than ever, with recent networks rivaling and likely outperforming humans on the benchmark [7]
through brute-force computational scale: increasing the number of network parameters and number of
images used for training orders-of-magnitude beyond AlexNet [1–3]. While the successes of so-called
“scaling laws” are undeniable, this singular focus on performance in the field has side-stepped an
equally important question that will govern the utility of object recognition models for the brain
sciences and industry applications alike: are the visual strategies learned by DNNs aligned with those
used by humans?
The visual strategies that mediate object recognition in humans can be decomposed into two related
but distinct processes: identifying where the important features for object recognition are in a scene,
and determining how to integrate the selected features into a categorical decision [8, 9]. It has been
* These authors contributed equally.
1

Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, & Psychological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute (ANITI), Toulouse, France
3
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, Providence, RI
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

