Graph Self-supervised Learning
with Accurate Discrepancy Learning

Dongki Kim1∗, Jinheon Baek1∗ , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , AITRICS2 , South Korea
cleverki@kaist.ac.kr, jinheon.baek@kaist.ac.kr, sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Self-supervised learning of graph neural networks (GNNs) aims to learn an accurate
representation of the graphs in an unsupervised manner, to obtain transferable
representations of them for diverse downstream tasks. Predictive learning and
contrastive learning are the two most prevalent approaches for graph self-supervised
learning. However, they have their own drawbacks. While the predictive learning
methods can learn the contextual relationships between neighboring nodes and
edges, they cannot learn global graph-level similarities. Contrastive learning, while
it can learn global graph-level similarities, its objective to maximize the similarity
between two differently perturbed graphs may result in representations that cannot
discriminate two similar graphs with different properties. To tackle such limitations,
we propose a framework that aims to learn the exact discrepancy between the
original and the perturbed graphs, coined as Discrepancy-based Self-supervised
LeArning (D-SLA). Specifically, we create multiple perturbations of the given
graph with varying degrees of similarity, and train the model to predict whether
each graph is the original graph or the perturbed one. Moreover, we further aim to
accurately capture the amount of discrepancy for each perturbed graph using the
graph edit distance. We validate our D-SLA on various graph-related downstream
tasks, including molecular property prediction, protein function prediction, and
link prediction tasks, on which ours largely outperforms relevant baselines1 .

1

Introduction

A graph, consisting of nodes and edges, is a data structure that defines a relationship among objects.
Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) [15, 8, 31, 38], which aim to represent this structure
with neural networks, have achieved great successes in modeling real-world graphs such as social
networks [5], knowledge graphs [1], biological networks [20], and molecular graphs [36]. However,
it is extremely costly and time-consuming to annotate every label of the graphs. For example, labeling
the properties of molecular graphs requires time-consuming laboratory experiments [11].
Recently, various self-supervised learning methods for GNNs [11, 45, 12, 28] have been studied to
overcome this issue of the lack of labeled graph data. The existing self-supervised learning methods
can be classified into two categories: predictive learning and contrastive learning. Predictive learning
methods [11, 22, 14] aim to learn representations by predicting contexts of a graph (Figure 1, (a-1)).
However, predictive learning schemes are limited as they consider only the subgraphical semantics.
Contrastive learning [32, 27, 42, 46, 43, 37], which is a popular self-supervised learning approach in
the computer vision field [24, 35, 4, 9], can learn the global semantics by maximizing the similarity
between instances (images) perturbed by semantic-invariant perturbations (e.g. color jittering or
flipping). Graph contrastive learning methods also use a similar strategy, generating positive examples
∗
1

Equal Contribution.
Code is available at https://github.com/DongkiKim95/D-SLA

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

