An Algorithm for Learning Switched Linear
Dynamics from Data
Guillaume Berger∗ Monal Narasimhamurthy∗ Kandai Watanabe
Morteza Lahijanian Sriram Sankaranarayanan
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA
firstname.lastname@colorado.edu

Abstract
We present an algorithm for learning switched linear dynamical systems in discrete time from noisy observations of the system’s full state or output. Switched
linear systems use multiple linear dynamical modes to fit the data within some
desired tolerance. They arise quite naturally in applications to robotics and cyberphysical systems. Learning switched systems from data is a NP-hard problem that
is nearly identical to the k-linear regression problem of fitting k > 1 linear models
to the data. A direct mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) approach yields
time complexity that is exponential in the number of data points. In this paper,
we modify the problem formulation to yield an algorithm that is linear in the size
of the data while remaining exponential in the number of state variables and the
desired number of modes. To do so, we combine classic ideas from the ellipsoidal
method for solving convex optimization problems, and well-known oracle separation results in non-smooth optimization. We demonstrate our approach on a set of
microbenchmarks and a few interesting real-world problems. Our evaluation suggests that the benefits of this algorithm can be made practical even against highly
optimized off-the-shelf MILP solvers.

1

Introduction

Switched linear systems model dynamical systems that arise in diverse areas including natural sciences (biological models) [4, 8, 15], robotics [2], and cyber-physical systems [1]. They are characterized by a finite set of modes, wherein each mode features a different set of governing equations
for the future states in terms of the current state of the system. In this paper, we study algorithms for
inferring the dynamics of a switched linear system from data that consists of full-state observations
(this can be subsequently extended to output observations using ARX models; see Section 2 for
details). Specifically, given a set of data points {(xi , x′i )}N
i=1 of current and next state observations,
and a number of modes m, we wish to find matrices A1 , . . . , Am such that each data point (xi , x′i )
is explained by some matrix Aj : (∀i) (∃j) ||x′i − Aj xi || ≤ ϵ||xi || + τ , for given error tolerances
ϵ, τ > 0. However, the switching signal which governs the current mode associated with each data
point is latent. This renders the problem NP-hard and the best known approaches have exponential
complexity in terms of the number of data points and the desired number of modes [22]. The exponential complexity in the number of data points makes this problem especially challenging since
many datasets of interest have thousands of data points but with tens of modes and state variables.
The key insight in this paper is that by reformulating this problem to incorporate a “gap” in the
tolerance, we can significantly improve the complexity to be linear in the number of data points
N and exponential in the number of modes and the dimension of the state space. Rather than
providing a Y ES/N O answer for a single tolerance bound ϵ, our approach takes as inputs two levels
of tolerance ϵ1 < ϵ2 . It either finds matrices that satisfy the “upper” tolerance bound ϵ2 > 0 or
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

