TaiSu: A 166M Large-scale High-Quality Dataset for
Chinese Vision-Language Pre-training
Yulong Liu1,2 , Guibo Zhu1,4,5 ∗, Bin Zhu3 , Qi Song3 , Guojing Ge1 , Haoran Chen1,4 , Guanhui
Qiao1,4 , Ru Peng2 , Lingxiang Wu1 , and Jinqiao Wang1,4,5
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, China
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Wuhan AI Research
{ lylhubxy, nancypt }@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{ gbzhu, jqwang }@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{ bin.zhu, qi.song }@mail.bnu.edu.cn
{ guojing.ge, chenhaoran2022,qiaoguanhui2021, lingxiang.wu }@ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) has been shown to be an efficient method to
improve the performance of models on different vision-and-language downstream
tasks. Substantial studies have shown that neural networks may be able to learn
some general rules about language and visual concepts from a large-scale weakly
labeled image-text dataset. However, most of the public cross-modal datasets that
contain more than 100M image-text pairs are in English; there is a lack of available
large-scale and high-quality Chinese VLP datasets. In this work, we propose a
new framework for automatic dataset acquisition and cleaning with which we
construct a new large-scale and high-quality cross-modal dataset named as TaiSu,
containing 166 million images and 219 million Chinese captions. Compared with
the recently released Wukong dataset, our dataset is achieved with much stricter
restrictions on the semantic correlation of image-text pairs. We also propose to
combine texts collected from the web with texts generated by a pre-trained imagecaptioning model. To the best of our knowledge, TaiSu is currently the largest
publicly accessible Chinese cross-modal dataset. Furthermore, we test our dataset
on several vision-language downstream tasks. TaiSu outperforms BriVL by a large
margin on the zero-shot image-text retrieval task and zero-shot image classification
task. TaiSu also shows better performance than Wukong on the image-retrieval task
without using image augmentation for training. Results demonstrate that TaiSu
can serve as a promising VLP dataset, both for understanding and generative tasks.
More information can be referred to https://github.com/ksOAn6g5/TaiSu.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) is a new paradigm to obtain the foundation models with largescale parameters[1]. It has achieved great success on different vision-language downstream tasks
such as Image-Text Retrieval, Image-Captioning, and Visual Question Answering. Its success is not
only attributed to the appearance of advanced models like BERT[2] and ViT[3], but also to the use
of large-scale multi-modal datasets. For example, CLIP[4] was trained with 400M image-text pairs,
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

