A Closer Look at Prototype Classifier for Few-shot
Image Classification
Mingcheng Hou
The University of Tokyo
hmc1984techjob@gmail.com

Issei Sato
The University of Tokyo
sato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The prototypical network is a prototype classifier based on meta-learning and
is widely used for few-shot learning because it classifies unseen examples by
constructing class-specific prototypes without adjusting hyper-parameters during
meta-testing. Interestingly, recent research has attracted a lot of attention, showing
that training a new linear classifier, which does not use a meta-learning algorithm,
performs comparably with the prototypical network. However, the training of
a new linear classifier requires the retraining of the classifier every time a new
class appears. In this paper, we analyze how a prototype classifier works equally
well without training a new linear classifier or meta-learning. We experimentally
find that directly using the feature vectors, which is extracted by using standard
pre-trained models to construct a prototype classifier in meta-testing, does not
perform as well as the prototypical network and training new linear classifiers on
the feature vectors of pre-trained models. Thus, we derive a novel generalization
bound for a prototypical classifier and show that the transformation of a feature
vector can improve the performance of prototype classifiers. We experimentally
investigate several normalization methods for minimizing the derived bound and
find that the same performance can be obtained by using the L2 normalization and
minimizing the ratio of the within-class variance to the between-class variance
without training a new classifier or meta-learning.

1

Introduction

Few-shot learning is used to adapt quickly to new classes with low annotation cost. Meta-learning is
a standard training procedure to tackle the few-shot learning problem and the prototypical network
[1], a.k.a ProtoNet is a widely used meta-learning algorithm for few-shot learning. In ProtoNet, we
use a prototype classifier based on meta-learning to predict the classes of unobserved objects by
constructing class-specific prototypes without adjusting the hyper-parameters during meta-testing.
ProtoNet has two advantages. (1) Since the nearest neighbor method is applied on query data and
class prototypes during the meta-test phase, no hyper-parameters are required in the meta-test phase.
(2) The classifiers can quickly adapt to new environments because they do not have to be re-trained
for the support set in the meta-test phase when new classes appear. Moreover, the generalization
bound of ProtoNet in relation to the number of shots in a support set has been studied [2]. The bound
suggests that the performance of ProtoNet depends on the ratio of the within-class variance to the
between-class variance of the features extracted using the meta-trained model.
There have been studies on training a new linear classifier on the features extracted using a pre-trained
model without meta-learning, which can perform comparably with the meta-learned models [3, 4].
We call this approach the linear-evaluation-based approach. In these studies, the models are trained
with the standard classification problem, i.e., models are trained with cross-entropy loss after linear
projection from the embedding space to the class-probability space. The linear-evaluation-based
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

