Test-Time Prompt Tuning for Zero-Shot
Generalization in Vision-Language Models

Manli Shu1∗ Weili Nie2 De-An Huang2 Zhiding Yu 2
Tom Goldstein 1 Anima Anandkumar2,3,† Chaowei Xiao2,4†
1
University of Maryland, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Caltech, 4 Arizona State University

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models (e.g., CLIP) have shown promising zero-shot
generalization in many downstream tasks with properly designed text prompts.
Instead of relying on hand-engineered prompts, recent works learn prompts using
the training data from downstream tasks. While effective, training on domainspecific data reduces a model’s generalization capability to unseen new domains.
In this work, we propose test-time prompt tuning (TPT), a method that can learn
adaptive prompts on the fly with a single test sample. For image classification, TPT
optimizes the prompt by minimizing the entropy with confidence selection so that
the model has consistent predictions across different augmented views of each test
sample. In evaluating generalization to natural distribution shifts, TPT improves
the zero-shot top-1 accuracy of CLIP by 3.6% on average, surpassing previous
prompt tuning approaches that require additional task-specific training data. In
evaluating cross-dataset generalization with unseen categories, TPT performs on
par with the state-of-the-art approaches that use additional training data. Project
page: https://azshue.github.io/TPT/.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in vision-language pre-training, such as CLIP [1] and ALIGN [2], present a
promising direction for developing foundation models for vision tasks [3, 4]. These foundation
models encode a wide range of visual concepts after training on millions of noisy image-text pairs and
can be applied to downstream tasks in a zero-shot manner without task-specific training data [5–11].
This is made possible by appropriately designed instruction prompts. Take image classification in
Figure 1 as an example: We can prepend a category name with a prompt “a photo of a" (e.g., “a
photo of a dog"). Images can then be classified by using CLIP to measure their alignment with the
various class descriptions. Designing such prompts thus plays a crucial role in applying foundation
models to downstream tasks in a zero-shot manner. However, such hand-crafted prompts require
domain-specific heuristics and may not be optimal.
Recent works address this by proposing prompt tuning to directly learn prompts using training data
from downstream tasks [12]. We can fine-tune prompts with training data in the same way we finetune model parameters since prompt embeddings are part of the model input and are differentiable
with respect to the loss function. Such an approach can find better prompts compared to hand-crafted
ones, but the learned prompts are limited to the distribution and tasks corresponding to training data
and may have limited generalization beyond that. In addition, this approach requires training data
with annotations, which can be expensive and is not available for zero-shot tasks.
∗
†

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA. manlis@cs.umd.edu.
Equal advising

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

