Structured Energy Network as a Loss Function
Jay-Yoon Lee¶
lee.jayyoon@snu.ac.kr
Wenlong Zhao|
wenlongzhao@cs.umass.edu

|

Dhruvesh Patel|
{dhruveshpate,

Purujit Goyal|
purujitgoyal}@cs.umass.edu

Zhiyang Xu⌃
zhiyangx@vt.edu

Andrew McCallum|
mccallum@cs.umass.edu

Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University
Manning College of Information & Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
⌃
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
¶

Abstract
Belanger & McCallum (2016) and Gygli et al. (2017) have shown that energy
networks can capture arbitrary dependencies amongst the output variables in structured prediction; however, their reliance on gradient based inference (GBI) makes
the inference slow and unstable. In this work, we propose Structured Energy As
Loss (SEAL) to take advantage of the expressivity of energy networks without
incurring the high inference cost. This is a novel learning framework that uses
an energy network as a trainable loss function (loss-net) to train a separate neural
network (task-net), which is then used to perform inference through a forward pass.
We establish SEAL as a general framework wherein various learning strategies like
margin-based, regression, and noise-contrastive could be employed to learn the
parameters of loss-net. Through extensive evaluation on multi-label classification,
semantic role labeling, and image segmentation, we demonstrate that SEAL provides various useful design choices, is faster at inference than GBI, and leads to
significant performance gains over the baselines.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction is an important machine learning problem in which, given an input x, the model
needs to predict the output y 2 Y1 ⇥ Y2 ⇥ · · · ⇥ YL where there are dependencies across y1 , . . . , yL .
Common structured prediction tasks include multi-label classification (Belanger & McCallum, 2016;
Gygli et al., 2017), extracting parse trees or semantic role labels from texts (Palmer et al., 2010),
and image segmentation (Müller, 2014). Traditionally, these tasks are performed using models
that explicitly represent the dependencies among output variables, such as directed and undirected
graphical models, including Hidden Markov Models and Conditional Random Fields. However,
except in cases with very limited dependency patterns (Lafferty et al., 2001; Ghamrawi & McCallum,
2005), inference algorithms in these methods are difficult to engineer and expensive to run because
structured output spaces are exponentially large. In a multi-label classification task, for example, the
size of the label space Y is 2L given Yi = {0, 1}.

With their growing expressivity and capacity, it is common to use large feedforward neural networks
to implicitly capture dependencies among output variables. Given an input x, the elements of an
output y are predicted in a conditionally independent manner in parallel, solely relying on the
representation of input x to capture dependencies among output variables. While the feedforward
approach is computationally efficient, the widely used cross-entropy loss does not directly capture
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

