Domain Adaptation meets Individual Fairness.
And they get along.

Debarghya Mukherjee∗
Princeton University
University of Michigan
mdeb@umich.edu

Felix Petersen∗
Stanford University
University of Konstanz
mail@felix-petersen.de

Mikhail Yurochkin
IBM Research, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com

Yuekai Sun
University of Michigan
yuekai@umich.edu

Abstract
Many instances of algorithmic bias are caused by distributional shifts. For example,
machine learning (ML) models often perform worse on demographic groups that
are underrepresented in the training data. In this paper, we leverage this connection between algorithmic fairness and distribution shifts to show that algorithmic
fairness interventions can help ML models overcome distribution shifts, and that
domain adaptation methods (for overcoming distribution shifts) can mitigate algorithmic biases. In particular, we show that (i) enforcing suitable notions of
individual fairness (IF) can improve the out-of-distribution accuracy of ML models
under the covariate shift assumption and that (ii) it is possible to adapt representation alignment methods for domain adaptation to enforce individual fairness. The
former is unexpected because IF interventions were not developed with distribution
shifts in mind. The latter is also unexpected because representation alignment is
not a common approach in the individual fairness literature.

1

Introduction

Although algorithmic bias and distribution shifts are often considered separate problems, there is a
recent body of empirical work that shows many instances of algorithmic bias are caused by distribution
shifts. Broadly speaking, there are two ways distribution shifts cause algorithmic biases [1]: (i) The
model is trained to predict the wrong target; (ii) The model is trained to predict the correct target, but
its predictions are inaccurate for demographic groups that are underrepresented in the training data.
From a statistical perspective, the first type of algorithmic bias is caused by concept or posterior
drift between the training data and the real-world. This leads to a mismatch between the model’s
predictions and actual data. This type of algorithmic bias is also known as label choice bias [2]. The
second type of algorithmic biases arises when ML models are trained or evaluated with non-diverse
data, causing the models to perform poorly on underserved groups. This type of algorithmic bias
is caused by a covariate shift between the training data and the real-world data. In this paper, we
mostly focus on algorithmic biases caused by covariate shift. The overlap between the problems of
algorithmic bias and distribution shift suggests two questions:
1. Is it possible to overcome distribution shifts with algorithmic fairness interventions?
2. Is it possible to mitigate biases caused by distribution shifts with domain adaptation methods?
* Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

