Statistical Learning and Inverse Problems:
A Stochastic Gradient Approach

Yuri R. Fonseca
Decision, Risk and Operations
Columbia University
New York, NY
yfonseca23@gsb.columbia.edu

Yuri F. Saporito
School of Applied Mathematics
Getulio Vargas Foundation
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
yuri.saporito@fgv.br

Abstract
Inverse problems are paramount in Science and Engineering. In this paper, we consider the setup of Statistical Inverse Problem (SIP) and demonstrate how Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithms can be used to solve linear SIP. We provide
consistency and finite sample bounds for the excess risk. We also propose a modification for the SGD algorithm where we leverage machine learning methods to
smooth the stochastic gradients and improve empirical performance. We exemplify the algorithm in a setting of great interest nowadays: the Functional Linear
Regression model. In this case we consider a synthetic data example and a classification problem for predicting the main activity of bitcoin addresses based on their
balances.

1

Introduction

Inverse Problems (IP) might be described as the search of an unknown parameter (that could be a
function) that satisfies a given, known equation. Considering the notation:
y = A[f ◦ ] + noise,
where f ◦ and y are elements of given Hilbert spaces, we would like to compute (or estimate) f ◦
given the data y for some level of noise. Typically, IPs are ill-posed in the sense that the solution
does not depend continuously on the data. There are several very important and impressive examples
of IPs in our daily lives. Medical imaging has been using IPs for decades and it has shaped the area,
as for instance, Computerized Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). For an
introductory text, see Vogel [2002].
A vast literature of IPs is devoted to deterministic problems where the noise term is also a element of
a Hilbert space and commonly assumed small in norm, which is not usually verifiable in practice. In
this work, we will take a different avenue, known as Statistical Inverse Problems (SIP). This approach
is a formalization of IPs within a probabilistic setting, where the uncertainty of all measurements are
properly considered. Our focus in this work is to propose a direct and practical method for solving
SIP problems and, at the same time, provide theoretical guarantees for the excess risk performance of
the algorithm we develop. Our algorithm is based on a gradient descent framework, where stochastic
gradients (or base learners that approximate the stochastic gradients) are used to estimate general
functional parameters.
The paper is organized as follows. We finish this section contextualizing our paper in the broad
literature and stating our main contributions. In Section 2, we formally introduce the learning
problem that we analyze. In Section 3, we provide examples of practical problems that fits within
our formulation. In Section 4 we provide our main results and algorithms. Finally, in Section 5 we
provide numerical examples and a real data application for a Functional Linear Regression problem
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

