Concept Activation Regions: A Generalized
Framework For Concept-Based Explanations

Jonathan Crabbé
University of Cambridge
jc2133@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
UCLA
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Concept-based explanations permit to understand the predictions of a deep neural
network (DNN) through the lens of concepts specified by users. Existing methods
assume that the examples illustrating a concept are mapped in a fixed direction
of the DNN’s latent space. When this holds true, the concept can be represented
by a concept activation vector (CAV) pointing in that direction. In this work, we
propose to relax this assumption by allowing concept examples to be scattered
across different clusters in the DNN’s latent space. Each concept is then represented
by a region of the DNN’s latent space that includes these clusters and that we call
concept activation region (CAR). To formalize this idea, we introduce an extension
of the CAV formalism that is based on the kernel trick and support vector classifiers.
This CAR formalism yields global concept-based explanations and local conceptbased feature importance. We prove that CAR explanations built with radial kernels
are invariant under latent space isometries. In this way, CAR assigns the same
explanations to latent spaces that have the same geometry. We further demonstrate
empirically that CARs offer (1) more accurate descriptions of how concepts are
scattered in the DNN’s latent space; (2) global explanations that are closer to human
concept annotations and (3) concept-based feature importance that meaningfully
relate concepts with each other. Finally, we use CARs to show that DNNs can
autonomously rediscover known scientific concepts, such as the prostate cancer
grading system.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are both useful and challenging. Their utility is reflected in their increasing
contributions to sophisticated tasks such as natural language processing [1, 2], computer vision [3, 4]
and scientific discovery [5–8]. Their challenging nature can be attributed to their inherent complexity.
State of the art deep models typically contain millions to billions parameters and, hence, appear as
black-boxes to human users. The opacity of black-box models make it difficult to: anticipate how
models will perform at deployment [9]; reliably distil knowledge from the models [10] and earn the
trust of stakeholders in high-stakes domains [11–13]. With the aim of increasing the transparency of
black-box models, the field of explainable AI (XAI) developed [14–17]. We can broadly divide XAI
methods in 2 categories: 1 Methods that restrict the model’s architecture to enable explanations.
Examples include attention models that motivate their predictions by highlighting features they pay
attention to [18] and prototype-based models that motivate their predictions by highlighting relevant
examples from their training set [19]. 2 Post-hoc methods that can be used in a plug-in fashion to
provide explanation for a pre-trained model. Examples include feature importance methods (also
known as feature attribution or saliency methods) that highlight features the model is sensitive to [20–
26]; example importance methods that identify influential training examples [27–29] and hybrid
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

