Social-Inverse: Inverse Decision-making of Social
Contagion Management with Task Migrations

Guangmo Tong
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware
amotong@udel.edu

Abstract
Considering two decision-making tasks A and B, each of which wishes to compute
an effective decision Y for a given query X, can we solve task B by using querydecision pairs (X, Y ) of A without knowing the latent decision-making model?
Such problems, called inverse decision-making with task migrations, are of interest
in that the complex and stochastic nature of real-world applications often prevents
the agent from completely knowing the underlying system. In this paper, we
introduce such a new problem with formal formulations and present a generic
framework for addressing decision-making tasks in social contagion management.
On the theory side, we present a generalization analysis for justifying the learning
performance of our framework. In empirical studies, we perform a sanity check and
compare the presented method with other possible learning-based and graph-based
methods. We have acquired promising experimental results, confirming for the first
time that it is possible to solve one decision-making task by using the solutions
associated with another one.

1

Introduction

Social contagion management. Social contagion, in its most general sense, describes the diffusion
process of one or more information cascades spreading between a set of atomic entities through the
underlying network [1, 2, 3, 4]. Prototypical applications of social contagion management include
deploying advertising campaigns to maximize brand awareness [5, 6], broadcasting debunking
information to minimize the negative impact of online misinformation [7, 8, 9], HIV prevention for
homeless youth [10, 11], and the prevention of youth obesity [12, 13]. In these applications, a central
problem is to launch new information cascades in response to certain input queries, with the goal of
optimizing the agents’ objectives [14, 15]. In principle, most of these tasks fall into either diffusion
enhancement, which seeks to maximize the influence of the to-be-generated cascade (e.g., marketing
campaign [5, 16, 17] and public service announcement [12, 18, 19]), or diffusion containment, which
aims to generate positive cascades to minimize the spread of negative cascades (e.g., misinformation
[20, 21, 22] and violence-promoting messages [23, 24]).
Inverse decision-making with task migrations. Traditional research on social contagion management often adopts classic operational diffusion models with known parameters, and focuses on
algorithmic development in overcoming the NP-hardness [25, 17, 26, 27, 28]. However, real-world
contagions are often very complicated, and therefore, perfectly knowing the diffusion model is
less realistic [29, 30, 31, 32, 33]. When presented with management tasks defined over unknown
diffusion models, one can adopt the learn-and-optimize approach in which modeling methodologies
and optimization schemes are designed separately; in such methods, the main issue is that the learning
process is guided by model accuracy but not by the optimization effect [34, 35], suggesting that
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

