Measuring Data Reconstruction Defenses in
Collaborative Inference Systems
⇤

Mengda Yang1 , Ziang Li1 , Juan Wang1 , Hongxin Hu2 , Ao Ren3 , Xiaoyang Xu1 and Wenzhe Yi1
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
3
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University

Abstract
The collaborative inference systems are designed to speed up the prediction processes in edge-cloud scenarios, where the local devices and the cloud system work
together to run a complex deep-learning model. However, those edge-cloud collaborative inference systems are vulnerable to emerging reconstruction attacks, where
malicious cloud service providers are able to recover the edge-side users’ private
data. To defend against such attacks, several defense countermeasures have been
recently introduced. Unfortunately, little is known about the robustness of those
defense countermeasures. In this paper, we take the first step towards measuring the
robustness of those state-of-the-art defenses with respect to reconstruction attacks.
Specifically, we show that the latent privacy features are still retained in the obfuscated representations. Motivated by such an observation, we design a technology
called Sensitive Feature Distillation (SFD) to restore sensitive information from
the protected feature representations. Our experiments show that SFD can break
through defense mechanisms in model partitioning scenarios, demonstrating the inadequacy of existing defense mechanisms as a privacy-preserving technique against
reconstruction attacks. We hope our findings inspire further work in improving the
robustness of defense mechanisms against reconstruction attacks for collaborative
inference systems.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of deep neural network technology, the deployment of deep learning
(DL) applications on edge devices is becoming more widespread. However, resource-constrained
edge devices are often difficult to accommodate computationally intensive DL models. In addition,
cloud-based DL inference applications require devices to upload users’ private data to cloud service
providers, which poses a serious privacy threat. Collaborative DL systems have recently emerged as
a good alternative to address these challenges, where the local devices and the remote servers work
together to run a complex neural network [Eshratifar et al., 2019; Banitalebi-Dehkordi et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2021b]. A DL model can be split such that only its front part is executed on the local edge
devices while its back part is performed on the remote cloud. Therefore, end users are not required to
upload their private data to the cloud, and their privacy concerns can be addressed to some extent.
This paper focuses on reconstruction attacks, where existing research has shown that adversaries can
easily recover sensitive data with the output of the middle layers of a DL model [He et al., 2019;
Singh et al., 2021]. To address this problem, many defense approaches have been proposed for
⇤

Corresponding author: jwang@whu.edu.cn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

