Escaping from the Barren Plateau via Gaussian
Initializations in Deep Variational Quantum Circuits
Kaining Zhang∗ , Liu Liu∗ , Min-Hsiu Hsieh† , and Dacheng Tao∗
∗

School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
†
Hon Hai Quantum Computing Research Center, Taipei, Taiwan

Abstract
Variational quantum circuits have been widely employed in quantum simulation
and quantum machine learning in recent years. However, quantum circuits with
random structures have poor trainability due to the exponentially vanishing gradient
with respect to the circuit depth and the qubit number. This result leads to a general
standpoint that deep quantum circuits would not be feasible for practical tasks.
In this work, we propose an initialization strategy with theoretical guarantees for
the vanishing gradient problem in general deep quantum circuits. Specifically, we
prove that under proper Gaussian initialized parameters, the norm of the gradient
decays at most polynomially when the qubit number and the circuit depth increase.
Our theoretical results hold for both the local and the global observable cases,
where the latter was believed to have vanishing gradients even for very shallow
circuits. Experimental results verify our theoretical findings in quantum simulation
and quantum chemistry.

1

Introduction

Quantum computing has attracted great attention in recent years, especially since the realization of
quantum supremacy [1, 2] with noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices [3]. Due to mild
requirements on the gate noise and the circuit connectivity, variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) [4]
become one of the most promising frameworks for achieving practical quantum advantages on NISQ
devices. Specifically, different VQAs have been proposed for many topics, e.g., quantum chemistry [5–
13], quantum simulations [14–23], machine learning [24–31], numerical analysis [32–36], and linear
algebra problems [37–39]. Recently, various small-scale VQAs have been implemented on real
quantum computers for tasks such as finding the ground state of molecules [10–12] and exploring
applications in supervised learning [25], generative learning [30] and reinforcement learning [29].
Typical variational quantum algorithms is a trainable quantum-classical hybrid framework based
on parameterized quantum circuits (PQCs) [40]. Similar to classical counterparts such as neural
networks [41], first-order methods including the gradient descent [42] and its variants [43] are widely
employed in optimizing the loss function of VQAs. However, VQAs may face the trainability barrier
when scaling up the size of quantum circuits (i.e., the number of involved qubits or the circuit depth),
which is known as the barren plateau problem [44].
Roughly speaking, the barren plateau describes the phenomenon that the value of the loss function
and its gradients concentrate around their expectation values with exponentially small variances.
We remark that gradient-based methods could hardly handle trainings with the barren plateau phenomenon [45]. Both the machine noise of the quantum channel and the statistical noise induced by
measurements could severely degrade the estimation of gradients. Moreover, the optimization of
the loss with a flat surface takes much more time using inaccurate gradients than ideal cases. Thus,
solving the barren plateau problem is imperative for achieving practical quantum advantages with
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

