Gradient Estimation with Discrete Stein Operators
Jiaxin Shi†
Stanford University
jiaxins@stanford.edu
Jessica Hwang
Stanford University
jjhwang@stanford.edu

Yuhao Zhou
Tsinghua University
yuhaoz.cs@gmail.com

Michalis K. Titsias
DeepMind
mtitsias@google.com

Lester Mackey
Microsoft Research New England
lmackey@microsoft.com

Abstract
Gradient estimation—approximating the gradient of an expectation with respect to
the parameters of a distribution—is central to the solution of many machine learning problems. However, when the distribution is discrete, most common gradient
estimators suffer from excessive variance. To improve the quality of gradient estimation, we introduce a variance reduction technique based on Stein operators for
discrete distributions. We then use this technique to build flexible control variates
for the REINFORCE leave-one-out estimator. Our control variates can be adapted
online to minimize variance and do not require extra evaluations of the target function. In benchmark generative modeling tasks such as training binary variational
autoencoders, our gradient estimator achieves substantially lower variance than
state-of-the-art estimators with the same number of function evaluations.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning relies heavily on gradient methods to optimize the parameters of a learning
system. However, exact gradient computation is often difficult. For example, in variational inference
for training latent variable models [29, 43], policy gradient algorithms in reinforcement learning [65],
and combinatorial optimization [40], the exact gradient features an intractable sum or integral
introduced by an expectation under an evolving probability distribution. To make progress, one
resorts to estimating the gradient by drawing samples from that distribution [39, 50].
The two main classes of gradient estimators used in machine learning are the pathwise or reparameterization gradient estimators [29, 47, 58] and the REINFORCE or score function estimators [18, 65]. The
pathwise estimators have shown great success in training variational autoencoders [29] but are only
applicable to continuous probability distributions. The REINFORCE estimators are more generalpurpose and easily accommodate discrete distributions but often suffer from excessively high variance.
To improve the quality of REINFORCE estimators, we develop a new variance reduction technique
for discrete expectations. Our method is based upon Stein operators [see, e.g., 1, 55], computable
functionals that generate mean-zero functions under a target distribution and provide a natural way of
designing control variates (CVs) for stochastic estimation.
We first provide a general recipe for constructing practical Stein operators for discrete distributions (Table 1), generalizing the prior literature [6, 8, 9, 16, 25, 46, 67]. We then develop a gradient
estimation framework—RODEO—that augments REINFORCE estimators with mean-zero CVs
generated from Stein operators. Finally, inspired by Double CV [60], we extend our method to
develop CVs for REINFORCE leave-one-out estimators [30, 49] to further reduce the variance.
†

Work done while at Microsoft Research New England.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

