Stability and Generalization of Kernel Clustering:
From Single Kernel to Multiple Kernel

Weixuan Liang1
Siwei Wang1
1

Xinwang Liu1,∗

Yong Liu2,3

Jiyuan Liu1

Sihang Zhou4
Yi Zhang1

Jun-Jie Huang1
En Zhu1

School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
4
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, NUDT, Changsha, China

Abstract
Multiple kernel clustering (MKC) is an important research topic that has been
widely studied for decades. However, current methods still face two problems:
inefficient when handling out-of-sample data points and lack of theoretical study
of the stability and generalization of clustering. In this paper, we propose a novel
method that can efficiently compute the embedding of out-of-sample data with a
solid generalization guarantee. Specifically, we approximate the eigen functions
of the integral operator associated with the linear combination of base kernel
functions to construct low-dimensional embeddings of out-of-sample points for
efficient multiple kernel clustering. In addition, we, for the first time, theoretically
study the stability of clustering algorithms and prove that the
 single-view version of
the proposed method has uniform stability as O Kn−3/2 and establish an upper

e Kn−3/2 + n−1/2 , where K is the cluster number and
bound of excess risk as O
n is the number of samples. We then extend the theoretical results to multiple kernel
scenarios and find that the stability of MKC depends on kernel weights. As an
example, we apply our method to a novel MKC algorithm termed SimpleMKKM
and derive the upper bound of its excess clustering risk, which is tighter than
the current results. Extensive experimental results validate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Multiple kernel clustering (MKC) [33] aims to learn an optimal kernel from a set of pre-specified
kernel matrices for high-quality partition. These methods usually assume that the optimal kernel
matrix is a linear combination of the pre-specified base kernels. By jointly optimizing kernel weights
and a clustering indicator matrix, MKC improves the clustering performance of single-view kernel
k-means (KKM). In recent years, MKC algorithms have been extensively studied. Among these
works, Lu et al. [23] propose to change the MKC framework into the form of kernel alignment.
Gönen et al. [9] propose to employ a localized method to obtain more sample-specific information
from the data. Recently, Liu et al. [20] propose a parameter-free MKC algorithm that adopts a
novel min-max optimization framework and achieves state-of-the-art performance on a wide range
of applications. Although impressive improvements have been made by the existing methods, there
∗

Corresponding author: xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

