Batch size-invariance for policy optimization
Jacob Hilton
OpenAI
jhilton@openai.com

Karl Cobbe
OpenAI
karl@openai.com

John Schulman
OpenAI
joschu@openai.com

Abstract
We say an algorithm is batch size-invariant if changes to the batch size can largely
be compensated for by changes to other hyperparameters. Stochastic gradient
descent is well-known to have this property at small batch sizes, via the learning
rate. However, some policy optimization algorithms (such as PPO) do not have
this property, because of how they control the size of policy updates. In this work
we show how to make these algorithms batch size-invariant. Our key insight is
to decouple the proximal policy (used for controlling policy updates) from the
behavior policy (used for off-policy corrections). Our experiments help explain why
these algorithms work, and additionally show how they can make more efficient
use of stale data.

1

Introduction

Policy gradient-based methods for reinforcement learning have enjoyed great success in recent years.
The stability and reliability of these methods is typically improved by controlling the size of policy
updates, using either a “trust region” (TRPO) or a surrogate objective (PPO) [Schulman et al., 2015a,
2017]. The usual justification for this is that we cannot trust updates that take us too far from the
policy used to collect experience, called the behavior policy. In this work we identify a subtle flaw
with this: the behavior policy is irrelevant to the justification. Instead, what matters is that we control
how fast the policy is updated, or put another way, that we approximate the natural policy gradient
[Kakade, 2001].
Our key insight is that the “old” policy in these methods serves two independent purposes. The first
purpose is for off-policy corrections, via importance sampling, for which the old policy must be the
behavior policy. The second purpose is to control the size of policy updates, for which the old policy
can be any recent policy, which we call the proximal policy. It does not matter whether the proximal
policy is also the behavior policy; it only matters how old the proximal policy is. We demonstrate this
by running PPO with stale data collected using a policy from multiple iterations ago, which causes
performance to quickly degrade unless the proximal policy is decoupled from the behavior policy.
Our insight allows us to make PPO batch size-invariant, meaning that when the batch size is changed,
we can preserve behavior, as a function of the number of examples processed, by changing other
hyperparameters (as long as the batch size is sufficiently small). We achieve this by using an
exponentially-weighted moving average (EWMA) of the policy network’s weights as the network
for the proximal policy. Batch size-invariance has been studied many times before (see Section
3.1), sometimes under the name “perfect scaling”. It is of practical benefit because the batch size
has a big influence on training, but is often constrained by computational resources such as GPU
memory. If an algorithm is batch size-invariant, then the batch size may be freely adjusted according
to computational constraints, while other hyperparameters are adjusted formulaically to compensate.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
• In Section 2, we explain the difference between the proximal and behavior policies, and
show how to decouple them in PPO’s objectives.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

