On Deep Generative Models for Approximation and
Estimation of Distributions on Manifolds
Biraj Dahal˚
School of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
bdahal6@gatech.edu

Alex Havrilla˚
School of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
ahavrilla3@gatech.edu

Minshuo Chen
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Princeton University
mc0750@princeton.edu

Tuo Zhao
Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
tourzhao@gatech.edu

Wenjing Liao
School of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
wliao60@gatech.edu

Abstract
Generative networks have experienced great empirical successes in distribution
learning. Many existing experiments have demonstrated that generative networks
can generate high-dimensional complex data from a low-dimensional easy-tosample distribution. However, this phenomenon can not be justified by existing
theories. The widely held manifold hypothesis speculates that real-world data sets,
such as natural images and signals, exhibit low-dimensional geometric structures.
In this paper, we take such low-dimensional data structures into consideration by
assuming that data distributions are supported on a low-dimensional manifold. We
prove statistical guarantees of generative networks under the Wasserstein-1 loss.
We show that the Wasserstein-1 loss converges to zero at a fast rate depending on
the intrinsic dimension instead of the ambient data dimension. Our theory leverages
the low-dimensional geometric structures in data sets and justifies the practical
power of generative networks. We require no smoothness assumptions on the data
distribution which is desirable in practice.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014,
Arjovsky et al., 2017] and variational autoencoder [Kingma and Welling, 2013, Mohamed and
Wierstra, 2014], utilize neural networks to generate new samples which follow the same distribution as
the training data. They have been successful in many applications including producing photorealistic
images, improving astronomical images, and modding video games [Reed et al., 2016, Ledig et al.,
2017, Schawinski et al., 2017, Brock et al., 2018, Volz et al., 2018, Radford et al., 2015, Salimans
et al., 2016].
To estimate a data distribution Q, generative models solve the following optimization problem
mingθ PG discrepancyppgθ q7 ρ, Qq,
(1)
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

