Reinforcement Learning
with Non-Exponential Discounting

Matthias Schultheis
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technische Universität Darmstadt
matthias.schultheis@tu-darmstadt.de

Constantin A. Rothkopf
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technische Universität Darmstadt
constantin.rothkopf@tu-darmstadt.de

Heinz Koeppl
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technische Universität Darmstadt
heinz.koeppl@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Commonly in reinforcement learning (RL), rewards are discounted over time using
an exponential function to model time preference, thereby bounding the expected
long-term reward. In contrast, in economics and psychology, it has been shown
that humans often adopt a hyperbolic discounting scheme, which is optimal when
a specific task termination time distribution is assumed. In this work, we propose
a theory for continuous-time model-based reinforcement learning generalized to
arbitrary discount functions. This formulation covers the case in which there is a
non-exponential random termination time. We derive a Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman
(HJB) equation characterizing the optimal policy and describe how it can be solved
using a collocation method, which uses deep learning for function approximation.
Further, we show how the inverse RL problem can be approached, in which one tries
to recover properties of the discount function given decision data. We validate the
applicability of our proposed approach on two simulated problems. Our approach
opens the way for the analysis of human discounting in sequential decision-making
tasks.

1

Introduction

An often observed phenomenon in humans and animals is that they prefer rewards rather sooner
than later [1]. It comes with no surprise that an animal searching for food aims to find it as soon as
possible and employees working in a company prefer to be paid after each month instead of after
each year. In behavioral experiments, it was observed that people are even willing to pay a price to
receive rewards earlier [2]. It can be concluded that rewards become of less value in the future, a
phenomenon which is known as discounting [2].
Modeling and experimentally inferring discounting functions, which describe how values are discounted over time, already have a long history in economics and psychology, where many different
functional forms have been proposed [3, 4, 5]. While from an economic perspective, a fixed interest
rate seems reasonable, leading to an exponential discount function, human behavior is oftentimes
better described by a hyperbolic curve [6]. The reason for this is that human decisions are typically
not consistent regarding shifting rewards in time, a phenomenon named preference reversal: We
might find that a subject prefers a smaller reward on the same day over a larger reward one day after.
However, when given the choice between the same smaller reward in 365 days, compared to the same
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

