Teach Less, Learn More: On the Undistillable Classes
in Knowledge Distillation

Yichen Zhu,
Midea Group

Ning Liu
Midea Group

Weibing Meng
Tsinghua University

Zhiyuan Xu
Midea Group

Yi Wang
Midea Group

Xin Liu
East China Normal University

Zhicai Ou
Midea Group

Jian Tang∗
Midea Group

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) can effectively compress neural networks by training
a smaller network (student) to simulate the behavior of a larger one (teacher).
A counter-intuitive observation is that a more expansive teacher does not make
a better student, but the reasons for this phenomenon remain unclear. In this
paper, we demonstrate that this is directly attributed to the presence of undistillable
classes: when trained with distillation, the teacher’s knowledge of some classes
is incomprehensible to the student model. We observe that while KD improves
the overall accuracy, it is at the cost of the model becoming inaccurate in these
undistillable classes. After establishing their widespread existence in state-ofthe-art distillation methods, we illustrate their correlation with the capacity gap
between teacher and student models. Finally, we present a simple “Teach Less
Learn More” (TLLM) framework to identify and discard the undistillable classes
during training. We validate the effectiveness of our approach on multiple datasets
with varying network architectures. In all settings, our proposed method is able to
exceed the performance of competitive state-of-the-art techniques.

1

Introduction

More accurate machine learning models often demand more computation and memory at test time,
making them difficult to deploy on computational-constraint devices. Knowledge distillation (KD)
alleviates this burden by transferring the knowledge from an expensive teacher model to a cheap
student model to improve the performance of this more efficient network. Over the past several
years, we have witnessed a huge success in knowledge distillation and a surge of related literature on
designing better distillation techniques.
An intuitive thought of knowledge distillation is that better teachers are supposed to make better
students since a larger model can learn more visually meaningful and task-related information, and a
student model can presumably benefit from learning with more informative knowledge. However,
recent works show that such intuition is incorrect. In fact, prior works found that students distilled
from a bigger teacher, one with more parameters and higher accuracy, can perform worse than the
same students distilled from a smaller teacher [23, 9, 36, 25, 33]. The situation is getting more severe
when training on a large-scale, challenging dataset such as ImageNet [5]. More surprisingly, the model
with the same architecture [49] or even a model with lower performance [18, 46, 50] can be used as a
teacher network to perform knowledge distillation, which plays a role of regularization [32, 24, 52].
Indeed, a large body of researches [55, 35, 53, 17, 34] devoted to solving this problem, but few
minimal efforts have been put into understanding this phenomenon.
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

