Towards Practical Control of Singular Values of
Convolutional Layers

Alexandra Senderovich∗†
HSE University

Ekaterina Bulatova∗
HSE University

Anton Obukhov
ETH Zürich

Maxim Rakhuba
HSE University

Abstract
In general, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are easy to train, but their essential properties, such as generalization error and adversarial robustness, are
hard to control. Recent research demonstrated that singular values of convolutional layers significantly affect such elusive properties and offered several methods for controlling them. Nevertheless, these methods present an intractable computational challenge or resort to coarse approximations. In this
paper, we offer a principled approach to alleviating constraints of the prior art
at the expense of an insignificant reduction in layer expressivity. Our method
is based on the tensor-train decomposition; it retains control over the actual
singular values of convolutional mappings while providing structurally sparse
and hardware-friendly representation. We demonstrate the improved properties
of modern CNNs with our method and analyze its impact on the model performance, calibration, and adversarial robustness. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/WhiteTeaDragon/practical_svd_conv

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, empirical advances in Deep Learning have made machine learning ubiquitous
to researchers and practitioners from various fields of science and industry. However, the theory of
Deep Learning lags behind its practical applications, resulting in unexpected outcomes or lack of
explainability of the models. These adverse effects are becoming more prominent with many models
put into customer-facing products, such as perception systems of self-driving cars, chatbots, and other
applications. The demand for tighter control over deployed models has given rise to several subfields
of Deep Learning, such as the study of adversarial robustness and model calibration, to name a few.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and, in particular, residual CNNs have become a benchmark
for various computer vision tasks. The key component of CNNs is convolutional layers, representing
linear transformations that account for the image data structure. The singular values of these linear
transformations are key to the properties of the whole network, such as the Lipschitz constant and,
hence, generalization error and robustness to adversarial examples. Moreover, bounding the Lipschitz
constant of convolutional layers can also improve training, as it prevents gradients from exploding.
Nevertheless, finding and controlling singular values of convolutional layers is challenging. Indeed,
computing and then clipping exact singular values of a layer [Sedghi et al., 2019], given by a kernel
tensor of the size k × k × cin × cout , has time and space complexities of O(n2 c2 (c + log n)) and
O(n2 c2 ) respectively, where n × n is the input image size, cin and cout are the numbers of input and
output channels respectively, c = max{cin , cout }, and k × k is the filter size. Since typically k 2 ≪ c,
computing singular values requires many more operations than computing a single convolution with
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Alexandra Senderovich (AlexandraSenderovich@gmail.com)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

