Optimizing Data Collection for Machine Learning

Rafid Mahmood1

James Lucas1 Jose M. Alvarez1 Sanja Fidler1,2,3 Marc T. Law1
NVIDIA 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute
{rmahmood, jalucas, josea, sfidler, marcl}@nvidia.com
1

Abstract
Modern deep learning systems require huge data sets to achieve impressive performance, but there is little guidance on how much or what kind of data to collect.
Over-collecting data incurs unnecessary present costs, while under-collecting may
incur future costs and delay workflows. We propose a new paradigm for modeling
the data collection workflow as a formal optimal data collection problem that allows designers to specify performance targets, collection costs, a time horizon, and
penalties for failing to meet the targets. Additionally, this formulation generalizes
to tasks requiring multiple data sources, such as labeled and unlabeled data used
in semi-supervised learning. To solve our problem, we develop Learn-OptimizeCollect (LOC), which minimizes expected future collection costs. Finally, we
numerically compare our framework to the conventional baseline of estimating data
requirements by extrapolating from neural scaling laws. We significantly reduce
the risks of failing to meet desired performance targets on several classification,
segmentation, and detection tasks, while maintaining low total collection costs.

1

Introduction

When deploying a deep learning model in an industrial application, designers often mandate that the
model must meet a pre-determined baseline performance, such as a target metric over a validation
data set. For example, an object detector may require a certain minimum mean average precision
before being deployed in a safety-critical setting. One of the most effective ways of meeting target
performances is by collecting more training data for a given model.
Determining how much data is needed to meet performance targets can impact costs and development
delays. Overestimating the data requirement incurs excess costs from collection, cleaning, and
annotation. For instance, annotating segmentation masks for a driving data set takes between 15
to 40 seconds per object. For 100,000 images the annotation could require between 170 and 460
days-equivalent of time [1, 2]. On the other hand, collecting too little data may incur future costs and
workflow delays from having to collect more later. For example, in medical imaging applications,
this means further clinical data acquisition rounds that require expensive clinician time. In the worst
case, designers may even realize that a project is infeasible only after collecting insufficient data.
The growing literature on sample complexity in machine learning has identified neural scaling laws
that scale model performance with data set sizes according to power laws [3–10]. For instance, Rosenfeld et al. [6] fit power law functions on the performance statistics of small data sets to extrapolate the
learning curve with more data. In contrast, Mahmood et al. [2] consider estimating data requirements
and show that even small errors in a power law model of the learning curve can translate to massively
over- or underestimating how much data is needed. Beyond this, different data sources have different
costs and scale differently with performance [11–14]. For example, although unlabeled data may
be easier to collect than labeled data, some semi-supervised learning tasks may need an order of
magnitude more unlabeled data to match the performance of a small labeled set. Thus, collecting
more data based only on estimation will fail to capture uncertainty and collection costs.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

