Inception Transformer

Chenyang Si1∗ Weihao Yu1,2∗ Pan Zhou1 Yichen Zhou1,2 Xinchao Wang2 Shuicheng Yan1
1

Sea AI Lab

2

National University of Singapore

{sicy,yuweihao,zhoupan,zhouyc,yansc}@sea.com, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent studies show that Transformer has strong capability of building long-range
dependencies, yet is incompetent in capturing high frequencies that predominantly convey local information. To tackle this issue, we present a novel and
general-purpose Inception Transformer, or iFormer for short, that effectively learns
comprehensive features with both high- and low-frequency information in visual
data. Specifically, we design an Inception mixer to explicitly graft the advantages
of convolution and max-pooling for capturing the high-frequency information
to Transformers. Different from recent hybrid frameworks, the Inception mixer
brings greater efficiency through a channel splitting mechanism to adopt parallel
convolution/max-pooling path and self-attention path as high- and low-frequency
mixers, while having the flexibility to model discriminative information scattered
within a wide frequency range. Considering that bottom layers play more roles in
capturing high-frequency details while top layers more in modeling low-frequency
global information, we further introduce a frequency ramp structure, i.e., gradually decreasing the dimensions fed to the high-frequency mixer and increasing
those to the low-frequency mixer, which can effectively trade-off high- and lowfrequency components across different layers. We benchmark the iFormer on a
series of vision tasks, and showcase that it achieves impressive performance on
image classification, COCO detection and ADE20K segmentation. For example,
our iFormer-S hits the top-1 accuracy of 83.4% on ImageNet-1K, much higher
than DeiT-S by 3.6%, and even slightly better than much bigger model Swin-B
(83.3%) with only 1/4 parameters and 1/3 FLOPs. Code and models are released
at https://github.com/sail-sg/iFormer.

1

Introduction

Transformer [1] has taken the natural language processing (NLP) domain by storm, achieving surprisingly high performance in many NLP tasks, e.g., machine translation [2] and question-answering [3].
This is largely attributed to its strong capability of modeling long-range dependencies in the data with
self-attention mechanism. Its success has led researchers to investigate its adaptation to the computer
vision field, and Vision Transformer (ViT) [4] is a pioneer. This architecture is directly inherited
from NLP [1], but applied to image classification with raw image patches as input. Later, many ViT
variants [5–13] have been developed to boost performance or scale to a wider range of vision tasks,
e.g., object detection [10, 11] and segmentation [12, 13].
ViT and its variants are highly capable of capturing low-frequencies in the visual data [14], mainly
including global shapes and structures of a scene or object, but are not very powerful for learning
high-frequencies, mainly including local edges and textures. This can be intuitively explained: selfattention, the main operation used in ViTs to exchange information among non-overlap patch tokens,
is a global operation and much more capable of capturing global information (low frequencies) in the
∗

Equal contribution. Weihao Yu did this work during an internship at Sea AI Lab.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

