Spectral Bias in Practice: the Role of
Function Frequency in Generalization
Sara Fridovich-Keil ⇤
University of California, Berkeley
sfk@eecs.berkeley.edu

Raphael Gontijo-Lopes
Google Brain
iraphael@google.com

Rebecca Roelofs
Google Brain
rofls@google.com

Abstract
Despite their ability to represent highly expressive functions, deep learning models
seem to find simple solutions that generalize surprisingly well. Spectral bias –
the tendency of neural networks to prioritize learning low frequency functions
– is one possible explanation for this phenomenon, but so far spectral bias has
primarily been observed in theoretical models and simplified experiments. In this
work, we propose methodologies for measuring spectral bias in modern image
classification networks on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. We find that these networks
indeed exhibit spectral bias, and that interventions that improve test accuracy on
CIFAR-10 tend to produce learned functions that have higher frequencies overall
but lower frequencies in the vicinity of examples from each class. This trend holds
across variation in training time, model architecture, number of training examples,
data augmentation, and self-distillation. We also explore the connections between
function frequency and image frequency and find that spectral bias is sensitive to
the low frequencies prevalent in natural images. On ImageNet, we find that learned
function frequency also varies with internal class diversity, with higher frequencies
on more diverse classes. Our work enables measuring and ultimately influencing
the spectral behavior of neural networks used for image classification, and is a step
towards understanding why deep models generalize well.

1

Introduction

Two fundamental questions in machine learning are why overparameterized models generalize and
how to make them more robust to distribution shift and adversarial examples. Resolving both of these
questions requires understanding how complex our models should be.
For instance, it is thought that overparameterized models generalize well because there are implicit
regularizers that constrain the complexity of the learned functions. However, the precise nature of
these implicit regularizers, and their importance in practice, remains unclear. As for how to achieve
robustness, no consensus has emerged regarding function complexity. On the one hand, Cranko et al.
[4] and Leino et al. [24] argue that Lipschitz smoothness of the learned function offers a guarantee of
robustness; on the other, Shah et al. [37] and Madry et al. [25] argue that simplicity can be harmful
and a robust model must actually be more complex than its non-robust counterpart.
One window into function complexity is spectral bias – the tendency of neural networks to learn low
frequency (simple and smooth) functions first, then gradually increase the frequency (complexity)
of the learned function as training proceeds. Foundational work in this area has shown theoretical
evidence of spectral bias by analyzing convergence rates of neural networks towards functions of
different frequencies [1, 35].
⇤

Work done as an intern and student researcher at Google Brain.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

