Learning Modular Simulations
for Homogeneous Systems
Jayesh K. Gupta∗, Sai Vemprala∗, Ashish Kapoor
Microsoft Autonomous Systems and Robotics Research
<jayesh.gupta,savempra,akapoor>@microsoft.com

Abstract
Complex systems are often decomposed into modular subsystems for engineering
tractability. Although various equation based white-box modeling techniques make
use of such structure, learning based methods have yet to incorporate these ideas
broadly. We present a modular simulation framework for modeling homogeneous
multibody dynamical systems, which combines ideas from graph neural networks
and neural differential equations. We learn to model the individual dynamical
subsystem as a neural ODE module. Full simulation of the composite system
is orchestrated via spatio-temporal message passing between these modules. An
arbitrary number of modules can be combined to simulate systems of a wide variety
of coupling topologies. We evaluate our framework on a variety of systems and
show that message passing allows coordination between multiple modules over
time for accurate predictions and in certain cases, enables zero-shot generalization
to new system configurations. Furthermore, we show that our models can be
transferred to new system configurations with lower data requirement and training
effort, compared to those trained from scratch.

1

Introduction

Modeling and simulation are key enablers in engineering as viable alternatives to real world systems.
Simulation allows for the testing and evaluation of large/complex systems in a risk-free environment
and has been of use in many disciplines. Simulation also plays a key role in domains such as deep
reinforcement learning, which requires a large volume of interactions with the environment to learn
effective policies. However, traditional simulators often require a large amount of engineering effort
to create and can be computationally intensive when high fidelity predictions are needed. This has
created interest in data-driven simulations, where machine learning algorithms are used to learn
system dynamics directly from observations [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. While machine learning algorithms excel
at learning correlations from data, such end-to-end learning approaches result in models that cannot
be reused for different system configurations. Additionally, end-to-end learning also requires large
amounts of data and training effort when trying to model real-world systems.
In this paper we propose a machine learning based framework to learn and compose modular
simulators. We build upon the observations that complex systems comprises of multiple modules
(e.g., multibody systems), where each module evolves according to its own set of dynamical equations
with corresponding inputs and outputs [6]. Examples include multiple pendulums connected via
a single thread and multiple quadrotors carrying a large structure or a beam. Instead of modeling
the entire system jointly, it might be more beneficial to model individual subsystems (such as a
single pendulum or one quadrotor) and then consider interaction effects. The ability to harness such
modularity can help reduce the sample complexity for machine learning as well create transferable
subsystems that enable rapid prototyping.
∗

Equal contributions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

