Rethinking the compositionality of point clouds
through regularization in the hyperbolic space

Antonio Montanaro∗
Politecnico di Torino, Italy
antonio.montanaro@polito.it

Diego Valsesia
Politecnico di Torino, Italy
diego.valsesia@polito.it

Enrico Magli
Politecnico di Torino, Italy
enrico.magli@polito.it

Abstract
Point clouds of 3D objects exhibit an inherent compositional nature where simple
parts can be assembled into progressively more complex shapes to form whole
objects. Explicitly capturing such part-whole hierarchy is a long-sought objective
in order to build effective models, but its tree-like nature has made the task elusive.
In this paper, we propose to embed the features of a point cloud classifier into the
hyperbolic space and explicitly regularize the space to account for the part-whole
hierarchy. The hyperbolic space is the only space that can successfully embed the
tree-like nature of the hierarchy. This leads to substantial improvements in the
performance of state-of-art supervised models for point cloud classification.

1

Introduction

Is the whole more than the sum of its parts? While philosophers have been debating such deep
question since the time of Aristotle, we can certainly say that understanding and capturing the
relationship between parts as constituents of whole complex structures is of paramount importance
in building models of reality. In this paper, we turn our attention to the compositional nature of 3D
objects, represented as point clouds, where simple parts can be assembled to form progressively more
complex shapes. Indeed, the complex geometry of an object can be better understood by unraveling
the implicit hierarchy of its parts. Such hierarchy can be intuitively captured by a tree where nodes
close to the root represent basic universal shapes, which become progressively more complex as we
approach the whole-object leaves. Transforming an object into another requires swapping parts by
traversing the tree up to a common ancestor part. It is thus clear that a model extracting features, that
claim to capture the nature of 3D objects, needs to incorporate such hierarchy.
In the last years, point cloud processing methods have tried to devise methods to extract complex
geometric information from points and neighborhoods. Architectures like graph neural networks
[1] compose the features extracted by local receptive fields, with sophisticated geometric priors [2]
exploiting locality and self-similarity, while a different school of thought argues that simple architectures, such as PointMLP [3] and SimpleView [4], with limited geometric priors are nevertherless
very effective. It thus raises a question whether prior knowledge about the data is being exploited
effectively.
In this sense, works such as PointGLR [5], Info3D [6] and DCGLR [7] recognized the need to reason
about local and global interactions in the feature extraction process. In particular, their claim is that
∗

Code of the project: https://github.com/diegovalsesia/HyCoRe

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

