Generic bounds on the approximation error for
physics-informed (and) operator learning
Tim De Ryck ⇤
Siddhartha Mishra †

Abstract
We propose a very general framework for deriving rigorous bounds on the approximation error for physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) and operator learning
architectures such as DeepONets and FNOs as well as for physics-informed operator learning. These bounds guarantee that PINNs and (physics-informed) DeepONets or FNOs will efficiently approximate the underlying solution or solution
operator of generic partial differential equations (PDEs). Our framework utilizes
existing neural network approximation results to obtain bounds on more involved
learning architectures for PDEs. We illustrate the general framework by deriving
the first rigorous bounds on the approximation error of physics-informed operator
learning and by showing that PINNs (and physics-informed DeepONets and FNOs)
mitigate the curse of dimensionality in approximating nonlinear parabolic PDEs.

1

Introduction

The efficient numerical approximation of partial differential equations (PDEs) is of paramount
importance as PDEs mathematically describe an enormous range of interesting phenomena in the
sciences and engineering. Machine learning techniques, particularly deep learning, are playing
an increasingly important role in this context. For instance, given their universal approximation
properties, deep neural networks serve as ansatz spaces for supervised learning of a variety of
(parametric) PDEs [19, 70, 40, 53, 54] and references therein. In this setting, large amounts of training
data might be required. However, this data is often acquired from expensive computer simulations
or physical measurements [53], necessitating the design of learning frameworks that work with
limited data. Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs), proposed by [18, 42, 41] and popularized
by [67, 68], are a prominent example of such a learning framework as the residual of the underlying
PDE is minimized within the class of neural networks and in principle, little (or even no) training
data is required. PINNs and their variants have proven to be a very powerful and computationally
efficient framework for approximating solutions to PDEs, [69, 51, 55, 65, 76, 34, 35, 61, 59, 60, 2]
and references therein.
Often in the context of PDEs, one needs to approximate the underlying solution operator that maps
one infinite-dimensional function space into another [27, 39]. As neural networks can only map
between finite dimensional spaces, a new field of operator learning is emerging wherein novel
learning frameworks need to be designed in order to approximate operators. These include deep
operator networks (DeepONets) [9, 49] and their variants as well as neural operators [39], which
generalize neural networks to this setting. A variety of neural operators have been proposed, see
[45, 46] but arguably, the most efficient form of neural operators is provided by the so-called Fourier
neural operators (FNOs) [44]. Both DeepONets and FNOs have been very successfully deployed in
⇤
†

Seminar for Applied Mathematics (SAM), D-MATH, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Seminar for Applied Mathematics (SAM), D-MATH and ETH AI center, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

