Active Learning of Classifiers
with Label and Seed Queries

Marco Bressan
Dept. of CS, Univ. of Milan, Italy
marco.bressan@unimi.it
Silvio Lattanzi
Google
silviol@google.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
DSRC & Dept. of CS, Univ. of Milan, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it
Andrea Paudice
Dept. of CS, Univ. of Milan, Italy &
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy
andrea.paudice@unimi.it

Maximilian Thiessen
Research Unit ML, TU Wien, Austria
maximilian.thiessen@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We study exact active learning of binary and multiclass classifiers with margin.
Given an n-point set X ⊂ Rm , we want to learn an unknown classifier on X
whose classes have finite strong convex hull margin, a new notion extending the
SVM margin. In the standard active learning setting, where only label queries
are allowed, learning a classifier with strong convex hull margin γ requires in the
m−1
worst case Ω 1 + γ1 2 queries. On the other hand, using the more powerful seed
queries (a variant of equivalence queries), the target classifier could be learned
in O(m log n) queries via Littlestone’s Halving algorithm; however, Halving is
computationally inefficient. In this work we show that, by carefully combining the
two types of queries, a binary classifier can be learned
in time poly(n + m) using

only O(m2 log n) label queries and O m log m
seed
queries; the result extends
γ
to k-class classifiers at the price of a k!k 2 multiplicative overhead. Similar results
hold when the input points have bounded bit complexity, or when only one class
has strong convex hull margin against the rest. We complement the
 upper bounds
by showing that in the worst case any algorithm needs Ω km log γ1 seed and label
queries to learn a k-class classifier with strong convex hull margin γ.

1

Introduction

This work investigates efficient algorithms for exact active learning of binary and multiclass classifiers
in the transductive setting. Given a set X of n points in Rm , our goal is to learn a function h : X → [k]
belonging to some class H. In the classic active learning framework, h identifies a subset of X,
and the algorithm learns h via queries LABEL(x) that return h(x) for any given x ∈ X. In that
case, it is well-known that h can be learned with O(log n) LABEL queries if the star number of H is
finite [Hanneke and Yang, 2015]. Unfortunately, even simple families such as linear classifiers have
unbounded star number, in which case Ω(n) LABEL queries are needed in the worst case. To bypass
this lower bound, it has become increasingly common to introduce enriched queries, that reveal
additional information on h and are plausible in practice. One notable example is that of comparison
queries for linear separators in Rm which, given any pair of points x, y ∈ X, reveal which one is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

