MAtt: A Manifold Attention Network for
EEG Decoding

Yue-Ting Pan
Jing-Lun Chou
Chun-Shu Wei
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsunchu, Taiwan
wei@nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
Recognition of electroencephalographic (EEG) signals highly affect the efficiency
of non-invasive brain-computer interfaces (BCIs). While recent advances of deeplearning (DL)-based EEG decoders offer improved performances, the development
of geometric learning (GL) has attracted much attention for offering exceptional
robustness in decoding noisy EEG data. However, there is a lack of studies on the
merged use of deep neural networks (DNNs) and geometric learning for EEG decoding. We herein propose a manifold attention network (MAtt), a novel geometric
deep learning (GDL)-based model, featuring a manifold attention mechanism that
characterizes spatiotemporal representations of EEG data fully on a Riemannian
symmetric positive definite (SPD) manifold. The evaluation of the proposed MAtt
on both time-synchronous and -asyncronous EEG datasets suggests its superiority
over other leading DL methods for general EEG decoding. Furthermore, analysis
of model interpretation reveals the capability of MAtt in capturing informative
EEG features and handling the non-stationarity of brain dynamics. Source codes
are available at https://github.com/CECNL/MAtt.

1

Introduction and related works

A brain-computer interface (BCI) is a type of human-machine interaction that bridges a pathway from
brain to external devices. Electroencephalogram (EEG), a non-invasive neuromonitoring modality
with high portability and affordability, has been widely used to explore practical applications of BCI
in the real world [1, 2, 3]. For instance, disabled users can type messages through an EEG-based BCI
that recognizes the steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP) induced by flickering visual targets
presented on a screen [4, 5, 6]. Stroke patients who need restoration of motor function undergo
motor-imagery (MI) BCI-controlled rehabilitation as an active training [7, 8]. Most EEG-based BCI
systems are designed to detect/recognize reproducible time-asynchronous or time-synchronous EEG
patterns of interest, depending on the schemes of BCI [9]. For example, the MI EEG pattern is an
endogenous oscillatory perturbation sourced from the motor cortex without an explicit onset time
[10]. On the other hand, a time-synchronous EEG pattern is time-locked to a specific event. For
example, the pattern of SSVEP is synchronized to the change of brightness on a flickering visual
target. The efficiency of BCI systems largely relies on the accuracy and robustness of the EEG
decoder. However, due to the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [11] and non-stationarity [12] of EEG,
translating perplexing EEG signals into meaningful information has been a grand challenge in the
field.
Recent advances in deep learning (DL) have contributed to the rapid development of DL-based EEG
decoding techniques [13]. DL models are capable of extracting features automatically according
to given training data. Convolutional neural network (CNN) is one type of the most common DL
models and has achieved remarkable performance in tasks such as image recognition and object
detection [14, 15, 16]. CNN models newly designed for EEG decoding use convolutional kernels that
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

