Robust Graph Structure Learning via
Multiple Statistical Tests
Yaohua Wang ⇤
Alibaba Group
xiachen.wyh@alibaba-inc.com

Ming Lin †
Amazon
minglamz@amazon.com

Fangyi Zhang * †
Queensland University of Technology
Centre for Robotics (QCR)
fangyi.zhang@qut.edu.au

Senzhang Wang ‡
Central South University
szwang@csu.edu.cn

Xiuyu Sun ‡
Alibaba Group
xiuyu.sxy@alibaba-inc.com

Rong Jin †
Twitter
rongjinemail@gmail.com

Abstract
Graph structure learning aims to learn connectivity in a graph from data. It is
particularly important for many computer vision related tasks since no explicit
graph structure is available for images for most cases. A natural way to construct a
graph among images is to treat each image as a node and assign pairwise image
similarities as weights to corresponding edges. It is well known that pairwise
similarities between images are sensitive to the noise in feature representations,
leading to unreliable graph structures. We address this problem from the viewpoint
of statistical tests. By viewing the feature vector of each node as an independent
sample, the decision of whether creating an edge between two nodes based on their
similarity in feature representation can be thought as a single statistical test. To
improve the robustness in the decision of creating an edge, multiple samples are
drawn and integrated by multiple statistical tests to generate a more reliable similarity measure, consequentially more reliable graph structure. The corresponding
elegant matrix form named B-Attention is designed for efficiency. The effectiveness of multiple tests for graph structure learning is verified both theoretically and
empirically on multiple clustering and ReID benchmark datasets. Source codes are
available at https://github.com/Thomas-wyh/B-Attention.

1

Introduction

Graph structure learning plays an important role in Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs). It seeks
to discover underlying graph structures for better graph representation learning when graph structures
are unavailable, noisy or corrupted. These issues are typical in the field of vision tasks [58, 63, 62,
20, 42, 50, 57, 13, 39, 67, 47]. As an example, there is no explicit graph structure between photos
in your phone albums, so the graph-based approaches [20, 42, 57] in photo management softwares
seek to learn graph structure. A popular research direction on it is to consider graph structure
⇤

Equal contribution.
Work done while at Alibaba.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

