Unsupervised Learning of Equivariant Structure
from Sequences

1

Takeru Miyato∗1,2 Masanori Koyama∗1 Kenji Fukumizu3,1 ∗ equal contribution
Preferred Networks, Inc. 2 University of Tübingen 3 The Institute of Statistical Mathematics

Abstract
In this study, we present meta-sequential prediction (MSP), an unsupervised
framework to learn the symmetry from the time sequence of length at least three.
Our method leverages the stationary property (e.g. constant velocity, constant acceleration) of the time sequence to learn the underlying equivariant structure of
the dataset by simply training the encoder-decoder model to be able to predict the
future observations. We will demonstrate that, with our framework, the hidden
disentangled structure of the dataset naturally emerges as a by-product by applying simultaneous block-diagonalization to the transition operators in the latent
space, the procedure which is commonly used in representation theory to decompose the feature-space based on the type of response to group actions. We will
showcase our method from both empirical and theoretical perspectives. Our result suggests that finding a simple structured relation and learning a model with
extrapolation capability are two sides of the same coin. The code is available at
https://github.com/takerum/meta_sequential_prediction.
.

1

Introduction

The recent evolution and successes of neural networks in machine learning fields have shown the
importance of symmetry-aware neural network models [18, 45, 38, 63]. In particular, symmetries in
the form of geometric/algebraic constraints have been proven useful in various applications involving high-dimensional, highly-structured observations. For example, recent literature of robotics and
reinforcement learning has succeeded in exploiting the knowledge of geometrical symmetries to improve the sample efficiency [62, 65] or to train a model that generalizes to unseen observations [58].
However, building an inductive bias that matches the given dataset of interest is challenging, and recent studies have been exploring the ways to learn symmetries itself from observational sequences.
Many of these approaches consider settings with relatively restrictive assumptions or weak supervision. For example, [56] allows the trainer to use the knowledge of the identities of the actions used
in making the transition. Meanwhile, [4, 35, 34] essentially assume that the transition velocity of all
sequences in the datasets are the same.
These studies indicate that there is still much room left for the question of “what is required for
dataset/model to enable the unsupervised learning of the equivariance relation corresponding to the
underlying symmetry”. This paper advances this investigation by showing that if the sequential
dataset consists of time series with a certain stationary property (constant velocity, constant acceleration), we can learn the underlying symmetries by simply training the model to be able to predict
the future with linear transition in the latent space. Our theory in Section 3 shows that this strategy can learn a model that is almost equivariant. Moreover, we will experimentally show that, by
training an encoder-decoder model in a framework of meta-learning which we call meta-sequential
prediction (MSP), we can actually learn an equivariant model. In particular, we show that we can
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

