Meta-Learning Dynamics Forecasting Using
Task Inference
Rui Wang*
UC San Diego

Robin Walters*
Northeastern University

Rose Yu
UC San Diego

Abstract
Current deep learning models for dynamics forecasting struggle with generalization. They can only forecast in a specific domain and fail when applied to
systems with different parameters, external forces, or boundary conditions. We
propose a model-based meta-learning method called DyAd which can generalize
across heterogeneous domains by partitioning them into different tasks. DyAd has
two parts: an encoder which infers the time-invariant hidden features of the task
with weak supervision, and a forecaster which learns the shared dynamics of the
entire domain. The encoder adapts and controls the forecaster during inference
using adaptive instance normalization and adaptive padding. We prove that the
generalization error of such a procedure is governed by task relatedness in the
source domain and domain differences between source and target. Experimentally, we demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-art approaches to
forecasting complex physical dynamics including turbulent flow, real-world sea
surface temperature and ocean currents. Our code is available open sourced at
https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/Dynamic-Adaptation-Network.

1

Introduction

Modeling dynamical systems with deep learning has shown great success in a wide range of systems
from climate science, Internet of Things (IoT) to infectious diseases [23, 64, 8, 33, 42, 22]. However,
the main limitation of previous works is limited generalizability. Most approaches only focus on
a specific system and train on past data in order to predict the future. Thus, a new model must be
trained to predict a system with different dynamics. Consider, for example, learning fluid dynamics;
shown in Fig. 1 are two fluid flows with different degrees of turbulence. Although the flows are
governed by the same equations, the difference in buoyant forces would require two separate deep
learning models to forecast. Therefore, it is imperative to develop generalizable deep learning models
for dynamical systems that can learn and predict well over a large heterogeneous domain.
Meta-learning [63, 7, 13], or learning to learn,
improves generalization by learning multiple
tasks from the environment. Recent developments in meta-learning have been successfully
time
applied to few-shot classification [46, 62], active learning [77], and reinforcement learning
?
[18, 20]. However, meta-learning in the context of forecasting high-dimensional physical
dynamics has not been studied before. The chal- Figure 1: Meta-learning dynamic forecasting on
lenges with meta-learning dynamical systems turbulent flow. The model needs to generalize to a
are unique in that (1) we need to efficiently infer flow with a very different buoyant force.
the latent representation of the dynamical system given observed time series data, (2) we need to account for changes in unknown initial and
boundary conditions, and (3) we need to model the temporal dynamics across heterogeneous domains.

...

...

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

