Learning on Arbitrary Graph Topologies
via Predictive Coding
Tommaso Salvatori1,⇤ Luca Pinchetti1,⇤ Beren Millidge2 Yuhang Song1,2,†
Tianyi Bao1 Rafal Bogacz2 Thomas Lukasiewicz3,1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
MRC Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of Oxford, UK
3
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria
tommaso.salvatori@cs.ox.ac.uk, luca.pinchetti@cs.ox.ac.uk
beren.millidge@ndcn.ox.ac.uk, yuhang.song@some.ox.ac.uk, tianyi.bao@cs.ox.ac.uk
rafal.bogacz@ndcn.ox.ac.uk, thomas.lukasiewicz@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Training with backpropagation (BP) in standard deep learning consists of two main
steps: a forward pass that maps a data point to its prediction, and a backward pass
that propagates the error of this prediction back through the network. This process is
highly effective when the goal is to minimize a specific objective function. However,
it does not allow training on networks with cyclic or backward connections. This is
an obstacle to reaching brain-like capabilities, as the highly complex heterarchical
structure of the neural connections in the neocortex are potentially fundamental for
its effectiveness. In this paper, we show how predictive coding (PC), a theory of
information processing in the cortex, can be used to perform inference and learning
on arbitrary graph topologies. We experimentally show how this formulation,
called PC graphs, can be used to flexibly perform different tasks with the same
network by simply stimulating specific neurons. This enables the model to be
queried on stimuli with different structures, such as partial images, images with
labels, or images without labels. We conclude by investigating how the topology of
the graph influences the final performance, and comparing against simple baselines
trained with BP.

1

Introduction

Classical deep learning has achieved remarkable results by training deep neural networks to minimize
an objective function. Here, every weight parameter gets updated to minimize this function using
reverse differentiation [1, 2]. However, in the brain, every synaptic connection is independently
updated to correct the behaviour of its post-synaptic neuron [3] using local information, and it
is unknown whether this process minimizes a global objective function. The brain maintains an
internal model of the world, which constantly generates predictions of external stimuli. When the
predictions differ from reality, the brain immediately corrects this error (difference between reality and
prediction) by updating the strengths of the synaptic connections [4–7]. This theory of information
processing, called predictive coding (PC), is highly influential, despite experimental evidence in the
cortex being mixed [8–11], and it is at the centre of a large amount of research in computational
neuroscience [12–16]. From the machine learning perspective, PC has promising properties: it is
able to achieve excellent results in classification [17–19] and memorization [20, 21], and is able to
process information in both a bottom up and a top down direction. This last property is fundamental
† Corresponding author.
* Equal contribution.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

