Towards Practical Few-Shot Query Sets:
Transductive Minimum Description Length Inference

Ségolène Martin
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria,
CentraleSupélec, CVN

Malik Boudiaf
ÉTS Montreal

Jean-Christophe Pesquet†
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria,
CentraleSupélec, CVN

Emilie Chouzenoux∗
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria,
CentraleSupélec, CVN
Ismail Ben Ayed‡
ÉTS Montreal

Abstract
Standard few-shot benchmarks are often built upon simplifying assumptions on the
query sets, which may not always hold in practice. In particular, for each task at
testing time, the classes effectively present in the unlabeled query set are known
a priori, and correspond exactly to the set of classes represented in the labeled
support set. We relax these assumptions and extend current benchmarks, so that the
query-set classes of a given task are unknown, but just belong to a much larger set of
possible classes. Our setting could be viewed as an instance of the challenging yet
practical problem of extremely imbalanced K-way classification, K being much
larger than the values typically used in standard benchmarks, and with potentially
irrelevant supervision from the support set. Expectedly, our setting incurs drops in
the performances of state-of-the-art methods. Motivated by these observations, we
introduce a PrimAl Dual Minimum Description LEngth (PADDLE) formulation,
which balances data-fitting accuracy and model complexity for a given few-shot
task, under supervision constraints from the support set. Our constrained MDL-like
objective promotes competition among a large set of possible classes, preserving
only effective classes that befit better the data of a few-shot task. It is hyperparameter free, and could be applied on top of any base-class training. Furthermore,
we derive a fast block coordinate descent algorithm for optimizing our objective,
with convergence guarantee, and a linear computational complexity at each iteration.
Comprehensive experiments over the standard few-shot datasets and the more
realistic and challenging i-Nat dataset show highly competitive performances of
our method, more so when the numbers of possible classes in the tasks increase. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.com/SegoleneMartin/PADDLE.

1

Introduction

The performance of deep learning models is often seriously affected when tackling new tasks with
limited supervision, i.e., classes that were unobserved during training and for which we have only a
handful of labeled examples. Few-shot learning [1, 2, 3] focuses on this generalization challenge,
which occurs in a breadth of applications. In standard few-shot settings, a deep network is first trained
∗

E. Chouzenoux acknowledges support from the European Research Council Starting Grant MAJORIS
ERC-2019-STG-850925.
†
The work of J.-C. Pesquet is supported by the ANR Chair in AI BRIDGEABLE.
‡
The work of I. Ben Ayed is supported by the DATAIA Institute, and is part of his sabbatical-leave visit at
the Université Paris-Saclay.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

