An Adaptive Deep RL Method for Non-Stationary
Environments with Piecewise Stable Context
Xiaoyu Chen∗♢
Li Zhao†‡
Tao Qin‡

Xiangming Zhu∗♣
Wenxue Cheng‡

Yufeng Zheng♠
Peng Cheng‡

Jianyu Chen♢

Pushi Zhang‡
Yongqiang Xiong‡

Tie-Yan Liu‡

♢ Tsinghua University
♣ Shanghai Jiao Tong University
♠ University of California, Berkeley
‡ Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
One of the key challenges in deploying RL to real-world applications is to adapt to
variations of unknown environment contexts, such as changing terrains in robotic
tasks and fluctuated bandwidth in congestion control. Existing works on adaptation
to unknown environment contexts either assume the contexts are the same for the
whole episode or assume the context variables are Markovian. However, in many
real-world applications, the environment context usually stays stable for a stochastic
period and then changes in an abrupt and unpredictable manner within an episode,
resulting in a segment structure, which existing works fail to address. To leverage
the segment structure of piecewise stable context in real-world applications, in this
paper, we propose a Segmented Context Belief Augmented Deep (SeCBAD) RL
method. Our method can jointly infer the belief distribution over latent context
with the posterior over segment length and perform more accurate belief context
inference with observed data within the current context segment. The inferred
belief context can be leveraged to augment the state, leading to a policy that can
adapt to abrupt variations in context. We demonstrate empirically that SeCBAD
can infer context segment length accurately and outperform existing methods on a
toy grid world environment and MuJoCo tasks with piecewise-stable context.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has achieved great success in a wide range of challenging environments
such as Atari games (Mnih et al., 2013; Bellemare et al., 2012; Hessel et al., 2017) or continuous
control tasks (Schulman et al., 2015, 2017a). However, in stark contrast with this trend, applying
RL to real-world applications remains a great challenge. In most real-world settings, there could be
variations in environmental factors, such as changing terrains in robotic tasks, fluctuated bandwidth in
congestion control, and dynamic traffic patterns in autonomous driving. We refer to such environment
factors as situation or context. The changes in context are not neglectable since context usually has
a substantial impact on transition and reward functions. When the context is fixed and known to
us, the problem is stationary and easier to solve. However, in most realistic settings, the context is
usually dynamic within an episode and unknown to us at test time. Therefore, detecting and adapting
∗
†

Equal contribution. This work is conducted at Microsoft.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

