Implicit Neural Representations with
Levels-of-Experts

Zekun Hao˚:
hz472@cornell.edu

Arun Mallya˚
˚
NVIDIA

Serge Belongie:
Cornell University

Ming-Yu Liu˚

sjb344@cornell.edu

mingyul@nvidia.com

:

amallya@nvidia.com

Abstract
Coordinate-based networks, usually in the forms of MLPs, have been successfully
applied to the task of predicting high-frequency but low-dimensional signals using
coordinate inputs. To scale them to model large-scale signals, previous works
resort to hybrid representations, combining a coordinate-based network with a
grid-based representation, such as sparse voxels. However, such approaches lack
a compact global latent representation in its grid, making it difficult to model a
distribution of signals, which is important for generalization tasks. To address the
limitation, we propose the Levels-of-Experts (LoE) framework, which is a novel
coordinate-based representation consisting of an MLP with periodic, positiondependent weights arranged hierarchically. For each linear layer of the MLP,
multiple candidate values of its weight matrix are tiled and replicated across the
input space, with different layers replicating at different frequencies. Based on
the input, only one of the weight matrices is chosen for each layer. This greatly
increases the model capacity without incurring extra computation or compromising
generalization capability. We show that the new representation is an efficient and
competitive drop-in replacement for a wide range of tasks, including signal fitting,
novel view synthesis, and generative modeling.

1

Introduction

There has been a growing interest in representing low-dimensional but high-frequency signals, such
as images, videos, and 3D scenes, with fully-connected neural networks. A common paradigm is
to use a coordinate-based multilayer perceptron (MLP) that takes coordinate positions as input and
predicts the data value at the specified location [30, 44, 49]. Compared to explicit representations
such as point clouds and voxel grids, this kind of implicit neural representation (INR) is memory
efficient and can model a distribution of signals for conditional synthesis tasks [2, 26, 34, 37, 43]
thanks to its ability to learn a compact and meaningful latent space.
However, scaling up an INR to better represent higher-resolution signals or a distribution of signals,
like a distribution of images, is challenging because the mapping can be highly nonlinear. To increase
the model capacity to deal with the complexity, we can either make the MLP wider by increasing
the dimensions of activations or deeper by stacking more layers. Unfortunately, both options will
dramatically increase the computation needed at each data point. Recently, Rebain et al. [40] have
shown that this results in an undesirable trade-off because the representation power gain diminishes
quickly with increased width or depth. We further explore and analyze this issue in Section 4.2.
Many recent works bypass this scaling problem by using a hybrid representation [4, 8, 10, 11, 19,
24, 25, 33, 38, 40, 41, 47, 48]. A discrete data structure, such as sparse voxels, decomposes the
space into grids. Within each grid, a lightweight MLP conditioned on the grid embedding produces
local detail at a scale finer than the grid resolution. However, such an approach has two major
limitations: (1) The reliance on smooth interpolation of grid embeddings [24, 25, 33, 38, 47] or
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

