Mask Matching Transformer for
Few-Shot Segmentation

Siyu Jiao1,2∗, Gengwei Zhang3 , Shant Navasardyan4 , Ling Chen3 ,
Yunchao Wei1,2 , Humphrey Shi 4

Yao Zhao1,2 ,

1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
3
AAII, University of Technology Sydney 4 Picsart AI Research (PAIR)
jiaosiyu@bjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to tackle the challenging few-shot segmentation task from a
new perspective. Typical methods follow the paradigm to firstly learn prototypical
features from support images and then match query features in pixel-level to obtain
segmentation results. However, to obtain satisfactory segments, such a paradigm
needs to couple the learning of the matching operations with heavy segmentation
modules, limiting the flexibility of design and increasing the learning complexity.
To alleviate this issue, we propose Mask Matching Transformer (MM-Former),
a new paradigm for the few-shot segmentation task. Specifically, MM-Former
first uses a class-agnostic segmenter to decompose the query image into multiple
segment proposals. Then, a simple matching mechanism is applied to merge the
related segment proposals into the final mask guided by the support images. The
advantages of our MM-Former are two-fold. First, the MM-Former follows the
paradigm of decompose first and then blend, allowing our method to benefit from
the advanced potential objects segmenter to produce high-quality mask proposals
for query images. Second, the mission of prototypical features is relaxed to learn
coefficients to fuse correct ones within a proposal pool, making the MM-Former be
well generalized to complex scenarios or cases. We conduct extensive experiments
on the popular COCO-20i and Pascal-5i benchmarks. Competitive results well
demonstrate the effectiveness and the generalization ability of our MM-Former.
Code is available at github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/Mask-Matching-Transformer.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation, one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision, has achieved a grand
success [3, 5, 37, 12] in recent years with the advantages of deep learning techniques [11] and
large-scale annotated datasets [14, 6]. However, the presence of data samples naturally abides by
a long-tailed distribution where the overwhelming majority of categories have very few samples.
Therefore, few-shot segmentation [21, 27, 35] is introduced to segment objects of the tail categories
only according to a minimal number of labels.
Mainstream few-shot segmentation approaches typically follow the learning-to-learning fashion,
where a network is trained with episodic training to segment objects conditioned on a handful of
labeled samples. The fundamental idea behind it is how to effectively use the information provided
by the labeled samples (called support) to segment the test (referred to as the query) image. Early
∗

Work done during an internship at Picsart AI Research (PAIR).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

