Temporally-Consistent Survival Analysis

Lucas Maystre
Spotify
lucasm@spotify.com

Daniel Russo
Columbia University & Spotify
djr2174@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
We study survival analysis in the dynamic setting: We seek to model the time to
an event of interest given sequences of states. Taking inspiration from temporaldifference learning, a central idea in reinforcement learning, we develop algorithms
that estimate a discrete-time survival model by exploiting a temporal-consistency
condition. Intuitively, this condition captures the fact that the survival distribution
at consecutive states should be similar, accounting for the delay between states. Our
method can be combined with any parametric survival model and naturally accommodates right-censored observations. We demonstrate empirically that it achieves
better sample-efficiency and predictive performance compared to approaches that
directly regress the observed survival outcome.

1

Introduction

Survival analysis provides a statistical framework for reasoning about the time until an event of
interest occurs [20, 1]. It is used in a wide range of applications, including modeling patient outcomes
in clinical studies [25, 2], predicting customer retention in subscription-based businesses [14, 7], and
many more. In the simplest setting, we are given a dataset mapping instances, described by a vector
of covariates, to observations about time-to-event. Several aspects distinguish survival analysis from
simple regression. The event may not always occur within the observed time-window, leading to
so-called censored data which contain useful information but need to be treated differently from fully
observed data. Furthermore, the focus is often on estimating the rate at which the event occurs, also
known as the risk or hazard, as opposed to obtaining a pointwise prediction about the time-to-event.
Across applications, it is becoming increasingly commonplace to collect multiple measurements over
time. In this dynamic setting, the data consist of sequences of states instead of a single, static vector of
covariates. From an initial state indicating, for instance, features of a patient and a choice of medical
treatment, we might observe not just the survival time but rich information on the evolution of their
health. For a registered user of a subscription service, we observe not just how long they remain a
subscriber but also how their usage evolves over time. We ask the question: Can we take advantage
of sequential data to improve survival predictions? Existing work has mostly focused on building
representations summarizing measurements up to a given point in time [34, 22], and on modeling the
joint distribution of sequences and time-to-event explicitly [35, 17]. In this paper, we contend that
there is a different, complementary way to capitalize on dynamic survival data.
We study this problem formally through a discrete-time model. We begin by assuming that sequences
of states follow a Markov chain. We model the event of interest as a special terminal state, and we
seek to estimate the survival distribution (i.e., the distribution of the hitting time for that terminal
state) from any other state. Drawing on ideas from dynamic programming [5], we take advantage
of a temporal-consistency condition. The survival distribution at a given state can be written as a
combination of a) the probability of reaching the terminal state at the next step, and b) the survival
distribution at the next state. Given full knowledge of the Markov transition matrix, the survival
distribution from any state can be computed exactly with a simple recursive algorithm.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

