Equivariant Networks for Crystal Structures
Sékou-Oumar Kaba, Siamak Ravanbakhsh
School of Computer Science,
McGill University
Mila - Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute
{kabaseko@mila.quebec, siamak@cs.mcgill.ca}

Abstract
Supervised learning with deep models has tremendous potential for applications in
materials science. Recently, graph neural networks have been used in this context,
drawing direct inspiration from models for molecules. However, materials are
typically much more structured than molecules, which is a feature that these models
do not leverage. In this work, we introduce a class of models that are equivariant
with respect to crystalline symmetry groups. We do this by defining a generalization
of the message passing operations that can be used with more general permutation
groups, or that can alternatively be seen as defining an expressive convolution
operation on the crystal graph. Empirically, these models achieve competitive
results with state-of-the-art on property prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has seen remarkable applications in computational chemistry, both on the side of
molecular property prediction and molecule generation. For small molecules, these methods are
close to a level of precision that would make them suitable for practical applications [46]. However,
less attention has been put to the problem of designing neural network architectures for the larger
assemblies of atoms that constitute materials. This is a crucial problem, as deep learning could
advantageously complement computationally demanding ab initio simulation methods like DFT
[38, 28].
In this paper, we address the problem of designing equivariant layers and use them for supervised
learning on materials. We focus on crystals, materials characterized by the ordered arrangement
of their atoms in lattices. Crystalline materials are largely present around us and essential in
technological applications, as they include a large number of metals, ceramics, and salts, among
others [3]. They can be described as the regular repetition of a set of atoms, called the unit cell, in
all directions of space. These patterns are analogous to wallpaper patterns, for which the repeated
structure is an image. Crystals are characterized by a high degree of symmetry which is fundamental
in understanding their physical properties. Consequently, we suggest that equivariant deep learning
provides an appropriate framework to design function approximators for crystals.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently been proposed for supervised prediction tasks on
crystals [54, 70, 12]. We hypothesize here that these models may fall short in exploiting crystal
symmetry and that structural information is lost when mapping a crystal structure to a graph. In
particular, GNNs are equivariant to the permutation of atoms given as input to the model. This
condition is overly restrictive and amounts to forgetting about the ordered nature of a crystal. We
propose to use models equivariant to a product of groups G⇤ ⇥ SC , where G⇤ acts at the level of the
Bravais lattice, the underlying periodic grid of the crystal, and SC on the unit cells. We show that our
proposed equivariant architecture is more expressive than GNNs on this data structure.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

