Visual Prompting via Image Inpainting

Amir Bar∗ 1,2 , Yossi Gandelsman∗ 1 , Trevor Darrell1 , Amir Globerson2,3 , Alexei A. Efros1
1

UC Berkeley

2

Tel Aviv University

3

Google Research

Abstract
How does one adapt a pre-trained visual model to novel downstream tasks without
task-specific finetuning or any model modification? Inspired by prompting in NLP,
this paper investigates visual prompting: given input-output image example(s)
of a new task at test time and a new input image, the goal is to automatically
produce the output image, consistent with the given examples. We show that
posing this problem as simple image inpainting – literally just filling in a hole
in a concatenated visual prompt image – turns out to be surprisingly effective,
provided that the inpainting algorithm has been trained on the right data. We train
masked auto-encoders on a new dataset that we curated – 88k unlabeled figures
from academic papers sources on Arxiv. We apply visual prompting to these
pretrained models and demonstrate results on various downstream image-to-image
tasks, including foreground segmentation, single object detection, colorization,
edge detection, etc.1

1

Introduction

In the past few years, self-supervised learning has gained popularity in computer vision and natural
language processing (NLP). The growing capacity of modern deep learning models made them
prone to overfitting when trained on relatively small labeled datasets. Self-supervised learning
provides a solution to this problem by generating “free labels” for any dataset, without the need for
manual annotation, addressing the data hunger in these high-capacity deep learning models. However,
features learned via self-supervision are not “ready for use” – they typically need to be adapted for a
given downstream task by fine-tuning on some labeled dataset. Could this fine-tuning be avoided?
In NLP, prompting [5] has recently emerged as a way to employ a model for a new task without any
additional training. A common way of task-prompting for a specific language understanding task at
test time is to provide the trained model with an input corresponding to example(s) of the target task
together with the query. E.g., typing the following input prompt:
Je suis désolé
J’adore la glace

I’m sorry

will prompt the model [5] to perform the task of French-to-English translation, returning:
I love ice cream
Can this idea of test-time task prompting be generalized to the visual domain? That is, instead of
the current situation in computer vision, where each trained model serves its predefined task (e.g.
segmentation, detection, classification), can we have a single general model that can perform a wide
range of user-specified tasks without any fine-tuning (i.e., weight modification)?
In this paper we take a step toward this goal by demonstrating that large-capacity image inpainting
models, when trained on the right data, can be surprisingly effective tools for visual prompting.
1

* Equal contribution.
Project page: https://yossigandelsman.github.io/visual_prompt.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

