A Neural Corpus Indexer for Document Retrieval

Yujing Wang1 Yingyan Hou1,2,∗ Haonan Wang1,3,∗ Ziming Miao1 Shibin Wu1,2,∗
Hao Sun1,4,∗ Qi Chen1 Yuqing Xia1 Chengmin Chi1 Guoshuai Zhao1 Zheng Liu1
Xing Xie1 Hao Allen Sun1 Weiwei Deng1 Qi Zhang1 Mao Yang1
1
Microsoft 2 Tsinghua University 3 University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign 4 Peking University
1
{yujwang, zimiao, cheqi, yuqxia, chec, zhengliu}@microsoft.com
1
{guzhao, xingx, hasun, dedeng, zhang.qi, maoyang}@microsoft.com
2
{hyy20, wusb20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
3
haonan3@illinois.edu 4 sunhao@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art document retrieval solutions mainly follow an indexretrieve paradigm, where the index is hard to be directly optimized for the final
retrieval target. In this paper, we aim to show that an end-to-end deep neural
network unifying training and indexing stages can significantly improve the recall
performance of traditional methods. To this end, we propose Neural Corpus Indexer (NCI), a sequence-to-sequence network that generates relevant document
identifiers directly for a designated query. To optimize the recall performance of
NCI, we invent a prefix-aware weight-adaptive decoder architecture, and leverage
tailored techniques including query generation, semantic document identifiers, and
consistency-based regularization. Empirical studies demonstrated the superiority
of NCI on two commonly used academic benchmarks, achieving +21.4% and
+16.8% relative enhancement for Recall@1 on NQ320k dataset and R-Precision
on TriviaQA dataset, respectively, compared to the best baseline method.

1

Introduction

Document retrieval and ranking are two key stages for a standard web search engine [56, 34]. First,
the document retrieval stage retrieves candidate documents relevant to the query, and then, the ranking
stage gives a more precise ranking score for each document. The ranking stage is often fulfilled by a
deep neural network, taking each pair of query and document as input and predicting their relevance
score. Nevertheless, a precise ranking model is very costly, while typically only a hundred or thousand
candidates per query are affordable in an online system. As a result, the recall performance of the
document retrieval stage is very crucial to the effectiveness of web search engines.
Existing document retrieval methods can be divided into two categories, namely term-based and
semantic-based approaches [22]. Term-based retrieval approaches [9, 59] build an inverted index
for the entire web corpus, but they hardly capture document semantics and fail to retrieve similar
documents in different wordings. Thus, semantic-based approaches [56, 36] are proposed to alleviate
this discrepancy. First, they learn dense representations for both queries and documents through a
twin-tower architecture; then Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search is applied to retrieve
relevant documents for the designated query. Despite of their success in real applications, these
approaches can not fully leverage the power of deep neural networks for the following reasons.
First, a single embedding vector has limited capacity to memorize all semantics in a document,
and it performs even worse than term-based methods in the applications that heavily rely on exact
match [37]. Second, the model is unable to incorporate deep query-document interactions. Because
∗

The work was done at Microsoft.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

