Human-AI Shared Control via Policy Dissection

Quanyi Li⋄‡ , Zhenghao Peng§ , Haibin Wu⋄ , Lan Feng† , Bolei Zhou§
⋄
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence, † ETH Zurich,
‡
University of Edinburgh, § University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
Human-AI shared control allows human to interact and collaborate with autonomous agents to accomplish control tasks in complex environments. Previous Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods attempted goal-conditioned designs
to achieve human-controllable policies at the cost of redesigning the reward function and training paradigm. Inspired by the neuroscience approach to investigate
the motor cortex in primates, we develop a simple yet effective frequency-based
approach called Policy Dissection to align the intermediate representation of the
learned neural controller with the kinematic attributes of the agent behavior. Without modifying the neural controller or retraining the model, the proposed approach
can convert a given RL-trained policy into a human-controllable policy. We evaluate the proposed approach on many RL tasks such as autonomous driving and
locomotion. The experiments show that human-AI shared control system achieved
by Policy Dissection in driving task can substantially improve the performance
and safety in unseen traffic scenes. With human in the inference loop, the locomotion robots also exhibit versatile controllable motion skills even though they
are only trained to move forward. Our results suggest the promising direction
of implementing human-AI shared autonomy through interpreting the learned
representation of the autonomous agents. Code and demo videos are available at
https://metadriverse.github.io/policydissect.

1

Introduction

In recent years, autonomous agents trained from deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) have achieved
huge success in a range of applications from robot control [68, 56, 37, 41, 72], autonomous driving [25,
7, 29], to the power system in smart building [44]. Despite the capability of discovering feasible
policy under unknown system dynamics in a model-free setting [66], the learning-based agents lack
sufficient generalizability [14] in unseen environments, which hinders their real-world deployments.
Furthermore, it remains difficult to understand the internal mechanism and the decision-making of the
neural network [30, 78], especially when abnormal behaviors happen [10, 77, 49]. Thus the absence
of generalizability, transparency and controllability limits the application of the end-to-end neural
controllers in safety-critical systems.
One potential direction to make the neural controller safer and more trustworthy is incorporating
human into the inference loop, which we refer to as human-AI shared control. With human involvement, the shared autonomy systems can achieve substantial improvement over the performance and
safety [54, 15, 55], even on new tasks and unseen environments. Human-AI shared control has
been implemented in various forms, such as enforcing intervention [28, 51] or providing high-level
commands [15] to the AI models. Previous works mainly explore goal-conditioned reinforcement
learning (GCRL) as a form of human-AI shared control, where a high-level goal is fed as an input
to the policy during training [60, 2, 15, 25, 57]. Thus the behavior of the learned agent can be
controlled by varying the input goal [47, 38, 79, 37]. However, training goal-conditioned policy
requires additional modifications to the observation design, the reward function and the training
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

