A Mean-Field Game Approach to Cloud Resource
Management with Function Approximation

Weichao Mao
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
weichao2@illinois.edu
Chen Wang
IBM Research
chen.wang1@ibm.com

Haoran Qiu
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
haoranq4@illinois.edu

Hubertus Franke
IBM Research
frankeh@us.ibm.com

Ravishankar K. Iyer
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
rkiyer@illinois.edu

Zbigniew Kalbarczyk
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
kalbarcz@illinois.edu
Tamer Başar
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
basar1@illinois.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has gained increasing popularity for resource management in cloud services such as serverless computing. As self-interested users
compete for shared resources in a cluster, the multi-tenancy nature of serverless platforms necessitates multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) solutions, which
often suffer from severe scalability issues. In this paper, we propose a mean-field
game (MFG) approach to cloud resource management that is scalable to a large
number of users and applications and incorporates function approximation to deal
with the large state-action spaces in real-world serverless platforms. Specifically,
we present an online natural actor-critic algorithm for learning in MFGs compatible with various forms of function approximation. We theoretically establish its
finite-time convergence to the regularized Nash equilibrium under linear function
approximation and softmax parameterization. We further implement our algorithm
using both linear and neural-network function approximations, and evaluate our
solution on an open-source serverless platform, OpenWhisk, with real-world workloads from production traces. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach is
scalable to a large number of users and significantly outperforms various baselines
in terms of function latency and resource utilization efficiency.

1

Introduction

Serverless computing1 is an emerging cloud computing paradigm that allows users to develop and run
their applications without worrying about the configurations of the infrastructure (containers or virtual
machines) [7, 33]. In contrast to traditional cloud computing, serverless users are only charged by the
function execution time and their operational cost is reduced since the cloud provider takes care of
the resource management (e.g., serverless function provisioning and scheduling) on their behalf. The
tension between cloud providers and users incurs a more complex resource management problem: The
platform needs to meet various user-defined serverless function quality-of-service (QoS) guarantees
while the provider aims to keep the cluster resource utilization at a high level in the face of elastic
and bursty function requests. Numerous heuristics-based solutions (e.g., [64, 67, 69, 77]) have been
1

We focus on Function-as-a-Service (FaaS), which is the most common serverless service in cloud computing.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

