Promising or Elusive? Unsupervised Object
Segmentation from Real-world Single Images

Yafei Yang

Bo Yang

vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
ya-fei.yang@connect.polyu.hk

bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of unsupervised object segmentation from
single images. We do not introduce a new algorithm, but systematically investigate the effectiveness of existing unsupervised models on challenging real-world
images. We firstly introduce four complexity factors to quantitatively measure
the distributions of object- and scene-level biases in appearance and geometry for
datasets with human annotations. With the aid of these factors, we empirically
find that, not surprisingly, existing unsupervised models catastrophically fail to
segment generic objects in real-world images, although they can easily achieve
excellent performance on numerous simple synthetic datasets, due to the vast gap
in objectness biases between synthetic and real images. By conducting extensive
experiments on multiple groups of ablated real-world datasets, we ultimately find
that the key factors underlying the colossal failure of existing unsupervised models
on real-world images are the challenging distributions of object- and scene-level
biases in appearance and geometry. Because of this, the inductive biases introduced
in existing unsupervised models can hardly capture the diverse object distributions. Our research results suggest that future work should exploit more explicit
objectness biases in the network design.

1

Introduction

The capability of automatically identifying individual objects from complex visual observations
is a central aspect of human intelligence [53]. It serves as the key building block for higher-level
cognition tasks such as planning and reasoning [28]. In last years, a plethora of models have been
proposed to segment objects from single static images in an unsupervised fashion: from the early
AIR [22] and MONet [8] to the recent SPACE [39], SlotAtt [40], GENESIS-V2 [20], etc. They
jointly learn to represent and segment multiple objects from a single image, without needing any
human annotations in training. This process is often called perceptual grouping/binding or objectcentric learning. These methods and their variants have achieved impressive segmentation results on
numerous synthetic scene datasets such as dSprites [42] and CLEVR [33]. Such advances come with
great expectations that the unsupervised techniques would likely close the gap with fully-supervised
methods for real-world visual understanding. However, few work has systematically investigated
the true potential of the emerging unsupervised object segmentation models on complex real-world
images such as COCO dataset [38]. This naturally raises an essential question:
Is it promising or even possible to segment generic objects from real-world single images using
(existing) unsupervised methods?
What is an object? To answer the above question involves another fundamental question: what
is an object? Exactly 100 years ago in Gestalt psychology, Wertheimer [61] first introduced a set
of Gestalt principles such as proximity, similarity and continuation to heuristically define visual
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

