An Information-Theoretic Framework for
Deep Learning

Hong Jun Jeon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
hjjeon@stanford.edu

Benjamin Van Roy
Department of Electrical Engineering
Department of Management
Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
bvr@stanford.edu

Abstract
Each year, deep learning demonstrates new and improved empirical results with
deeper and wider neural networks. Meanwhile, with existing theoretical frameworks, it is difficult to analyze networks deeper than two layers without resorting
to counting parameters or encountering sample complexity bounds that are exponential in depth. Perhaps it may be fruitful to try to analyze modern machine learning under a different lens. In this paper, we propose a novel information-theoretic
framework with its own notions of regret and sample complexity for analyzing the
data requirements of machine learning. We use this framework to study the sample complexity of learning from data generated by deep ReLU neural networks
and deep networks that are infinitely wide but have a bounded sum of weights.
We establish that the sample complexity of learning under these data generating
processes is at most linear and quadratic, respectively, in network depth.

1

Introduction

In modern machine learning, the apparent capabilities of empirical methods have rapidly outpaced
what is soundly understood theoretically. Modern neural network architectures have scaled immensely in both parameter count and depth. GPT3, for example, encodes about 175 billion parameters in 96 decoder blocks, each with many layers within. Yet, contrary to traditional intuition, these
deep neural networks with gargantuan parameter counts are able to generalize well and produce
useful models with tractable amounts of data. This gap between what has been shown theoretically
versus empirically makes it quite enticing to develop a coherent framework that could potentially
explain this phenomenon.
Existing theory breaks down when trying to explain learning under models that are simultaneously
very deep (many layers) and wide (many hidden units per layer). Classical results such as those of
Haussler [1992] and Bartlett et al. [1998] can potentially handle the deep but narrow case. These
results bound the sample complexity of a learning a neural network function in terms of the number of parameters and the depth. More recently, Harvey et al. [2017] established a general result
that suggests that for neural networks with piecewise-linear activation units, the sample complexity
grows linearly in the product of parameter count and depth.
However, when we consider neural networks with arbitrary width, these bounds become vacuous.
As an alternative to parameter count methods, researchers have produced sample complexity bounds
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

