On the Limitations of
Stochastic Pre-processing Defenses
Yue Gao
University of Wisconsin–Madison
gy@cs.wisc.edu

Ilia Shumailov
University of Cambridge & Vector Institute
ilia.shumailov@cl.cam.ac.uk

Kassem Fawaz
University of Wisconsin–Madison
kfawaz@wisc.edu

Nicolas Papernot
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
nicolas.papernot@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Defending against adversarial examples remains an open problem. A common
belief is that randomness at inference increases the cost of finding adversarial
inputs. An example of such a defense is to apply a random transformation to
inputs prior to feeding them to the model. In this paper, we empirically and
theoretically investigate such stochastic pre-processing defenses and demonstrate
that they are flawed. First, we show that most stochastic defenses are weaker than
previously thought; they lack sufficient randomness to withstand even standard
attacks like projected gradient descent. This casts doubt on a long-held assumption
that stochastic defenses invalidate attacks designed to evade deterministic defenses
and force attackers to integrate the Expectation over Transformation (EOT) concept.
Second, we show that stochastic defenses confront a trade-off between adversarial
robustness and model invariance; they become less effective as the defended model
acquires more invariance to their randomization. Future work will need to decouple
these two effects. We also discuss implications and guidance for future research.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples [4, 36], where an adversary can
add imperceptible perturbations to the input of a model and change its prediction [5, 24]. Their
discovery has motivated a wide variety of defense approaches [6, 8, 12, 29, 40, 42] along with the
evaluation of their adversarial robustness [2, 28, 38]. Current evaluations mostly rely on adaptive
attacks [2, 38], which require significant modeling and computational efforts. However, even when
the attack succeeds, such evaluations may not always reveal the fundamental weaknesses of an
examined defense. Without awareness of the underlying weaknesses, subsequent defenses may still
conduct inadvertently weak adaptive attacks; this leads to overestimated robustness.
One popular class of defenses that demonstrates the above is the stochastic pre-processing defense,
which relies on applying randomized transformations to inputs to provide robustness [12, 42]. Despite
existing attack techniques designed to handle randomness [2, 3], there is an increasing effort to
improve these defenses through a larger randomization space or more complicated transformations.
For example, BaRT [28] employs 25 transformations, where the parameters of each transformation
are further randomized. Due to the complexity of this defense, it was only broken recently (three
years later) by Sitawarin et al. [34] with a complicated adaptive attack. Still, it is unclear how future
defenses can avoid the pitfalls of existing defenses, largely because these pitfalls remain unknown.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

