Communicating Natural Programs
to Humans and Machines
Samuel Acquaviva⇤
MIT

Yewen Pu⇤
Autodesk Research

Catherine Wong †
MIT

Marta Kryven †
MIT

Gabrielle E Ecanow
MIT

Michael Henry Tessler
MIT

Theodoros Sechopoulos †
MIT
Maxwell Nye
MIT

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

Abstract
The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) is a set of procedural tasks that
tests an agent’s ability to flexibly solve novel problems. While most ARC tasks are
easy for humans, they are challenging for state-of-the-art AI. What makes building
intelligent systems that can generalize to novel situations such as ARC difficult?
We posit that the answer might be found by studying the difference of language:
While humans readily generate and interpret instructions in a general language,
computer systems are shackled to a narrow domain-specific language that they can
precisely execute. We present LARC, the Language-complete ARC: a collection of
natural language descriptions by a group of human participants who instruct each
other on how to solve ARC tasks using language alone, which contains successful
instructions for 88% of the ARC tasks. We analyze the collected instructions as
‘natural programs’, finding that while they resemble computer programs, they are
distinct in two ways: First, they contain a wide range of primitives; Second, they
frequently leverage communicative strategies beyond directly executable codes.
We demonstrate that these two distinctions prevent current program synthesis techniques from leveraging LARC to its full potential, and give concrete suggestions
on how to build the next-generation program synthesizers.

1

Introduction

Humans solve a range of procedural tasks such as cooking, tying shoes, and programming. Although
current AI systems achieve super-human proficiency at certain narrowly specified tasks [1, 2], their
reasoning is domain-specific and fails to generalize to novel situations [3]. The Abstraction and
Reasoning Corpus (ARC) introduced by [4] presents a set of procedural tasks constructed expressly to
benchmark fundamental capacities associated with human general intelligence, including abstraction,
generalization, object categories, and procedural analogies [3, 5–10]. Specifically, ARC requires one
to infer a procedure consistent with a small number of abstract input-output examples and apply it to
a new input to generate an unseen answer, see Figure 1.
How do we build systems that are capable of solving general, procedural tasks such as ARC?
Traditional approaches of program synthesis [11–14] and semantic parsing [15–20] assume the tasks
are DSL-closed – for any task, there exists a program, written in a predefined Domain Specific
Language (DSL), that solves the task. The ARC benchmark is uniquely designed to be DSL-open
⇤

and † denote equal contributions

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

