Riemannian Score-Based Generative Modelling
Valentin De Bortoli∗†, Émile Mathieu∗‡, Michael Hutchinson∗‡,
James Thornton‡, Yee Whye Teh‡, Arnaud Doucet‡

Abstract
Score-based generative models (SGMs) are a powerful class of generative models
that exhibit remarkable empirical performance. Score-based generative modelling
(SGM) consists of a “noising” stage, whereby a diffusion is used to gradually add
Gaussian noise to data, and a generative model, which entails a “denoising” process
defined by approximating the time-reversal of the diffusion. Existing SGMs assume
that data is supported on a Euclidean space, i.e. a manifold with flat geometry. In
many domains such as robotics, geoscience or protein modelling, data is often
naturally described by distributions living on Riemannian manifolds and current
SGM techniques are not appropriate. We introduce here Riemannian Score-based
Generative Models (RSGMs), a class of generative models extending SGMs to
Riemannian manifolds. We demonstrate our approach on a variety of manifolds,
and in particular with earth and climate science spherical data.

1

Introduction

Score-based Generative Models (SGMs) also called diffusion models (Song and Ermon, 2019; Song
et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021) formulate generative modelling as a
denoising process. Noise is incrementally added to data using a diffusion process until it becomes
approximately Gaussian. The generative model is then obtained by simulating an approximation of
the corresponding time-reversal process, which progressively denoises a Gaussian sample to obtain
a data sample. This process is also a diffusion whose drift depends on the logarithmic gradients of
the noised data densities, i.e. the Stein scores, estimated using a neural network via score matching
(Hyvärinen, 2005; Vincent, 2011).
SGMs have been primarily applied to data living on Euclidean spaces, i.e. manifolds with flat
geometry. However, in a large number of scientific domains the distributions of interest are supported
on Riemannian manifolds. These include, to name a few, protein modelling (Shapovalov and
Dunbrack Jr, 2011), cell development (Klimovskaia et al., 2020), image recognition (Lui, 2012),
geological sciences (Karpatne et al., 2018; Peel et al., 2001), graph-structured and hierarchical data
(Roy et al., 2007; Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005), robotics (Feiten et al., 2013; Senanayake and
Ramos, 2018) and high-energy physics (Brehmer and Cranmer, 2020).
We introduce in this work Riemannian Score-based Generative Models (RSGMs), an extension of
SGMs to Riemannian manifolds which incorporate the geometry of the data by defining the forward
diffusion process directly on the Riemannian manifold, inducing a manifold-valued reverse process.
This requires constructing a noising process on the manifold that converges to an easy-to-sample
reference distribution. We establish that, as in the Euclidean case, the corresponding time-reversal
process is also a diffusion whose drift includes the Stein score which is intractable but can similarly be
estimated via score matching. Methodological extensions are required as in most cases the transition
kernel of the noising process cannot be sampled exactly. For example on compact manifolds it is
∗

equal contribution.
Dept. of Computer Science ENS, CNRS, PSL University Paris, France.
‡
Dept. of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
†

