An In-depth Study of Stochastic Backpropagation

Mingze Xu∗ Hao Chen Bing Shuai Zhuowen Tu Joseph Tighe
AWS AI Labs
{junfa, xumingze, hxen, bshuai, ztu, tighej}@amazon.com

Jun Fang

Abstract
In this paper, we provide an in-depth study of Stochastic Backpropagation (SBP)
when training deep neural networks for standard image classification and object
detection tasks. During backward propagation, SBP calculates gradients by using
only a subset of feature maps to save GPU memory and computational cost. We
interpret SBP as an efficient way to implement stochastic gradient decent by
performing backpropagation dropout, which leads to significant memory saving and
training run-time reduction, with a minimal impact on the overall model accuracy.
We offer best practices to apply SBP for training image recognition models, which
can be adopted in learning a wide range of deep neural networks. Experiments
on image classification and object detection show that SBP can save up to 40%
of GPU memory with less than 1% accuracy degradation. Code is available at:
https://github.com/amazon-research/stochastic-backpropagation

1

Introduction

A common practice to improve accuracy when training deep neural networks is to increase the input
resolution [19], model depth [7], and model width [21]. However, this can significantly increase
the GPU memory usage, making training on devices with limited resources difficult. For example,
training an object detector using ConvNeXt-Base [14] as the backbone with batch size 2 requires
over 17 GB of memory, which cannot fit on many modern GPUs.
A number of prior works have explored memory-efficient training designs, especially for large
model training on high resolution images or videos. Mixed-precision training [17] uses lower
precision to represent the network weights and activations for certain layers of the network. Gradient
checkpointing [2] restores intermediate feature maps by recomputing nodes in the computation graph
during the backward pass, which requires extra computations. Gradient accumulation [12] splits a
mini-batch into smaller chunks to calculate gradients iteratively, which slows down training process.
A recent method, Stochastic Backpropagation (SBP) [3], offers a new perspective for memoryefficient model training. It performs partial execution of gradients during backpropagation on
randomly selected frames when training video models [13, 24, 23, 22]. It achieves considerable
memory saving by only caching a subset of video frame feature maps without significant accuracy
loss. However, SBP in [3] is only applied to video-based models using two architectures and its
design space has not be thoroughly explored on wider tasks. The explanation provided in [3] for
the effectiveness of SBP is simple but narrow — it attributes the validity of the method to the high
redundancy of video frames.
This leaves a number of questions around SBP unanswered: (1) Is SBP ’s effectiveness limited to
the temporal redundancy of video or can it effectively leverage spatial redundancy? (2) If so, can
SBP be generalized to image-based tasks, with more limited redundancy? (3) Is SBP generalizable
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

