Training stochastic stabilized supralinear networks
by dynamics-neutral growth

Wayne W.M. Soo
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
wmws2@cam.ac.uk

Máté Lengyel
Department of Engineering Department of Cognitive Science
University of Cambridge
Central European University
m.lengyel@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
There continues to be a trade-off between the biological realism and performance
of neural networks. Contemporary deep learning techniques allow neural networks
to be trained to perform challenging computations at (near) human-level, but these
networks typically violate key biological constraints. More detailed models of
biological neural networks can incorporate many of these constraints but typically
suffer from subpar performance and trainability. Here, we narrow this gap by
developing an effective method for training a canonical model of cortical neural
circuits, the stabilized supralinear network (SSN), that in previous work had to
be constructed manually or trained with undue constraints. SSNs are particularly
challenging to train for the same reasons that make them biologically realistic:
they are characterized by strongly-connected excitatory cells and expansive firing
rate non-linearities that together make them prone to dynamical instabilities unless
stabilized by appropriately tuned recurrent inhibition. Our method avoids such
instabilities by initializing a small network and gradually increasing network size
via the dynamics-neutral addition of neurons during training. We first show how
SSNs can be trained to perform typical machine learning tasks by training an SSN
on MNIST classification. We then demonstrate the effectiveness of our method by
training an SSN on the challenging task of performing amortized Markov chain
Monte Carlo-based inference under a Gaussian scale mixture generative model of
natural image patches with a rich and diverse set of basis functions – something
that was not possible with previous methods. These results open the way to training
realistic cortical-like neural networks on challenging tasks at scale.

1

Introduction

Biological neural network models of the brain have long been studied to understand some of the
fundamental network mechanisms employed by the brain [1–4]. However, these models were not
capable of actually achieving the brain’s performance on its wide range of complex computations.
Conversely, artificial neural networks have been achieving competitive performance in a multitude of
image, language, and speech-related tasks, but typically without regard to biological realism [5–8].
In systems neuroscience, neural networks have also been trained on laboratory tasks employed in
typical experiments [9–16]. These approaches provided important insights into the contributions of
experimentally found macroscopic neural dynamics and representations to the successful performance
of such tasks. However, these networks did not incorporate some of the most salient constraints
on the detailed organization of cortical circuits. For example, they were purely feedforward [10],
utilized neuronal transfer functions that were either outright saturating (e.g. tanh) or at best lacked the
superlinear characteristics of cortical neurons (as in ReLUs, or the rectified softplus) [9–11, 15, 16],
had noiseless dynamics [12], no separation of excitatory (E) and inhibitory (I) cells [9, 10, 15], and
sometimes even employed artificial gating mechanisms such as LSTMs [13]. Due to these properties,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

