Supervising the Multi-Fidelity Race
of Hyperparameter Configurations

Martin Wistuba∗ †
Amazon Web Services, Berlin, Germany
marwistu@amazon.com

Arlind Kadra∗
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
kadraa@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Josif Grabocka
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
grabocka@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Multi-fidelity (gray-box) hyperparameter optimization techniques (HPO) have
recently emerged as a promising direction for tuning Deep Learning methods.
However, existing methods suffer from a sub-optimal allocation of the HPO budget to the hyperparameter configurations. In this work, we introduce DyHPO, a
Bayesian Optimization method that learns to decide which hyperparameter configuration to train further in a dynamic race among all feasible configurations. We
propose a new deep kernel for Gaussian Processes that embeds the learning curve
dynamics, and an acquisition function that incorporates multi-budget information.
We demonstrate the significant superiority of DyHPO against state-of-the-art hyperparameter optimization methods through large-scale experiments comprising 50
datasets (Tabular, Image, NLP) and diverse architectures (MLP, CNN/NAS, RNN).

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) is arguably an acute open challenge for Deep Learning (DL),
especially considering the crucial impact HPO has on achieving state-of-the-art empirical results.
Unfortunately, HPO for DL is a relatively under-explored field and most DL researchers still optimize
their hyperparameters via obscure trial-and-error practices. On the other hand, traditional Bayesian
Optimization HPO methods [Snoek et al., 2012, Bergstra et al., 2011] are not directly applicable to
deep networks, due to the infeasibility of evaluating a large number of hyperparameter configurations.
In order to scale HPO for DL, three main directions of research have been recently explored. (i)
Online HPO methods search for hyperparameters during the optimization process via meta-level
controllers [Chen et al., 2017, Parker-Holder et al., 2020], however, this online adaptation can not
accommodate all hyperparameters (e.g. related to architectural changes). (ii) Gradient-based HPO
techniques, on the other hand, compute the derivative of the validation loss w.r.t. hyperparameters by
reversing the training update steps [Maclaurin et al., 2015, Franceschi et al., 2017, Lorraine et al.,
2020], however, the reversion is not directly applicable to all cases (e.g. dropout rate). The last
direction, (iii) Gray-box HPO techniques discard sub-optimal configurations after evaluating them on
lower budgets [Li et al., 2017, Falkner et al., 2018].
In contrast to the online and gradient-based alternatives, gray-box approaches can be deployed in
an off-the-shelf manner to all types of hyperparameters and architectures. The gray-box concept is
based on the intuition that a poorly-performing hyperparameter configuration can be identified and
∗
†

equal contribution
work does not relate to position at Amazon

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

