FedSR: A Simple and Effective Domain Generalization
Method for Federated Learning

A. Tuan Nguyen
University of Oxford
tuan@robots.ox.ac.uk

Philip H. S. Torr
University of Oxford
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Ser-Nam Lim
Meta AI Research
sernamlim@fb.com

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) refers to the decentralized and privacy-preserving machine
learning framework in which multiple clients collaborate (with the help of a central
server) to train a global model without sharing their data. However, most existing
FL methods only focus on maximizing the model’s performance on the source
clients’ data (e.g., mobile users) without considering its generalization ability to
unknown target data (e.g., a new user). In this paper, we incorporate the problem of
Domain Generalization (DG) into Federated Learning to tackle the aforementioned
issue. However, virtually all existing DG methods require a centralized setting
where data is shared across the domains, which violates the principles of decentralized FL and hence not applicable. To this end, we propose a simple yet novel
representation learning framework, namely FedSR, which enables domain generalization while still respecting the decentralized and privacy-preserving natures of
this FL setting. Motivated by classical machine learning algorithms, we aim to
learn a simple representation of the data for better generalization. In particular,
we enforce an L2-norm regularizer on the representation and a conditional mutual
information (between the representation and the data given the label) regularizer
to encourage the model to only learn essential information (while ignoring spurious correlations such as the background). Furthermore, we provide theoretical
connections between the above two objectives and representation alignment in
domain generalization. Extensive experimental results suggest that our method
significantly outperforms relevant baselines in this particular problem.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we are interested the problem of decentralized Federated Learning (FL), where K
clients collaborate to jointly train a machine learning model with their local (decentralized) data. For
privacy reasons, we consider the setting where it is desirable/preferred that the clients do not share
their data with each other. For example, [28] brings up an example scenario where mobile devices
collaborate to train a model without sending their data to a central server. Another example is that K
hospitals train a diagnosis model together but do not want to share their patients’ data.
However, a major concern with this machine learning framework is that it often does not account for
the possible distribution shift on the target data, a problem commonly referred to as Domain Generalization (DG). Furthermore, and perhaps more problematically, it not straightforward to incorporate
existing DG techniques into this FL setting due to its privacy-preserving nature. Specifically, most
domain invariant representation learning methods [9, 38, 31, 22, 32] require sharing/comparing the
representation of the data across domains, while meta-learning based methods [21, 5] require access
to data from a pool of multiple source domains (in a central server).
There have been some early attempts to incorporate domain generalization into the FL framework.
For example, [27] proposes a technique tailored for medical image segmentation which allows the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

