MCVD: Masked Conditional Video Diffusion for
Prediction, Generation, and Interpolation

Vikram Voleti∗
Mila, University of Montreal
Canada
vikram.voleti@umontreal.ca

Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau*
Mila, University of Montreal
Canada
alexia.jolicoeur-martineau@mail.mcgill.ca

Christopher Pal
Mila, Polytechnique Montreal
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
ServiceNow Research

Abstract
Video prediction is a challenging task. The quality of video frames from current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) generative models tends to be poor and generalization
beyond the training data is difficult. Furthermore, existing prediction frameworks
are typically not capable of simultaneously handling other video-related tasks such
as unconditional generation or interpolation. In this work, we devise a generalpurpose framework called Masked Conditional Video Diffusion (MCVD) for all of
these video synthesis tasks using a probabilistic conditional score-based denoising
diffusion model, conditioned on past and/or future frames. We train the model in a
manner where we randomly and independently mask all the past frames or all the
future frames. This novel but straightforward setup allows us to train a single model
that is capable of executing a broad range of video tasks, specifically: future/past
prediction – when only future/past frames are masked; unconditional generation
– when both past and future frames are masked; and interpolation – when neither
past nor future frames are masked. Our experiments show that this approach can
generate high-quality frames for diverse types of videos. Our MCVD models are
built from simple non-recurrent 2D-convolutional architectures, conditioning on
blocks of frames and generating blocks of frames. We generate videos of arbitrary
lengths autoregressively in a block-wise manner. Our approach yields SOTA results
across standard video prediction and interpolation benchmarks, with computation
times for training models measured in 1-12 days using ≤ 4 GPUs.
Project page: https://mask-cond-video-diffusion.github.io
Code: https://mask-cond-video-diffusion.github.io/

1

Introduction

Predicting what one may visually perceive in the future is closely linked to the dynamics of objects
and people. As such, this kind of prediction relates to many crucial human decision-making tasks
ranging from making dinner to driving a car. If video models could generate full-fledged videos in
pixel-level detail with plausible futures, agents could use them to make better decisions, especially
safety-critical ones. Consider, for example, the task of driving a car in a tight situation at high
speed. Having an accurate model of the future could mean the difference between damaging a car or
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

