Hilbert Distillation for Cross-Dimensionality Networks

Dian Qin1∗ Haishuai Wang1∗† Zhe Liu1 Hongjia Xu1 Sheng Zhou1,2 Jiajun Bu1†
1
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Service Robot,
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
{qindian, haishuai.wang, zheliu, xu_hj, zhousheng_zju, bjj}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
3D convolutional neural networks have revealed superior performance in processing
volumetric data such as video and medical imaging. However, the competitive
performance by leveraging 3D networks results in huge computational costs, which
are far beyond that of 2D networks. In this paper, we propose a novel Hilbert curvebased cross-dimensionality distillation approach that facilitates the knowledge of
3D networks to improve the performance of 2D networks. The proposed Hilbert
Distillation (HD) method preserves the structural information via the Hilbert curve,
which maps high-dimensional (>=2) representations to one-dimensional continuous
space-filling curves. Since the distilled 2D networks are supervised by the curves
converted from dimensionally heterogeneous 3D features, the 2D networks are
given an informative view in terms of learning structural information embedded
in well-trained high-dimensional representations. We further propose a Variablelength Hilbert Distillation (VHD) method to dynamically shorten the walking
stride of the Hilbert curve in activation feature areas and lengthen the stride in
context feature areas, forcing the 2D networks to pay more attention to learning
from activation features. The proposed algorithm outperforms the current stateof-the-art distillation techniques adapted to cross-dimensionality distillation on
two classification tasks. Moreover, the distilled 2D networks by the proposed
method achieve competitive performance with the original 3D networks, indicating
the lightweight distilled 2D networks could potentially be the substitution of
cumbersome 3D networks in the real-world scenario.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation aims to transfer knowledge from cumbersome models to lightweight models.
The vanilla knowledge distillation [11] collects the logits that contain the cognizance of wrong
classes in the cumbersome model. Forcing the lightweight model to mimic the logits can obviously
strengthen its parsing ability. Recent efforts further devote to improve the distillation effectiveness by
adopting intermediate representations [9, 18, 32, 35, 36] and the relation knowledge [22, 23, 25, 33]
of samples as new distillation mediums. In some real-world scenarios (e.g., video analysis and
medical imaging processing), 3D models typically present overwhelming performance compared
with common 2D models, yet the 3D models suffer from huge computational costs. One way to
mitigate this problem is by leveraging knowledge distillation to encapsulate the parsing ability of 3D
models into 2D models. However, the cross-dimensionality distillation problem, especially 3D-to-2D
distillation, is largely unaddressed in the literature.
Most existing methods that utilize intermediate features for distillation are designed by employing
a metric function (e.g., mean square error (MSE) and Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence) between
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

