A Closer Look at the Adversarial Robustness of
Deep Equilibrium Models

1

Zonghan Yang1 , Tianyu Pang2 , Yang Liu1,3,4∗
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Sea AI Lab, Singapore
3
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China

yangzh20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, tianyupang@sea.com, liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep equilibrium models (DEQs) refrain from the traditional layer-stacking
paradigm and turn to find the fixed point of a single layer. DEQs have achieved
promising performance on different applications with featured memory efficiency.
At the same time, the adversarial vulnerability of DEQs raises concerns. Several
works propose to certify robustness for monotone DEQs. However, limited efforts
are devoted to studying empirical robustness for general DEQs. To this end, we
observe that an adversarially trained DEQ requires more forward steps to arrive at
the equilibrium state, or even violates its fixed-point structure. Besides, the forward
and backward tracks of DEQs are misaligned due to the black-box solvers. These
facts cause gradient obfuscation when applying the ready-made attacks to evaluate
or adversarially train DEQs. Given this, we develop approaches to estimate the
intermediate gradients of DEQs and integrate them into the attacking pipelines. Our
approaches facilitate fully white-box evaluations and lead to effective adversarial
defense for DEQs. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 validate the adversarial
robustness of DEQs competitive with deep networks of similar sizes.

1

Introduction

Conventional deep networks employ multiple stacked layers to process data in a feedforward manner
[17]. During training, network parameters are optimized by backpropagating loss updates through the
consecutive layers [36]. Recently, [3] propose deep equilibrium models (DEQs), whose forward pass
involves finding the fixed point (i.e., equilibrium state) of a single layer. With implicit differentiation,
the backward pass of DEQs is formulated as another linear fixed-point system. Training DEQs with
black-box root solvers only consumes O(1) memory, which enables DEQs to achieve performance
competitive with conventional networks in large-scale applications, including language modelling
[3], image classification and segmentation [4], density modelling [24, 16], and graph modelling [23].
Considering the fixed point as a local attractor, DEQs are expected to be stable to small input perturbations. However, empirical observations show the opposite that a vanilla DEQ is also vulnerable to
adversarial attacks [16]. Along this routine, several works are proposed to investigate the certified
robustness for monotone DEQs [40, 34, 27, 20, 28, 10]. Inspired from the monotone operator splitting
theories, monotone DEQs are designed with the guarantee of existence and convergence of equilibrium points. However, the layer parameterization of monotone DEQs and the limited scalability of
certification methods narrow the scope of these previous studies. On the other hand, [16] explore the
adversarial robustness for general DEQs. They incorporate the adversarial generation process into
the equilibrium solver to accelerate the PGD attack [25]. Nevertheless, the PGD attack is originally
designed for deep networks, requiring for end-to-end white-box differentiation. In contrast, DEQs
∗

Corresponding author: Yang Liu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

