House of Cans: Covert Transmission of Internal
Datasets via Capacity-Aware Neuron Steganography

Xudong Pan
Fudan University
xdpan18@fudan.edu.cn
Mi ZhangB
Fudan University
mi_zhang@fudan.edu.cn

Shengyao Zhang
Fudan University
shengyaozhang21@m.fudan.edu.cn
Yifan Yan
Fudan University
yanyf20@fudan.edu.cn

Min YangB
Fudan University
m_yang@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a capacity-aware neuron steganography scheme (i.e.,
Cans) to covertly transmit multiple private machine learning (ML) datasets via a
scheduled-to-publish deep neural network (DNN) as the carrier model. Unlike
existing steganography schemes which treat the DNN parameters as bit strings,
Cans for the first time exploits the learning capacity of the carrier model via a
novel parameter sharing mechanism. Extensive evaluation shows, Cans is the first
working scheme which can covertly transmit over 10000 real-world data samples
within a carrier model which has 220× less parameters than the total size of the
stolen data, and simultaneously transmit multiple heterogeneous datasets within
a single carrier model, under a trivial distortion rate (< 10−5 ) and with almost
no utility loss on the carrier model (< 1%). Besides, Cans implements by-design
redundancy to be resilient against common post-processing techniques on the
carrier model before the publishing.

1

Introduction

Large machine learning (ML) datasets become critical assets for AI corporations [2, 8]. As the
preparation of datasets is highly time-consuming and labor-intensive, it is common and reasonable
for relevant parties to hold the data as confidential properties [45]. Despite being carefully curated in
local data centers isolated from the open network [3], recent research shows model-level vulerabilities
still expose the private datasets under the risk of disclosure (e.g., [7, 15, 39, 37]).
Once a deep neural network (DNN) finishes its training process on a private dataset, the model
immediately becomes an exploitable source of data disclosure. By interacting with the trained
model in a full-knowledge manner (i.e., with known parameters, model architecture, etc.) or via the
prediction API, previous works reveal the possibility of inferring sample-level sensitive information
or even reconstructing raw training samples from the intermediate computation results (e.g., features
[30] and gradients [28, 50, 16]) and the outputs of a trained model [9, 36, 35, 10]. For example,
Carlini et al. reveal and evaluate how sensitive texts (e.g., social security number) are memorized in
DNN-based online services [9] (e.g., Google’s Smart Compose [13]) and more recent industry-level
pretrained large language models [10] (e.g., OpenAI’s GPT-2 [34]). Such vulnerabilities reflect the
tension between the confidential data and the openly accessible trained model. A natural question is,
whether a private dataset with no exposed open interfaces can be impregnable against data stealing.
Our Work. In this paper, we reveal that severe leakage of the sensitive information can still happen
even for private ML datasets with no exposed public interface. To break the privacy barrier of ML data
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

