Private Graph All-Pairwise-Shortest-Path Distance
Release With Improved Error Rate

Chenglin Fan, Ping Li, Xiaoyun Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{chenglinfan2020, pingli98, lixiaoyun996}@gmail.com

Abstract
Releasing all pairwise shortest path (APSP) distances among vertices on general
graphs under weight Differential Privacy (DP) is known as a challenging task
that has gained increasing interest recently. Previous work achieved DP with
the maximal absolute error among all published pairwise distances bounded by
Õ(n) where n is the number of nodes. Whether the approximation error can
be reduced to sublinear in n is still an interesting open problem. In this paper,
we break the linear barrier on the distance approximation error in APSP release,
by proposing an algorithm that releases a constructed synthetic graph privately.
Computing all pairwise distances on the constructed graph only introduces Õ(n1/2 )
error in answering all pairwise shortest path distances for fixed privacy parameter.
Our method is based on a novel graph diameter (link length) augmentation via
constructing “shortcuts” for the paths and the use of Laplace noise with non-zero
mean. Numerical examples are also provided. Additionally, we also propose a DP
algorithm with error rate Õ(k), which improves the error of general graphs, when
the graph has small feedback vertex set number k = o(n1/2 ).

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in private data analysis, from academic research
to industry practice. Typically, many industrial machine learning applications consist of two steps:
1) collecting data from users; 2) training models using the collected user data. One key question is:
throughout this process, how can we extract meaningful information from the data, without leaking
sensitive data of each user? In other words, how can we prevent an adversarial attacker from inferring
any user’s data, given the public information that can be accessed? This has been the overarching
question in a line of research that studies private algorithms under various settings. The concept of
differential privacy (DP) (Blum et al., 2005; Chawla et al., 2005; Dwork, 2006) has been a popular
approach for rigorously defining and resolving the problem of keeping useful information for model
learning, while protecting privacy for each individual. In the traditional setting, databases D and
D′ are collections of data records and are considered to be neighboring if they are identical except
for a single record (individual information). DP requires that the output of running a randomized
algorithm on D and D′ should have very close probability distributions. There are many types of
databases, and in this work, we will specifically focus on the differential privacy of graphs.
Weight private graphs. In general, there are three types of private graph models, regarding the
nodes, the edges and the edge weights, respectively. The node private model requires DP for two
adjacent graphs differing in one node. In the edge private model, two neighboring graphs are defined
such that they only differ by one edge, while sharing the same set of nodes.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

