The Implicit Delta Method
Nathan Kallus⇤
Cornell University & Netflix Research
kallus@cornell.edu

James McInerney⇤
Netflix Research
jmcinerney@netflix.com

Abstract
Epistemic uncertainty quantification is a crucial part of drawing credible conclusions from predictive models, whether concerned about the prediction at a
given point or any downstream evaluation that uses the model as input. When
the predictive model is simple and its evaluation differentiable, this task is solved
by the delta method, where we propagate the asymptotically-normal uncertainty
in the predictive model through the evaluation to compute standard errors and
Wald confidence intervals. However, this becomes difficult when the model and/or
evaluation becomes more complex. Remedies include the bootstrap, but it can be
computationally infeasible when training the model even once is costly. In this
paper, we propose an alternative, the implicit delta method, which works by infinitesimally regularizing the training loss of the predictive model to automatically
assess downstream uncertainty. We show that the change in the evaluation due to
regularization is consistent for the asymptotic variance of the evaluation estimator,
even when the infinitesimal change is approximated by a finite difference. This
provides both a reliable quantification of uncertainty in terms of standard errors
as well as permits the construction of calibrated confidence intervals. We discuss
connections to other approaches to uncertainty quantification, both Bayesian and
frequentist, and demonstrate our approach empirically.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider quantifying uncertainty in evaluations of predictive models trained on data.
Consider the following examples. We fit a complex model (such as a neural net) to predict mean
service time for an incoming call to a call center given some features, and we use it to prioritize
calls in a queuing system. We may be interested in confidence intervals on the average wait time
of incoming calls in the queue. Such confidence intervals would be crucial for drawing credible
conclusions about such evaluations, since we know we cannot take the point prediction at face value
given the sampling uncertainty in the data. We may, alternatively, be fitting a ranking algorithm by
predicting user interaction from user-item features and then applying some fixed business rules on
top, and we want to assess how often certain item categories would end up at the top. Of course,
we would want to understand how certain we are in this assessment. Or, we fit a complex model
to predict mean demand given price and user features from a price experiment we ran, and we use
it to target discounts by optimizing demand at a price times unit profit. We may be interested in
confidence intervals on the average profit over a given distribution of features.
All of these examples have three important features: they involve (1) a computationally burdensome
step of fitting a large-scale model, (2) evaluating the result using a complicated function that need not
even be known explicitly, and (3) requiring the epistemic uncertainty of the evaluation given a model
and finite data set, in contrast to the total uncertainty comprising both epistemic and irreducible
aleatoric uncertainty [9]. Were the first two of these simple (simple model and simple function
thereof), we could just use the classic delta method [10] (see next section for detail). However, when
these aspects are complex and the model involves many parameters, it may be too prohibitive to
⇤

Equal contribution, alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

