Learning Two-Player Mixture Markov Games:
Kernel Function Approximation and Correlated
Equilibrium

Chris Junchi Li∗
University of California, Berkeley
junchili@berkeley.edu

Dongruo Zhou∗
University of California, Los Angeles
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
University of California, Los Angeles
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We consider learning Nash equilibria in two-player zero-sum Markov Games with
nonlinear function approximation, where the action-value function is approximated
by a function in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). The key challenge
is how to do exploration in the high-dimensional function space. We propose
a novel online learning algorithm to find a Nash equilibrium by minimizing the
duality gap. At the core of our algorithms are upper and lower confidence bounds
that are derived based on the principle of optimism
√ in the face of uncertainty.
We prove that our algorithm is able to attain an O( T ) regret with polynomial
computational complexity, under very mild assumptions on the reward function and
the underlying dynamic of the Markov Games. We also propose several extensions
of our algorithm, including an algorithm with a Bernstein-type bonus that can
achieve a tighter regret bound, and another algorithm for model misspecification
that can be applied to neural network function approximation.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has been the focus of research across a range of research
communities [Shapley, 1953, Littman, 1994]. The case of two-player Markov Games (MG) has
been of particular interest. In this case, two players select their actions based on the current state
simultaneously and independently. One player (the max-player) aims to maximize the return based
on the reward provided by the environment, while the other (the min-player) aims to minimize it. A
series of recent results have established polynomial sample complexity/regret guarantees that depend
on the cardinality of state/action spaces for two-player zero-sum MGs [Wei et al., 2017, Bai and Jin,
2020, Bai et al., 2020, Liu et al., 2021, Jia et al., 2019, Sidford et al., 2020, Cui and Yang, 2021,
Lagoudakis and Parr, 2002, Perolat et al., 2015, Pérolat et al., 2016a,b, 2017, Jin et al., 2021b].
Meanwhile, most of the recent successful applications of MARL deal with large state/action
spaces that may be continuous or a fine-grained discretization of a continuous space. Examples
include GO [Silver et al., 2016], autonomous driving [Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016], TexasHold’em
poker [Brown and Sandholm, 2019], and AlphaStar for the game Starcraft [Vinyals et al., 2019].
In order to tackle problems with large state/action spaces, researchers have designed MARL algorithms based on function approximation which approximate the original high-dimensional value
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

