Neural Abstractions
Alessandro Abate∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK

Alec Edwards∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK

Mirco Giacobbe∗
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham, UK

Abstract
We present a novel method for the safety verification of nonlinear dynamical models
that uses neural networks to represent abstractions of their dynamics. Neural networks have extensively been used before as approximators; in this work, we make
a step further and use them for the first time as abstractions. For a given dynamical
model, our method synthesises a neural network that overapproximates its dynamics by ensuring an arbitrarily tight, formally certified bound on the approximation
error. For this purpose, we employ a counterexample-guided inductive synthesis
procedure. We show that this produces a neural ODE with non-deterministic disturbances that constitutes a formal abstraction of the concrete model under analysis.
This guarantees a fundamental property: if the abstract model is safe, i.e., free from
any initialised trajectory that reaches an undesirable state, then the concrete model
is also safe. By using neural ODEs with ReLU activation functions as abstractions,
we cast the safety verification problem for nonlinear dynamical models into that
of hybrid automata with affine dynamics, which we verify using SpaceEx. We
demonstrate that our approach performs comparably to the mature tool Flow* on
existing benchmark nonlinear models. We additionally demonstrate and that it is
effective on models that do not exhibit local Lipschitz continuity, which are out of
reach to the existing technologies.

1

Introduction

Dynamical models describe processes that are ubiquitous in science and engineering. They are widely
used to model the behaviour of cyber-physical system designs, whose correctness is crucial when they
are deployed in safety-critical domains [10, 13, 47]. To guarantee that a dynamical model satisfies a
safety specification, simulations are useful but insufficient because they are inherently non-exhaustive
and they suffer from numerical errors, which may leave unsafe behaviours unidentified. Formal
verification of continuous dynamical models tackles the question of determining with formal certainty
whether every possible behavior of the model satisfies a safety specification [43, 49, 109]. In this
paper, we present a method to combine machine learning and symbolic reasoning for a sound and
effective safety verification of nonlinear dynamical models.
The formal verification problem for continuous-time and hybrid dynamical models is unsolvable in
general and, even for models with linear dynamics, complete procedures are available under stringent
conditions [11, 12, 70, 84, 85]. For most practical models that contain nonlinear terms [79, 103],
∗

The authors are listed alphabetically

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

