Insights into Pre-training via Simpler Synthetic Tasks

Yuhuai Wu12∗
yuhuai@cs.stanford.edu

Felix Li3∗
fzli@berkeley.edu
1

Percy Liang1
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Stanford University
2
Google Research
3
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Pre-training produces representations that are effective for a wide range of downstream tasks, but it is still unclear what properties of pre-training are necessary
for effective gains. Notably, recent work shows that even pre-training on synthetic tasks can achieve significant gains in downstream tasks. In this work, we
perform three experiments that iteratively simplify pre-training and show that
the simplifications still retain much of its gains. First, building on prior work,
we perform a systematic evaluation of three existing synthetic pre-training methods on six downstream tasks. We find the best synthetic pre-training method,
LIME, attains an average of 67% of the benefits of natural pre-training. Second, to our surprise, we find that pre-training on a simple and generic synthetic
task defined by the Set function achieves 65% of the benefits, almost matching
LIME. Third, we find that 39% of the benefits can be attained by using merely
the parameter statistics of synthetic pre-training. We release the source code at
https://github.com/felixzli/synthetic_pretraining.

1

Introduction

Pre-training on a large amount of data from sources such as text from the web—natural pre-training—
is effective for a wide range of downstream tasks (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2021; Lu et al., 2021). More surprisingly, recent works (Wu et al., 2021; Krishna et al., 2021; Ri &
Tsuruoka, 2022; Anderson & Farrell, 2022) show that pre-training on data that is fully synthetically
generated—synthetic pre-training—can also provide substantial gains, partially closing the gap
between training from a randomly initialized model and a naturally pre-trained model.
What properties of pre-training are necessary for effective gains? In this paper, we conduct a careful
empirical study to help understand this question. We perform three experiments that iteratively
simplify natural pre-training, while still retaining much of the benefits of natural pre-training. See
Figure 1 for an overview of the results obtained in our three experiments.
First, we perform a systematic evaluation of three previously proposed synthetic pre-training methods
over six downstream tasks. Prior works only evaluated each synthetic pre-training method on a single
downstream domain: Wu et al. (2021) on mathematical reasoning benchmarks, Chiang & Lee (2021)
on GLUE, Krishna et al. (2021) on summarization, and Ri & Tsuruoka (2022) on language modeling
and dependency parsing. We instead show how general these methods are as well as how different
synthetic pre-training methods compare against each other. We find that the best performing synthetic
task, LIME (Wu et al., 2021), closes a significant fraction of the gap between random initialization
and natural pre-training for summarization (85%), semantic parsing (83%), reading comprehension
(55%), code translation (43%), and retrosynthesis (49%).
∗

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

