Deep Differentiable Logic Gate Networks

Felix Petersen
Stanford University
University of Konstanz
mail@felix-petersen.de

Christian Borgelt
University of Salzburg
christian@borgelt.net

Hilde Kuehne
University of Frankfurt
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
kuehne@uni-frankfurt.de

Oliver Deussen
University of Konstanz
oliver.deussen@uni.kn

Abstract
Recently, research has increasingly focused on developing efficient neural network
architectures. In this work, we explore logic gate networks for machine learning
tasks by learning combinations of logic gates. These networks comprise logic gates
such as ªANDº and ªXORº, which allow for very fast execution. The difficulty
in learning logic gate networks is that they are conventionally non-differentiable
and therefore do not allow training with gradient descent. Thus, to allow for
effective training, we propose differentiable logic gate networks, an architecture
that combines real-valued logics and a continuously parameterized relaxation of
the network. The resulting discretized logic gate networks achieve fast inference
speeds, e.g., beyond a million images of MNIST per second on a single CPU core.

1

Introduction

With the success of neural networks, there has also always been strong interest in research and industry
in making the respective computations as fast and efficient as possible, especially at inference time.
Various techniques have been proposed to solve this problem, including reduced computational
precision [1], [2], binary [3] and sparse [4] neural nets. In this work, we want to train a different kind
of architecture, which is well known in the domain of computer architectures: logic (gate) networks.
The problem in training networks of discrete components like logic gates, is that they are nondifferentiable and therefore, conventionally, cannot be optimized via standard methods such as
gradient descent [5]. One approach for this would be gradient-free optimization methods such as
evolutionary training [6], [7], which works for small models, but becomes infeasible for larger ones.
In this work, we propose an approach for gradient-based training of logic gate networks (aka. arithmetic / algebraic circuits [8], [9]). Logic gate networks are based on binary logic gates, such as ªandº
and ªxorº (see Table 1). For training logic gate networks, we continuously relax them to differentiable
logic gate networks, which allows efficiently training them with gradient descent. For this, we use
real-valued logic and learn which logic gate to use at each neuron. Specifically, for each neuron, we
learn a probability distribution over logic gates. After training, the resulting network is discretized
to a (hard) logic gate network by choosing the logic gate with the highest probability. As the (hard)
logic gate network comprises logic gates only, it can be executed very fast. Additionally, as the logic
gates are binary, every neuron / logic gate has only 2 inputs, and the networks are extremely sparse.
Logic gate networks are not binary neural networks: binary neural networks are a form of low
precision (wrt. weights and/or activations) neural networks, as they reduce weights and/or activations
to binary precision. Binary neural networks are usually dense and typically rely on weights trained in
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

