Training with More Confidence: Mitigating Injected
and Natural Backdoors During Training

Zhenting Wang
Rutgers University
zhenting.wang@rutgers.edu

Hailun Ding
Rutgers University
hailun.ding@rutgers.edu

Juan Zhai
Rutgers University
juan.zhai@rutgers.edu

Shiqing Ma
Rutgers University
sm2283@rutgers.edu

Abstract
The backdoor or Trojan attack is a severe threat to deep neural networks (DNNs).
Researchers find that DNNs trained on benign data and settings can also learn
backdoor behaviors, which is known as the natural backdoor. Existing works on
anti-backdoor learning are based on weak observations that the backdoor and benign behaviors can differentiate during training. An adaptive attack with slow
poisoning can bypass such defenses. Moreover, these methods cannot defend
natural backdoors. We found the fundamental differences between backdoorrelated neurons and benign neurons: backdoor-related neurons form a hyperplane
as the classification surface across input domains of all affected labels. By further analyzing the training process and model architectures, we found that piecewise linear functions cause this hyperplane surface. In this paper, we design a
novel training method that forces the training to avoid generating such hyperplanes and thus remove the injected backdoors. Our extensive experiments on
five datasets against five state-of-the-art attacks and also benign training show
that our method can outperform existing state-of-the-art defenses. On average,
the ASR (attack success rate) of the models trained with NONE is 54.83 times
lower than undefended models under standard poisoning backdoor attack and
1.75 times lower under the natural backdoor attack. Our code is available at
https://github.com/RU-System-Software-and-Security/NONE.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to Trojans1 . A Trojaned model makes normal predictions on benign inputs and outputs the target label when the input contains a specific pattern (i.e.,
Trojan trigger) such as a yellow pad. To inject a Trojan [1–7], the adversary can poison the training
dataset by adding poisoning samples (or Trojan samples): inputs stamped with the Trojan trigger
and labeled as the target label. This is a typical data poisoning attack, and the model can learn the
trigger as a strong feature for the target label. Recently, researchers found the existence of natural
Trojans. Namely, a model trained on benign datasets with normal settings (e.g., hyperparameters,
optimizers) can also learn Trojans, when there exists a strong input pattern in the training dataset
that corresponds to one label [8]. In such natural Trojan scenarios, the input pattern serves as a
Trojan trigger, and its corresponding label is the target label. By reverse-engineering the trigger, the
adversary can leverage it for attacks. As such, both injected and natural Trojans are severe threats.
1

Trojan attack is also known as the backdoor attack in the existing literature.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

