Debiased Machine Learning without Sample-Splitting
for Stable Estimators
Qizhao Chen
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
qizhaochen@g.harvard.edu

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
vsyrgk@stanford.edu

Morgane Austern
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
morgane.austern@gmail.com

Abstract
Estimation and inference on causal parameters is typically reduced to a generalized method of moments problem, which involves auxiliary functions that correspond to solutions to a regression or classification problem. Recent line of work
on debiased machine learning shows how one can use generic machine learning
estimators for these auxiliary problems, while maintaining asymptotic normality
and root-n consistency of the target parameter of interest, while only requiring
mean-squared-error guarantees from the auxiliary estimation algorithms. The literature typically requires that these auxiliary problems are fitted on a separate
sample or in a cross-fitting manner. We show that when these auxiliary estimation
algorithms satisfy natural leave-one-out stability properties, then sample splitting
is not required. This allows for sample re-use, which can be beneficial in moderately sized sample regimes. For instance, we show that the stability properties that
we propose are satisfied for ensemble bagged estimators, built via sub-sampling
without replacement, a popular technique in machine learning practice.

1

Introduction

A large variety of problems in causal inference and more generally semi-parametric inference can
be framed as finding a solution to a moment condition:
M (✓, g) , EZ [m(Z; ✓, g)]

M (✓0 , g0 ) = 0

where Z 2 Z is a vector of random variables that, apart from the target parameter ✓0 2 ⇥ ⇢ Rp of
interest (we assume p = O(1)), also depends on unknown nuisance functions g0 2 G, which need to
be estimated in a flexible manner from the data. This framework has a long history in the literature on
semi-parametric inference [38, 26, 27, 47, 36, 51, 57, 12, 40, 49, 58, 13, 41, 1, 42, 2, 53, 37, 3], which
analyzes the following two-stage estimation process with sample re-use, when having access to n
iid samples {Z1 , . . . , Zn } and as n grows, treating the target parameter dimension p as a constant:
1. Obtain an estimate ĝ 2 G of the nuisance function g0 based on all the samples.
2. Return any estimate ✓ˆ 2 ⇥ that satisfies:
⇣
⌘
Mn ( ˆ
✓, ĝ) = op n 1/2

n

with

Mn (✓, g) ,

1X
m(Zi ; ✓, g).
n i=1

Given that the estimation of function ĝ is a complex non-parametric problem, it will typically only
satisfy slower than parametric error rates. Moreover, in high dimensional settings, when machine
learning techniques are used to estimate ĝ, then the regularization bias of ĝ will propagate to the
ˆ leading to non-regular estimates and the inability to construct confidence intervals.
final estimate ✓,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

