What’s the Harm? Sharp Bounds on the Fraction
Negatively Affected by Treatment

Nathan Kallus
Netflix and Cornell University
kallus@cornell.edu

Abstract
The fundamental problem of causal inference – that we never observe counterfactuals – prevents us from identifying how many might be negatively affected by
a proposed intervention. If, in an A/B test, half of users click (or buy, or watch,
or renew, etc.), whether exposed to the standard experience A or a new one B,
hypothetically it could be because the change affects no one, because the change
positively affects half the user population to go from no-click to click while negatively affecting the other half, or something in between. While unknowable, this
impact is clearly of material importance to the decision to implement a change or
not, whether due to fairness, long-term, systemic, or operational considerations. We
therefore derive the tightest-possible (i.e., sharp) bounds on the fraction negatively
affected (and other related estimands) given data with only factual observations,
whether experimental or observational. Naturally, the more we can stratify individuals by observable covariates, the tighter the sharp bounds. Since these bounds
involve unknown functions that must be learned from data, we develop a robust
inference algorithm that is efficient almost regardless of how and how fast these
functions are learned, remains consistent when some are mislearned, and still
gives valid conservative bounds when most are mislearned. Our methodology
altogether therefore strongly supports credible conclusions: it avoids spuriously
point-identifying this unknowable impact, focusing on the best bounds instead, and
it permits exceedingly robust inference on these. We demonstrate our method in
simulation studies and in a case study of career counseling for the unemployed.

1

Introduction

Before making changes to an online platform, product managers regularly conduct experiments (“A/B
tests”) to make sure a change does not negatively impact users’ experience. Similarly, extensive
program evaluations, whether experimental or observational, are a corner stone of evidence-based
policymaking and help avoid harmful policy changes. These tests and evaluations focus on assessing
the causal effect of a change on key metrics, whether user engagement or retention on online platforms
or outcomes like employment for social programs. Average treatment effects, heterogeneous treatment
effects, and distributional treatment effects on these outcomes quantify the quality of the intervention
in terms of aggregate impacts on the population or on subpopulations. This is in its essence a
statistical solution to the fundamental problem of causal inference: assess aggregate effects since the
impact on any one individual can never be observed. We can never know whether a user that churned
under arm “B” would have been retained under arm “A,” but we can characterize the distribution of
retention under each arm, even segmenting the population by observable features.
While unknowable, the impact of changes on individuals is clearly of material importance to the
decision to implement a change or not. This individual impact can have downstream effects, whether
user-behavioral, reputational, or operational. Moreover, quantifying how negative this impact can
be is crucial to understanding fairness with respect to the welfare of the individuals, rather than just
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

