Improving Out-of-Distribution Generalization by
Adversarial Training with Structured Priors

Yifei Wang 2∗
Hong Zhu3
Yisen Wang1,4†
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE),
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Qixun Wang1*

1

Abstract
Deep models often fail to generalize well in test domains when the data distribution
differs from that in the training domain. Among numerous approaches to address
this Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization problem, there has been a growing
surge of interest in exploiting Adversarial Training (AT) to improve OOD performance. Recent works have revealed that the robust model obtained by conducting
sample-wise AT also retains transferability to biased test domains. In this paper,
we empirically show that sample-wise AT has limited improvement on OOD performance. Specifically, we find that AT can only maintain performance at smaller
scales of perturbation while Universal AT (UAT) is more robust to larger-scale perturbations. This provides us with clues that adversarial perturbations with universal
(low dimensional) structures can enhance the robustness against large data distribution shifts that are common in OOD scenarios. Inspired by this, we propose two
AT variants with low-rank structures to train OOD-robust models. Extensive experiments on DomainBed benchmark show that our proposed approaches outperform
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) and sample-wise AT. Our code is available at
https://github.com/NOVAglow646/NIPS22-MAT-and-LDAT-for-OOD.

1

Introduction

Existing deep learning methods have achieved good performance on visual classification tasks under
the same distribution of training sets and test sets. However, when the data distribution of the test set
is different from that of the training set, the classification performance of the deep neural networks
(DNNs) may decrease sharply [1]. This is mainly because DNNs may capture spurious features
such as the background and style information to assist the fast fitting during the training process [2].
However, in real-world scenarios, test data may differ from training data in the background and style
information, thus DNNs that rely on unstable spurious features to make predictions will fail. Solving
the above problem is known as the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization.
Another scenario where DNNs may fail is that they are often vulnerable to adversarial examples [3].
Adversarial training (AT) is originally proposed as an effective way to defend against adversarial
attacks [4]. Moreover, there is work showing that adversarial training helps to solve the OOD
generalization problem because OOD data can be seen as stronger perturbations to some extent [5].
The reason why AT can defend against adversarial attacks meanwhile benefit OOD generalization is
that it can make DNNs robust to the interference of spurious features, such as randomly injected noise
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

