Distributed Optimization for Overparameterized
Problems: Achieving Optimal Dimension Independent
Communication Complexity
Bingqing Song
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
email:song0409@umn.edu

Ioannis Tsaknakis
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
email:tsakn001@umn.edu

Chung-Yiu Yau
Department of SEEM
Chinese University of Hong Kong
email:cyyau@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Hoi-To Wai
Department of SEEM
Chinese University of Hong Kong
email:htwai@cuhk.edu.hk

Mingyi Hong
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
email:mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
Decentralized optimization are playing an important role in applications such
as training large machine learning models, among others. Despite its superior
practical performance, there has been some lack of fundamental understanding
about its theoretical properties. In this work, we address the following open research
question: To train an overparameterized model over a set of distributed nodes, what
is the minimum communication overhead (in terms of the bits got exchanged) that
the system needs to sustain, while still achieving (near) zero training loss? We
show that for a class of overparameterized models where the number of parameters
D is much larger than the total data samples N , the best possible communication
complexity is ⌦(N ), which is independent of the problem dimension D. Further,
for a few specific overparameterized models (i.e., the linear regression, and certain
multi-layer neural network with one wide layer), we develop a set of algorithms
which uses certain linear compression followed by adaptive quantization, and show
that they achieve dimension independent, near-optimal communication complexity.
To our knowledge, this is the first time that dimension independent communication
complexity has been shown for distributed optimization.

1

Introduction

The research of decentralized/distributed optimization has recently gained tremendous momentum,
partly due to the fact that a well-designed decentralized/distributed algorithm is capble of training
large-scale machine learning models, by utilizing massively distributed computation and data resources. In a typical decentralized optimization setting, multiple local agents hold small to moderately
sized datasets, and they collaborate by iteratively solving their local problems while sharing some
information with other agents. The majority of the state-of-the-art distributed/decentralized optimization algorithms are deeply rooted in classical consensus-based approaches [Tsitsiklis, 1984, Tsitsiklis
and Luo, 1987], where the agents repetitively share the local optimization variables, or the gradients
of local functions, so to reach an optimal consensual solution.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

