Divide and Contrast: Source-free Domain Adaptation
via Adaptive Contrastive Learning
Ziyi Zhang1 , Weikai Chen3 , Hui Cheng2 , Zhen Li4,5 , Siyuan Li6 , Liang Lin2 , Guanbin Li2∗
1

National Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
3
Tencent America, 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
5
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
6
AI Lab, School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
zhangziyi@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
We investigate a practical domain adaptation task, called source-free unsupervised
domain adaptation (SFUDA), where the source pretrained model is adapted to
the target domain without access to the source data. Existing techniques mainly
leverage self-supervised pseudo-labeling to achieve class-wise global alignment [1]
or rely on local structure extraction that encourages the feature consistency among
neighborhoods [2]. While impressive progress has been made, both lines of
methods have their own drawbacks – the “global” approach is sensitive to noisy
labels while the “local” counterpart suffers from the source bias. In this paper, we
present Divide and Contrast (DaC), a new paradigm for SFUDA that strives to
connect the good ends of both worlds while bypassing their limitations. Based on
the prediction confidence of the source model, DaC divides the target data into
source-like and target-specific samples, where either group of samples is treated
with tailored goals under an adaptive contrastive learning framework. Specifically,
the source-like samples are utilized for learning global class clustering thanks to
their relatively clean labels. The more noisy target-specific data are harnessed at the
instance level for learning the intrinsic local structures. We further align the sourcelike domain with the target-specific samples using a memory-based maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) loss to reduce the distribution mismatch. Extensive
experiments on VisDA, Office-Home, and the more challenging DomainNet have
verified the superior performance of DaC over current state-of-the-art approaches.
The code is available at https://github.com/ZyeZhang/DaC.git.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have brought impressive advances to the cutting edges of vast machine learning
tasks. However, the leap in performance often comes at the cost of large-scale labeled data. To
ease the process of laborious data annotation, domain adaptation (DA) provides an attractive option
that transfers the knowledge learned from the label-rich source domain to the unlabeled target data.
Though most DA approaches require the availability of source data during adaptation, in real-world
scenarios, one may only access a source-trained model instead of source data due to privacy issues.
Hence, this work studies a more practical task, coded source-free unsupervised domain adaptation
(SFUDA), that seeks to adapt a source model to a target domain without source data.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

