PALMER: Perception-Action Loop with Memory
for Long-Horizon Planning

Onur Beker

Mohammad Mohammadi

Amir Zamir

Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)

Abstract
To achieve autonomy in a priori unknown real-world scenarios, agents should be
able to: i) act from high-dimensional sensory observations (e.g., images), ii) learn
from past experience to adapt and improve, and iii) be capable of long horizon
planning. Classical planning algorithms (e.g. PRM, RRT) are proficient at handling
long-horizon planning. Deep learning based methods in turn can provide the necessary representations to address the others, by modeling statistical contingencies
between observations. In this direction, we introduce a general-purpose planning
algorithm called PALMER that combines classical sampling-based planning algorithms with learning-based perceptual representations. For training these perceptual
representations, we combine Q-learning with contrastive representation learning
to create a latent space where the distance between the embeddings of two states
captures how easily an optimal policy can traverse between them. For planning with
these perceptual representations, we re-purpose classical sampling-based planning
algorithms to retrieve previously observed trajectory segments from a replay buffer
and restitch them into approximately optimal paths that connect any given pair of
start and goal states. This creates a tight feedback loop between representation
learning, memory, reinforcement learning, and sampling-based planning. The end
result is an experiential framework for long-horizon planning that is significantly
more robust and sample efficient compared to existing methods.

1

Introduction

Animals and humans operate on high-dimensional stimuli (e.g., vision) to achieve diverse and everchanging goals necessary for their survival [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Learning through trial-and-error plays a
fundamental role in this [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 5]. Even in simplest environments, a brute-force approach
to trial-and-error by trying every possible action for achieving every possible goal is intractable.
The complexity of this search motivates memory-based mechanisms for compositional thinking.
Examples of such mechanisms include : i) remembering relevant segments of past experience, ii)
recomposing them in new counterfactual ways to form plans, and iii) executing such plans as part of
a targeted search strategy. Such mechanisms for recycling past successful behavior can significantly
accelerate trial-and-error compared to uniformly sampling all possible actions. This is because the
same behavior (i.e., sequence of actions) can remain valid for different goals and in different contexts,
due to the inherent compositional structure of real-world goals as well as the commonality of the
physical laws that govern real-world environments.
What principles can allow for memory mechanisms to remember and recompose bits of experience?
The concept of dynamic programming (DP) is directly related to this discussion, as it greatly reduces
the computational cost of trial-and-error by employing the principle of optimality [11]. This principle
can be colloquially stated as treating new and complex problems as a recomposition of old and simpler
sub-problems that were already solved before. Recent work [12, 13, 14] employs this perspective to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

