Cross-Linked Unified Embedding for cross-modality
representation learning

Xinming Tu1,3,∗, Zhi-Jie Cao1,2∗, Chen-Rui Xia1,2 , Sara Mostafavi3,†, Ge Gao1,2†
1
Peking University, 2 Changping Laboratory, 3 University of Washington

Abstract
Multi-modal learning is essential for understanding information in the real world.
Jointly learning from multi-modal data enables global integration of both shared
and modality-specific information, but current strategies often fail when observations from certain modalities are incomplete or missing for part of the subjects.
To learn comprehensive representations based on such modality-incomplete data,
we present a semi-supervised neural network model called CLUE (Cross-Linked
Unified Embedding). Extending from multi-modal VAEs, CLUE introduces the
use of cross-encoders to construct latent representations from modality-incomplete
observations. Representation learning for modality-incomplete observations is
common in genomics. For example, human cells are tightly regulated across multiple related but distinct modalities such as DNA, RNA, and protein, jointly defining
a cell’s function. We benchmark CLUE on multi-modal data from single cell
measurements, illustrating CLUE’s superior performance in all assessed categories
of the NeurIPS 2021 Multimodal Single-cell Data Integration Competition. While
we focus on analysis of single cell genomic datasets, we note that the proposed
cross-linked embedding strategy could be readily applied to other cross-modality
representation learning problems.

1

Introduction

Data from complex systems span multiple modalities. For example, to perceive the world we need
to see images, hear sounds, and read text. Learning how to represent multi-modal data in a way
that captures both shared and complementary information across modalities is a fundamental ML
task.[1, 2] Previous works have demonstrated that multi-modal learning improves video [3] and
image classification[4], and modality-translation[5].
Multi-modal learning is of critical importance in biology. Biological processes in cells involve
multiple regulatory layers that are composed of different types of parts, such as DNA[6, 7, 8] RNA[9],
and protein[10], but these layers directly influence each other, resulting in an intrinsic need for multimodal understanding. In recent years, single-cell technologies have enabled measuring a variety of
data modalities at single-cell resolution, including specialized techniques capable of simultaneously
measuring two or more modalities in the same cell (SHARE-seq[11], sci-CAR[12], SNARE-seq[13],
CITE-seq[14]). However, quality of multi-modal experiments is typically lower than unimodal ones.
Further, unimodal datasets can be generated on a much larger scale (tens of millions of cells, as
opposed to thousands of cells). Therefore, in-silico integration of these unimodal data may provide
great value for understanding inner workings of complex cell systems [15, 16].
∗

Contribute equally.
Correspondence should be addressed to gaog@mail.cbi.pku.edu.cn (for Dr.
saramos@cs.washington.edu (for Dr. Sara Mostafavi).
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

Ge Gao) or

