Learning Generalized Policy Automata
for Relational Stochastic Shortest Path Problems
Rushang Karia, Rashmeet Kaur Nayyar, Siddharth Srivastava
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281
U.S.A.
{Rushang.Karia,rmnayyar,siddharths}@asu.edu

Abstract
Several goal-oriented problems in the real-world can be naturally expressed as
Stochastic Shortest Path problems (SSPs). However, the computational complexity of solving SSPs makes nding solutions to even moderately sized problems
intractable. State-of-the-art SSP solvers are unable to learn generalized solutions
or policies that would solve multiple problem instances with different object names
and/or quantities. This paper presents an approach for learning Generalized Policy
Automata (GPAs): non-deterministic partial policies that can be used to catalyze
the solution process. GPAs are learned using relational, feature-based abstractions,
which makes them applicable on broad classes of related problems with different
object names and quantities. Theoretical analysis of this approach shows that it
guarantees completeness and hierarchical optimality. Empirical analysis shows that
this approach effectively learns broadly applicable policy knowledge in a few-shot
fashion and signicantly outperforms state-of-the-art SSP solvers on test problems
whose object counts are far greater than those used during training.

1 Introduction
Goal-oriented Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) expressed as Stochastic Shortest Path problems
(SSPs) have been the subject of active research since they provide a convenient framework for
modeling the uncertainty in action execution that often arises in the real-world. Recently, research
in deep learning has demonstrated success in solving goal-oriented MDPs using image-based state
representations (Tamar et al., 2016; Groshev et al., 2018). However, such methods require signicant
human-engineering effort in nding transformations like grayscale conversion, etc., to yield representations that facilitate learning. Many practical problems however, are more intuitively expressed
using relational representations and have been widely studied in the literature.
As an example, consider a planetary rover whose mission is to collect all rocks of interest from a
planet’s surface and deliver them to the base for analysis. Such a problem objective is not easily
described in an image-based representation (e.g., visibility is affected by line of sight) but can be easily
described using a relational description language such as rst-order logic. Finding suitable imagebased representations for such problems would be counter-productive and difcult. Furthermore,
image-based deep learning methods often require large amounts of training data and/or are unable to
provide guarantees of completeness and/or convergence.
Many real-world problems such as the rover example above can be readily expressed as SSPs using
symbolic descriptions that can be solved in polynomial time in terms of the state space. SSP algorithms
use a combination of pruning strategies (e.g., heuristics (Hansen and Zilberstein, 2001)) that can
eliminate large parts of the search space from consideration thereby reducing the computational effort
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

