Constrained GPI for Zero-Shot Transfer in
Reinforcement Learning

Jaekyeom Kim
Seoul National University
jaekyeom@snu.ac.kr

Seohong Park
University of California, Berkeley
seohong@berkeley.edu

Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
gunhee@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
For zero-shot transfer in reinforcement learning where the reward function varies
between different tasks, the successor features framework has been one of the
popular approaches. However, in this framework, the transfer to new target tasks
with generalized policy improvement (GPI) relies on only the source successor
features [6] or additional successor features obtained from the function approximators’ generalization to novel inputs [12]. The goal of this work is to improve
the transfer by more tightly bounding the value approximation errors of successor
features on the new target tasks. Given a set of source tasks with their successor
features, we present lower and upper bounds on the optimal values for novel task
vectors that are expressible as linear combinations of source task vectors. Based on
the bounds, we propose constrained GPI as a simple test-time approach that can
improve transfer by constraining action-value approximation errors on new target
tasks. Through experiments in the Scavenger and Reacher environment with state
observations as well as the DeepMind Lab environment with visual observations,
we show that the proposed constrained GPI significantly outperforms the prior
GPI’s transfer performance. Our code and additional information are available at
https://jaekyeom.github.io/projects/cgpi/.

1

Introduction

For sequential decision making, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been shown to be effective for
various types of problems including games [31] and robotics [20, 22]. With such great successes,
interest in multi-task RL has also surged, where its goal is to train a single agent that can efficiently
solve multiple varying tasks. In multi-task RL, we focus on the transfer learning setting, where the
agent learns shared structural knowledge from a set of source tasks during training, and exploits and
generalizes them in new, unseen target tasks at test time.
One popular approach to transfer in RL is to leverage the successor features (SFs) framework
[1, 6, 7, 12, 25], which transfers policies learned on source tasks to target tasks, where the tasks
share the same environment dynamics but differ in their reward functions. Successor features build
a representation of value functions decoupled from reward functions, and transfer to the tasks with
arbitrary reward functions by taking an inner product with corresponding task vectors. They utilize
generalized policy improvement (GPI) [6], which generalizes policy improvement with multiple
policies and provides the performance lower bounds for GPI policies.
However, GPI does not take into account any information from the smoothness of optimal actionvalue functions with respect to task vectors. Tackling this issue, Borsa et al. [12] propose universal
successor features approximators (USFAs), which can estimate the optimal successor features for
novel task vectors. Nevertheless, the function approximator can make high approximation errors
on the task vectors, especially when the new task vectors are distant from the source task vectors.
For instance, when USFAs are trained with source tasks to get close to given goals, they may not
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

