Physically-Based Face Rendering
for NIR-VIS Face Recognition

Yunqi Miao∗

Alexandros Lattas∗

Jiankang Deng†

Warwick Manufacturing Group
University of Warwick
Yunqi.Miao.1@warwick.ac.uk

Imperial College London
and Huawei
a.lattas@imperial.ac.uk

Huawei
and InsightFace
j.deng16@imperial.ac.uk

Jungong Han

Stefanos Zafeiriou

Department of Computer Science
Aberystwyth University
jungonghan77@gmail.com

Department of Computing
Imperial College London
s.zafeiriou@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Near infrared (NIR) to Visible (VIS) face matching is challenging due to the
significant domain gaps as well as a lack of sufficient data for cross-modality model
training. To overcome this problem, we propose a novel method for paired NIR-VIS
facial image generation. Specifically, we reconstruct 3D face shape and reflectance
from a large 2D facial dataset and introduce a novel method of transforming the VIS
reflectance to NIR reflectance. We then use a physically-based renderer to generate
a vast, high-resolution and photorealistic dataset consisting of various poses and
identities in the NIR and VIS spectra. Moreover, to facilitate the identity feature
learning, we propose an IDentity-based Maximum Mean Discrepancy (ID-MMD)
loss, which not only reduces the modality gap between NIR and VIS images at the
domain level but encourages the network to focus on the identity features instead
of facial details, such as poses and accessories. Extensive experiments conducted
on four challenging NIR-VIS face recognition benchmarks demonstrate that the
proposed method can achieve comparable performance with the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) methods without requiring any existing NIR-VIS face recognition datasets.
With slightly fine-tuning on the target NIR-VIS face recognition datasets, our
method can significantly surpass the SOTA performance. Code and pretrained
models are released under the insightface2 GitHub.

1

Introduction

To overcome the problem that the conventional VISible (VIS) images face recognition methods
generally fail to achieve a satisfactory performance under poor illumination, face recognition across
Near InfraRed (NIR) images and VIS images has recently gained increasing attention in the computer
vision community [21, 22, 12, 13]. However, due to the lack of sufficient NIR-VIS data, the training
of the NIR-VIS face recognition network is prone to be over-fitting [22].
To alleviate overfitting, previous works attempt to generate large-scale NIR-VIS face images by
transferring the VIS images to NIR ones [31, 40, 54, 52]. However, the image-to-image translation
based methods are limited by the number of data in the source domain and the diversity of generated
images [12]. Recently, unconditional generative models are employed to synthesize heterogeneous
∗
2

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work is done when Yunqi Miao is an intern at Huawei.
https://github.com/deepinsight/insightface/tree/master/recognition

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

