MaskTune: Mitigating Spurious Correlations by
Forcing to Explore

Saeid Asgari Taghanaki*
Autodesk AI Lab
Linh Tran
Autodesk AI Lab

Aliasghar Khani*
Autodesk AI Lab

Fereshte Khani*
Stanford University

Ali Mahdavi-Amiri
Simon Fraser University

Ali Gholami*
Autodesk AI Lab

Ghassan Hamarneh
Simon Fraser University

Abstract
A fundamental challenge of over-parameterized deep learning models is learning
meaningful data representations that yield good performance on a downstream
task without over-fitting spurious input features. This work proposes MaskTune,
a masking strategy that prevents over-reliance on spurious (or a limited number
of) features. MaskTune forces the trained model to explore new features during
a single epoch finetuning by masking previously discovered features. MaskTune,
unlike earlier approaches for mitigating shortcut learning, does not require any
supervision, such as annotating spurious features or labels for subgroup samples
in a dataset. Our empirical results on biased MNIST, CelebA, Waterbirds, and
ImagenNet-9L datasets show that MaskTune is effective on tasks that often suffer
from the existence of spurious correlations. Finally, we show that MaskTune
outperforms or achieves similar performance to the competing methods when
applied to the selective classification (classification with rejection option) task.
Code for MaskTune is available at https://github.com/aliasgharkhani/
Masktune.

1

Introduction

Spurious correlations are coincidental feature associations formed between a subset of the input and
target variables, which may be caused by factors such as data selection bias [Torralba and Efros, 2011,
Jabri et al., 2016]. The presence of spurious correlations in training data can cause over-parameterized
deep neural networks to fail, often drastically, when such correlations do not hold in test data [Sagawa
et al., 2019] or when encountering domain shift [Arjovsky et al., 2019]. Consider the classification
problem of cows and camels [Beery et al., 2018], where most of the images of cows vs. camels
are captured on green fields vs. desert backgrounds due to selection bias (and perhaps the nature
of the problem that camels are often in the desert). A model trained on such data may rely on the
background as the key discriminative feature between cows and camels, thus failing on images of
cows on non-green backgrounds or camels on non-desert backgrounds.
In over-parameterized regimes, there are often several solutions with almost identical loss values,
and the optimizer (e.g., SGD) typically selects a low-capacity one [Wilson et al., 2017, Valle-Perez
et al., 2018, Arpit et al., 2017, Kalimeris et al., 2019]. In the presence of spurious correlations, the
optimizer might choose to leverage them as they generally demand less capacity than the expected
semantic cues of interest, e.g., relying on the local color or texture of grass instead of the elaborate
visual features that give a cow its appearance [Bruna and Mallat, 2013, Bruna et al., 2015, Brendel
and Bethge, 2019, Khani and Liang, 2021].
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

