Off-Policy Evaluation with Policy-Dependent
Optimization Response
Wenshuo Guo⇤
Department of EECS
University of California, Berkeley
wguo@cs.berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan⇤
Department of EECS and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Angela Zhou⇤
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
zhoua@usc.edu

Abstract
The intersection of causal inference and machine learning for decision-making
is rapidly expanding, but the default decision criterion remains an average of
individual causal outcomes across a population. In practice, various operational
restrictions ensure that a decision-maker’s utility is not realized as an average but
rather as an output of a downstream decision-making problem (such as matching, assignment, network flow, minimizing predictive risk). In this work, we
develop a new framework for off-policy evaluation with policy-dependent linear optimization responses: causal outcomes introduce stochasticity in objective
function coefficients. Under this framework, a decision-maker’s utility depends
on the policy-dependent optimization, which introduces a fundamental challenge
of optimization bias even for the case of policy evaluation. We construct unbiased estimators for the policy-dependent estimand by a perturbation method, and
discuss asymptotic variance properties for a set of adjusted plug-in estimators.
Lastly, attaining unbiased policy evaluation allows for policy optimization: we
provide a general algorithm for optimizing causal interventions. We corroborate
our theoretical results with numerical simulations.

1

Introduction

The interface of causal inference and machine learning offers to “deliver the right intervention,
at the right time, to the right person”. An extensive line of research studies off-policy evaluation
(OPE) and learning—evaluating the average causal outcomes under alternative personalized treatment
assignment policies that differ from the treatment assignment which generated the data (and may have
introduced confounding), so that one may optimize over the best such treatment rule [Manski, 2004,
Dudík et al., 2011, Zhao et al., 2012, Thomas et al., 2015, Athey et al., 2017, Kitagawa and Tetenov,
2018, Kallus and Zhou, 2018b]. Most of this work is based on the assumption that the appropriate
decision criterion is an average of individuals across a population. But various operational restrictions
or settings imply that a decision-maker’s utility is often not realized as an average but rather as an
output of a downstream planning or decision-making problem.
For example, in studying the effects of price incentives in a matching market (e.g., on a rideshare platform), a firm’s revenue is not realized until it matches riders to drivers under certain
⇤

Authors listed in alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

