ClimbQ: Class Imbalanced Quantization Enabling
Robustness on Efficient Inferences
Ting-An Chen1,2 , De-Nian Yang2,3 Ming-Syan Chen1,3
Graduate Institute of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
3
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
1

tachen@arbor.ee.ntu.edu.tw, dnyang@iis.sinica.edu.tw, mschen@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Quantization compresses models to low bits for efficient inferences which has
received increasing attentions. However, existing approaches focused on balanced
datasets, while imbalanced data is pervasive in the real world. Therefore, in this
study, we investigate the realistic problem, quantization on class-imbalanced data.
We observe from the analytical results that quantizing imbalanced data tends to
obtain a large error due to the differences between separate class distributions,
which leads to a significant accuracy loss. To address this issue, we propose a novel
quantization framework, Class Imbalanced Quantization (ClimbQ) that focuses on
diminishing the inter-class heterogeneity for quantization error reduction. ClimbQ
first scales the variance of each class distribution and then projects data through the
new distributions to the same space for quantization. To guarantee the homogeneity
of class variances after the ClimbQ process, we examine the quantized features
and derive that the homogeneity satisfies when data size for each class is restricted
(bounded). Accordingly, we design a Homogeneous Variance Loss (HomoVar
Loss) which reweights the data losses of each class based on the bounded data
sizes to satisfy the homogeneity of class variances. Extensive experiments on classimbalanced and benchmark balanced datasets reveal that ClimbQ outperforms the
state-of-the-art quantization techniques, especially on highly imbalanced data.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with high computational complexity inhibits the deployment
on resource-limited mobile devices [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Quantization has been studied an efficient
method for reducing memory storage and accelerating inferences by compressing models to low
bits [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. The existing quantization approaches are generally developed under a
common assumption that the data is balanced for separate classes. However, class-imbalanced data is
ubiquitous in the real world.
Despite a realistic problem, quantization on class-imbalanced data has not been studied. Therefore,
in this research, we investigate the issues of quantization on class-imbalanced data. The exploration
results on CIFAR-10-LT (long-tailed CIFAR-10) are depicted in Fig. 1. Fig. 1a illustrates the data
size of each class, where the largest class (indexed 0) has 50 times more data than the smallest
class (indexed 9), i.e., an imbalanced dataset. We then conduct experiments to quantize the classimbalanced data by exploiting a baseline quantization approach, uniform quantization. Fig. 1b shows
that the majority classes (indexed 0 to 3) are quantized to 2 bits with only 2% accuracy loss (compared
to the 32-bit model), whereas the minority classes (indexed 8 and 9) obtain 14% accuracy drop. It
indicates that the quantization result is inclined to be dominated by the majority classes, which may
result from the heterogeneity of class distributions as presented in Fig. 1c. Fig. 1c manifests that
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

