Interventions, Where and How?
Experimental Design for Causal Models at Scale
⇤

Panagiotis Tigas 1
1

*

Yashas Annadani 2,3 Andrew Jesson1
Yarin Gal1 Stefan Bauer 2,4

Bernhard Schölkopf 3

OATML, University of Oxford 2 KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 4 CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar

Abstract
Causal discovery from observational and interventional data is challenging due to
limited data and non-identifiability: factors that introduce uncertainty in estimating
the underlying structural causal model (SCM). Selecting experiments (interventions) based on the uncertainty arising from both factors can expedite the identification of the SCM. Existing methods in experimental design for causal discovery from
limited data either rely on linear assumptions for the SCM or select only the intervention target. This work incorporates recent advances in Bayesian causal discovery into the Bayesian optimal experimental design framework, allowing for active
causal discovery of large, nonlinear SCMs while selecting both the interventional
target and the value. We demonstrate the performance of the proposed method on
synthetic graphs (Erdos-Rènyi, Scale Free) for both linear and nonlinear SCMs as
well as on the in-silico single-cell gene regulatory network dataset, DREAM.

Introduction

What is the structure of the protein-signaling network derived from a single cell? How do different habits influence
the presence of disease? Such questions refer to causal
effects in complex systems governed by nonlinear, noisy
processes. On most occasions, passive observation of such
systems is insufficient to uncover the real cause-effect
relationship and costly experimentation is required to disambiguate between competing hypotheses. As such, the
design of experiments is of significant interest; an efficient
experimentation protocol helps reduce the costs involved
in experimentation while aiding the process of producing knowledge through the (closed-loop / policy-driven)
scientific method (Fig. 1).

Mutual Information

1

ith

ew

en
rv
te

o

et

In

lu
Va

Target Node

In the language of causality (Pearl, 2009), the causal relationships are represented qualitatively by a directed acyclic Figure 1: Intervention-Inference-Design
graph (DAG), where the nodes correspond to different vari- loop of Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design for Causal Discovery framework.
ables of the system of study and the edges represent the
flow of information between the variables. The abstraction of DAGs allows us to represent the space
of possible explanations (hypotheses) for the observations at hand. Representing such hypotheses as
Bayesian probabilities (beliefs) allows us to formalize the problem of the scientific method as one of
⇤
Equal contribution. Correspondence to ptigas@robots.ox.ac.uk, yashas.annadani@gmail.com.
Implementation available at: https://github.com/yannadani/cbed

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

