Active Learning with Safety Constraints
Romain Camilleri, Andrew Wagenmaker, Jamie Morgenstern, Lalit Jain, Kevin Jamieson
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
{camilr,ajwagen,jamiemmt,jamieson}@cs.washington.edu,lalitj@uw.edu

Abstract
Active learning methods have shown great promise in reducing the number of
samples necessary for learning. As automated learning systems are adopted into
real-time, real-world decision-making pipelines, it is increasingly important that
such algorithms are designed with safety in mind. In this work we investigate
the complexity of learning the best safe decision in interactive environments. We
reduce this problem to a constrained linear bandits problem, where our goal is to
find the best arm satisfying certain (unknown) safety constraints. We propose an
adaptive experimental design-based algorithm, which we show efficiently trades
off between the difficulty of showing an arm is unsafe vs suboptimal. To our
knowledge, our results are the first on best-arm identification in linear bandits with
safety constraints. In practice, we demonstrate that this approach performs well on
synthetic and real world datasets.

1

Introduction

In many problems in online decision-making, the goal of the learner is to take measurements in such
a way as to learn a near-optimal policy. Oftentimes, though the space of policies may be large, the set
of feasible, or safe policies could be much smaller, effectively constraining the search space of the
learner. Furthermore, these constraints may themselves depend on unknown problem parameters.
For example, consider the problem of bidding sequentially in a series of auctions where the bidder
bids a price wt , the value of winning an item t is denoted vt , and the utility of winning that item and
paying price pt is vt pt . The goal of the bidder is to choose an optimal strategy amongst bidding
strategies s 2 S, s : R ! R. When a bidder is deciding how to choose these strategies, they often
face constraints: they may have a budget B they must abide to; they may wish to have those auctions
they win be well-distributed across time (e.g. in the case of advertising campaigns); they may want to
ensure the set of items they win satisfy some other property (e.g. for advertisements, they might want
to ensure they are not over-targeting any demographic group).
As another example, inventory management systems may face similar issues of deciding amongst
strategies, where there is some objective function (such as revenue) and a variety of constraints at play
in this choice (e.g. capacity of a set of warehouses, employee scheduling constraints, or limits on the
duration of delivery lag). They also operate in markets with changing demand and other uncertainties,
leading to uncertainty about which strategies are feasible or safe (satisfy constraints) and uncertainty
about the revenue they generate.
Both of these scenarios motivate understanding the sample complexity of selecting an action or
strategy which approximately maximizes an objective while also satisfying some constraints, where
samples are needed to both learn the objective value of actions and whether or not they satisfy said
constraints. In this work, we study the active sample complexity of this task—if the learner can
choose which examples to observe and have labeled, how many fewer samples might they need
compared to the number needed in a passive setting? We pose this as a best-arm identification
problem in the setting of linear bandits with safety constraints, where the goal is to estimate the best
arm, subject to it meeting certain (initially unknown) safety constraints. We propose an experiment
design-based algorithm which efficiently learns the best safe decision, and show the efficacy of this
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

