On Leave-One-Out Conditional Mutual Information
For Generalization
Mohamad Rida Rammal
University of California, Los Angeles
ridarammal@g.ucla.edu

Alessandro Achille
Caltech, AWS AI Labs
aachille@caltech.edu

Aditya Golatkar
University of California, Los Angeles
aditya29@cs.ucla.edu

Suhas Diggavi
University of California, Los Angeles
suhas@ee.ucla.edu

Stefano Soatto
University of California, Los Angeles
soatto@ucla.edu

Abstract
We derive information theoretic generalization bounds for supervised learning algorithms based on a new measure of leave-one-out conditional mutual information
(loo-CMI). In contrast to other CMI bounds, which may be hard to evaluate in
practice, our loo-CMI bounds are easier to compute and can be interpreted in connection to other notions such as classical leave-one-out cross-validation, stability
of the optimization algorithm, and the geometry of the loss-landscape. It applies
both to the output of training algorithms as well as their predictions. We empirically validate the quality of the bound by evaluating its predicted generalization
gap in scenarios for deep learning. In particular, our bounds are non-vacuous on
image-classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Generalization in classical machine learning models is often understood in terms of the bias-variance
trade-off: over-parameterized models fit the data better but are more likely to overfit. However, the
push for ever larger deep network models, driven by their remarkable empirical generalization, has
spurred a race for the development of new theories of generalization with two main objectives: (1)
guiding the practitioners in designing over-parameterized architectures and training schemes that
would generalize better and (2) providing provable bounds on the performance of the model after
deployment.
In this context, information theoretic bounds on generalization [27, 31, 5, 21, 29, 12, 16] are particularly appealing. They capture the intuitive idea that models that memorize less about the training
set will generalize better. In particular, since they deal with the amount of information stored in
the weights rather than the number of weights, they are especially adaptable to over-parameterized
models [17, 2, 1]. However, the bounds are often vacuous in realistic settings, require modified
training algorithms, or are difficult to compute and/or to relate to relevant properties of the network/training algorithm. To remedy this problem, we ask whether it is possible to develop a bound
that is: (a) realistically tight for standard training algorithms used in deep learning; (b) interpretable,
meaning that they can be rewritten in terms of quantities the practitioners can control during the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

