Deep Attentive Belief Propagation: Integrating
Reasoning and Learning for Solving Constraint
Optimization Problems

Yanchen Deng
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
ycdeng@ntu.edu.sg
Caihua Liu
School of Artificial Intelligence
Guilin University of Electronic Technology
caihua.liu@alumni.uts.edu.au

Shufeng Kong ∗
School of Software Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University
kongshf@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Bo An
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Belief Propagation (BP) is an important message-passing algorithm for various
reasoning tasks over graphical models, including solving the Constraint Optimization Problems (COPs). It has been shown that BP can achieve state-of-the-art
performance on various benchmarks by mixing old and new messages before
sending the new one, i.e., damping. However, existing methods of tuning a static
damping factor for BP not only are laborious but also harm their performance.
Moreover, existing BP algorithms treat each variable node’s neighbors equally
when composing a new message, which also limits their exploration ability. To
address these issues, we seamlessly integrate BP, Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs),
and Graph Attention Networks (GATs) within the message-passing framework
to reason about dynamic weights and damping factors for composing new BP
messages. Our model, Deep Attentive Belief Propagation (DABP), takes the factor
graph and the BP messages in each iteration as the input and infers the optimal
weights and damping factors through GRUs and GATs, followed by a multi-head
attention layer. Furthermore, unlike existing neural-based BP variants, we propose
a novel self-supervised learning algorithm for DABP with a smoothed solution
cost, which does not require expensive training labels and also avoids the common
out-of-distribution issue through efficient online learning. Extensive experiments
show that our model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Belief Propagation (BP) [27, 36] is an important message-passing algorithm for various reasoning
tasks over graphical models, e.g., computing partition function of a Markov random field [50],
estimating the marginal distribution of a given set of random variables [1], and decoding LPDC codes
[32]. Constraint Optimization Problems (COPs) [33, 41] are a general mathematical paradigm for
modeling many real-world problems like transportation, supply chain, energy, finance, and scheduling
[6, 24, 25, 41]. When solving COPs, BP, also known as Min-sum message passing [16], seeks to
find a cost-optimal solution by propagating cost information over the corresponding factor graph.
∗

Correspondence to: Shufeng Kong <kongshf@mail.sysu.edu.cn>

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

