Stochastic Adaptive Activation Function

Kyungsu Lee
DGIST∗
42988 Daegu, South Korea
ks_lee@dgist.ac.kr

Jaeseung Yang
DGIST
42988 Daegu, South Korea
yjs6813@dgist.ac.kr

Haeyun Lee
DGIST, SAMSUNG SDI
17084 Yong-In, South Korea
haeyun.lee@samsung.com

Jae Youn Hwang†
DGIST
42988 Daegu, South Korea
jyhwang@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract
The simulation of human neurons and neurotransmission mechanisms has been
realized in deep neural networks based on the theoretical implementations of activation functions. However, recent studies have reported that the threshold potential of
neurons exhibits different values according to the locations and types of individual
neurons, and that the activation functions have limitations in terms of representing
this variability. Therefore, this study proposes a simple yet effective activation
function that facilitates different thresholds and adaptive activations according
to the positions of units and the contexts of inputs. Furthermore, the proposed
activation function mathematically exhibits a more generalized form of Swish activation function, and thus we denoted it as Adaptive SwisH (ASH). ASH highlights
informative features that exhibit large values in the top percentiles in an input,
whereas it rectifies low values. Most importantly, ASH exhibits trainable, adaptive,
and context-aware properties compared to other activation functions. Furthermore,
ASH represents general formula of the previously studied activation function and
provides a reasonable mathematical background for the superior performance.
To validate the effectiveness and robustness of ASH, we implemented ASH into
many deep learning models for various tasks, including classification, detection,
segmentation, and image generation. Experimental analysis demonstrates that our
activation function can provide the benefits of more accurate prediction and earlier
convergence in many deep learning applications. 1

1

Introduction

Searching for the optimal activation functions has been a challenge in the field of artificial intelligence (Maas et al., 2013; Ramachandran et al., 2017; Clevert et al., 2015). Early activation functions
have been studied to compensate for the non-linearity of the artificial neural networks or ameliorate
the gradient vanishing problem (Hertz et al., 1997; Hochreiter, 1998). Recently, novel activation functions have been suggested with the zero-centered or parametric properties that improve the training
efficiency of deep neural networks (DNNs) (Maas et al., 2013; Clevert et al., 2015). Currently, the
activation functions focusing on the stability of DNNs or probabilistic distribution of inputs have
been proposed (Hendrycks, Gimpel, 2016; Misra, 2019). Advances in the activation functions have
∗

Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology
corresponding author
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/kyungsu-lee-ksl/ASH

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

