OpenSRH: optimizing brain tumor surgery using
intraoperative stimulated Raman histology
Cheng Jiang1* Asadur Chowdury1* Xinhai Hou1*
Akhil Kondepudi1 Christian W. Freudiger2 Kyle Conway1
Sandra Camelo-Piragua1 Daniel A. Orringer3 Honglak Lee1 Todd C. Hollon1
1

University of Michigan

2

Invenio Imaging

3

New York University

{chengjia, achowdur, xinhaih, tocho}@umich.edu

*

Equal Contribution

https://opensrh.mlins.org

Abstract
Accurate intraoperative diagnosis is essential for providing safe and effective
care during brain tumor surgery. Our standard-of-care diagnostic methods are
time, resource, and labor intensive, which restricts access to optimal surgical
treatments. To address these limitations, we propose an alternative workflow that
combines stimulated Raman histology (SRH), a rapid optical imaging method, with
deep learning-based automated interpretation of SRH images for intraoperative
brain tumor diagnosis and real-time surgical decision support. Here, we present
OpenSRH, the first public dataset of clinical SRH images from 300+ brain tumors
patients and 1300+ unique whole slide optical images. OpenSRH contains data
from the most common brain tumors diagnoses, full pathologic annotations, whole
slide tumor segmentations, raw and processed optical imaging data for end-to-end
model development and validation. We provide a framework for patch-based whole
slide SRH classification and inference using weak (i.e. patient-level) diagnostic
labels. Finally, we benchmark two computer vision tasks: multiclass histologic
brain tumor classification and patch-based contrastive representation learning. We
hope OpenSRH will facilitate the clinical translation of rapid optical imaging and
real-time ML-based surgical decision support in order to improve the access, safety,
and efficacy of cancer surgery in the era of precision medicine. Dataset access,
code, and benchmarks are available at https://opensrh.mlins.org.

1

Introduction

The optimal surgical management of brain tumors varies widely depending on the underlying
pathologic diagnosis [1]. Surgical goals range from needle biopsies (e.g. primary central nervous
system lymphoma [2]) to supramaximal resections (e.g. diffuse gliomas [3]). A major obstacle to
the precision care of brain tumor patients is that the pathologic diagnosis is usually unknown at
the time of surgery. For other tumor types, such as breast or lung cancer, diagnostic biopsies are
obtained prior to definitive surgical management, which provides essential clinical information used
to inform the goals of surgery. Routine diagnostic biopsies in neuro-oncology are not feasible due
to high surgical morbidity and the potential for permanent neurologic injury. Consequently, the
importance of intraoperative pathologic diagnosis in brain tumor surgery has been recognized for
nearly a century[4].
Unfortunately, our current intraoperative pathologic techniques are time, resource, and labor intensive
[7, 8]. Conventional diagnostic methods, including frozen sectioning and cytologic preparations,
require an extensive pathology infrastructure for tissue processing and specimen analysis by a board36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

