Most Activation Functions Can Win the Lottery
Without Excessive Depth
Rebekka Burholz
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
burkholz@cispa.de

Abstract
The strong lottery ticket hypothesis has highlighted the potential for training deep
neural networks by pruning, which has inspired interesting practical and theoretical
insights into how neural networks can represent functions. For networks with ReLU
activation functions, it has been proven that a target network with depth L can be
approximated by the subnetwork of a randomly initialized neural network that has
double the target’s depth 2L and is wider by a logarithmic factor. We show that a
depth L + 1 network is sufficient. This result indicates that we can expect to find
lottery tickets at realistic, commonly used depths while only requiring logarithmic
overparametrization. Our novel construction approach applies to a large class of
activation functions and is not limited to ReLUs. Code is available on Github
(RelationalML/LT-existence).

1

Introduction

The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis [13] and, in particular, its strong version [38] postulate that pruning
deep neural networks might provide a promising alternative to training large, overparameterized
neural networks with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). Pruning has the potential to not only
identify small scale neural networks that possess a meaningful, task-specific neural network structure
and generalize better due to regularization [51], but also to reduce the computational burden associated
with deep learning [50, 10, 29].
Also from a theoretical perspective, it has been shown that for every small enough target network a
sufficiently large, randomly initialized neural network, the source network, contains a subnetwork,
the lottery ticket (LT), that can approximate the target up to acceptable accuracy with high probability.
[32] has been the first to provide a probabilistic lower bound on the required network width of the
larger random network. This bound has been improved by [37, 36] to a width that is larger than
a target’s width only by a logarithmic factor. The limitations of these works are that they all are
restricted to ReLU activation functions and assume that the larger random network has twice the
depth of the target network Ls = 2Lt .
However, it is well known that deeper networks tend to have a higher expressiveness, as they
can approximate certain function classes with significantly fewer parameters than their shallow
counterparts [33, 49]. It could therefore reduce the overall sparsity of the target and the LT to allow
the target to utilize more of the source depth Ls for a sparser representation. A lower depth requirment
could also [11] have therefore derived lower bounds for the width of the random network of depth
Ls = Lt + 1, but these can only cover extremely sparse target networks, as the width requirement is
polynomial in the inverse approximation error 1/✏.
In contrast, we derive a novel construction that only requires a logarithmic factor. While we utilize
subset sum approximation results like [37], we allow a target network to have almost the same depth
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

