Explainability Via Causal Self-Talk

Nicholas A. Roy∗
DeepMind
nroy@deepmind.com

Junkyung Kim∗
DeepMind
junkyung@deepmind.com

Neil Rabinowitz∗ †
DeepMind
ncr@deepmind.com

Abstract
Explaining the behavior of AI systems is an important problem that, in practice, is
generally avoided. While the XAI community has been developing an abundance
of techniques, most incur a set of costs that the wider deep learning community
has been unwilling to pay in most situations. We take a pragmatic view of the
issue, and define a set of desiderata that capture both the ambitions of XAI and the
practical constraints of deep learning. We describe an effective way to satisfy all
the desiderata: train the AI system to build a causal model of itself. We develop
an instance of this solution for Deep RL agents: Causal Self-Talk. CST operates
by training the agent to communicate with itself across time. We implement this
method in a simulated 3D environment, and show how it enables agents to generate
faithful and semantically-meaningful explanations of their own behavior. Beyond
explanations, we also demonstrate that these learned models provide new ways of
building semantic control interfaces to AI systems.

1

Introduction

As modern machine learning systems become more powerful and embedded in our lives, the need
to have these systems explain their behavior becomes increasingly urgent. Despite incredible
performance in a variety of domains, almost all systems are completely unable to provide a satisfying
answer to the simple question, "Why did you do that?".
While there have been innovations in particular explainability methods [e.g. 8, 55, 56, 66], and
some attempts to apply techniques to domains that demand it [e.g. 23, 65], the vast majority of deep
learning applications do not engage with these techniques. This is in part because there are few
general methods, and most incur costs such as reduced performance and scalability; compounding
this, existing techniques often fail to deliver a useful or credible account of the systems’ behavior.
We believe that the reason for this is that explanation systems tend to fail to satisfy at least one of five
key desiderata discussed in detail below, namely: groundedness, flexibility, minimally-interfering,
scalability, and faithfulness. Two particular failure modes are most common: the addition of an
explanation system limits generality or hurts performance (e.g. when it requires explicitly structuring
the base system); or the explanations it produces cannot be trusted to be accurate (e.g. with many
external or post-hoc methods). An ideal explanation system would avoid both these pitfalls.
In this paper, we propose one such solution. We take a pragmatic viewpoint that providing explanations of a system’s behavior is, in essence, a task of building a model of that system. We argue
that the AI system itself is well-positioned to supply a model that fulfills all the aforementioned
desiderata. We thus train the base system to supply a "self-model" alongside its main representations.
Importantly, the base system and self-model are subject to different constraints: we want the base
system to be primarily optimized for performance, while we want the self-model to take on a faithful,
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

