GAPX: Generalized Autoregressive
Paraphrase-Identification X

Yifei Zhou
Cornell University
yz639@cornell.edu

Renyu Li
Cornell University
rl626@cornell.edu

Hayden Housen
Cornell University
hth33@cornell.edu

Ser-nam Lim
Meta AI
sernamlim@fb.com

Abstract
Paraphrase Identification is a fundamental task in Natural Language Processing.
While much progress has been made in the field, the performance of many state-ofthe-art models often suffer from distribution shift during inference time. We verify
that a major source of this performance drop comes from biases introduced by
negative examples. To overcome these biases, we propose in this paper to train two
separate models, one that only utilizes the positive pairs and the other the negative
pairs. This enables us the option of deciding how much to utilize the negative
model, for which we introduce a perplexity based out-of-distribution metric that
we show can effectively and automatically determine how much weight it should
be given during inference. We support our findings with strong empirical results. 1

1

Introduction

Paraphrases are sentences or phrases that convey the same meaning using different wording, and
is fundamental to the understanding of languages [7]. Paraphrase Identification is a well-studied
task of identifying if a given pair of sentences has the same meaning [51, 47, 56, 57, 31], and
has many important downstream applications such as machine translation [61, 44, 40, 27], and
question-answering [11, 35].
QQP

PAWS

WMT

PIT

similar topic

same bag-of-word

poor machine translation

similar topics

What causes stool color to
change to yellow?

Emma Townshend is
represented by David Godwin at
DGA Associates .

The company then changed its
company ID number, and that
was it.

That amber alert was getting
annoying

What can cause stool to come
out as little balls?

David David Godwin is
represented at DGA Associates
by Emma Townshend .

But it changed the name and
IDN and there was nothing to
deal with.

Why do I get amber alerts tho

Figure 1: Negative pairs in different datasets are mined differently in different datasets, and can lead
to significant biases during training.
Recently, researchers have observed that neural network architectures trained on different datasets
could achieve state-of-the-art performances for the task of paraphrase identification [52, 16, 50].
While these advances are encouraging for the research community, it has however been observed
1

Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/YifeiZhou02/generalized_paraphrase_identification

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

