Random Rank: The One and Only Strategyproof and
Proportionally Fair Randomized Facility Location
Mechanism
Haris Aziz
Computer Science and Engineering
UNSW Sydney
Sydney NSW 2052, Australia
haris.aziz@unsw.edu.au

Alexander Lam
Computer Science and Engineering
UNSW Sydney
Sydney NSW 2052, Australia
alexander.lam1@unsw.edu.au

Mashbat Suzuki
Computer Science and Engineering
UNSW Sydney
Sydney NSW 2052, Australia
mashbat.suzuki@unsw.edu.au

Toby Walsh
Computer Science and Engineering
UNSW Sydney
Sydney NSW 2052, Australia
t.walsh@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Proportionality is an attractive fairness concept that has been applied to a range
of problems including the facility location problem, a classic problem in social
choice. In our work, we propose a concept called Strong Proportionality, which
ensures that when there are two groups of agents at different locations, both groups
incur the same total cost. We show that although Strong Proportionality is a wellmotivated and basic axiom, there is no deterministic strategyproof mechanism
satisfying the property. We then identify a randomized mechanism called Random
Rank (which uniformly selects a number k between 1 to n and locates the facility
at the k’th highest agent location) which satisfies Strong Proportionality in expectation. Our main theorem characterizes Random Rank as the unique mechanism that
achieves universal truthfulness, universal anonymity, and Strong Proportionality in
expectation among all randomized mechanisms. Finally, we show via the AverageOrRandomRank mechanism that even stronger ex-post fairness guarantees can be
achieved by weakening universal truthfulness to strategyproofness in expectation.

1

Introduction

The facility location problem has been widely studied in various literatures. In the classic setting, we
are given a set of agent locations on the unit interval, and are tasked with finding an ‘ideal’ location
on the interval to place a facility. Each agent incurs a cost equal to its distance from the facility, and
therefore wants the facility to be placed as close as possible to its own location. The problem applies
to many real-world scenarios, such as the geographical placement of public facilities [Schummer and
Vohra, 2002; Miyagawa, 2001], or the choice of a political representative [Moulin, 1980; Feldman et
al., 2016]. The problem can be similarly applied to aggregate votes on what proportion of a budget is
dedicated to a certain project [Freeman et al., 2021], and the 1D-metric can be extended to a graph to
model router placement on a network [Hakimi, 1965].
In this paper, we explore the space of facility location mechanisms that have desirable fairness
and strategic properties. In particular, a mechanism should satisfy anonymity, which requires that
the outcome of the mechanism should not depend on the names of the agents. Secondly, we seek
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

