Divert More Attention to Vision-Language Tracking

Mingzhe Guo1∗ Zhipeng Zhang2∗ Heng Fan3 Liping Jing1†
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
DiDi Chuxing, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas
{mingzheguo, lpjing}@bjtu.edu.cn, zhipeng.zhang.cv@outlook.com, heng.fan@unt.edu
1

Abstract
Relying on Transformer for complex visual feature learning, object tracking has witnessed the new standard for state-of-the-arts (SOTAs). However, this advancement
accompanies by larger training data and longer training period, making tracking
increasingly expensive. In this paper, we demonstrate that the Transformer-reliance
is not necessary and the pure ConvNets are still competitive and even better yet
more economical and friendly in achieving SOTA tracking. Our solution is to
unleash the power of multimodal vision-language (VL) tracking, simply using
ConvNets. The essence lies in learning novel unified-adaptive VL representations
with our modality mixer (ModaMixer) and asymmetrical ConvNet search. We show
that our unified-adaptive VL representation, learned purely with the ConvNets,
is a simple yet strong alternative to Transformer visual features, by unbelievably
improving a CNN-based Siamese tracker by 14.5% in SUC on challenging LaSOT
(50.7%→65.2%), even outperforming several Transformer-based SOTA trackers.
Besides empirical results, we theoretically analyze our approach to evidence its
effectiveness. By revealing the potential of VL representation, we expect the
community to divert more attention to VL tracking and hope to open more possibilities for future tracking beyond Transformer. Code and models are released
at https://github.com/JudasDie/SOTS.

1

Introduction

Transformer tracking recently receives a surge of research
interests and becomes almost a necessity to achieve stateof-the-art (SOTA) performance [8, 52, 10]. The success
of Transformer trackers mainly attributes to attention that
enables complex feature interactions. But, is this complex
attention the only way realizing SOTA tracking? Or in
other words, is Transformer the only path to SOTA?

CNN Tracking

Transformer Tracking

10.9% gap

Current Best VL Tracker
We answer no, and display a Transformer-free path using pure convolutional neural network (CNN). Different
than complex interactions in visual feature by attention
requiring more training data and longer training time, our
alternative is to explore simple interactions of multimodal,
i.e., vision and language, through CNN. In fact, language, Figure 1: Comparison between CNNan equally important cue as vision, has been largely ex- based and Transformer-based trackers
plored in vision-related tasks, and is not new to tracking. on LaSOT [17].

∗

Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author.
This work is co-supervised by Prof. Liping Jing and Dr. Zhipeng Zhang.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

