Where to Pay Attention in Sparse Training
for Feature Selection?
Ghada Sokar
Eindhoven University of Technology
g.a.z.n.sokar@tue.nl
Mykola Pechenizkiy
Eindhoven University of Technology
m.pechenizkiy@tue.nl

Zahra Atashgahi
University of Twente
z.atashgahi@utwente.nl
Decebal Constantin Mocanu
University of Twente
Eindhoven University of Technology
d.c.mocanu@utwente.nl

Abstract
A new line of research for feature selection based on neural networks has recently
emerged. Despite its superiority to classical methods, it requires many training
iterations to converge and detect informative features. The computational time
becomes prohibitively long for datasets with a large number of samples or a very
high dimensional feature space. In this paper, we present a new efficient unsupervised method for feature selection based on sparse autoencoders. In particular, we
propose a new sparse training algorithm that optimizes a model’s sparse topology
during training to pay attention to informative features quickly. The attention-based
adaptation of the sparse topology enables fast detection of informative features
after a few training iterations. We performed extensive experiments on 10 datasets
of different types, including image, speech, text, artificial, and biological. They
cover a wide range of characteristics, such as low and high-dimensional feature
spaces, and few and large training samples. Our proposed approach outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods in terms of selecting informative features while reducing training iterations and computational costs substantially. Moreover, the
experiments show the robustness of our method in extremely noisy environments1 .

1

Introduction

Feature selection plays a crucial role in data mining and machine learning tasks with the explosion in
the size and dimensionality of real-world data [68; 10; 30; 44; 23]. It aims to efficiently select a subset
of the features that are most informative and remove the irrelevant or redundant ones. It is useful
for alleviating the curse of dimensionality, interpretability of model-driven decisions, generalization
of downstream tasks, reducing the prohibitive memory and computational costs, and avoiding the
expensive costs of collecting the full set of features as in biological studies [11; 38; 31; 52].
Many methods have been proposed for feature selection in supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised settings [75; 10; 60; 51; 19; 1]. Recently, using neural networks for feature selection
has received increasing attention due to its power to learn non-linear dependencies among input
features [39]. One limitation of current neural network-based methods is that they are computationally
expensive. The computational costs result from training dense models for many training iterations
until informative features are recognized. The costs increase for datasets with a very large number of
training samples or high dimensional feature space. This limitation is recently addressed in [4] by
utilizing sparse networks with dynamic sparsity for feature selection. An autoencoder is trained with
1

Code is available at https://github.com/GhadaSokar/WAST.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

