Non-Markovian Reward Modelling from Trajectory
Labels via Interpretable Multiple Instance Learning
Joseph Early ∗ † §

Tom Bewley ∗ ‡ §

Christine Evers †

Sarvapali Ramchurn † §

Abstract
We generalise the problem of reward modelling (RM) for reinforcement learning
(RL) to handle non-Markovian rewards. Existing work assumes that human evaluators observe each step in a trajectory independently when providing feedback on
agent behaviour. In this work, we remove this assumption, extending RM to capture
temporal dependencies in human assessment of trajectories. We show how RM can
be approached as a multiple instance learning (MIL) problem, where trajectories
are treated as bags with return labels, and steps within the trajectories are instances
with unseen reward labels. We go on to develop new MIL models that are able to
capture the time dependencies in labelled trajectories. We demonstrate on a range
of RL tasks that our novel MIL models can reconstruct reward functions to a high
level of accuracy, and can be used to train high-performing agent policies.

1

Introduction

There is growing consensus around the view that aligned and beneficial AI requires a reframing
of objectives as being contingent, uncertain, and learnable via interaction with humans [35]. In
reinforcement learning (RL), this proposal has found one formalisation in reward modelling (RM):
the inference of agent objectives from human preference information such as demonstrations, pairwise
choices, approval labels, and corrections [29]. Prior work in RM typically assumes that a human
evaluates the return (quality) of a sequential trajectory of agent behaviour by summing equal and
independent reward assessments of instantaneous states and actions, with the aim of RM being
to reconstruct the underlying reward function. However, in reality the human’s experience of a
trajectory is likely to be temporally extended (e.g., via a video clip [12] or real-time observation),
which opens the door to dependencies between earlier events and the assessment of later ones. The
independence assumption may be both psychologically unrealistic given human memory limitations
[26], and technically naïve given the difficulty of building complete instantaneous state representations
[25]. We thus seek to generalise RM to allow for temporal dependencies in human evaluation, by
postulating hidden state information that accumulates over a trajectory. Reconstruction of the human’s
preferences now requires the modelling of hidden state dynamics alongside the reward function itself.
In tackling this generalised problem, we identify a structural isomorphism between RM (specifically
from trajectory return labels) and the established field of multiple instance learning (MIL) [10].
Trajectories are recast as bags and constituent state-action pairs as instances, which collectively
contribute to labels provided at the bag level by interacting in potentially complex ways. This
mapping inspires a range of novel MIL model architectures that use long short-term memory (LSTM)
modules [19] to recover the hidden state dynamics, and learn instance-level reward predictions from
return-labelled trajectories of arbitrary length. In experiments with synthetic oracle labels, we show
that our MIL RM models can accurately reconstruct ground truth hidden states and reward functions
for non-Markovian tasks, and can be straightforwardly integrated into RL agent training to achieve
performance matching, or even exceeding, that of agents with direct access to true hidden states and
rewards. We then apply interpretability analysis to understand what the models have learnt.
∗

Equal contribution
University of Southampton, United Kingdom; {J.A.Early,C.Evers,sdr1}@soton.ac.uk
‡
University of Bristol, United Kingdom; tom.bewley@bristol.ac.uk
§
The Alan Turing Institute, United Kingdom
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

