Learning from Stochastically Revealed Preference

John R. Birge
The University of Chicago Booth School of Business
John.Birge@chicagobooth.edu
Xiaocheng Li
Imperial College Business School, Imperial College London
xiaocheng.li@imperial.ac.uk
Chunlin Sun
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University
chunlin@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the learning problem of revealed preference in a stochastic setting: a
learner observes the utility-maximizing actions of a set of agents whose utility
follows some unknown distribution, and the learner aims to infer the distribution
through the observations of actions. The problem can be viewed as a singleconstraint special case of the inverse linear optimization problem. Existing works
all assume that all the agents share one common utility which can easily be violated
under practical contexts. In this paper, we consider two settings for the underlying
utility distribution: a Gaussian setting where the customer utility follows the von
Mises-Fisher distribution, and a δ-corruption setting where the customer utility
distribution concentrates on one fixed vector with high probability and is arbitrarily
corrupted otherwise. We devise Bayesian approaches for parameter estimation and
develop theoretical guarantees for the recovery of the true parameter. We illustrate
the algorithm performance through numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

The problem of learning from revealed preference refers to the learning of a common utility function
for a set of agents based on the observations of the utility-maximizing actions from the agents. The
revealed preference problem has a long history in economics [Sam48, Afr67] (See [Var06] for a
review). A line of works [BV06, ZR12, BDM+ 14, ACD+ 15] formulate the problem as a learning
problem with two objectives: (i) rationalizing a set of observations, i.e., to find a utility function which
explains a set of past observations; (ii) predicting the future behavior of a utility-maximization agent.
Mathematically, the action of the agents is modeled by an optimization problem that maximizes a
linear (or concave) utility function subject to one linear budget constraint. The learner (decision
maker) aims to learn the unknown utility function through a set of observations of the constraints
and the optimal solutions. The problem can be viewed as a single-constraint special case of the
inverse optimization problem [AO01] which covers a wider range of applications: geoscience [BT92],
finance [BGP12], market analysis [BHP17], energy [ASS18], etc.
In this paper, we study the problem under a stochastic setting where the agents have a linear utility
function randomly distributed according to some unknown distribution. Such a stochastic setting
is well-motivated by some application context where the agents are customers and the constraint
models the prices and the customer’s budget. The optimal solution encodes the customer’s purchase
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

