Decomposing NeRF for Editing
via Feature Field Distillation
Sosuke Kobayashi
Preferred Networks, Inc.
sosk@preferred.jp

Eiichi Matsumoto
Preferred Networks, Inc.
matsumoto@preferred.jp

Vincent Sitzmann
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
sitzmann@mit.edu
pfnet-research.github.io/distilled-feature-fields/

Abstract
Emerging neural radiance fields (NeRF) are a promising scene representation
for computer graphics, enabling high-quality 3D reconstruction and novel view
synthesis from image observations. However, editing a scene represented by a
NeRF is challenging, as the underlying connectionist representations such as MLPs
or voxel grids are not object-centric or compositional. In particular, it has been
difficult to selectively edit specific regions or objects. In this work, we tackle
the problem of semantic scene decomposition of NeRFs to enable query-based
local editing of the represented 3D scenes. We propose to distill the knowledge of
off-the-shelf, supervised and self-supervised 2D image feature extractors such as
CLIP-LSeg or DINO into a 3D feature field optimized in parallel to the radiance
field. Given a user-specified query of various modalities such as text, an image
patch, or a point-and-click selection, 3D feature fields semantically decompose 3D
space without the need for re-training and enable us to semantically select and edit
regions in the radiance field. Our experiments validate that the distilled feature
fields can transfer recent progress in 2D vision and language foundation models
to 3D scene representations, enabling convincing 3D segmentation and selective
editing of emerging neural graphics representations.

1

Introduction

Emerging neural implicit representations or neural fields have been shown to be a promising approach
for representing a variety of signals [82, 53, 65, 106, 56]. In particular, they play an important
role in 3D scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis from a limited number of context images.
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) [56] enabled the recovery of a continuous volume density and radiance
field from a limited number of observations, producing high-quality images from arbitrary views
via volume rendering with promising applications in computer graphics. However, editing a scene
reconstructed by NeRF is non-obvious because the scene is not object-centric and is implicitly encoded
in the weights of a connectionist representation such as an MLP [56] or a voxelgrid [23]. Although
we can transform the scene in input or output space or via optimization-based editing [37, 97], this
does not enable selective object-centric or semantic, local edits, such as moving a single object.
Prior work has addressed this challenge via coordinate-level, semantic decompositions which allow
to selectively move, deform, paint, or optimize parts of a NeRF, but relies on costly annotation of
instance segmentations and training of instance-specific networks [104]. While this can be alleviated
with pre-trained segmentation models [25, 41], such models require pre-defined closed label sets and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

