Finding and Listing Front-door Adjustment Sets

Hyunchai Jeong
Purdue University
jeong3@purdue.edu

Jin Tian
Iowa State University
jtian@iastate.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Identifying the effects of new interventions from data is a significant challenge
found across a wide range of the empirical sciences. A well-known strategy for
identifying such effects is Pearl’s front-door (FD) criterion [26]. The definition
of the FD criterion is declarative, only allowing one to decide whether a specific
set satisfies the criterion. In this paper, we present algorithms for finding and
enumerating possible sets satisfying the FD criterion in a given causal diagram.
These results are useful in facilitating the practical applications of the FD criterion
for causal effects estimation and helping scientists to select estimands with desired
properties, e.g., based on cost, feasibility of measurement, or statistical power.

1

Introduction

Learning cause and effect relationships is a fundamental challenge across data-driven fields. For
example, health scientists developing a treatment for curing lung cancer need to understand how a
new drug affects the patient’s body and the tumor’s progression. The distillation of causal relations is
indispensable to understanding the dynamics of the underlying system and how to perform decisionmaking in a principled and systematic fashion [27, 37, 2, 30, 1, 23, 24].
One of the most common methods for learning causal relations is through Randomized Controlled
Trials (RCTs, for short) [8]. RCTs are considered as the “gold standard” in many fields of empirical
research and are used throughout the health and social sciences as well as machine learning and AI.
In practice, however, RCTs are often hard to perform due to ethical, financial, and technical issues.
For instance, it may be unethical to submit an individual to a certain condition if such condition may
have some potentially negative effects (e.g., smoking). Whenever RCTs cannot be conducted, one
needs to resort to analytical methods to infer causal relations from observational data, which appears
in the literature as the problem of causal effect identification [26, 27].
The causal identification problem asks whether the effect of holding a variable X at a constant value x
on a variable Y , written as P (Y |do(X = x)), or P (Y |do(x)), can be computed from a combination
of observational data and causal assumptions. One of the most common ways of eliciting these
assumptions is in the form of a causal diagram represented by a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where
its nodes and edges describe the underlying data generating process. For instance, in Fig. 1a, three
nodes X, Z, Y represent variables, a directed edge X → Z indicates that X causes Z, and a dashedbidirected edge X ↔ Y represents that X and Y are confounded by unmeasured (latent) factors.
Different methods can solve the identification problem, including Pearl’s celebrated do-calculus [26]
as well as different algorithmic solutions [40, 34, 12].
In practice, researchers often rely on identification strategies that generate well-known identification
formulas. One of the arguably most popular strategies is identification by covariate adjustment.
Whenever a set Z satisfies the back-door (BD) criterion [26] relative to the pair X and Y , where X
and Y represent the treatment and outcome variables,
P respectively, the causal effect P (Y |do(x)) can
be evaluated through the BD adjustment formula z P (y|x, z)P (z).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

