Compositional generalization through abstract
representations in human and artificial neural
networks
Takuya Ito⇤
Yale University
taku.ito1@gmail.com

Tim Klinger
IBM Research AI
tklinger@us.ibm.com

Douglas H. Schultz
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
dhschultz@unl.edu

John D. Murray
Yale University
john.murray@yale.edu

Michael W. Cole
Rutgers University
michael.cole@rutgers.edu

Mattia Rigotti
IBM Research AI
mr2666@columbia.edu

Abstract
Humans have a remarkable ability to rapidly generalize to new tasks that is difficult
to reproduce in artificial learning systems. Compositionality has been proposed as
a key mechanism supporting generalization in humans, but evidence of its neural
implementation and impact on behavior is still scarce. Here we study the computational properties associated with compositional generalization in both humans and
artificial neural networks (ANNs) on a highly compositional task. First, we identified behavioral signatures of compositional generalization in humans, along with
their neural correlates using whole-cortex functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) data. Next, we designed pretraining paradigms aided by a procedure we
term primitives pretraining to endow compositional task elements into ANNs. We
found that ANNs with this prior knowledge had greater correspondence with human
behavior and neural compositional signatures. Importantly, primitives pretraining
induced abstract internal representations, excellent zero-shot generalization, and
sample-efficient learning. Moreover, it gave rise to a hierarchy of abstract representations that matched human fMRI data, where sensory rule abstractions emerged
in early sensory areas, and motor rule abstractions emerged in later motor areas.
Our findings give empirical support to the role of compositional generalization in
human behavior, implicate abstract representations as its neural implementation,
and illustrate that these representations can be embedded into ANNs by designing
simple and efficient pretraining procedures.

1

Introduction

Humans can efficiently transfer prior knowledge to novel contexts, an ability commonly referred
to as transfer learning. One proposed mechanism underlying transfer learning is compositional
generalization (or compositional transfer) – the ability to systematically recompose learned concepts
into novel concepts (e.g., “red” and “apple” can be combined to form the concept of a “red apple”)
[5, 9, 20]. Indeed, it has been suggested that an algorithmic implementation of compositional
generalization is one of the key missing ingredients that ANN models need in order to achieve
human-like learning and reasoning capabilities [30, 28]. Therefore, quantifying how compositional
generalization is manifested in human behavior and investigating its underlying implementation in
biological brains is a natural first step to harness and deploy it in machine learning models.
⇤

Work done as an intern at IBM Research AI

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

