Generalizing Consistent Multi-Class Classification
with Rejection to be Compatible with Arbitrary Losses

Yuzhou Cao1∗ Tianchi Cai2
Lei Feng3,4† Lihong Gu2
2
1
Jinjie Gu
Bo An
Gang Niu4
Masashi Sugiyama4,5
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Ant Group, China
3
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
4
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
5
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Classification with rejection (CwR) refrains from making a prediction to avoid
critical misclassification when encountering test samples that are difficult to classify. Though previous methods for CwR have been provided with theoretical
guarantees, they are only compatible with certain loss functions, making them not
flexible enough when the loss needs to be changed with the dataset in practice.
In this paper, we derive a novel formulation for CwR that can be equipped with
arbitrary loss functions while maintaining the theoretical guarantees. First, we
show that K-class CwR is equivalent to a (K + 1)-class classification problem
on the original data distribution with an augmented class, and propose an empirical risk minimization formulation to solve this problem with an estimation
error bound. Then, we find necessary and sufficient conditions for the learning
consistency of the surrogates constructed on our proposed formulation equipped
with any classification-calibrated multi-class losses, where consistency means the
surrogate risk minimization implies the target risk minimization for CwR. Finally,
experimental results validate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

In risk-sensitive multi-class classification applications (e.g., medical diagnosis, healthcare, autonomous driving, and product inspections [13, 22, 44]), misclassification can cause serious or
even fatal consequences. To alleviate this issue, many studies have been conducted on classification
with rejection (CwR) [11, 6, 63, 13, 14, 16, 22, 52, 48, 44, 8], which can abstain from making an
unsure prediction to prevent such critical misclassification.
Most of the previous studies follow the framework that provides the reject option with a pre-defined
cost c which is lower than the misclassification cost 1. Given cost c, the problem is further formulated
as a risk minimization problem that aims to minimize the expectation of the zero-one-c loss, i.e., the
zero-one-c risk. With the risk minimization process, the obtained classifier can balance the cost of
rejection and prediction by choosing to incur a rejection cost c if the misclassification risk is high.
Due to the discontinuous nature of the zero-one-c loss, recent works focused on finding its continuous
surrogates to make the optimization problem tractable. A basic requirement for surrogate losses
is the consistency [65, 7, 54, 47], i.e., the surrogate risk minimization implies the zero-one-c risk
minimization. Moreover, compared with the traditional K-class classification task where decisions
∗
†

Work done when Yuzhou Cao was a research intern at Ant Group.
Corresponding author: Lei Feng <lfeng@cqu.edu.cn>

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

