Lost in Latent Space:
Examining failures of disentangled models at
combinatorial generalisation

Milton L. Montero1,2∗ Jeffrey S. Bowers1 Rui Pont Costa2
Casimir J.H. Ludwig1 Gaurav Malhotra1
1
School of Psychological Science 2 Department of Compute Science
University of Bristol
{m.lleramontero,j.bowers,rui.costa,c.ludwig,gaurav.malhotra}@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent research has shown that generative models with highly disentangled representations fail to generalise to unseen combination of generative factor values.
These findings contradict earlier research which showed improved performance in
out-of-training distribution settings when compared to entangled representations.
Additionally, it is not clear if the reported failures are due to (a) encoders failing
to map novel combinations to the proper regions of the latent space, or (b) novel
combinations being mapped correctly but the decoder being unable to render the
correct output for the unseen combinations. We investigate these alternatives by
testing several models on a range of datasets and training settings. We find that (i)
when models fail, their encoders also fail to map unseen combinations to correct
regions of the latent space and (ii) when models succeed, it is either because the
test conditions do not exclude enough examples, or because excluded cases involve
combinations of object properties with its shape. We argue that to generalise
properly, models not only need to capture factors of variation, but also understand
how to invert the process that causes the visual input.

1

Introduction

Disentangled representations extract factors of variations from data, and learning them has been the
focus of much research in recent years [1]. Several approaches have been proposed to induce disentanglement, including latent space penalization [1–3], different training regimes [4, 5], architectures
[6], data-driven inductive biases [7] and model selection methods [8]. These have produced more
interpretable representations [9] that improve sample efficiency and learning for downstream models
[10, 11, 8].
Importantly, researchers have also hypothesized that disentangled representations could provide a
way of improving generalisation performance by enabling the discovery of causal variables in data
[12] or by capturing its compositional structure [8]. This claim is especially interesting as it allows
machine learning systems to emulate a key property of human intelligence – the ability to generalise
to unseen combinations of known elements. For example, if a model has learned to generate red
triangles and blue squares, then the model should also be able to correctly generate blue triangles
and red squares. This property, which we refer to as combinatorial generalisation, gives humans the
ability to make “infinite use of finite means” [13–16] and has been termed “a top priority for AI to
achieve human-like abilities” [17]. Indeed, several authors have reported that unsupervised models
that are better at disentangling generative factors are also better at some forms of combinatorial
generalisation [1, 10, 6]
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

