Optimal Positive Generation via Latent
Transformation for Contrastive Learning

Yinqi Li1,2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
yinqi.li@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {changhong, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Contrastive learning, which learns to contrast positive with negative pairs of samples, has been popular for self-supervised visual representation learning. Although
great effort has been made to design proper positive pairs through data augmentation, few works attempt to generate optimal positives for each instance. Inspired
by semantic consistency and computational advantage in latent space of pretrained
generative models, this paper proposes to learn instance-specific latent transformations to generate Contrastive Optimal Positives (COP-Gen) for self-supervised
contrastive learning. Specifically, we formulate COP-Gen as an instance-specific
latent space navigator which minimizes the mutual information between the generated positive pair subject to the semantic consistency constraint. Theoretically,
the learned latent transformation creates optimal positives for contrastive learning,
which removes as much nuisance information as possible while preserving the
semantics. Empirically, using generated positives by COP-Gen consistently outperforms other latent transformation methods and even real-image-based methods in
self-supervised contrastive learning.

1

Introduction

Learning effective visual representation without explicit human annotation is attractive but challenging
in machine learning and computer vision. One way to achieve this goal is through self-supervised
learning, which leverages handcrafted pretext tasks to create the learning objectives, such as context
prediction [1], colorization [2], rotation prediction [3], and generative modeling [4, 5].
Recently, contrastive learning [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] has achieved great success in self-supervised visual
representation learning. The goal of contrastive learning is to pull semantically similar samples
(positive pairs) together in the feature space while pushing dissimilar samples (negative pairs) apart.
Without access to labels, negative pairs are sampled randomly and in large amount [10, 11] to obtain
effective representations [12, 13]. A line of works are proposed to calibrate the impact of negative
samples [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19].
On the other hand, the construction of positive pairs is also very crucial. Tian et al. [20] demonstrates
that optimal positive pairs are task-dependent. Since the labels of downstream tasks and pretraining
dataset are not accessible in self-supervised learning, a common way to create positive pairs is to
use semantic-preserving data space transformation (augmentation) to obtain two or more different
views of the same sample, as shown in Figure 1a. Great effort has been made to find the optimal
augmentation policy [11, 20]. Nevertheless, data augmentation cannot create instance-specific
optimal positives, which are key in contrastive learning to preserve semantic and discard nuisance
information for each sample. Some works try to address this problem by learning adversarial
Code and models are available at: https://github.com/LiYinqi/COP-Gen
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

