Mix and Reason: Reasoning over Semantic Topology
with Data Mixing for Domain Generalization

Chaoqi Chen1 Luyao Tang2 Feng Liu3 Gangming Zhao1 Yue Huang2 Yizhou Yu1∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Xiamen University 3 Deepwise AI Lab
cqchen1994@gmail.com, lytang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, liufeng@deepwise.com
gmzhao@connect.hku.hk, yhuang2010@xmu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) enables generalizing a learning machine from multiple
seen source domains to an unseen target one. The general objective of DG methods
is to learn semantic representations that are independent of domain labels, which
is theoretically sound but empirically challenged due to the complex mixture of
common and domain-specific factors. Although disentangling the representations
into two disjoint parts has been gaining momentum in DG, the strong presumption over the data limits its efficacy in many real-world scenarios. In this paper,
we propose Mix and Reason (MiRe), a new DG framework that learns semantic
representations via enforcing the structural invariance of semantic topology. MiRe
consists of two key components, namely, Category-aware Data Mixing (CDM) and
Adaptive Semantic Topology Refinement (ASTR). CDM mixes two images from
different domains in virtue of activation maps generated by two complementary
classification losses, making the classifier focus on the representations of semantic
objects. ASTR introduces relation graphs to represent semantic topology, which
is progressively refined via the interactions between local feature aggregation and
global cross-domain relational reasoning. Experiments on multiple DG benchmarks
validate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed MiRe.

1

Introduction

In real-world scenarios, such as autonomous driving and computer-aided diagnosis, deep neural
networks are expected to be trained on data collected from a small number of domains, but with the
objective of being deployed across novel domains with different data distributions to reduce annotation
costs and meet a broader range of needs. However, out-of-distribution data [29] does not satisfy
the basic IID assumption of modern deep learning models and emerges as an inevitable challenge,
significantly hindering the deployment of source-trained models in new target domains. Domain
generalization (DG) [47, 6, 23], which addresses this challenge by learning invariant representations
across multiple source domains, has attract a great deal of attention in the research community.
The objective of DG is to recover latent semantic factors that are independent of domain. Most DG
approaches rely on the assumption that the latent representations can be divided into two disjoint
components, i.e., common and domain-specific components. Inspired by this, mainstream DG
paradigms include data/feature augmentation [68, 75], feature disentanglement [53, 40], invariant
risk minimization [3, 2], meta-learning [33, 17], to name a few. By facilitating common knowledge
extraction and alleviating domain-specific components, these approaches have made tremendous
progress in various tasks, such as image classification [6, 84] and semantic segmentation [37, 51].
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

