Robust Streaming PCA
Daniel Bienstock
IEOR Department
Columbia University

Minchan Jeong
Graduate School of AI
KAIST

Apurv Shukla
IEOR Department
Columbia University

Se-Young Yun
Graduate School of AI
KAIST

{dano,as5197}@columbia.edu, {mcjeong,yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We consider streaming principal component analysis when the stochastic datagenerating model is subject to perturbations. While existing models assume a fixed
covariance, we adopt a robust perspective where the covariance matrix belongs
to a temporal uncertainty set. Under this setting, we provide fundamental limits
on convergence of any algorithm recovering principal components. We analyze
the convergence of the noisy power method and Oja’s algorithm, both studied for
the stationary data generating model, and argue that the noisy power method is
rate-optimal in our setting. Finally, we demonstrate the validity of our analysis
through numerical experiments on synthetic and real-world dataset.

1

Introduction

Principal component analysis (PCA) is one of the most extensively studied methods for obtaining the
low-dimensional representation of observed data [22]. However, classical algorithms for PCA store
all the observations and use cubic-time complexity, thereby imposing prohibitively large computationtime and space requirements.
Recently, several works on PCA have focused on the design and analysis of streaming algorithms
with near-optimal memory and storage complexity [25, 29, 40, 43]. These algorithms assume that all
the observations belong to the same low-dimensional space. However, this situation is unlikely when
the unknown/unexplored alterations corrupt a system’s observations. For instance, it is well known
that typical data attacks on power grids can significantly change the estimated covariance matrix of
the data observed from sensors [9, 10, 23]. Similarly, PCA can be used to explain stock returns in
terms of macroeconomic factors [27], and product pricing taking into account cross-product elasticity
and demands [45]. In all these scenarios, the underlying data-generating model changes every instant,
and the decisions are based on identifying the changed model.
Current work considers perturbations of the data lying in a fixed low-dimensional space [49]. They
determine the worst-case position of the adversarial data point to incur the maximum error in the
subspace estimated through PCA and measure the distance between the two subspaces using the
notion of the principal angle between them. Another line of work considers PCA through the lens of
stochastic optimization [5, 42, 51, 52]. Our work differs from these approaches since we assume that
the data-generating model changes at every time instant. Further, we propose near-optimal algorithms
for recovering principal components under this framework.
We assume a system relies on the time-series of p-dimensional vectors sampled from a time-varying
model. The available observations are the vectors (xt )Tt=1 . The noisy observation xt 2 Rp is a vector
lying in the column space of an unobserved full-rank matrix At 2 Rp⇥k . Precisely, from the standard
spiked covariance model [35], we consider the time-dependent environment:
xt ⇠ N (0p⇥1 , At A>
t +

2

Ip⇥p ),

The authors are ordered alphabetically.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(1)

