Layer Freezing & Data Sieving: Missing Pieces of a
Generic Framework for Sparse Training

Geng Yuan1,2,† , Yanyu Li1,2,† , Sheng Li3 , Zhenglun Kong2 , Sergey Tulyakov1 ,
Xulong Tang3 , Yanzhi Wang2 , Jian Ren1
1
Snap Inc., 2 Northeastern University, 3 University of Pittsburgh
yuan.geng@northeastern.edu, jren@snapchat.com

Abstract
Recently, sparse training has emerged as a promising paradigm for efficient deep
learning on edge devices. The current research mainly devotes the efforts to
reducing training costs by further increasing model sparsity. However, increasing
sparsity is not always ideal since it will inevitably introduce severe accuracy
degradation at an extremely high sparsity level. This paper intends to explore other
possible directions to effectively and efficiently reduce sparse training costs while
preserving accuracy. To this end, we investigate two techniques, namely, layer
freezing and data sieving. First, the layer freezing approach has shown its success
in dense model training and fine-tuning, yet it has never been adopted in the sparse
training domain. Nevertheless, the unique characteristics of sparse training may
hinder the incorporation of layer freezing techniques. Therefore, we analyze the
feasibility and potentiality of using the layer freezing technique in sparse training
and find it has the potential to save considerable training costs. Second, we propose
a data sieving method for dataset-efficient training, which further reduces training
costs by ensuring only a partial dataset is used throughout the entire training process.
We show that both techniques can be well incorporated into the sparse training
algorithm to form a generic framework, which we dub SpFDE. Our extensive
experiments demonstrate that SpFDE can significantly reduce training costs while
preserving accuracy from three dimensions: weight sparsity, layer freezing, and
dataset sieving1 .

1

Introduction

Sparse training, as a promising solution for efficient training on edge devices, has drawn significant
attention from both the industry and academia [1]. Recent studies have proposed various sparse
training algorithms with computation and memory savings to achieve training acceleration. These
sparse training approaches can be divided into two main categories. The first category is fixed-mask
sparse training methods, aiming to find a better sparse structure in the initial phase and keep the
sparse structure constant throughout the entire training process [2, 3]. These approaches have a
straightforward sparse training process but suffer from a higher accuracy degradation. Another
category is Dynamic Sparse Training (DST), which usually starts the training from a randomly
selected sparse structure [4, 5]. DST methods tend to continuously update the sparse structure during
the sparse training process while maintaining an overall sparsity ratio for the model. Compared with
the fixed-mask sparse training, the state-of-the-art DST methods have shown their superiority in
accuracy and recently become a more broadly adopted sparse training paradigm [6].
†
1

These authors contributed equally.
Code will be available at https://github.com/snap-research/SpFDE.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

