A Closer Look at Learned Optimization:
Stability, Robustness, and Inductive Biases
James Harrison, Luke Metz, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein
Google Research, Brain Team
{jamesharrison, lmetz, jaschasd}@google.com

Abstract
Learned optimizers—neural networks that are trained to act as optimizers—have
the potential to dramatically accelerate training of machine learning models. However, even when meta-trained across thousands of tasks at huge computational
expense, blackbox learned optimizers often struggle with stability and generalization when applied to tasks unlike those in their meta-training set. In this paper, we
use tools from dynamical systems to investigate the inductive biases and stability
properties of optimization algorithms, and apply the resulting insights to designing
inductive biases for blackbox optimizers. Our investigation begins with a noisy
quadratic model, where we characterize conditions in which optimization is stable, in terms of eigenvalues of the training dynamics. We then introduce simple
modifications to a learned optimizer’s architecture and meta-training procedure
which lead to improved stability, and improve the optimizer’s inductive bias. We
apply the resulting learned optimizer to a variety of neural network training tasks,
where it outperforms the current state of the art learned optimizer—at matched
optimizer computational overhead—with regard to optimization performance and
meta-training speed, and is capable of generalization to tasks far different from
those it was meta-trained on.

1

Introduction

Algorithms for stochastic non-convex optimization are a foundational element of modern neural
network training [1]. Choice of optimization algorithm (and the associated hyperparameters) is critical
for achieving good performance of the underlying model, as well as training stability. Practically, there
are few formal rules for choosing optimizers and hyperparameters, with researchers and practitioners
typically defaulting to a small number of optimizers and associated hyperparameters with which they
are familiar. Moreover, the algorithms chosen between are usually derived based on analysis in the
convex setting or informal heuristics, and algorithm performance varies substantially across different
real world tasks [2].
To resolve these issues, learned optimizers have been proposed [3–8]. These optimizers are typically
either composed of blackbox function approximators (such as neural networks) or hand-designed
functions containing hyperparameters that are learned. The distinguishing factor of this class of
optimizers is the training methodology: because global search over hyperparameters is computationally intractable for optimizers with many parameters, local gradient-based methods are used [7–9].
Thus, the meta-training of these optimizers—in which they are trained to optimize some metric of
performance for the underlying model such as validation loss—has strong similarities to training
other neural network models.
While learned optimizers are potentially transformative, they suffer from several fundamental flaws
preventing their broad uptake. The first is reduced performance and stability when they are applied in
circumstances unlike those in which they are meta-trained—for instance, learned optimizers often
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

