Beyond accuracy: generalization properties of
bio-plausible temporal credit assignment rules
Yuhan Helena Liu1,2,3,* , Arna Ghosh4,5 , Blake A. Richards4,5,6,7 , Eric Shea-Brown1,2,3 , and
Guillaume Lajoie5,7,8,*
1

Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
2
Allen Institute for Brain Science, 615 Westlake Ave N, Seattle WA, USA
3
Computational Neuroscience Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
4
School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
5
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada
6
Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada
7
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, CIFAR, Toronto, ON, Canada
8
Dept. de Mathématiques et Statistiques, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada
*
Correspondence: hyliu24@uw.edu, g.lajoie@umontreal.ca

Abstract
To unveil how the brain learns, ongoing work seeks biologically-plausible approximations of gradient descent algorithms for training recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Yet, beyond task accuracy, it is unclear if such learning rules
converge to solutions that exhibit different levels of generalization than their nonbiologically-plausible counterparts. Leveraging results from deep learning theory
based on loss landscape curvature, we ask: how do biologically-plausible gradient
approximations affect generalization? We first demonstrate that state-of-the-art
biologically-plausible learning rules for training RNNs exhibit worse and more variable generalization performance compared to their machine learning counterparts
that follow the true gradient more closely. Next, we verify that such generalization
performance is correlated significantly with loss landscape curvature, and we show
that biologically-plausible learning rules tend to approach high-curvature regions in
synaptic weight space. Using tools from dynamical systems, we derive theoretical
arguments and present a theorem explaining this phenomenon. This predicts our
numerical results, and explains why biologically-plausible rules lead to worse and
more variable generalization properties. Finally, we suggest potential remedies that
could be used by the brain to mitigate this effect. To our knowledge, our analysis
is the first to identify the reason for this generalization gap between artificial and
biologically-plausible learning rules, which can help guide future investigations
into how the brain learns solutions that generalize.

1

Introduction

A longstanding question in neuroscience is how animals excel at learning complex behavior involving
temporal dependencies across multiple timescales and thereafter generalize this learned behavior
to unseen data. This requires solving the temporal credit assignment problem: how to assign the
contribution of past neural states to future outcomes. To address this, neuroscientists are increasingly
turning to the mathematical framework provided by recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to model
learning mechanisms in the brain [1, 2]. Temporal credit assignment in RNNs is typically achieved
by backpropagation through time (BPTT), or other gradient descent-based optimization algorithms,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

