Product Ranking for Revenue Maximization with
Multiple Purchases

Renzhe Xu1 , Xingxuan Zhang1 , Bo Li2 , Yafeng Zhang3 , Xiaolong Chen3 , Peng Cui1∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Meituan Inc., Beijing, China
xrz199721gmail.com, xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com, libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
yafengz@outlook.com, chenxiaolong13@meituan.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Product ranking is the core problem for revenue-maximizing online retailers. To
design proper product ranking algorithms, various consumer choice models are
proposed to characterize the consumers’ behaviors when they are provided with a
list of products. However, existing works assume that each consumer purchases at
most one product or will keep viewing the product list after purchasing a product,
which does not agree with the common practice in real scenarios. In this paper,
we assume that each consumer can purchase multiple products at will. To model
consumers’ willingness to view and purchase, we set a random attention span and
purchase budget, which determines the maximal amount of products that he/she
views and purchases, respectively. Under this setting, we first design an optimal
ranking policy when the online retailer can precisely model consumers’ behaviors.
Based on the policy, we further develop
the Multiple-Purchase-with-Budget UCB
√
(MPB-UCB) algorithms with Õ( T ) regret that estimate consumers’ behaviors and
maximize revenue simultaneously in online settings. Experiments on both synthetic
and semi-synthetic datasets prove the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms.
The source code is available at https://github.com/windxrz/MPB-UCB.

1

Introduction

Online retailing has become increasingly popular over the last decades [17, 28, 52]. The way of
product ranking is the crux for online retailers because it determines the consumers’ shopping
behaviors [17] and thus influences the retailers’ revenue [20, 49]. For instance, the probability of
consumers’ purchasing from a firm or clicking an advertisement is strongly related to the display
order [8, 3, 33]. Therefore, it is crucial for online retailers to design proper product ranking algorithms
for revenue maximization.
The consumer choice model, when faced with a list of products, is the basis of the problem [17].
Generally speaking, existing works assume that the consumers view the list of products sequentially
and select products according to a choice model [43, 42, 32, 38, 18, 26, 25, 37]. However, most
of them assume that each consumer purchases at most one product and stop browsing immediately
afterward, which does not agree with the common practice since a consumer may expect multiple
purchases on a website or an app [34, 35, 16, 28]. Recently, several works consider a multiplepurchase setting while their targets are not revenue maximization [28, 15], or they assume that
consumers always continue viewing the product list after purchasing any product, which is not
practical in real scenarios [40].
* Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

