Plan To Predict: Learning an Uncertainty-Foreseeing
Model for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning

Zifan Wu
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China
wuzf5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Chao Yu∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China
yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Chen Chen
Noah’s Ark Lab
Huawei
Beijing, China
cclvr@163.com

Hankz Hankui Zhuo
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China
zhuohank@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Jianye Hao
Noah’s Ark Lab
Huawei
Beijing, China
haojianye@huawei.com

Abstract
In Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL), model learning is critical since
an inaccurate model can bias policy learning via generating misleading samples.
However, learning an accurate model can be difficult since the policy is continually
updated and the induced distribution over visited states used for model learning
shifts accordingly. Prior methods alleviate this issue by quantifying the uncertainty
of model-generated samples. However, these methods only quantify the uncertainty
passively after the samples were generated, rather than foreseeing the uncertainty
before model trajectories fall into those highly uncertain regions. The resulting lowquality samples can induce unstable learning targets and hinder the optimization
of the policy. Moreover, while being learned to minimize one-step prediction
errors, the model is generally used to predict for multiple steps, leading to a
mismatch between the objectives of model learning and model usage. To this end,
we propose Plan To Predict (P2P), an MBRL framework that treats the model
rollout process as a sequential decision making problem by reversely considering
the model as a decision maker and the current policy as the dynamics. In this
way, the model can quickly adapt to the current policy and foresee the multi-step
future uncertainty when generating trajectories. Theoretically, we show that the
performance of P2P can be guaranteed by approximately optimizing a lower bound
of the true environment return. Empirical results demonstrate that P2P achieves
state-of-the-art performance on several challenging benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Through learning an approximate dynamics of the environment and then using it to assist policy
learning, Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) methods [Moerland et al., 2020] have
been shown to be much more sample-efficient than model-free methods both theoretically and
empirically [Nagabandi et al., 2018, Luo et al., 2019, Janner et al., 2019]. The learning of the model is
critical for MBRL, since an inaccurate model can bias policy learning through generating misleading
pseudo samples, which is also referred to as the model bias issue [Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011].
∗

corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

