On the Robustness of Graph Neural Diffusion to
Topology Perturbations

Yang Song∗
Nanyang Technological University
C3 AI
yang.song@c3.ai

Qiyu Kang∗
Nanyang Technological University
kang0080@e.ntu.edu.sg

Sijie Wang∗
Nanyang Technological University
wang1679@e.ntu.edu.sg

Kai Zhao∗
Nanyang Technological University
kai.zhao@ntu.edu.sg

Wee Peng Tay
Nanyang Technological University
wptay@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Neural diffusion on graphs is a novel class of graph neural networks that has
attracted increasing attention recently. The capability of graph neural partial differential equations (PDEs) in addressing common hurdles of graph neural networks
(GNNs), such as the problems of over-smoothing and bottlenecks, has been investigated but not their robustness to adversarial attacks. In this work, we explore
the robustness properties of graph neural PDEs. We empirically demonstrate that
graph neural PDEs are intrinsically more robust against topology perturbation as
compared to other GNNs. We provide insights into this phenomenon by exploiting
the stability of the heat semigroup under graph topology perturbations. We discuss
various graph diffusion operators and relate them to existing graph neural PDEs.
Furthermore, we propose a general graph neural PDE framework based on which a
new class of robust GNNs can be defined. We verify that the new model achieves
comparable state-of-the-art performance on several benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep learning on graphs and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), in particular, have achieved remarkable
success in a variety of application areas such as those related to chemistry (molecules), finance (trading
networks) and the social media (the Facebook friend network) [1–5]. GNNs have been applied to
various tasks including node classification [3], link prediction [6], and recommender systems [7]. The
key to the success of GNNs is the neural message passing scheme [8] where messages are propagated
along edges and optimized toward a downstream task.
While aggregating neighboring nodes’ information is a powerful principle of representation learning,
the way that GNNs exchange information between nodes makes them vulnerable to adversarial
attacks [9]. Adversaries can perturb a graph’s topology by adding or removing edges [10–12] or by
injecting malicious nodes to the original graph [13–15]. Another common attack is to perturb node
attributes [9, 16–18]. Our paper will mainly tackle graph topology perturbation. Adversaries who can
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

