Learning Best Combination for Efficient N:M Sparsity

Yuxin Zhang1 Mingbao Lin2 Zhihang Lin1 Yiting Luo1
Ke Li2 Fei Chao1 Yongjian Wu2 Rongrong Ji1,3,4∗
1

MAC Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, Xiamen China
4
Pengcheng Lab, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
By forcing at most N out of M consecutive weights to be non-zero, the recent N:M
network sparsity has received increasing attention for its two attractive advantages:
1) Promising performance at a high sparsity. 2) Significant speedups on NVIDIA
A100 GPUs. Recent studies require an expensive pre-training phase or a heavy
dense-gradient computation. In this paper, we show that the N:M learning can
be naturally characterized as a combinatorial problem that searches for the best
combination candidate within a finite collection. Motivated by this characteristic,
we solve N:M sparsity in an efficient divide-and-conquer manner. First, we divide
N
the weight vector into CM
combination subsets of a fixed size N. Then, we conquer
the combinatorial problem by assigning each combination a learnable score that is
jointly optimized with its associate weights. We prove that the introduced scoring
mechanism can well model the relative importance between combination subsets.
And by gradually removing low-scored subsets, N:M fine-grained sparsity can be
efficiently optimized during the normal training phase. Comprehensive experiments
demonstrate that our learning best combination (LBC) performs consistently better
than off-the-shelf N:M sparsity methods across various networks. Our project is
released at https://github.com/zyxxmu/LBC.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the popularity of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in visual
problems such as image classification [34, 12], object detection [11, 8] and semantic segmentation [9,
3]. However, the remarkable performance comes at the cost of huge computation burdens and
memory footprint, resulting in great challenges for deploying CNNs in resource-limited devices.
Model compression has received extensive attention from both academia and industries. By reducing
the number of parameters in CNNs, network sparsity has become one of the most representative
techniques to alleviate storage and computation burdens. According to the sparsity granularity,
traditional methods can be divided into unstructured sparsity [18, 6, 10] and structured sparsity [20,
29, 27]. As shown in Fig. 1(a), unstructured sparsity removes arbitrary weights in CNNs. Dozens of
earlier studies [23, 17, 7] have demonstrated its ability to reach negligible performance degradation
under a large compression rate. Unfortunately, unstructured sparsity often results in an irregular sparse
matrix, which causes heavy index storage and very little acceleration. On the contrary, structured
sparsity removes all weights in a filter as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). As a result, the sparse weights are
still in a hardware-friendly format, leading to notable speedups. Nevertheless, the removal of the
whole filters also severely damages the accuracy performance. Thus, future progress is expected to
find out a new sparsity pattern to tradeoff the performance and acceleration.
∗

Corresponding author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

