Sampling in Constrained Domains with
Orthogonal-Space Variational Gradient Descent
Ruqi Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
ruqiz@purdue.edu

Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
lqiang@cs.texas.edu

Xin T. Tong
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
mattxin@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Sampling methods, as important inference and learning techniques, are typically designed for unconstrained domains. However, constraints are ubiquitous in machine
learning problems, such as those on safety, fairness, robustness, and many other
properties that must be satisfied to apply sampling results in real-life applications.
Enforcing these constraints often leads to implicitly-defined manifolds, making
efficient sampling with constraints very challenging. In this paper, we propose
a new variational framework with a designed orthogonal-space gradient flow (OGradient) for sampling on a manifold G0 defined by general equality constraints.
O-Gradient decomposes the gradient into two parts: one decreases the distance
to G0 and the other decreases the KL divergence in the orthogonal space. While
most existing manifold sampling methods require initialization on G0 , O-Gradient
does not require such prior knowledge. We prove that O-Gradient converges to the
target constrained distribution with rate e
O(1/the number of iterations) under mild
conditions. Our proof relies on a new Stein characterization of conditional measure
which could be of independent interest. We implement O-Gradient through both
Langevin dynamics and Stein variational gradient descent and demonstrate its
effectiveness in various experiments, including Bayesian deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

Sampling methods, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [1] and Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) [23, 22], have been widely used for getting samples from or approximating
intractable distributions in machine learning (ML) problems, such as estimating Bayesian neural
network posteriors [38], generating new images [33], and training energy-based models [15]. While
being powerful, most sampling methods usually can only be used in unconstrained domains or some
special geometric spaces. This greatly limits the application of sampling to many real-life tasks.
We consider sampling from a distribution ⇡ with an equality constraint g(x) = 0 where g : Rd ! R is
a general differentiable function. The domain in this case is the level set G0 = {x 2 Rd : g(x) = 0}
which is a submanifold in Rd . We do not require additional information about G0 , such as explicit
parameterization or known in-domain points, which is in contrast, often demanded by previous
methods [3, 35, 2, 19]. The problem defined above includes many ML applications, such as disease
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

