Stochastic Second-Order Methods Improve
Best-Known Sample Complexity of SGD for
Gradient-Dominated Functions
Saeed Masiha⇤
College of Management of Technology
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
mohammadsaeed.masiha@epfl.ch
Niao He
Department of Computer Science
ETH, Zurich, Switzerland
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Saber Salehkaleybar⇤
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
saber.salehkaleybar@epfl.ch
Negar Kiyavash
College of Management of Technology
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Patrick Thiran
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
patrick.thiran@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the performance of Stochastic Cubic Regularized Newton (SCRN) on a
class of functions satisfying gradient dominance property with 1  ↵  2 which
holds in a wide range of applications in machine learning and signal processing.
This condition ensures that any first-order stationary point is a global optimum. We
prove that the total sample complexity of SCRN in achieving ✏-global optimum
is O(✏ 7/(2↵)+1 ) for 1  ↵ < 3/2 and Õ(✏ 2/(↵) ) for 3/2  ↵  2. SCRN
improves the best-known sample complexity of stochastic gradient descent. Even
under a weak version of gradient dominance property, which is applicable to
policy-based reinforcement learning (RL), SCRN achieves the same improvement
over stochastic policy gradient methods. Additionally, we show that the average
sample complexity of SCRN can be reduced to O(✏ 2 ) for ↵ = 1 using a variance
reduction method with time-varying batch sizes. Experimental results in various
RL settings showcase the remarkable performance of SCRN compared to first-order
methods.

1

Introduction

Consider the following unconstrained stochastic non-convex optimization problem:
min F (x) := E⇠ [f (x, ⇠)],

x2Rd

(1)

where the random variable ⇠ is sampled from an underlying distribution P⇠ . In order to optimize the
objective function F (x), we have access to the first and second derivatives of stochastic function
f (x, ⇠). The above optimization problem covers a wide range of problems, from the offline setting
where the objective function is minimized over a fixed number of samples, to the online setting where
the samples are drawn sequentially.
⇤

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

