Provable General Function Class Representation
Learning in Multitask Bandits and MDPs

Rui Lu1 , Andrew Zhao1 , Simon S. Du2 , Gao Huang1
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
{r-lu21,zqc21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
ssdu@cs.washington.com, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
While multitask representation learning has become a popular approach in reinforcement learning (RL) to boost the sample efficiency, the theoretical understanding of
why and how it works is still limited. Most previous analytical works could only
assume that the representation function is already known to the agent or from linear
function class, since analyzing general function class representation encounters
non-trivial technical obstacles such as generalization guarantee, formulation of
confidence bound in abstract function space, etc. However, linear-case analysis
heavily relies on the particularity of linear function class, while real-world practice
usually adopts general non-linear representation functions like neural networks.
This significantly reduces its applicability. In this work, we extend the analysis to
general function class representations. Specifically, we consider an agent playing
M contextual bandits (or MDPs) concurrently and extracting a shared representation function ϕ from a specific function class Φ using our proposed Generalized
Functional Upper Confidence Bound algorithm (GFUCB). We theoretically validate the benefit of multitask representation learning within general function class
for bandits and linear MDP for the first time. Lastly, we conduct experiments to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm with neural net representation.

1

Introduction

Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved many successful applications in games [6, 34],
robotics [23], and many other fields. However, due to the large cardinality of state space or action
space in real-world problems, the large sample complexity has been a major problem for employing
these RL algorithms in reality. A popular method called multitask representation learning tries to
tackle this problem by extracting a shared low-dimensional representation function among multiple
related tasks, then using a simple function (e.g., linear) on top of this common representation to solve
each task[4, 7, 24].
Despite the empirical success for multitask representation learning, particularly in reinforcement
learning because of its effectiveness in reducing sample complexity, the theoretical understanding
about it is still limited. A march of works[37, 36, 22, 33, 25, 31, 16, 3, 11, 9, 41, 30] give results
on function approximation in bandits and RL, which permits a representation. In these frameworks,
an agent is considered playing M related tasks concurrently. Each task is a distinct contextual
bandit or linear MDP problem 1 , and all these M tasks share a common representation ϕ ∈ Φ where
Φ = {ϕ : S × A 7→ Rk } is representation function class extracting a k-dimensional representation
1
Although the name of linear MDP contains term “linear”, it actually has infinite degrees of freedom because
the representation function ϕ could be general non-linear function.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

