Sharing Knowledge for Meta-learning
with Feature Descriptions

Tomoharu Iwata
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Kyoto, Japan
tomoharu.iwata.gy@hco.ntt.co.jp

Atsutoshi Kumagai
NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories
Tokyo, Japan
atsutoshi.kumagai.ht@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
Language is an important tool for humans to share knowledge. We propose a
meta-learning method that shares knowledge across supervised learning tasks using
feature descriptions written in natural language, which have not been used in the
existing meta-learning methods. The proposed method improves the predictive
performance on unseen tasks with a limited number of labeled data by metalearning from various tasks. With the feature descriptions, we can find relationships
across tasks even when their feature spaces are different. The feature descriptions
are encoded using a language model pretrained with a large corpus, which enables
us to incorporate human knowledge stored in the corpus into meta-learning. In our
experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed method achieves better predictive
performance than the existing meta-learning methods using a wide variety of
real-world datasets provided by the statistical office of the EU and Japan.

1

Introduction

Humans can learn new tasks using descriptions written in natural language, which support us in
improving the performance on the new tasks especially when we have little experience since the
descriptions help understand how experience on familiar tasks can be used for the new tasks. For
example, Table 1 shows a dataset from Eurostat, which is the statistical office of the European
Union. Some people can guess the production value at basic price in Denmark on soft wheat and
spelt in 2017 given Table 1 using knowledge about countries, cereals, and agriculture. On the other
hand, supervised learning methods using data shown in Table 1 cannot guess the value since some
features, i.e., ‘Denmark’ and ‘soft wheat and spelt’, do not appear in the training data. Meta-learning
methods have been proposed for sharing knowledge across supervised learning tasks to improve
the performance on unseen tasks with a small amount of training data. However, the existing metalearning methods do not use feature descriptions written in natural language although many real-world
datasets contain feature descriptions as shown in Table 1.
In this paper, we propose a meta-learning method that learns from datasets with feature descriptions
to improve the generalization performance on unseen tasks with small labeled data. With feature
descriptions, we can share knowledge between different tasks with similar descriptions even when
their feature spaces are different. We transform the feature descriptions to sentence embeddings
by a sentence encoder, e.g., Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [3],
pretrained with a large-scale corpus, by which we can exploit a huge amount of human knowledge
accumulated in the corpus for meta-learning. The sentence embeddings reflect the meaning of the
descriptions but they are not necessarily suitable for supervised learning tasks. We translate them by
a feature encoder network to improve the generalization performance.
We embed instances in a task-specific space by an instance encoder network using their feature values
and descriptions translated into sentence embeddings. By adapting a Gaussian process (GP) [17] to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

