Lower Bounds on Randomly Preconditioned Lasso
via Robust Sparse Designs

Jonathan A. Kelner∗
MIT

Frederic Koehler†
Stanford

Raghu Meka‡
UCLA

Dhruv Rohatgi§
MIT

Abstract
Sparse linear regression with ill-conditioned Gaussian random covariates is widely
believed to exhibit a statistical/computational gap, but there is surprisingly little
formal evidence for this belief. Recent work has shown that, for certain covariance
matrices, the broad class of Preconditioned Lasso programs provably cannot succeed on polylogarithmically sparse signals with a sublinear number of samples.
However, this lower bound only holds against deterministic preconditioners, and
in many contexts randomization is crucial to the success of preconditioners. We
prove a stronger lower bound that rules out randomized preconditioners. For an
appropriate covariance matrix, we construct a single signal distribution on which
any invertibly-preconditioned Lasso program fails with high probability, unless it
receives a linear number of samples. Surprisingly, at the heart of our lower bound
is a new robustness result in compressed sensing. In particular, we study recovering a sparse signal when a few measurements can be erased adversarially. To
our knowledge, this natural question has not been studied before for sparse measurements. We surprisingly show that standard sparse Bernoulli measurements
are almost-optimally robust to adversarial erasures: if b measurements are erased,
then all but O(b) of the coordinates of the signal are identifiable.

1

Introduction

Random-design sparse linear regression (SLR) is a fundamental problem in high-dimensional statistics and learning theory. The simplest formulation of this problem is the following: given independent covariates X1 , . . . , Xm drawn from an n-variable Gaussian distribution with zero mean and
positive-definite covariance Σ, and responses yi = hXi , w∗ i for some unknown k-sparse signal w∗
(i.e. with at most k nonzero entries), the goal is to recover w∗ . While there are more complex models (e.g. with noise or non-Gaussian distributions), we are proving lower bounds, so the simplified
model only makes our results stronger.
Information-theoretically, for any positive-definite covariance Σ, it’s possible to recover w∗ exactly
from only O(k log n) samples (Xi , yi ). (Again, this is a special case of more general results for
the noisy setting.) However, the algorithm which achieves this sample complexity is computationally inefficient — it has time complexity O(nk ). Significant effort has gone into polynomial-time
∗
kelner@mit.edu. This work was supported in part by NSF Large CCF-1565235, NSF Medium CCF1955217, and NSF TRIPODS 1740751.
†
fkoehler@stanford.edu. This work was supported in part by NSF CAREER Award CCF-1453261,
NSF Large CCF-1565235, A. Moitra’s ONR Young Investigator Award, and E. Mossel’s Vannevar Bush Faculty
Fellowship ONR-N00014-20-1-2826.
‡
raghum@cs.ucla.edu. This work was supported in part by NSF CAREER Award CCF-1553605 and
NSF Small CCF-2007682.
§
drohatgi@mit.edu. This work was supported in part by an Akamai Presidential Fellowship and a U.S.
DoD NDSEG Fellowship.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

