Efficient coding, channel capacity, and the emergence
of retinal mosaics
Na Young Jun
Department of Neurobiology
Duke University
Durham, NC 27710
nayoung.jun@duke.edu

Greg D. Field
Department of Neurobiology
Duke University
Durham, NC 27710
field@neuro.duke.edu

John M. Pearson
Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics
Department of Neurobiology
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27710
john.pearson@duke.edu

Abstract
Among the most striking features of retinal organization is the grouping of its
output neurons, the retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), into a diversity of functional
types. Each of these types exhibits a mosaic-like organization of receptive fields
(RFs) that tiles the retina and visual space. Previous work has shown that many
features of RGC organization, including the existence of ON and OFF cell types,
the structure of spatial RFs, and their relative arrangement, can be predicted on
the basis of efficient coding theory. This theory posits that the nervous system is
organized to maximize information in its encoding of stimuli while minimizing
metabolic costs. Here, we use efficient coding theory to present a comprehensive
account of mosaic organization in the case of natural videos as the retinal channel
capacity—the number of simulated RGCs available for encoding—is varied. We
show that mosaic density increases with channel capacity up to a series of critical
points at which, surprisingly, new cell types emerge. Each successive cell type
focuses on increasingly high temporal frequencies and integrates signals over larger
spatial areas. In addition, we show theoretically and in simulation that a transition
from mosaic alignment to anti-alignment across pairs of cell types is observed with
increasing output noise and decreasing input noise. Together, these results offer a
unified perspective on the relationship between retinal mosaics, efficient coding,
and channel capacity that can help to explain the stunning functional diversity of
retinal cell types.

1

Introduction

The retina is one of the most intensely studied neural circuits, yet we still lack a computational
understanding of its organization in relation to its function. At a structural level, the retina forms
a three-layer circuit, with its primary feedforward pathway consisting of photoreceptors to bipolar
cells to retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), the axons of which form the optic nerve [1]. RGCs can be
divided into 30-50 functionally distinct cell types (depending on species) with each cell responsive
to a localized area of visual space (its receptive field (RF)), and the collection of RFs for each type
tiling space to form a “mosaic” [2, 3, 4, 5]. Each mosaic represents the extraction of a specific type
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

