NCP: Neural Correspondence Prior for Effective
Unsupervised Shape Matching

Souhaib Attaiki
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
attaiki@lix.polytechnique.fr

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
We present Neural Correspondence Prior (NCP), a new paradigm for computing
correspondences between 3D shapes. Our approach is fully unsupervised and can
lead to high-quality correspondences even in challenging cases such as sparse
point clouds or non-isometric meshes, where current methods fail. Our first key
observation is that, in line with neural priors observed in other domains, recent
network architectures on 3D data, even without training, tend to produce pointwise
features that induce plausible maps between rigid or non-rigid shapes. Secondly,
we show that given a noisy map as input, training a feature extraction network with
the input map as supervision tends to remove artifacts from the input and can act
as a powerful correspondence denoising mechanism, both between individual pairs
and within a collection. With these observations in hand, we propose a two-stage
unsupervised paradigm for shape matching by (i) performing unsupervised training
by adapting an existing approach to obtain an initial set of noisy matches, and (ii)
using these matches to train a network in a supervised manner. We demonstrate
that this approach significantly improves the accuracy of the maps, especially
when trained within a collection. We show that NCP is data-efficient, fast, and
achieves state-of-the-art results on many tasks. Our code can be found online:
https://github.com/pvnieo/NCP.

1

Introduction

Establishing dense correspondences between 3D shapes is a fundamental problem in computer vision
and computer graphics, as it enables many downstream applications such as statistical shape analysis
[1, 2], texture [3] and deformation transfer [4, 5], and registration [6], to name a few.
A particularly challenging setting for this task is the computation of correspondences between 3D
shapes that undergo non-rigid, non-isometric deformations, and that may exhibit some partiality, such
as missing semantic parts, and can be represented as sparse point clouds.
The standard approach is to formulate shape correspondence as a supervised learning problem, by
relying on ground truth maps within large datasets of shape pairs. Given such ground truth, it
is possible to train neural networks to either produce deformation fields [7], segmentation maps
[8, 9, 10] or functional maps [11, 12, 13] between the input shapes. However, all such methods rely
on the presence of labeled point-to-point correspondences, which are expensive to obtain, and are
only available in a handful of cases.
At the same time, unsupervised techniques try to solve the matching problem by imposing structural
properties on the maps, either in the intrinsic [14, 15, 16] or extrinsic domains [17, 18]. However, the
priors used by these methods tend to be purely geometric (e.g., promoting near isometry or divergencefree deformation fields), and, as we demonstrate below, are not always applicable, especially in
challenging non-isometric settings.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

