Finding Optimal Arms in Non-stochastic
Combinatorial Bandits with Semi-bandit Feedback
and Finite Budget

Jasmin Brandta , Viktor Bengsb , Björn Haddenhorsta , Eyke Hüllermeierb,c
a
Department of Computer Science, Paderborn University, Germany
b
Institute of Informatics, University of Munich (LMU), Germany
c
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany
jasmin.brandt@upb.de, viktor.bengs@lmu.de, bjoernha@mail.upb.de, eyke@lmu.de

Abstract
We consider the combinatorial bandits problem with semi-bandit feedback under
finite sampling budget constraints, in which the learner can carry out its action
only for a limited number of times specified by an overall budget. The action is
to choose a set of arms, whereupon feedback for each arm in the chosen set is
received. Unlike existing works, we study this problem in a non-stochastic setting
with subset-dependent feedback, i.e., the semi-bandit feedback received could be
generated by an oblivious adversary and also might depend on the chosen set of
arms. In addition, we consider a general feedback scenario covering both the
numerical-based as well as preference-based case and introduce a sound theoretical
framework for this setting guaranteeing sensible notions of optimal arms, which
a learner seeks to find. We suggest a generic algorithm suitable to cover the full
spectrum of conceivable arm elimination strategies from aggressive to conservative.
Theoretical questions about the sufficient and necessary budget of the algorithm to
find the best arm are answered and complemented by deriving lower bounds for
any learning algorithm for this problem scenario.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandits (MAB) problem is an intensively studied problem class in the realm of
machine learning, in which a learner is facing a sequential decision making problem under uncertainty
[32]. A decision (action) corresponds to making a choice between a finite set of specific choice
alternatives (objects, items, etc.), also called arms in reference to the metaphor of gambling machines
in casinos. After each decision to choose a particular arm, the learner receives some form of feedback
– typically a numerical reward – determined by a feedback mechanism of the chosen arm. The learner
is not aware of the arms’ feedback mechanisms and consequently tries to learn these in the course
of time by performing actions according to its learning strategy. The concrete design of its learning
strategy depends essentially on two main components of the learning setting: the assumptions on the
feedback mechanisms and the learning task.
Traditionally, and even up to now the most prevalent assumption is that the feedback received by
choosing one arm is generated by means of a probability distribution of the chosen arm [41, 31]. In
this way, any useful learning strategy revolves around learning specific probabilistic features of the
arms’ distributions such as the means. These features, in turn, quite naturally provide a way to define
a notion of (sub-)optimality of an arm as well as a best arm. A relaxation of this stochastic setting is
the non-stochastic setting, in which no assumption is made in the form of probabilistic laws of the
feedback mechanisms. Instead, either no assumptions are made on the feedback mechanisms, so that
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

