When Privacy Meets Partial Information:
A Refined Analysis of Differentially Private Bandits

Achraf Azize and Debabrota Basu
Équipe Scool, Univ. Lille, Inria,
CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189- CRIStAL
F-59000 Lille, France
{achraf.azize,debabrota.basu}@inria.fr

Abstract
We study the problem of multi-armed bandits with ϵ-global Differential Privacy
(DP). First, we prove the minimax and problem-dependent regret lower bounds for
stochastic and linear bandits that quantify the hardness of bandits with ϵ-global
DP. These bounds suggest the existence of two hardness regimes depending on the
privacy budget ϵ. In the high-privacy regime (small ϵ), the hardness depends on
a coupled effect of privacy and partial information about the reward distributions.
In the low-privacy regime (large ϵ), bandits with ϵ-global DP are not harder than
the bandits without privacy. For stochastic bandits, we further propose a generic
framework to design a near-optimal ϵ-global DP extension of an index-based
optimistic bandit algorithm. The framework consists of three ingredients: the
Laplace mechanism, arm-dependent adaptive episodes, and usage of only the
rewards collected in the last episode for computing private statistics. Specifically,
we instantiate ϵ-global DP extensions of UCB and KL-UCB algorithms, namely
AdaP-UCB and AdaP-KLUCB. AdaP-KLUCB is the first algorithm that both
satisfies ϵ-global DP and yields a regret upper bound that matches the problemdependent lower bound up to multiplicative constants.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit problems, in short bandits, are a model for sequential decision-making with
partial information (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2018). In bandits, a learner sequentially interacts
with an environment, which is a set of unknown distributions (or arms or actions), over T ∈ N
steps. T is referred to as the horizon. At each step t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, the learner chooses an arm At
from {1, . . . , K} and the environment reveals a reward rt from the distribution νAt . The learner’s
PT
objective is to maximise its cumulative reward t=1 rt . An equivalent performance metric for
a bandit algorithm π is regret. Regret is the difference between the expected cumulative reward
collected by pulling the optimal arm a∗ for T times and the expected cumulative reward obtained
by using π. Regret is the price paid by the bandit algorithm due to partial information about the
reward distributions. The goal of a bandit algorithm is to minimise its regret. Bandits, introduced
in (Thompson, 1933) for medical trials, are widely studied and deployed in real-life applications,
such as online advertising (Schwartz et al., 2017), recommendation systems (Silva et al., 2022)
and investment portfolio design (Silva et al., 2022). Sensitive data of individuals, such as health
conditions, personal preferences, financial status etc., are utilised in these applications, which raises
the concern about privacy.
Example 1. In bandit-based recommendation systems, the learning algorithm selects an item for
each user. The user decides whether or not to click the recommendation. Based on the click feedback,
the bandit algorithm improves its subsequent recommendations. Here, an action corresponds to an
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

