Mirror Descent Maximizes Generalized Margin
and Can Be Implemented Efficiently

Haoyuan Sun
MIT
haoyuans@mit.edu

Kwangjun Ahn
MIT
kjahn@mit.edu

Christos Thrampoulidis
UBC
cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca

Navid Azizan
MIT
azizan@mit.edu

Abstract
Driven by the empirical success and wide use of deep neural networks, understanding the generalization performance of overparameterized models has become an
increasingly popular question. To this end, there has been substantial effort to
characterize the implicit bias of the optimization algorithms used, such as gradient
descent (GD), and the structural properties of their preferred solutions. This paper
answers an open question in this literature: For the classification setting, what
solution does mirror descent (MD) converge to? Specifically, motivated by its
efficient implementation, we consider the family of mirror descent algorithms with
potential function chosen as the p-th power of the ℓp -norm, which is an important
generalization of GD. We call this algorithm p-GD. For this family, we characterize
the solutions it obtains and show that it converges in direction to a generalized
maximum-margin solution with respect to the ℓp -norm for linearly separable classification. While the MD update rule is in general expensive to compute and perhaps
not suitable for deep learning, p-GD is fully parallelizable in the same manner as
SGD and can be used to train deep neural networks with virtually no additional
computational overhead. Using comprehensive experiments with both linear and
deep neural network models, we demonstrate that p-GD can noticeably affect the
structure and the generalization performance of the learned models.

1

Introduction

Overparameterized deep neural networks have enjoyed a tremendous amount of success in a wide
range of machine learning applications [Brown et al., 2020, Dosovitskiy et al., 2020, Ramesh et al.,
2021, Schrittwieser et al., 2020]. However, as these highly expressive models have the capacity to
have multiple solutions that interpolate training data, and not all these solutions perform well on test
data, it is important to characterize which of these interpolating solutions the optimization algorithms
converge to. Such characterization is important as it helps understand the generalization performance
of these models, which is one of the most fundamental questions in machine learning.
Notably, it has been observed that even in the absence of any explicit regularization, the interpolating
solutions obtained by the standard gradient-based optimization algorithms, such as (stochastic)
gradient descent, tend to generalize well. Recent research has highlighted that such algorithms favor
particular types of solutions, i.e., they implicitly regularize the learned models. Importantly, such
implicit biases are shown to play a crucial role in determining generalization performance, e.g.,
[Donhauser et al., 2022, Neyshabur et al., 2014, Wilson et al., 2017, Zhang et al., 2021].
In the literature, the implicit bias of first-order methods is first studied in linear settings since the
analysis is more tractable, and also, there have been several theoretical and empirical evidence that
certain insights from linear models translate to deep learning, e.g. [Allen-Zhu et al., 2019, Bartlett
et al., 2017, Belkin et al., 2019, Jacot et al., 2018, Lyu and Li, 2019, Nakkiran et al., 2021]. In the
linear setting, it is easier to establish implicit bias for regression tasks, where square loss is typically
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

