A Data-Augmentation Is Worth A Thousand Samples:
Analytical Moments And Sampling-Free Training

Randall Balestriero
Meta AI Research, FAIR
NYC, USA
rbalestriero@meta.com

Ishan Misra
Meta AI Research, FAIR
NYC, USA
imisra@meta.com

Yann LeCun
Meta AI Research, FAIR, NYU
NYC, USA
ylecun@meta.com

Abstract
Data-Augmentation (DA) is known to improve performance across tasks and
datasets. We propose a method to theoretically analyze the effect of DA and study
questions such as: how many augmented samples are needed to correctly estimate
the information encoded by that DA? How does the augmentation policy impact
the final parameters of a model? We derive several quantities in close-form, such
as the expectation and variance of an image, loss, and model’s output under a given
DA distribution. Up to our knowledge, we obtain the first explicit regularizer that
corresponds to using DA during training for non-trivial transformations such as
affine transformations, color jittering, or Gaussian blur. Those derivations open
new avenues to quantify the benefits and limitations of DA. For example, given
a loss at hand, we find that common DAs require tens of thousands of samples
for the loss to be correctly estimated and for the model training to converge. We
then show that for a training loss to have reduced variance under DA sampling, the
model’s saliency map (gradient of the loss with respect to the model’s input) must
align with the smallest eigenvector of the sample’s covariance matrix under the
considered DA augmentation; this is exactly the quantity estimated and regularized
by TangentProp. Those findings also hint at a possible explanation on why models
tend to shift their focus from edges to textures when specific DAs are employed.

1

Introduction

Data Augmentation (DA) is a prevalent technique in training deep learning models [1, 2, 3]. These
Deep Networks (DNs) models fγ , governed by some parameters γ ∈ Γ, are trained on the train set
and expected to generalize to unseen samples (test set). To combat the tendency of DNs to overfit [4],
producing a large train-test performance gap, regularization and in particular DA is heavily employed,
amongst other mechanisms such as weight-decay [5, 6]. The benefit of DA over those alternatives is
that defining input transformations that preserve the semantics of their inputs is a relatively simple
task, at least in computer vision or acoustic processing [7, 8, 9]. Furthermore, if the DA is well
designed and rich enough, it can effectively bring the number of non-trivial training samples close
to the theoretical limits ensuring that any performance gap between the train and test set vanishes
[10] as empirically observed in various scenarios [11, 12]. In fact, DA has proven so useful that
novel training methods such as self-supervised learning (SSL) entirely rely on DA [13, 14] to learn
meaningful data representations.
Despite its empirical effectiveness, our understanding of DA has many open questions, three of which
we propose to study: (a) how do different DAs impact the model’s parameters during training?;
(b) how sample-efficient is the DA sampling, i.e., how many DA samples a model must observe
to converge?; and (c) how sensitive is a loss/model to the DA sampling and how this variance
evolves during training as a function of the model’s ability to minimize the loss at hand, and as a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

