Taming Fat-Tailed (“Heavier-Tailed” with Potentially
Infinite Variance) Noise in Federated Learning

Haibo Yang
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
yang.5952@osu.edu

Peiwen Qiu
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
qiu.617@osu.edu

Jia Liu
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
liu@ece.osu.edu

Abstract
In recent years, federated learning (FL) has emerged as an important distributed
machine learning paradigm to collaboratively learn a global model with multiple
clients, while keeping data local and private. However, a key assumption in most
existing works on FL algorithms’ convergence analysis is that the noise in stochastic first-order information has a finite variance. Although this assumption covers all
light-tailed (i.e., sub-exponential) and some heavy-tailed noise distributions (e.g.,
log-normal, Weibull, and some Pareto distributions), it fails for many fat-tailed
noise distributions (i.e., “heavier-tailed” with potentially infinite variance) that
have been empirically observed in the FL literature. To date, it remains unclear
whether one can design convergent algorithms for FL systems that experience
fat-tailed noise. This motivates us to fill this gap in this paper by proposing an
algorithmic framework called FAT-Clipping (federated averaging with two-sided
learning rates and clipping), which contains two variants: FAT-Clipping per-round
(FAT-Clipping-PR) and FAT-Clipping per-iteration (FAT-Clipping-PI). Specifically, for the largest tail-index α ∈ (1, 2] such that the fat-tailed noise in FL still
2−α
has a bounded α-moment, we show that both variants achieve O((mT ) α ) and
1−α
O((mT ) 3α−2 ) convergence rates in the strongly-convex and general non-convex
settings, respectively, where m and T are the numbers of clients and communication
rounds. Moreover, with more clipping operations compared to FAT-Clipping-PR,
FAT-Clipping-PI further enjoys a linear speedup effect with respect to the number
of local updates at each client and being lower-bound-matching (i.e., order-optimal).
Collectively, our results advance the understanding of designing efficient algorithms
for FL systems that exhibit fat-tailed first-order oracle information.

1

Introduction

In recent years, federated learning (FL) has emerged as an important distributed machine learning
paradigm, where, coordinated by a server, a set of clients collaboratively learn a global model, while
keeping their training data local and private. With intensive research in recent years, researchers
have developed many FL algorithms (e.g., FedAvg [1] and many follow-ups [2–12]) that have been
theoretically shown to achieve fast convergence rates in the presence of various types of randomness
and heterogeneity resulted from training data, network environments, computing resources at clients,
etc. Moreover, many of these algorithms enjoy the so-called “linear speedup” effect, i.e., the
convergence time to a first-order stationary point is inversely proportional to the number of workers
and local update steps.
However, despite the recent advances in FL algorithm design and theoretical understanding, a “cloud
that remains obscures the sky of FL” is a common assumption that can be found in almost all works
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

