Support Recovery in Sparse PCA with Incomplete
Data
Hanbyul Lee
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
lee3078@purdue.edu

Qifan Song
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
qfsong@purdue.edu

Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Abstract
We study a practical algorithm for sparse principal component analysis (PCA) of
incomplete and noisy data. Our algorithm is based on the semidefinite program
(SDP) relaxation of the non-convex l1 -regularized PCA problem. We provide
theoretical and experimental evidence that SDP enables us to exactly recover the
true support of the sparse leading eigenvector of the unknown true matrix, despite
only observing an incomplete (missing uniformly at random) and noisy version
of it. We derive sufficient conditions for exact recovery, which involve matrix
incoherence, the spectral gap between the largest and second-largest eigenvalues,
the observation probability and the noise variance. We validate our theoretical
results with incomplete synthetic data, and show encouraging and meaningful
results on a gene expression dataset.

1

Introduction

Principal component analysis (PCA) is one of the most popular methods to reduce data dimension
which is widely used in various applications including genetics, image processing, engineering, and
many others. However, standard PCA is usually not preferred when principal components depend
on only a small number of variables, because it provides dense vectors as a solution which degrades
interpretability of the result. This can be worse especially in the high-dimensional setting where the
solution of standard PCA is inconsistent as addressed in several works [Paul, 2007, Nadler, 2008,
Johnstone and Lu, 2009]. To solve the inconsistency issue and improve interpretability, sparse PCA
has been proposed, which enforces sparsity in the PCA solution so that dimension reduction and
variable selection can be simultaneously performed. Theoretical and algorithmic researches on sparse
PCA have been actively conducted over the past few years [Zou et al., 2006, Amini and Wainwright,
2008, Journée et al., 2010, Ma, 2013, Lei and Vu, 2015, Berk and Bertsimas, 2019, Richtárik et al.,
2021].
In this paper, we consider a special situation where the data to which sparse PCA is applied are not
completely observed, but partially missing. Missing data frequently occurs in a wide range of machine
learning problems, where sparse PCA is no exception. There are various reasons and situations where
data becomes incomplete, such as failures of hardware, high expenses of sampling, and preserving
privacy. One concrete example is the analysis of single-cell RNA sequence (scRNA-seq) data [Park
and Zhao, 2019], where the cells are divided into several distinct types which can be characterized
with only a small number of genes among tens of thousands of genes. Sparse PCA can be effectively
utilized here to reduce the dimension (from numerous cells to a few cell types) and to select a small
number of genes that affect the reduced data. However, since scRNA-seq data usually have many
missing values due to technical and sampling issues, the existing sparse PCA theory and method
designed for fully observed data cannot be directly applied, and new methodology and theory are in
demand.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

