B RAIN N ETWORK T RANSFORMER

1

Xuan Kan1 Wei Dai2 Hejie Cui1 Zilong Zhang3 Ying Guo1 Carl Yang1
Emory University 2 Stanford University 3 University of International Business and Economics
{xuan.kan,hejie.cui,yguo2,j.carlyang}@emory.edu
dvd.ai@stanford.edu 201957020@uibe.edu.cn

Abstract
Human brains are commonly modeled as networks of Regions of Interest (ROIs)
and their connections for the understanding of brain functions and mental disorders. Recently, Transformer-based models have been studied over different
types of data, including graphs, shown to bring performance gains widely. In this
work, we study Transformer-based models for brain network analysis. Driven
by the unique properties of data, we model brain networks as graphs with nodes
of fixed size and order, which allows us to (1) use connection profiles as node
features to provide natural and low-cost positional information and (2) learn pairwise connection strengths among ROIs with efficient attention weights across
individuals that are predictive towards downstream analysis tasks. Moreover, we
propose an O RTHONORMAL C LUSTERING R EADOUT operation based on selfsupervised soft clustering and orthonormal projection. This design accounts for
the underlying functional modules that determine similar behaviors among groups
of ROIs, leading to distinguishable cluster-aware node embeddings and informative graph embeddings. Finally, we re-standardize the evaluation pipeline on the
only one publicly available large-scale brain network dataset of ABIDE, to enable meaningful comparison of different models. Experiment results show clear
improvements of our proposed B RAIN N ETWORK T RANSFORMER on both the
public ABIDE and our restricted ABCD datasets. The implementation is available
at https://github.com/Wayfear/BrainNetworkTransformer.

1

Introduction

Brain network analysis has been an intriguing pursuit for neuroscientists to understand human brain
organizations and predict clinical outcomes [50, 59, 58, 5, 18, 27, 52, 29, 58, 28, 41, 44, 31]. Among
various neuroimaging modalities, functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is one of the most
commonly used for brain network construction, where the nodes are defined as Regions of Interest
(ROIs) given an atlas, and the edges are calculated as pairwise correlations between the blood-oxygenlevel-dependent (BOLD) signal series extracted from each region [54, 53, 59, 16]. Researchers
observe that some regions can co-activate or co-deactivate simultaneously when performing cognitiverelated tasks such as action, language, and vision. Based on this pattern, brain regions can be classified
into diverse functional modules to analyze diseases towards their diagnosis, progress understanding
and treatment.
Nowadays Transformer-based models have led a tremendous success in various downstream tasks
across fields including natural language processing [56, 17] and computer vision [20, 10, 55]. Recent
efforts have also emerged to apply Transformer-based designs to graph representation learning.
GAT [57] firstly adapts the attention mechanism to graph neural networks (GNNs) but only considers
the local structures of neighboring nodes. Graph Transformer [21] injects edge information into
the attention mechanism and leverages the eigenvectors of each node as positional embeddings.
SAN [40] further enhances the positional embeddings by considering both eigenvalues and eigenvectors and improves the attention mechanism by extending the attention from local to global structures.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

