LAMP: Extracting Text from Gradients with
Language Model Priors

Mislav Balunović∗, Dimitar I. Dimitrov∗, Nikola Jovanović, Martin Vechev
{mislav.balunovic,dimitar.iliev.dimitrov,
nikola.jovanovic,martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich

Abstract
Recent work shows that sensitive user data can be reconstructed from gradient
updates, breaking the key privacy promise of federated learning. While success
was demonstrated primarily on image data, these methods do not directly transfer
to other domains such as text. In this work, we propose LAMP, a novel attack
tailored to textual data, that successfully reconstructs original text from gradients.
Our attack is based on two key insights: (i) modeling prior text probability with an
auxiliary language model, guiding the search towards more natural text, and (ii)
alternating continuous and discrete optimization, which minimizes reconstruction
loss on embeddings, while avoiding local minima by applying discrete text transformations. Our experiments demonstrate that LAMP is significantly more effective
than prior work: it reconstructs 5x more bigrams and 23% longer subsequences
on average. Moreover, we are the first to recover inputs from batch sizes larger
than 1 for textual models. These findings indicate that gradient updates of models
operating on textual data leak more information than previously thought.

1

Introduction

Federated learning [24] (FL) is a widely adopted framework for training machine learning models in
a decentralized way. Conceptually, FL aims to enable training of highly accurate models without
compromising client data privacy, as the raw data never leaves client machines. However, recent work
[28, 43, 41] has shown that the server can in fact recover the client data, by applying a reconstruction
attack on the gradient updates sent from the client during training. Such attacks typically start from
a randomly sampled input and modify it such that its corresponding gradients match the gradient
update originally sent by the client. While most works focus on reconstruction attacks in computer
vision, there has comparatively been little work in the text domain, despite the fact that some of the
most prominent applications of FL involve learning over textual data, e.g., next-word prediction on
mobile phones [30]. A key component of successful attacks in vision has been the use of image priors
such as total variation [7]. These priors guide the reconstruction towards natural images, which are
more likely to correspond to client data. However, the use of priors has so far been missing from
attacks on text [43, 3], limiting their ability to reconstruct real client data.
This work: private text reconstruction with priors In this work, we propose LAMP, a new
reconstruction attack which leverages language model priors to extract private text from gradients.
The overview of our attack is given in Fig. 1. The attacker has access to a snapshot of the transformer
network being trained in a federated manner (e.g., BERT), and a gradient ∇θ L(x∗ , y ∗ ) which the
client has computed on that snapshot, using their private data. The attack starts by sampling token
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

