On global convergence of ResNets: From finite to
infinite width using linear parameterization

Raphaël Barboni
ENS - PSL Univ.
raphael.barboni@ens.fr

Gabriel Peyré
CNRS and ENS - PSL Univ.
gabriel.peyre@ens.fr

François-Xavier Vialard
LIGM, Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS
francois-xavier.vialard@u-pem.fr

Abstract
Overparameterization is a key factor in the absence of convexity to explain global
convergence of gradient descent (GD) for neural networks. Beside the well studied
lazy regime, infinite width (mean field) analysis has been developed for shallow
networks, using convex optimization techniques. To bridge the gap between the
lazy and mean field regimes, we study Residual Networks (ResNets) in which
the residual block has linear parameterization while still being nonlinear. Such
ResNets admit both infinite depth and width limits, encoding residual blocks in a
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). In this limit, we prove a local PolyakLojasiewicz inequality. Thus, every critical point is a global minimizer and a
local convergence result of GD holds, retrieving the lazy regime. In contrast with
other mean-field studies, it applies to both parametric and non-parametric cases
under an expressivity condition on the residuals. Our analysis leads to a practical
and quantified recipe: starting from a universal RKHS, Random Fourier Features
are applied to obtain a finite dimensional parameterization satisfying with highprobability our expressivity condition.

1

Introduction

State of the art supervised learning methods are based on deep neural networks, sometimes heavily
overparameterized, which perfectly fit training data or even noisy data while exhibiting good generalization properties. Such a behaviour appears as a paradox and questions the established theory
of “bias-variance trade-off” [9]. That an overparameterized model can fit data perfectly comes as
no surprise but this capability does not explain the observed generalization properties. Towards a
better understanding of it, one first needs to understand the optimization procedure in the parameter
space that selects the interpolation map. This question is tightly linked with the parameterization of
the space of maps that are explored and state of the art parameterizations have emerged in the past
years. One key architecture that is ubiquitous in deep learning are skip connections, heavily used
in Residual Neural Networks (ResNets) [25] and it has led to state of the art results in supervised
learning. ResNets actually allow one to consider a very large number of layers [59].
Continuous models. Passing to the limit of infinite depth allows the connection with continuous
models (Neural ODE) for which theoretical methods and new algorithms can be designed [11, 56].
Indeed, the similarities between ResNet architectures and discrete numerical schemes motivated the
introduction of a continuous neural ODE
żt = v(Wt , zt ) ∀t ∈ [0, 1] ,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(1)

