MBW: Multi-view Bootstrapping in the Wild

Mosam Dabhi1

Chaoyang Wang1
Ian Fasel2∗

1

Carnegie Mellon University

Tim Clifford2

László A. Jeni1∗

Simon Lucey3∗
2

Apple

3

The University of Adelaide

Abstract
Labeling articulated objects in unconstrained settings has a wide variety of applications including entertainment, neuroscience, psychology, ethology, and many fields
of medicine. Large offline labeled datasets do not exist for all but the most common
articulated object categories (e.g., humans). Hand labeling these landmarks within
a video sequence is a laborious task. Learned landmark detectors can help, but
can be error-prone when trained from only a few examples. Multi-camera systems
that train fine-grained detectors have shown significant promise in detecting such
errors, allowing for self-supervised solutions that only need a small percentage
of the video sequence to be hand-labeled. The approach, however, is based on
calibrated cameras and rigid geometry, making it expensive, difficult to manage,
and impractical in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we address these bottlenecks
by combining a non-rigid 3D neural prior with deep flow to obtain high-fidelity
landmark estimates from videos with only two or three uncalibrated, handheld
cameras. With just a few annotations (representing 1-2% of the frames), we are
able to produce 2D results comparable to state-of-the-art fully supervised methods,
along with 3D reconstructions that are impossible with other existing approaches.
Our Multi-view Bootstrapping in the Wild (MBW) approach demonstrates impressive results on standard human datasets, as well as tigers, cheetahs, fish, colobus
monkeys, chimpanzees, and flamingos from videos captured casually in a zoo. We
release the codebase for MBW as well as this challenging zoo dataset consisting of
image frames of tail-end distribution categories with their corresponding 2D and
3D labels generated from minimal human intervention.

1

Introduction

Hand labeling landmarks of articulated objects within video is an arduous and expensive task.
Landmark detectors [29, 20, 32] can be employed to automate the process. However, they require the
ingestion of large amounts of labeled training data to be reliable – an infeasible requirement for all
but the most common of articulated objects (e.g. people, hands). Semi-supervision can help [28],
where a small portion of frames within the video are hand labeled. Candidate labels can be generated
from the noisy landmark detectors – trained from the seed hand labeled examples – inliers are then
determined through calibrated rigid multi-view geometry. These inliers are treated as labels and used
to train the next round of landmark detectors. This semi-supervised process is iterated to increase the
number of inlier estimates, with additional human annotation being added judiciously to ensure the
full sequence is labeled. Such strategies have been instrumental for obtaining reliable ground-truth –
most notably the Multi-view Bootstrapping (MB) approach of Simon et al. [28]. Human annotators
∗

indicates the authors advised equally

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

