PDSketch: Integrated Planning Domain
Programming and Learning

Jiayuan Mao1 Tomás Lozano-Pérez1 Joshua B. Tenenbaum1,2,3 Leslie Pack Kaelbling1
1
MIT Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
MIT Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
3
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines

Abstract
This paper studies a model learning and online planning approach towards building
flexible and general robots. Specifically, we investigate how to exploit the locality
and sparsity structures in the underlying environmental transition model to improve
model generalization, data-efficiency, and runtime-efficiency. We present a new
domain definition language, named PDSketch. It allows users to flexibly define
high-level structures in the transition models, such as object and feature dependencies, in a way similar to how programmers use TensorFlow or PyTorch to specify
kernel sizes and hidden dimensions of a convolutional neural network. The details
of the transition model will be filled in by trainable neural networks. Based on
the defined structures and learned parameters, PDSketch automatically generates
domain-independent planning heuristics without additional training. The derived
heuristics accelerate the performance-time planning for novel goals.

1

Introduction

A long-standing goal in AI is to build robotic agents that are flexible and general, able to accomplish
a diverse set of tasks in novel and complex environments. Such tasks generally require a robot to
generate long-horizon plans for novel goals in novel situations, by reasoning about many objects
and the ways in which their state-changes depend on one another. A promising solution strategy is
to combine model learning with online planning: the agent forms an internal representation of the
environment’s states and dynamics by learning from external or actively-collected data, and then
applies planning algorithms to generate actions, given a new situation and goal at performance time.
There are two primary desiderata for a system based on model-learning and planning. First, the
learning process should be data efficient, especially because of the combinatorial complexity of
possible configuration of in the real world. Second, the learned model should be computationally
efficient, making online planning a feasible runtime execution strategy.
A critical strategy for learning models that generalize well from small amounts of data and that
can be deployed efficiently at runtime is to introduce inductive biases. In image processing, we
leverage translation invariance and equivariance by using convolutions. In graph learning, we leverage
permutation invariance by using graph neural networks. Two essential forms of structure we can
leverage in dynamic models of the physical world are locality and sparsity. Consider a robot picking
an object up off a table. At the object level, the operation only changes the states of the object being
picked up and the robot, and only depends on a few other nearby objects, such as the table (local). At
the object feature level, only the configuration of the robot and pose of the object are changed, but
their colors and frictional properties are unaffected (sparse).
Classical hand-engineered approaches to robot task and motion planning have designed representations that expose and exploit locality through lifting (or object-centrism), which allows relational
Correspondence to: jiayuanm@mit.edu. Project page: http://pdsketch.csail.mit.edu.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

