Randomized Message-Interception Smoothing:
Gray-box Certificates for Graph Neural Networks

Yan Scholten1 , Jan Schuchardt1 , Simon Geisler1 ,
Aleksandar Bojchevski2 & Stephan Günnemann1
{y.scholten, j.schuchardt, s.geisler}@tum.de
bojchevski@cispa.de, s.guennemann@tum.de
1
Dept. of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich
2
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
Randomized smoothing is one of the most promising frameworks for certifying
the adversarial robustness of machine learning models, including Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs). Yet, existing randomized smoothing certificates for GNNs are
overly pessimistic since they treat the model as a black box, ignoring the underlying
architecture. To remedy this, we propose novel gray-box certificates that exploit
the message-passing principle of GNNs: We randomly intercept messages and
carefully analyze the probability that messages from adversarially controlled nodes
reach their target nodes. Compared to existing certificates, we certify robustness to
much stronger adversaries that control entire nodes in the graph and can arbitrarily
manipulate node features. Our certificates provide stronger guarantees for attacks
at larger distances, as messages from farther-away nodes are more likely to get
intercepted. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on various models and
datasets. Since our gray-box certificates consider the underlying graph structure, we
can significantly improve certifiable robustness by applying graph sparsification.1

1

Introduction

The core principle behind the majority of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) is message passing –
the representation of a node is (recursively) computed based on the representations of its neighbors
(Gilmer et al., 2017). This allows for information to propagate across the graph, e.g. in a k-layer
GNN the prediction for a node depends on the messages received from its k-hop neighborhood. With
such models, if an adversary controls a few nodes in the graph, they can manipulate node features to
craft adversarial messages that in turn change the prediction for a target node.
Such feature-based adversarial attacks are becoming significantly stronger in recent years and pose a
realistic threat (Ma et al., 2020; Zou et al., 2021): Adversaries may arbitrarily manipulate features of
entire nodes in their control, for example in social networks, public knowledge graphs and graphs in
the financial and medical domains. Detecting such adversarial perturbations is a difficult unsolved
task even beyond graphs (Carlini and Wagner, 2017), meaning such attacks may go unnoticed.
How can we limit the influence of such adversarial attacks? We introduce a simple but powerful idea:
intercept adversarial messages. Specifically, we propose message-interception smoothing where
we randomly delete edges and/or randomly ablate (mask) nodes, and analyze the probability that
messages from adversarially controlled nodes reach the target nodes. By transforming any messagepassing GNN into a smoothed GNN, where the prediction is the majority vote under this randomized
message interception, we can provide robustness certificates (see Figure 1).
1

Project page: https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/interception-smoothing

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

