ZARTS: On Zero-order Optimization for
Neural Architecture Search

1

Xiaoxing Wang1 , Wenxuan Guo1 , Jianlin Su2 , Xiaokang Yang1 , Junchi Yan1∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shenzhen Zhuiyi Technology Co., Ltd.
{figure1_wxx,arya_g,xkyang,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
bojonesu@wezhuiyi.com

Abstract
Differentiable architecture search (DARTS) has been a popular one-shot paradigm
for NAS due to its high efficiency. It introduces trainable architecture parameters
to represent the importance of candidate operations and proposes first/secondorder approximation to estimate their gradients, making it possible to solve NAS
by gradient descent algorithm. However, our in-depth empirical results show
that the approximation often distorts the loss landscape, leading to the biased
objective to optimize and, in turn, inaccurate gradient estimation for architecture
parameters. This work turns to zero-order optimization and proposes a novel NAS
scheme, called ZARTS, to search without enforcing the above approximation.
Specifically, three representative zero-order optimization methods are introduced:
RS, MGS, and GLD, among which MGS performs best by balancing the accuracy
and speed. Moreover, we explore the connections between RS/MGS and the
gradient descent algorithm and show that our ZARTS can be seen as a robust
gradient-free counterpart to DARTS. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets
and search spaces show the remarkable performance of our method. In particular,
results on 12 benchmarks verify the outstanding robustness of ZARTS, where the
performance of DARTS collapses due to its known instability issue. Also, we
search on the search space of DARTS to compare with peer methods, and our
discovered architecture achieves 97.54% accuracy on CIFAR-10 and 75.7% top-1
accuracy on ImageNet. Finally, we combine our ZARTS with three orthogonal
variants of DARTS for faster search speed and better performance. Source code
will be made publicly available at: https://github.com/vicFigure/ZARTS.

1

Introduction

It remains open to search for efficient architectures automatically instead of by humans [27, 14, 15].
Neural architecture search (NAS) has attracted wide attention, which can be modeled as bi-level
optimization for network architectures and operation weights. One-shot NAS [1] is a popular search
framework that regards neural architectures as directed acyclic graphs (DAG) and constructs a
supernet with all possible connections and operations in the search space. DARTS [20] further
introduces trainable architecture parameters to represent the importance of candidate operations,
which are alternately trained by SGD optimizer along with network weights. It proposes a first-order
approximation to estimate the gradients of architecture parameters, which is biased and may lead to
the severe instability issue shown by [3]. Other works [38, 6] point out that architecture parameters
will converge to a sharp local minimum resulting in the instability issue, so they introduce extra
regularization items making architecture parameters converge to a flat local minimum.
∗

The SJTU authors are also with MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, SJTU. Junchi Yan is the corresponding author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

