A2: Efficient Automated Attacker for Boosting
Adversarial Training

Zhuoer Xu1,2 , Guanghui Zhu1∗ , Changhua Meng2 , Shiwen Cui2 , Zhenzhe Ying2 ,
Weiqiang Wang2 , Ming Gu2 , Yihua Huang1
1 State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 Tiansuan Lab, Ant Group
zhuoer.xu@smail.nju.edu.cn, zgh@nju.edu.cn,
{changhua.mch,donn.csw,zhenzhe.yzz,weiqiang.wwq,guming.mg}@antgroup.com,
yhuang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Based on the significant improvement of model robustness by AT (Adversarial
Training), various variants have been proposed to further boost the performance.
Well-recognized methods have focused on different components of AT (e.g., designing loss functions and leveraging additional unlabeled data). It is generally
accepted that stronger perturbations yield more robust models. However, how to
generate stronger perturbations efficiently is still missed. In this paper, we propose
an efficient automated attacker called A2 to boost AT by generating the optimal
perturbations on-the-fly during training. A2 is a parameterized automated attacker
to search in the attacker space for the best attacker against the defense model and
examples. Extensive experiments across different datasets demonstrate that A2
generates stronger perturbations with low extra cost and reliably improves the
robustness of various AT methods against different attacks.

1

Introduction

DNNs (Deep Neural Networks) are extremely vulnerable to imperceptible perturbations despite their
success in a wide variety of applications [He et al., 2016, Kenton and Toutanova, 2019, Guo et al.,
2017]. In particular, adding small but carefully chosen deviations to the input, called adversarial
perturbations, can cause DNNs to make incorrect predictions with high confidence. It indicates that
models trained by minimizing the empirical risk are not intrinsically robust. To explicitly improve
robustness, AT (Adversarial Training), where a defense model is trained on worst-case adversarial
perturbations generated by an attacker, was developed and proved to be effective.
Based on the significant improvement of models’ robustness, various methods have been proposed, which focus on different components of AT: analyzing the robustness of neural architectures
Zagoruyko and Komodakis [2016], designing loss functions such as TRADES [Zhang et al., 2019]
and MART [Wang et al., 2019], perturbing the model to regularize the loss landscape’s flatness (i.e.,
AWP Wu et al. [2020]) and leveraging unlabeled data (i.e., RST [Carmon et al., 2019]). Gowal et al.
[2020] compares the performance of each combination of most components and achieves the SOTA
(state-of-the-art) performance.
All the above AT methods use PGD𝐾 [Madry et al., 2018], which is a 𝐾-step stack of FGSM [Goodfellow et al., 2015], as the attacker to generate perturbations for each example against the defense
model. As the key of AT, stronger perturbations yield more robust models. However, there is a
trade-off between the strength of the perturbation and the training efficiency. Increasing the attack
step 𝐾 strengthens the perturbations, but linearly increases the training overhead [Gowal et al., 2020].
∗ Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

