Polynomial Neural Fields
for Subband Decomposition and Manipulation

Guandao Yang∗
Cornell University

Sagie Benaim*
University of Copenhagen

Jonathan T. Barron
Google Research

Varun Jampani
Google Research

Thomas Funkhouser
Google Research

Kyle Genova
Google Research

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

Serge Belongie
University of Copenhagen

Abstract
Neural fields have emerged as a new paradigm for representing signals, thanks
to their ability to do it compactly while being easy to optimize. In most applications, however, neural fields are treated like black boxes, which precludes
many signal manipulation tasks. In this paper, we propose a new class of neural
fields called polynomial neural fields (PNFs). The key advantage of a PNF is
that it can represent a signal as a composition of a number of manipulable and
interpretable components without losing the merits of neural fields representation. We develop a general theoretical framework to analyze and design PNFs.
We use this framework to design Fourier PNFs, which match state-of-the-art performance in signal representation tasks that use neural fields. In addition, we
empirically demonstrate that Fourier PNFs enable signal manipulation applications such as texture transfer and scale-space interpolation. Code is available at
https://github.com/stevenygd/PNF.

1

Introduction

Neural fields are neural networks that take as input spatial coordinates and output a function of the
coordinates, such as image colors [8, 56], 3D signed distance functions [3, 46], or radiance fields [39].
Recent works have shown that such representations are compact [15, 35, 51], allow sampling at
arbitrary locations [56, 59], and are easy to optimize within the deep learning framework. These
advantages enabled their success in many spatial visual computing applications including novel view
synthesis [39, 41, 43, 55, 68] and 3D reconstruction [17, 27, 47, 55, 56]. Most recent neural field
based methods, however, treat the network as a black box. As such, one can only obtain information
by querying it with spatial coordinates. This precludes the applications where we want to change the
signal represented in a neural field. For example, it is difficult to remove high frequency noise or
change the stationary texture of an image.
One way to enable signal manipulation is to decompose a signal into a number of interpretable
components and use these components for manipulation. A general approach that works across a
wide range of signals is to decompose them into frequency subbands [1, 7, 54]. Such decompositions
are studied in the traditional signal processing literature, e.g., the use of Fourier or Wavelet transforms
of the spatial signal. These transformations, however, usually assume the signal is densely sampled
∗

Equal contribution. Part of this work was done while Guandao was a student researcher at Google.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

