Iterative Structural Inference of Directed Graphs

Aoran Wang
University of Luxembourg
aoran.wang@uni.lu

Jun Pang
University of Luxembourg
jun.pang@uni.lu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a variational model, Iterative Structural Inference of
Directed Graphs (iSIDG), to infer the existence of directed interactions from
observational agents’ features over a time period in a dynamical system. First, the
iterative process in our model feeds the learned interactions back to encourage our
model to eliminate indirect interactions and to emphasize directional representation
during learning. Second, we show that extra regularization terms in the objective
function for smoothness, connectiveness, and sparsity prompt our model to infer a
more realistic structure and to further eliminate indirect interactions. We evaluate
iSIDG on various datasets including biological networks, simulated fMRI data, and
physical simulations to demonstrate that our model is able to precisely infer the
existence of interactions, and is significantly superior to baseline models.

1

Introduction

A wide range of dynamical systems in the real world can be viewed as the composition of interacting
agents, including physical systems [24, 13], multi-agent systems [5, 27] and biological systems [48,
35]. Knowing the interactions of dynamical systems can promote our understanding of the intrinsic
mechanisms of these systems, and further facilitate accurate prediction and control of dynamical
systems. However, in many cases, unlike the states of the agents, the interactions are usually not
directly observable or measurable. Therefore, it is necessary to uncover the underlying interactions
of dynamical systems based on the observational states of the agents. In dynamical systems, the
states of an agent are affected by the interactions, and the states are usually recorded as a set of
continuous variables, which make it difficult to uncover the interactions based on the similarity
between the agents. It is also worth mentioning that most dynamical systems are characterized by
directed interactions, such as citation networks [44], social ego networks [31], and gene regulatory
networks [35]. We address the revealing of the existence of interactions in the dynamical systems as
the problem of structural inference, and model the dynamical system as a directed graph, in which
the nodes represent the agents of the system, and the directed edges denote the interactions between
the agents. Thus, the structural inference problem is transformed into the inference of the asymmetric
adjacency matrix of the graph based on observational nodes’ features (dynamics).
While several models have been proposed to address this problem with unsupervised variational
generative frameworks [22, 51, 30], most of them only deal with undirected interactions, and almost
none of them explains why the variational method succeeds in inferring the structure. In this paper,
based on the theory of Information Bottleneck (IB) [47, 1], which states the training of variational
auto-encoder (VAE) follows the two-step procedure of deep learning: label-fitting and representationcompression, we explain the intrinsic mechanism of structural inference with VAEs, and propose
a novel VAE based machine learning approach, namely iterative Structural Inference of Directed
Graphs (iSIDG), for iterative inference of the directed graph structure based on observational node
features. Our iSIDG model utilizes a graph neural network (GNN) as encoder and infers adjacency
matrix of the graph in its latent space.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

