Bayesian Optimization over Discrete and Mixed
Spaces via Probabilistic Reparameterization
Samuel Daulton
University of Oxford, Meta
sdaulton@meta.com

Xingchen Wan
University of Oxford
xwan@robots.ox.ac.uk

David Eriksson
Meta
deriksson@meta.com

Maximilian Balandat
Meta
balandat@meta.com

Michael A. Osborne
University of Oxford
mosb@robots.ox.ac.uk

Eytan Bakshy
Meta
ebakshy@meta.com

Abstract
Optimizing expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions of discrete (and potentially
continuous) design parameters is a ubiquitous problem in scientific and engineering
applications. Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular, sample-efficient method
that leverages a probabilistic surrogate model and an acquisition function (AF) to
select promising designs to evaluate. However, maximizing the AF over mixed
or high-cardinality discrete search spaces is challenging standard gradient-based
methods cannot be used directly or evaluating the AF at every point in the search
space would be computationally prohibitive. To address this issue, we propose
using probabilistic reparameterization (PR). Instead of directly optimizing the
AF over the search space containing discrete parameters, we instead maximize
the expectation of the AF over a probability distribution defined by continuous
parameters. We prove that under suitable reparameterizations, the BO policy that
maximizes the probabilistic objective is the same as that which maximizes the AF,
and therefore, PR enjoys the same regret bounds as the original BO policy using
the underlying AF. Moreover, our approach provably converges to a stationary
point of the probabilistic objective under gradient ascent using scalable, unbiased
estimators of both the probabilistic objective and its gradient. Therefore, as the
number of starting points and gradient steps increase, our approach will recover
of a maximizer of the AF (an often-neglected requisite for commonly used BO
regret bounds). We validate our approach empirically and demonstrate state-of-theart optimization performance on a wide range of real-world applications. PR is
complementary to (and benefits) recent work and naturally generalizes to settings
with multiple objectives and black-box constraints.

1

Introduction

Many scientific and engineering problems involve tuning discrete and/or continuous parameters
to optimize an objective function. Often, the objective function is “black-box”, meaning it has no
known closed-form expression. For example, optimizing the design of an electrospun oil sorbent—a
material that can be used to absorb oil in the case of a marine oil spill to mitigate ecological harm—to
maximize properties such as the oil absorption capacity and mechanical strength [59] can involve
tuning both discrete ordinal experimental conditions and continuous parameters controlling the
composition of the material. For another example, optimizing the structural design of a welded beam
can involve tuning the type of metal (categorical), the welding type (binary), and the dimensions
of the different components of the beam (discrete ordinals)–resulting in a search space with over
370 million possible designs [54]. We consider the scenario where querying the objective function is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

