Differentially Private Model Compression
Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah1 , Arturs Backurs2 , Huseyin A. Inan2 ,
Lukas Wutschitz3 , Janardhan Kulkarni2
1
University of California San Diego, 2 Microsoft Research, 3 Microsoft
fmireshg@eng.ucsd.com
{arturs.backurs,huseyin.inan,lukas.wutschitz,jakul}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent papers have shown that large pre-trained language models (LLMs) such as
BERT, GPT-2 can be fine-tuned on private data to achieve performance comparable
to non-private models for many downstream Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tasks while simultaneously guaranteeing differential privacy. The inference cost
of these models – which consist of hundreds of millions of parameters – however,
can be prohibitively large. Hence, often in practice, LLMs are compressed before
they are deployed in specific applications. In this paper, we initiate the study of differentially private model compression and propose frameworks for achieving 50%
sparsity levels while maintaining nearly full performance. We demonstrate these
ideas on standard GLUE benchmarks using BERT models, setting benchmarks for
future research on this topic.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: The 3-pronged modern deep learning pipeline: Pre-train on public data, fine-tune on private
data, and compress the model to meet the memory and latency requirements of specific applications.
Since the advent of Transformer-based [67] large language models (LLMs) such as BERT [13, 37],
GPT families [50, 5], there has been a paradigm shift in the way deep learning models are trained
for natural language processing (NLP) applications. LLMs are first pre-trained on extremely large
and diverse publicly available datasets. The weights are then fine-tuned for a specific task of interest
using a much smaller private dataset, which may consist of sensitive information about the users.
Finally, before deploying, the models are compressed (also referred to as sparsified or distilled) to
reduce the parameter count. The reason for this final step is that LLMs such as BERT and GPT-2
consist of hundreds of millions of parameters, and hence inference time and memory footprints of the
models are too large to be used in many applications. As a concrete example, consider a language
model that is deployed for sentence completion task in text editors. In this scenario, clearly, the
inference (response) time of the model needs to be in orders of milliseconds to be useful. Besides the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

