Variational Model Perturbation for Source-Free
Domain Adaptation

Mengmeng Jing1,2∗, Xiantong Zhen2 †, Jingjing Li1 , Cees G. M. Snoek2
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
We aim for source-free domain adaptation, where the task is to deploy a model
pre-trained on source domains to target domains. The challenges stem from the
distribution shift from the source to the target domain, coupled with the unavailability of any source data and labeled target data for optimization. Rather than
fine-tuning the model by updating the parameters, we propose to perturb the source
model to achieve adaptation to target domains. We introduce perturbations into the
model parameters by variational Bayesian inference in a probabilistic framework.
By doing so, we can effectively adapt the model to the target domain while largely
preserving the discriminative ability. Importantly, we demonstrate the theoretical
connection to learning Bayesian neural networks, which proves the generalizability
of the perturbed model to target domains. To enable more efficient optimization,
we further employ a parameter sharing strategy, which substantially reduces the
learnable parameters compared to a fully Bayesian neural network. Our model
perturbation provides a new probabilistic way for domain adaptation which enables
efficient adaptation to target domains while maximally preserving knowledge in
source models. Experiments on several source-free benchmarks under three different evaluation settings verify the effectiveness of the proposed variational model
perturbation for source-free domain adaptation.

1

Introduction

A well-trained neural network can achieve satisfactory performance on in-distribution tasks. However,
in real applications, a common situation is that the training set and the test set are from different
distributions. In this case, the performance of the models usually degrades significantly due to
domain shifts. Domain adaptation (DA) [1, 2, 3, 4] is proposed to solve this problem by transferring
knowledge from the labeled source domain (the training set) to the unlabeled target domain (the test
set). It is assumed that source data are still available when adapting to target data. In this paper, we
focus on the more challenging scenario where source data are not accessible, which is known as
source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) [5, 6]. SFDA promises much wider ranges of applications
than the vanilla domain adaptation in that it can circumvent the problem of not disclosing source data
in order to protect the privacy of individuals or the intellectual property of commercial entities.
To deal with domain shift, two popular techniques in the literature to adapt the SFDA model to the
target domain are fine-tuning (updating the whole parameters) and modulating (tuning the batch
normalization layers and freeze all the other parameters). The former focuses on the difference
of domains, while the latter focuses on the relevance of domains. For fine-tuning methods, e.g.,
SHOT [7] and NRC [8], the parameters of the entire model are further updated by designing
∗
†

This work was done when Mengmeng Jing was a visiting student at University of Amsterdam.
Currently with United Imaging Healthcare, Co., Ltd., China.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

