Efficiency Ordering of Stochastic Gradient Descent

1

Jie Hu1∗
Vishwaraj Doshi2∗
Do Young Eun1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Carolina State University
2
Data Science and Advanced Analytics, IQVIA
jhu29@ncsu.edu
vishwaraj.doshi@iqvia.com dyeun@ncsu.edu

Abstract
We consider the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm driven by a general
stochastic sequence, including i.i.d noise and random walk on an arbitrary graph,
among others; and analyze it in the asymptotic sense. Specifically, we employ the
notion of ‘efficiency ordering’, a well-analyzed tool for comparing the performance
of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) samplers, for SGD algorithms in the
form of Loewner ordering of covariance matrices associated with the scaled iterate
errors in the long term. Using this ordering, we show that input sequences that are
more efficient for MCMC sampling also lead to smaller covariance of the errors
for SGD algorithms in the limit. This also suggests that an arbitrarily weighted
MSE of SGD iterates in the limit becomes smaller when driven by more efficient
chains. Our finding is of particular interest in applications such as decentralized
optimization and swarm learning, where SGD is implemented in a random walk
fashion on the underlying communication graph for cost issues and/or data privacy.
We demonstrate how certain non-Markovian processes, for which typical mixingtime based non-asymptotic bounds are intractable, can outperform their Markovian
counterparts in the sense of efficiency ordering for SGD. We show the utility
of our method by applying it to gradient descent with shuffling and mini-batch
gradient descent, reaffirming key results from existing literature under a unified
framework. Empirically, we also observe efficiency ordering for variants of SGD
such as accelerated SGD and Adam, open up the possibility of extending our notion
of efficiency ordering to a broader family of stochastic optimization algorithms.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is widely used in machine learning, signal processing and other
engineering fields to solve the optimization problem
(
)
n
X
1
θ∗ = arg min f (θ) ≜
F (θ, i) ,
(1)
θ∈Θ
n i=1
where Θ ⊂ Rd is some closed and convex set, and F (·, i) : Rd → R for i ∈ [n] ≜ {1, · · · , n} are
smooth functions on Θ, not necessarily convex, such that their summation f : Rd → R exhibits a
minimizer θ∗ ∈ Θ satisfying ∇f (θ∗ ) = 0. The update rule of the iterative SGD scheme is of the form
θt+1 = ProjΘ (θt − γt+1 ∇θ F (θt , Xt+1 )) ,

(2)

where γt is the step size that can be constant or diminishing as t → ∞, ProjΘ is a projection operator
onto the constraint set Θ, and {Xt }t≥0 is some sequence taking values in [n]. This sequence is
often generated in a stochastic manner, and samples can be drawn from temporally independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d) random variables that are either uniformly distributed over [n]
[60, 54, 14], or leverage importance sampling techniques for variance reduction [52, 12, 27]. {Xt }t≥0
∗

Equal contributors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

