In the Eye of the Beholder:
Robust Prediction with Causal User Modeling

Amir Feder
Columbia University
amir.feder@columbia.edu

Guy Horowitz
Technion

Yoav Wald
Johns Hopkins University

Roi Reichart
Technion

Nir Rosenfeld
Technion

Abstract
Accurately predicting the relevance of items to users is crucial to the success of
many social platforms. Conventional approaches train models on logged historical
data; but recommendation systems, media services, and online marketplaces all
exhibit a constant influx of new content—making relevancy a moving target, to
which standard predictive models are not robust. In this paper, we propose a learning
framework for relevance prediction that is robust to changes in the data distribution.
Our key observation is that robustness can be obtained by accounting for how users
causally perceive the environment. We model users as boundedly-rational decision
makers whose causal beliefs are encoded by a causal graph, and show how minimal
information regarding the graph can be used to contend with distributional changes.
Experiments in multiple settings demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Across a multitude of domains and applications, machine learning has become imperative for guiding
human users in many of the decisions they make [44,58,10]. From recommendation systems and
search engines to e-commerce platforms and online marketplaces, learned models are regularly used
to filter content, rank items, and display select information—all with the primary intent of helping
users choose items that are relevant to them. The predominant approach for learning in these tasks is
to train models to accurately predict the relevance of items to users. But since training is often carried
out on logged historical records, even highly-accurate models remain calibrated to the distribution of
previously observed data on which they were trained [7,59,56]. Given that in virtually any online
platform the distribution of content naturally varies over time and location—due to trends and fashions,
innovation, or forces of supply and demand—models trained on logged data may fail to correctly
predict the choices and preferences of users on unseen, future distributions [12,1,18,27,34].
In this paper, we present a novel conceptual framework for learning predictive models of user-item
relevance that are robust to changes in the underlying data distribution. Our approach is built around
two key observations: (i) that relevance to users is determined by the way in which users perceive
value, and (ii) that this process of value attribution is causal in nature. As an example, consider a
video streaming service in which a user 𝑢 is trying to determine whether watching a certain movie will
be worthwhile. To make this decision, 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}, the user has at her disposal a feature description of
the movie, 𝑥, and a system-generated, personalized relevance score, 𝑟 (e.g., “a 92% match!”). How
will she integrate these two informational sources into a decision? We argue that this crucially hinges
on her belief as to why a particular relevance score is coupled to a particular movie. For example,
if a movie boasts a high relevance score, then she might suppose this score was given because the
system believes the user would like this movie. Another user, however, may reason differently, and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

