k-Sliced Mutual Information:
A Quantitative Study of Scalability with Dimension
Ziv Goldfeld
Cornell University
goldfeld@cornell.edu

Kristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
kristjan.h.greenewald@ibm.com

Theshani Nuradha
Cornell University
pt388@cornell.edu

Galen Reeves
Duke University
galen.reeves@duke.edu

Abstract
Sliced mutual information (SMI) is defined as an average of mutual information
(MI) terms between one-dimensional random projections of the random variables.
It serves as a surrogate measure of dependence to classic MI that preserves many
of its properties but is more scalable to high dimensions. However, a quantitative
characterization of how SMI itself and estimation rates thereof depend on the
ambient dimension, which is crucial to the understanding of scalability, remain
obscure. This work provides a multifaceted account of the dependence of SMI on
dimension, under a broader framework termed k-SMI, which considers projections
to k-dimensional subspaces. Using a new result on the continuity of differential
entropy in the 2-Wasserstein metric, we derive sharp bounds on the error of Monte
Carlo (MC)-based estimates of k-SMI, with explicit dependence on k and the
ambient dimension, revealing their interplay with the number of samples. We then
combine the MC integrator with the neural estimation framework to provide an endto-end k-SMI estimator, for which optimal convergence rates are established. We
also explore asymptotics of the population k-SMI as dimension grows, providing
Gaussian approximation results with a residual that decays under appropriate
moment bounds. All our results trivially apply to SMI by setting k = 1. Our theory
is validated with numerical experiments and is applied to sliced InfoGAN, which
altogether provide a comprehensive quantitative account of the scalability question
of k-SMI, including SMI as a special case when k = 1.

1

Introduction

Mutual information (MI) is a fundamental measure of dependence between random variables [1, 2],
with a myriad of applications in information theory, statistics, and more recently machine learning
[3–14]. Its appeal stems from the favorable structural properties it possesses, such as meaningful units
(bits or nats), identification of independence, entropy decompositions, and convenient variational
forms. However, modern learning applications require estimating MI between high-dimensional
variables based on data, which is known to be notoriously hard with exponential in dimension sample
complexity [15, 16]. To alleviate this impasse, sliced MI (SMI) was recently introduced by a subset
of the authors as a surrogate dependence measure that preserves much of the classic structure while
being more scalable for computation and estimations in high dimensions [17].
Inspired by slicing techniques for statistical divergences [18–21], SMI is defined as an average of MI
terms between one-dimensional projections of the high-dimensional variables. Beyond showing that
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

