Statistically
Meaningful Approximation: a Case Study on
Approximating Turing Machines with Transformers

Colin Wei

Yining Chen

Tengyu Ma

Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{colinwei,cynnjjs,tengyuma}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
A common lens to theoretically study neural net architectures is to analyze the functions they can approximate. However, the constructions from approximation theory
often have unrealistic aspects, for example, reliance on infinite precision to memorize
target function values. To address this issue, we propose a formal definition of statistically meaningful approximation which requires the approximating network to exhibit
good statistical learnability. We present case studies on statistically meaningful approximation for two classes of functions: boolean circuits and Turing machines. We
show that overparameterized feedforward neural nets can statistically meaningfully
approximate boolean circuits with sample complexity depending only polynomially
on the circuit size, not the size of the approximating network. In addition, we show
that transformers can statistically meaningfully approximate Turing machines with
computation time bounded by T , requiring sample complexity polynomial in the
alphabet size, state space size, and logpT q. Our analysis introduces new tools for generalization bounds that provide much tighter sample complexity guarantees than the
typical VC-dimension or norm-based bounds, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Dating back to the seminal works on universal approximation [16, 25, 40, 31], a common way to
theoretically study neural nets has been through their expressivity, which measures the ability of
neural nets to approximate well-behaved functions. This perspective has shaped how researchers
perceive different types of deep learning architectures: a basic way to theoretically justify new
architectures is to study their approximation capabilities. This has led to a number of analyses studying
universal approximation capabilities for various widely-used architectures, such as recurrent neural
nets (RNNs) [47], graph neural nets [46], convolutional networks [3, 64, 59], residual networks [32],
transformers [61], and neural ODEs [51, 63].
However, approximation theoretic results often misalign with more meaningful end-to-end guarantees, because models constructed in the literature often exhibit unrealistic properties. For example, a common technique in the universal approximation literature is to rely strongly on infiniteprecision weights and activations, or exponentially many parameters to encode the desired function
values [25, 16, 31, 32, 61, 44]. This issue even arises outside of universal approximation, e.g., various
papers demonstrate the ability of RNNs and transformers to simulate various computational models
such as Turing machines and automata, but require strong reliance on arbitrary precision [48, 42, 29, 9].
Infinite precision can inflate the expressivity of an architecture (function class) in a unrealistic and
misleading way: for example, finite width RNNs with infinite precision can simulate Turing machines,
but finite-precision, finite-width RNNs cannot. This is implied by streaming lower bounds [1] – any
finite-precision, finite-width RNN induces a finite-space streaming algorithm corresponding to running
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

