A Theoretical Study on Solving Continual Learning

Gyuhak Kim∗1 , Changnan Xiao∗2 , Tatsuya Konishi† 3 , Zixuan Ke1 , Bing Liu‡ 1
1
University of Illinois at Chicago
2
ByteDance
3
KDDI Research

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) learns a sequence of tasks incrementally. There are two
popular CL settings, class incremental learning (CIL) and task incremental learning (TIL). A major challenge of CL is catastrophic forgetting (CF). While several
techniques are available to effectively overcome CF for TIL, CIL remains to be
challenging due to the additional difficulty of inter-task class separation. So far
little theoretical work has been done to provide a principled guidance and necessary and sufficient conditions for solving the CIL problem. This paper performs
such a study. It first probabilistically decomposes the CIL problem into two subproblems: within-task prediction (WP) and task-id prediction (TP). It further proves
that TP is correlated with out-of-distribution (OOD) detection. The key result is
that regardless of whether WP and TP or OOD detection are defined explicitly
or implicitly by a CIL algorithm, good WP and good TP or OOD detection are
necessary and sufficient for good CIL performances. Additionally, TIL is simply
WP. Based on the theoretical result, new CIL methods are also designed, which
outperform strong baselines in both CIL and TIL settings by a large margin.4

1

Introduction

Continual learning aims to incrementally learn a sequence of tasks [1]. Each task consists of a set of
classes to be learned together. A major challenge of CL is catastrophic forgetting (CF). Although a
large number of CL techniques have been proposed, they are mainly empirical. Limited theoretical
research has done on how to solve CL. This paper performs such a theoretical study about the
necessary and sufficient conditions for effective CL. There are two main CL settings that have been
extensively studied: class incremental learning (CIL) and task incremental learning (TIL) [2]. In
CIL, the learning process builds a single classifier for all tasks/classes learned so far. In testing, a test
instance from any class may be presented for the model to classify. No prior task information (e.g.,
task-id) of the test instance is provided. Formally, CIL is defined as follows.
Class incremental learning (CIL). CIL learns a sequence of tasks, 1, 2, ..., T . Each task k has a
k
training dataset Dk = {(xik , yki )ni=1
}, where nk is the number of data samples in task k, and xik ∈ X
i
is an input sample and yk ∈ Yk (the set of all classes of task k) is its class label. All Yk ’s are disjoint
ST
(Yk ∩ Yk′ = ∅, ∀k ̸= k ′ ) and k=1 Yk = Y. The goal of CIL is to construct a single predictive
function or classifier f : X → Y that can identify the class label y of each given test instance x.
In the TIL setup, each task is a separate classification problem. For example, one task could be to
classify different breeds of dogs and another task could be to classify different types of animals (the
∗

Equal contribution
The work was done when this author was visiting Bing Liu’s group at University of Illinois at Chicago
‡
Correspondance author. Bing Liu <liub@uic.edu>
4
The code is available at https://github.com/k-gyuhak/WPTP
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

