Analyzing Sharpness along GD Trajectory:
Progressive Sharpening and Edge of Stability

Zhouzi Li∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University
zhouzi188763@gmail.com

Zixuan Wang∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University
wangzx2019012326@gmail.com

Jian Li†
IIIS, Tsinghua University
lapordge@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent findings demonstrate that modern neural networks trained by full-batch
gradient descent typically enter a regime called Edge of Stability (EOS). In this
regime, the sharpness, i.e., the maximum Hessian eigenvalue, first increases to the
value 2/(step size) (the progressive sharpening phase) and then oscillates around
this value (the EOS phase). This paper aims to analyze the GD dynamics and the
sharpness along the optimization trajectory. Our analysis naturally divides the GD
trajectory into four phases depending on the change in the sharpness value. We
empirically identify the norm of output layer weight as an interesting indicator
of the sharpness dynamics. Based on this empirical observation, we attempt to
theoretically and empirically explain the dynamics of various key quantities that
lead to the change of the sharpness in each phase of EOS. Moreover, based on
certain assumptions, we provide a theoretical proof of the sharpness behavior in the
EOS regime in two-layer fully-connected linear neural networks. We also discuss
some other empirical findings and the limitation of our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved great success in a variety of machine learning applications, and gradientbased algorithms are the prevailing optimization methods for training deep neural networks. However,
mathematically understanding the behavior of the optimization methods for deep learning is highly
challenging, due to non-convexity, over-parameterization, and complicated architectures. In particular,
some recent empirical findings in deep networks contradict the traditional understandings of gradient
methods. For example, Wu et al. [30] observed that the solution found by gradient descent has
sharpness approximately equal to 2/η instead of just being smaller than 2/η. Also, Jastrzebski et al.
[14] observed that there is a break-even point in the SGD trajectory, and after this point, there is a
regularization effect on the loss curvature.
One recent well-known example is the phenomenon called “Edge of Stability" (EOS) (Cohen et al.
[6]). Based on the classical optimization theory, the learning rate η of gradient-based method should
be smaller than 2/λ so that the loss can decrease, where λ is the largest eigenvalue of the Hessian of
the objective, also called “sharpness” in the literature. Otherwise, the loss diverges (even for simple
quadratic functions). However, the empirical findings in Cohen et al. [6] show that under various
∗

Contributed equally, listed in alphabetical order.
The authors are supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 62161146004,
Turing AI Institute of Nanjing and Xi’an Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core Technology.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

