TwiBot-22: Towards Graph-Based
Twitter Bot Detection
Shangbin Feng1,2∗ Zhaoxuan Tan1∗ Herun Wan1∗ Ningnan Wang1∗ Zilong Chen1,3∗ Binchi Zhang1,4∗
Qinghua Zheng1† Wenqian Zhang1 Zhenyu Lei1 Shujie Yang1 Xinshun Feng1 Qingyue Zhang1
Hongrui Wang1 Yuhan Liu1 Yuyang Bai1 Heng Wang1 Zijian Cai1 Yanbo Wang1
Lijing Zheng1 Zihan Ma1 Jundong Li4 Minnan Luo1
Xi’an Jiaotong University1 , University of Washington2 , Tsinghua University3 , University of Virginia4
contact: shangbin@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Twitter bot detection has become an increasingly important task to combat
misinformation, facilitate social media moderation, and preserve the integrity of
the online discourse. State-of-the-art bot detection methods generally leverage the
graph structure of the Twitter network, and they exhibit promising performance
when confronting novel Twitter bots that traditional methods fail to detect. However, very few of the existing Twitter bot detection datasets are graph-based, and
even these few graph-based datasets suffer from limited dataset scale, incomplete
graph structure, as well as low annotation quality. In fact, the lack of a large-scale
graph-based Twitter bot detection benchmark that addresses these issues has
seriously hindered the development and evaluation of novel graph-based bot
detection approaches. In this paper, we propose TwiBot-22, a comprehensive
graph-based Twitter bot detection benchmark that presents the largest dataset to
date, provides diversiﬁed entities and relations on the Twitter network, and has
considerably better annotation quality than existing datasets. In addition, we
re-implement 35 representative Twitter bot detection baselines and evaluate them
on 9 datasets, including TwiBot-22, to promote a fair comparison of model performance and a holistic understanding of research progress. To facilitate further
research, we consolidate all implemented codes and datasets into the TwiBot-22
evaluation framework, where researchers could consistently evaluate new models
and datasets. The TwiBot-22 Twitter bot detection benchmark and evaluation
framework are publicly available at https://twibot22.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Automated users on Twitter, also known as Twitter bots, have become a widely known and welldocumented phenomenon. Over the past decade, malicious Twitter bots were responsible for a wide
range of problems such as online disinformation [Cui et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2020, Lu and Li,
2020], election interference [Howard et al., 2016, Bradshaw et al., 2017, Rossi et al., 2020, Ferrara,
2017], extremism campaign [Ferrara et al., 2016, Marcellino et al., 2020], and even the spread of
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: Qinghua Zheng, School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong
University. Email: qhzheng@xjtu.edu.cn; Minnan luo, School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an
Jiaotong University. Email: minnluo@xjtu.edu.cn
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

