Reincarnating Reinforcement Learning:
Reusing Prior Computation to Accelerate Progress

Rishabh Agarwal1,2∗ Max Schwarzer1,2
Pablo Samuel Castro1 Aaron Courville2 Marc G. Bellemare1,2
1
Google Research, Brain Team 2 MILA

Abstract
Learning tabula rasa, that is without any previously learned knowledge, is the
prevalent workflow in reinforcement learning (RL) research. However, RL systems,
when applied to large-scale settings, rarely operate tabula rasa. Such large-scale
systems undergo multiple design or algorithmic changes during their development
cycle and use ad hoc approaches for incorporating these changes without re-training
from scratch, which would have been prohibitively expensive. Additionally, the
inefficiency of deep RL typically excludes researchers without access to industrialscale resources from tackling computationally-demanding problems. To address
these issues, we present reincarnating RL as an alternative workflow or class of
problem settings, where prior computational work (e.g., learned policies) is reused
or transferred between design iterations of an RL agent, or from one RL agent
to another. As a step towards enabling reincarnating RL from any agent to any
other agent, we focus on the specific setting of efficiently transferring an existing
sub-optimal policy to a standalone value-based RL agent. We find that existing
approaches fail in this setting and propose a simple algorithm to address their
limitations. Equipped with this algorithm, we demonstrate reincarnating RL’s gains
over tabula rasa RL on Atari 2600 games, a challenging locomotion task, and the
real-world problem of navigating stratospheric balloons. Overall, this work argues
for an alternative approach to RL research, which we believe could significantly
improve real-world RL adoption and help democratize it further. Open-sourced
code and trained agents at agarwl.github.io/reincarnating_rl.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a general-purpose paradigm for making data-driven decisions. Due
to this generality, the prevailing trend in RL research is to learn systems that can operate efficiently
tabula rasa, that is without much learned knowledge including prior computational work such as
offline datasets or learned policies. However, tabula rasa RL systems are typically the exception rather
than the norm for solving large-scale RL problems [4, 13, 55, 75, 85]. Such large-scale RL systems
often need to function for long periods of time and continually experience new data; restarting them
from scratch may require weeks if not months of computation, and there may be billions of data
points to re-process – this makes the tabula rasa approach impractical. For example, the system that
plays Dota 2 at a human-like level [13] underwent several months of RL training with continual
changes (e.g., in model architecture, environment, etc) during its development; this necessitated
building upon the previously trained system after such changes to circumvent re-training from scratch,
which was done using ad hoc approaches (described in Section 3).
Current RL research also excludes the majority of researchers outside certain resource-rich labs from
tackling complex problems, as doing so often incurs substantial computational and financial cost:
AlphaStar [85], which achieves grandmaster level in StarCraft, was trained using TPUs for more than
a month and replicating it would cost several million dollars (Appendix A.1). Even the quintessential
deep RL benchmark of training an agent on 50+ Atari games [10], with at least 5 runs, requires
∗

Correspondence to Rishabh Agarwal <rishabhagarwal@google.com>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

