To update or not to update?
Neurons at equilibrium in deep models

Andrea Bragagnolo
University of Turin, Italy
Synesthesia s.r.l., Turin, Italy
andrea.bragagnolo@unito.it

Enzo Tartaglione
LTCI, Télécom Paris,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
enzo.tartaglione@telecom-paris.fr

Marco Grangetto
University of Turin, Italy
marco.grangetto@unito.it

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning optimization showed that, with some a-posteriori
information on fully-trained models, it is possible to match the same performance
by simply training a subset of their parameters. Such a discovery has a broad impact
from theory to applications, driving the research towards methods to identify the
minimum subset of parameters to train without look-ahead information exploitation.
However, the methods proposed do not match the state-of-the-art performance and
rely on unstructured sparsely connected models.
In this work we shift our focus from the single parameters to the behavior of the
whole neuron, exploiting the concept of neuronal equilibrium (NEq). When a
neuron is in a configuration at equilibrium (meaning that it has learned a specific
input-output relationship), we can halt its update; on the contrary, when a neuron is
at non-equilibrium, we let its state evolve towards an equilibrium state, updating
its parameters. The proposed approach has been tested on different state-of-theart learning strategies and tasks, validating NEq and observing that the neuronal
equilibrium depends on the specific learning setup.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has become a staple solution to different tasks, such as computer
vision, bio-informatics, speech recognition, and many more. Unfortunately, modern neural network
architectures are becoming more and more “expensive”: performing simple inferences requires a lot
of computational resources, and training the models even more. Such cost poses several challenges
for the research community: the training of a network model is associated with large carbon footprints
and the commercialization of AI research (especially for edge devices) is hindered by the resource
requirements of the models Strubell et al. (2019).
For several years now, many works in literature have shown that is possible to shrink both the
size and resource requirements, mainly via quantization Yang et al. (2020); Jin et al. (2022) and
pruning Wang et al. (2020); Tang et al. (2020); Tanaka et al. (2020). In particular, pruning techniques
can drastically reduce the number of operations needed to perform inference, without affecting the
overall performance of the model. Pruning targets the reduction of parameters in the model, which
has advantages after training; unfortunately, it is unable to reduce the cost of the training cycle, and
on the contrary, it requires, in general, iterations of few-shot pruning, followed by fine-tuning Lee
et al. (2019); Tartaglione et al. (2018).
This paper has been accepted for publication at the 36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS 2022).

