SCL-WC: Cross-Slide Contrastive Learning for
Weakly-Supervised Whole-Slide Image Classification
∗

Xiyue Wang1,2 , Jinxi Xiang3 , Jun Zhang3 , Sen Yang3 , Zhongyi Yang3 , Minghui Wang1,2 , Jing
∗
Zhang1 , Wei Yang3 , Junzhou Huang3 , and Xiao Han3
1

College of Biomedical Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China 610065
2
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China 610065
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China 518057
wangxiyue@stu.scu.edu.cn, wangminghui@scu.edu.cn, jing_zhang@scu.edu.cn,
{jinxixiang, junejzhang, scusenyang, zhongyiyang, willyang, joehhuang, haroldhan}@tencent.com

Abstract
Weakly-supervised whole-slide image (WSI) classification (WSWC) is a challenging task where a large number of unlabeled patches (instances) exist within each
WSI (bag) while only a slide label is given. Despite recent progress for the multiple
instance learning (MIL)-based WSI analysis, the major limitation is that it usually
focuses on the easy-to-distinguish diagnosis-positive regions while ignoring positives that occupy a small ratio in the entire WSI. To obtain more discriminative
features, we propose a novel weakly-supervised classification method based on
cross-slide contrastive learning (called SCL-WC), which depends on task-agnostic
self-supervised feature pre-extraction and task-specific weakly-supervised feature
refinement and aggregation for WSI-level prediction. To enable both intra-WSI and
inter-WSI information interaction, we propose a positive-negative-aware module
(PNM) and a weakly-supervised cross-slide contrastive learning (WSCL) module, respectively. The WSCL aims to pull WSIs with the same disease types
closer and push different WSIs away. The PNM aims to facilitate the separation
of tumor-like patches and normal ones within each WSI. Extensive experiments
demonstrate state-of-the-art performance of our method in three different classification tasks (e.g., over 2% of AUC in Camelyon16, 5% of F1 score in BRACS,
and 3% of AUC in DiagSet). Our method also shows superior flexibility and
scalability in weakly-supervised localization and semi-supervised classification
experiments (e.g., first place in the BRIGHT challenge). Our code will be available
at https://github.com/Xiyue-Wang/SCL-WC.

1

Introduction

The gold standard for cancer diagnosis is derived by examining pathological slides. With the
advance in scanning technology, tissue slides are scanned into whole-slide images (WSIs) for better
management and processing, which facilitates the development of computational pathology [1; 2].
Due to the gigapixel size of WSIs and their wide variations (e.g., tumor types and staining protocols)
[3; 4], acquiring exhaustive pixel/patch-level annotations is very time-consuming and expensive.
As the dataset size increases, such sufficient labels are obviously impractical. In practice, weak
annotations at the WSI level are more readily available in clinical reports, which facilitates the
emergence of weakly-supervised WSI classification (WSWC) studies.
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

