On the Convergence of Stochastic Multi-Objective
Gradient Manipulation and Beyond
Shiji Zhou⇤†
Tsinghua University
zhoushiji00@gmail.com
Jiyan Jiang
Tsinghua University
scjjy95@outlook.com

Wenpeng Zhang⇤ †
Ant Group
zhangwenpeng0@gmail.com

Wenliang Zhong
Ant Group
yice.zwl@antgroup.com

Jinjie Gu
Ant Group
jinjie.gujj@antgroup.com

Wenwu Zhu†
Tsinghua University
wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The conflicting gradients problem is one of the major bottlenecks for the effective
training of machine learning models that deal with multiple objectives. To resolve
this problem, various gradient manipulation techniques, such as PCGrad, MGDA,
and CAGrad, have been developed, which directly alter the conflicting gradients to
refined ones with alleviated or even no conflicts. However, the existing design and
analysis of these techniques are mainly conducted under the full-batch gradient
setting, ignoring the fact that they are primarily applied with stochastic mini-batch
gradients. In this paper, we illustrate that the stochastic gradient manipulation
algorithms may fail to converge to Pareto optimal solutions. Firstly, we show that
these different algorithms can be summarized into a unified algorithmic framework,
where the descent direction is given by the composition of the gradients of the
multiple objectives. Then we provide an explicit two-objective convex optimization instance to explicate the non-convergence issue under the unified framework,
which suggests that the non-convergence results from the determination of the
composite weights solely by the instantaneous stochastic gradients. To fix the nonconvergence issue, we propose a novel composite weights determination scheme
that exponentially averages the past calculated weights. Finally, we show the resulting new variant of stochastic gradient manipulation converges to Pareto optimal
or critical solutions and yields comparable or improved empirical performance.

1

Introduction

In many real-world application scenarios, the deployed machine learning models are designed to deal
with multiple objectives. For example, in online advertising, the models need to maximize both the
Click-Through Rate and the Post-Click Conversion Rate [33, 34, 27, 43]. In autonomous driving,
the automatic pilots learn to simultaneously solve multiple tasks such as object identification and
self-localization [14, 32]. Despite being widely used, multi-objective machine learning models is
known to be very challenging to train as different objectives may conflict with each other, creating
the conflicting gradients problem [19, 46, 28]. As is well acknowledged, the conflicting gradients are
⇤

Equal contributions

†

Corresponding authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

