Active Ranking without Strong Stochastic Transitivity

Hao Lou
Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
haolou@virginia.edu

Tao Jin
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
taoj@virginia.edu

Yue Wu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
ywu@cs.ucla.edu

Pan Xu
Dept. of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
pan.xu@duke.edu

Quanquan Gu*
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Farzad Farnoud∗
Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
farzad@virginia.edu

Abstract
Ranking from noisy comparisons is of great practical interest in machine learning.
In this paper, we consider the problem of recovering the exact full ranking for a list
of items under ranking models that do not assume the Strong Stochastic Transitivity
property. We propose a δ-correct algorithm, Probe-Rank, that actively learns the
ranking from noisy pairwise comparisons. We prove a sample complexity upper
bound for Probe-Rank, which only depends on the preference probabilities between
items that are adjacent in the true ranking. This improves upon existing sample
complexity results that depend on the preference probabilities for all pairs of items.
Probe-Rank thus outperforms existing methods over a large collection of instances
that do not satisfy Strong Stochastic Transitivity. Thorough numerical experiments
in various settings are conducted, demonstrating that Probe-Rank is significantly
more sample-efficient than the state-of-the-art active ranking method.

1

Introduction

Ranking from noisy comparisons has a wide range of applications including voting [5, 7], identifying
the winner/full ranking of teams in sport leagues, ranking players in online gaming systems [17],
crowdsourcing services [6], web search [8], and recommendation systems [2, 23]. In practice,
comparisons usually contain certain levels of “noise”. For example, duels in a game are not always
won by the more proficient player, and preferences between movies/restaurants can also vary among
different individuals. The presence of noise is commonly studied using a probabilistic comparison
model [12, 25], where an item has a certain probability to win the comparison over another or a group
of items.
We are interested in estimating the total ranking. To guarantee that the ranking is consistent with the
preference probabilities, it is often assumed [12, 14, 21, 25] that if i ranks higher than j, then i wins
∗

Co-corresponding Authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

