Deep Architecture Connectivity Matters for Its
Convergence: A Fine-Grained Analysis

Wuyang Chen∗
University of Texas at Austin
Boris Hanin
Princeton University

Wei Huang∗
RIKEN AIP

Xinyu Gong
University of Texas at Austin

Zhangyang Wang
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Advanced deep neural networks (DNNs), designed by either human or AutoML
algorithms, are growing increasingly complex. Diverse operations are connected by
complicated connectivity patterns, e.g., various types of skip connections. Those
topological compositions are empirically effective and observed to smooth the
loss landscape and facilitate the gradient flow in general. However, it remains
elusive to derive any principled understanding of their effects on the DNN capacity
or trainability, and to understand why or in which aspect one specific connectivity pattern is better than another. In this work, we theoretically characterize
the impact of connectivity patterns on the convergence of DNNs under gradient
descent training in fine granularity. By analyzing a wide network’s Neural Network Gaussian Process (NNGP), we are able to depict how the spectrum of an
NNGP kernel propagates through a particular connectivity pattern, and how that
affects the bound of convergence rates. As one practical implication of our results,
we show that by a simple filtration on “unpromising" connectivity patterns, we
can trim down the number of models to evaluate, and significantly accelerate the
large-scale neural architecture search without any overhead. Code is available at:
https://github.com/VITA-Group/architecture_convergence.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed substantial progress in designing better deep neural network architectures.
The common objective is to build networks that are easy to optimize, of superior trade-offs between
efficiency and accuracy, and are generalizable to diverse tasks and datasets. When developing deep
networks, how operations (linear transformations and non-linear activations) are connected and
stacked together is vital, which is studied in network’s convergence [18, 71, 75], complexity [47, 50,
21], generalization [14, 8, 61], loss landscapes [36, 20, 51], etc.
Although it has been widely observed that the performance of deep networks keeps being improved
by advanced design options, our understanding remains limited on how a network’s properties
are influenced by its architectures. For example, in computer vision, design trends have shifted
from vanilla chain-like stacked layers [33, 32, 53] to manually elaborated connectivity patterns
(ResNet [25], DenseNet [28], etc.). While people observed smoothed loss landscapes [36], mitigated
gradient vanishing problem [4], and better generalization [29], these findings only explain the
effectiveness of adding skip connections in general, but barely lead to further “finer-grained" insight
on more sophisticated composition of skip connections beyond ResNet. Recently, the AutoML
community tries to relieve human efforts and propose to automatically discover novel networks from
∗

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

