Capturing Failures of Large Language Models via
Human Cognitive Biases
Erik Jones
UC Berkeley
erjones@berkeley.edu

Jacob Steinhardt
UC Berkeley
jsteinhardt@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large language models generate complex, open-ended outputs: instead of outputting a class label they write summaries, generate dialogue, or produce working
code. In order to asses the reliability of these open-ended generation systems, we
aim to identify qualitative categories of erroneous behavior, beyond identifying
individual errors. To hypothesize and test for such qualitative errors, we draw
inspiration from human cognitive biases—systematic patterns of deviation from rational judgement. Specifically, we use cognitive biases as motivation to (i) generate
hypotheses for problems that models may have, and (ii) develop experiments that
elicit these problems. Using code generation as a case study, we find that OpenAI’s
Codex errs predictably based on how the input prompt is framed, adjusts outputs
towards anchors, and is biased towards outputs that mimic frequent training examples. We then use our framework to elicit high-impact errors such as incorrectly
deleting files. Our results indicate that experimental methodology from cognitive
science can help characterize how machine learning systems behave.1

1

Introduction

Recent large language models have achieved new, exciting capabilities. In contrast to traditional
classifiers, these models can generate open-ended text, enabling use cases like summarization
[Stiennon et al., 2020], dialog [Thoppilan et al., 2022], and code generation [Chen et al., 2021].
The open-ended power of these systems, however, poses new reliability challenges. We must
understand not only when systems err, but also the kinds of errors they make, as some errors are much
more costly than others. For example, erroneous code that does not compile is less dangerous than
code that deletes all files in the home directory. Studying how frequently an error occurs is difficult,
as the same error (e.g. delete all files) can appear in a wide range of syntactically diverse outputs.
In order to better reason about how complex systems err, we need methods to test whether systems
make the same qualitative error across different prompts, even when the generated outputs differ.
To study these reliability challenges, we primarily focus on code generation models. Such models
complete programs from comments, descriptions of code functionality, or initial lines of code.
Code generation is particularly amenable to study since it is objective: generated solutions are
unambiguously correct or incorrect. Yet it is also open-ended: the set of programs a model could
output is arbitrarily large, so the rate at which a specific program is outputted is not very descriptive.
Many of the reliability challenges posed by code generation models, and open-ended systems broadly,
also arise when studying qualitative failures in human decision making. These failures, called
cognitive biases, are systematic ways in which humans deviate from rational judgment [Tversky
and Kahneman, 1974]. For example, Tversky and Kahneman find that humans inadequately adjust
1

Code for this paper is available at https://github.com/ejones313/codex-cog-biases.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

