Nonnegative Tensor Completion
via Integer Optimization

Caleb Xavier Bugg†
†

Chen Chen‡

Anil Aswani†

University of California, Berkeley, {caleb_bugg,aaswani}@berkeley.edu
‡
The Ohio State University, chen.8018@osu.edu

Abstract
Unlike matrix completion, tensor completion does not have an algorithm that is
known to achieve the information-theoretic sample complexity rate. This paper
develops a new algorithm for the special case of completion for nonnegative tensors.
We prove that our algorithm converges in a linear (in numerical tolerance) number
of oracle steps, while achieving the information-theoretic rate. Our approach is
to define a new norm for nonnegative tensors using the gauge of a particular 0-1
polytope; integer linear programming can, in turn, be used to solve linear separation
problems over this polytope. We combine this insight with a variant of the FrankWolfe algorithm to construct our numerical algorithm, and we demonstrate its
effectiveness and scalability through computational experiments using a laptop on
tensors with up to one-hundred million entries.

1

Introduction

Tensors generalize matrices. A tensor ψ of order p is ψ ∈ Rr1 ×···×rp , where ri is the dimension of
the tensor in the i-th index, for i = 1, . . . , p. Though related, many problems that are polynomial-time
solvable for matrices are NP-hard for tensors. For instance, it is NP-hard to compute the rank of a
tensor (Hillar and Lim, 2013). Tensor versions of the spectral norm, nuclear norm, and singular value
decomposition are also NP-hard to compute (Hillar and Lim, 2013; Friedland and Lim, 2014).
1.1

Past Approaches to Tensor Completion

Tensor completion is the problem of observing (possibly with noise) a subset of entries of a tensor and
then estimating the remaining entries based on an assumption of low-rankness. The tensor completion
problem is encountered in a number of important applications, including computer vision (Liu et al.,
2012; Zhang et al., 2019), regression with only categorical variables (Aswani, 2016), healthcare
(Gandy et al., 2011; Dauwels et al., 2011), and many other application domains (Song et al., 2019).
Although the special case of matrix completion is now well understood, the tensor version of this
problem has an unresolved tension. To date, no tensor completion algorithm has been shown to achieve
the information-theoretic sample complexity rate. Namely, for a tensor completionp
problem
P on a
rank k tensor with sample size n, the information-theoretic rate for estimation error is k · i ri /n
(Gandy et al., 2011). In fact, evidence suggests a computational barrier in which no polynomial-time
algorithm can achieve this rate (Barak and Moitra, 2016). One set of approaches has polynomial-time
computation but requires exponentially more samples than the information-theoretic rate (Gandy
et al., 2011; Mu et al., 2014; Barak and Moitra, 2016; Montanari and Sun, 2018), whereas another
set of approaches achieve substantially closer to the information-theoretic rate but (in order to attain
global minima) requires solving NP-hard problems that lack numerical algorithms (Chandrasekaran
et al., 2012; Yuan and Zhang, 2016, 2017; Rauhut and Stojanac, 2021).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

