Learning to Reconstruct Missing Data from
Spatiotemporal Graphs with Sparse Observations

Ivan Marisca∗
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA,
Università della Svizzera italiana
ivan.marisca@usi.ch

Andrea Cini∗
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA,
Università della Svizzera italiana
andrea.cini@usi.ch

1

1

Cesare Alippi
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA,
Università della Svizzera italiana
2
Politecnico di Milano
cesare.alippi@usi.ch
1

Abstract
Modeling multivariate time series as temporal signals over a (possibly dynamic)
graph is an effective representational framework that allows for developing models
for time series analysis. In fact, discrete sequences of graphs can be processed by
autoregressive graph neural networks to recursively learn representations at each
discrete point in time and space. Spatiotemporal graphs are often highly sparse,
with time series characterized by multiple, concurrent, and long sequences of
missing data, e.g., due to the unreliable underlying sensor network. In this context,
autoregressive models can be brittle and exhibit unstable learning dynamics. The
objective of this paper is, then, to tackle the problem of learning effective models
to reconstruct, i.e., impute, missing data points by conditioning the reconstruction
only on the available observations. In particular, we propose a novel class of
attention-based architectures that, given a set of highly sparse discrete observations,
learn a representation for points in time and space by exploiting a spatiotemporal
propagation architecture aligned with the imputation task. Representations are
trained end-to-end to reconstruct observations w.r.t. the corresponding sensor and its
neighboring nodes. Compared to the state of the art, our model handles sparse data
without propagating prediction errors or requiring a bidirectional model to encode
forward and backward time dependencies. Empirical results on representative
benchmarks show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Exploiting structure – both temporal and spatial – is arguably the key ingredient for the success of
modern deep learning architectures and models. Structure and invariances allow imposing inductive
biases to learning systems that act as strong regularizations, thus limiting the space of possible models
to the most plausible ones and, consequently, greatly reducing sample complexity. This is the case
with spatiotemporal graph neural networks (STGNNs) [1–3] which learn to process multivariate
time series while taking into account underlying space and time dependencies by encoding structural
spatiotemporal inductive biases in their architectures. In particular, graphs are used to model the
presence of spatial relationships which can be thought of as soft functional dependencies existing
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

