CCCP is Frank-Wolfe in disguise

Alp Yurtsever
Umeå University
alp.yurtsever@umu.se

Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
This paper uncovers a simple but rather surprising connection: it shows that the wellknown convex-concave procedure (CCCP) and its generalization to constrained
problems are both special cases of the Frank-Wolfe (FW) method. This connection
not only provides insight of deep (in our opinion) pedagogical value, but also
transfers the recently discovered convergence theory of nonconvex Frank-Wolfe
methods immediately to CCCP, closing a long-standing gap in its non-asymptotic
convergence theory. We hope the viewpoint uncovered by this paper spurs the
transfer of other advances made for FW to both CCCP and its generalizations.

1

Introduction

We study non-convex difference of convex (DC) optimization problems of the form:
min f (x) − g(x), x ∈ D,
x

(1.1)

where both f and g are convex functions and D is a constraint set that might itself be non-convex (we
will specify its structure later). Throughout, we assume that the optimal value f ? − g ? is finite.
Formulation (1.1) is a DC program. When f and g are smooth, a powerful local method is ConvexConcave Procedure (CCCP) [Yuille and Rangarajan, 2003] that reduces (1.1) to a sequence of convex
problems. CCCP is not only algorithmically appealing, it is also widely applicable and numerous
algorithms can be viewed as special cases of CCCP, most notably the famous EM algorithm—see [§4
Yuille and Rangarajan, 2003].
But despite its wide applicability (see §2.2) and elegance, convergence theory for CCCP is quite
limited. Its asymptotic convergence can be obtained by viewing it as a specialization of the DC
algorithm (DCA) [Le Thi and Pham Dinh, 2018], or via a more refined analysis designed for CCCP
in [Lanckriet and Sriperumbudur, 2009]. A long-standing gap in the literature on CCCP has been to
obtain non-asymptotic convergence theory that establishes convergence to an ε-stationary point in
O(poly(1/ε)) or fewer iterations.1
The starting point of this paper is a discovery that is elementary yet surprising: CCCP is a special
case of the Frank-Wolfe (FW) method! This discovery not only provides insight of deep (in our
opinion) pedagogical value, but it also transfers the convergence theory of nonconvex FW to CCCP,
which closes the abovementioned gap in CCCP’s non-asymptotic convergence theory.
1.1

Main contributions

In light of this short background, we summarize now the key contributions of this paper.
 We recognize the basic (unconstrained) CCCP method to be a special case of Frank-Wolfe. By
the same argument, even its generalization to convex constrained instances of (1.1) is a special
case of FW. This realization allows us to immediately transfer non-asymptotic convergence
theory of FW to CCCP and convex constrained CCCP.
1

We became aware of some recent discoveries on the non-asymptotic convergence of basic CCCP in
[Abbaszadehpeivasti et al., 2021, Lê-Huu and Alahari, 2021] after completing this work—see Remark 3.4.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

