Effective Adaptation in Multi-Task Co-Training for
Unified Autonomous Driving

Xiwen Liang1∗ , Yangxin Wu1∗ , Jianhua Han2 , Hang Xu2 , Chunjing Xu2 , Xiaodan Liang1†
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{liangxw29@mail2, wuyx29@mail2, liangxd9@mail}.sysu.edu.cn,
{hanjianhua4, xu.hang, xuchunjing}@huawei.com

Abstract
Aiming towards a holistic understanding of multiple downstream tasks simultaneously, there is a need for extracting features with better transferability. Though
many latest self-supervised pre-training methods have achieved impressive performance on various vision tasks under the prevailing pretrain-finetune paradigm,
their generalization capacity to multi-task learning scenarios is yet to be explored.
In this paper, we extensively investigate the transfer performance of various types
of self-supervised methods, e.g., MoCo and SimCLR, on three downstream tasks,
including semantic segmentation, drivable area segmentation, and traffic object
detection, on the large-scale driving dataset BDD100K. We surprisingly find that
their performances are sub-optimal or even lag far behind the single-task baseline,
which may be due to the distinctions of training objectives and architectural design lied in the pretrain-finetune paradigm. To overcome this dilemma as well
as avoid redesigning the resource-intensive pre-training stage, we propose a simple yet effective pretrain-adapt-finetune paradigm for general multi-task training, where the off-the-shelf pretrained models can be effectively adapted without
increasing the training overhead. During the adapt stage, we utilize learnable
multi-scale adapters to dynamically adjust the pretrained model weights supervised by multi-task objectives while leaving the pretrained knowledge untouched.
Furthermore, we regard the vision-language pre-training model CLIP as a strong
complement to the pretrain-adapt-finetune paradigm and propose a novel adapter
named LV-Adapter, which incorporates language priors in the multi-task model via
task-specific prompting and alignment between visual and textual features. Our
experiments demonstrate that the adapt stage significantly improves the overall
performance of those off-the-shelf pretrained models and the contextual features
generated by LV-Adapter are of general benefits for downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Multi-task learning is a long-studied problem in computer vision and has become an emerging
paradigm in autonomous driving [19, 50, 18]. An autonomous vehicle may need to concurrently
perform a wide range of perception tasks, e.g., locating the pedestrians and cars, deciding road
affordability for driving, as well as detecting the lanes to precipitate a driving action. The joint
learning of multiple tasks can not only reduce the training and inference time, but also act as a
regularizer that enforces the learning of generalizable representations [6, 19]. Apart from efficiency
and simplicity, an all-in-one architecture is argued to have the potential to enhance the robustness of
the driving system by implicitly learning the synergy between heterogeneous tasks [19, 45, 40].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

