Dense Interspecies Face Embedding

Sejong Yang
Yonsei University
sejong.yang@yonsei.ac.kr
Seonghyeon Nam
York University
snam0331@gmail.com

Subin Jeon
Yonsei University
subinjeon@yonsei.ac.kr
Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University
seonjookim@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Dense Interspecies Face Embedding (DIFE) is a new direction for understanding faces of various animals by extracting common features among animal faces
including human face. There are three main obstacles for interspecies face understanding: (1) lack of animal data compared to human, (2) ambiguous connection
between faces of various animals, and (3) extreme shape and style variance. To
cope with the lack of data, we utilize multi-teacher knowledge distillation of CSE
and StyleGAN2 requiring no additional data or label. Then we synthesize pseudo
pair images through the latent space exploration of StyleGAN2 to find implicit
associations between different animal faces. Finally, we introduce the semantic
matching loss to overcome the problem of extreme shape differences between
species. To quantitatively evaluate our method over possible previous methodologies like unsupervised keypoint detection, we perform interspecies facial keypoint
transfer on MAFL and AP-10K. Furthermore, the results of other applications like
interspecies face image manipulation and dense keypoint transfer are provided.
The code is available at https://github.com/kingsj0405/dife.

1

Introduction

Face understanding is a longstanding research topic in computer vision, and there have been extensive
studies and applications such as face recognition, facial expression estimation, face photo manipulation, and virtual humans [6, 47, 4, 51, 3]. The vast majority of successful works on faces have focused
on human faces due to its practical implication for a variety of applications and the accessibility to
a large amount of annotated data. There have been few attempts for understanding faces of other
animal species to facilitate more applications such as ecological research, pet identification, and
farm automation [14, 34, 12]. However, the task of understanding animal faces is more challenging
than that for the human face due to the lack of sufficient data with annotations. In the literature
on full-body understanding, joint learning of interspecies data has been studied as a remedy by
transferring the knowledge of well-annotated domain such as human to other species [33, 26, 27].
However, the existing approaches are focused on full-body data, therefore their performance on facial
data is limited.
In this work, we are interested in the problem of learning the representation of interspecies facial
semantics, which is a common representation shared across interspecies facial data. Learning such
representation allows us to extend face understanding beyond the human face, as it enables discovering
facial semantics of other species without enough annotations through transferring knowledge from
well-annotated human data. As many animal species share similar face geometry, the representation
can also benefit from learning multiple species jointly. Since sharing photos of animals through social
networks has become more popular, learning the interspecies face representation can be used for
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

