Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models

Jordan Hoffmann∗

Sebastian Borgeaud∗

Trevor Cai

Eliza Rutherford

Johannes Welbl

Aidan Clark

George van den Driessche
Karen Simonyan

Arthur Mensch∗

Diego de Las Casas
Tom Hennigan

Bogdan Damoc

Erich Elsen

Lisa Anne Hendricks

Eric Noland
Aurelia Guy

Oriol Vinyals
∗

Elena Buchatskaya

Jack W. Rae

Katie Millican
Simon Osindero
Laurent Sifre∗

Equal contributions

DeepMind
(sborgeaud|amensch|sifre)@deepmind.com

Abstract
We investigate the optimal model size and number of tokens for training a Transformer language model under a given compute budget. We find that current large
language models are significantly undertrained, a consequence of the recent focus
on scaling language models whilst keeping the amount of training data constant.
By training over 400 language models ranging from 70 million to over 16 billion
parameters on 5 to 500 billion tokens, we find that for compute-optimal training, the
model size and the number of training tokens should be scaled equally: for every
doubling of model size the number of training tokens should also be doubled. We
test this hypothesis by training a predicted compute-optimal model, Chinchilla, that
uses the same compute budget as Gopher but with 70B parameters and 4× more
more data. Chinchilla uniformly and significantly outperforms Gopher (280B),
GPT-3 (175B), Jurassic-1 (178B), and Megatron-Turing NLG (530B) on a large
range of downstream evaluation tasks. This also means that Chinchilla uses substantially less compute for fine-tuning and inference, greatly facilitating downstream
usage. As a highlight, Chinchilla reaches a state-of-the-art average accuracy of
67.5% on the MMLU benchmark, greater than a 7% improvement over Gopher.

1

Introduction

A series of Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently been introduced [6, 30, 38, 48, 52], with the
largest dense language models now having over 500 billion parameters. These large autoregressive
transformers [53] have demonstrated impressive performance on many tasks using a variety of
evaluation protocols: zero-shot generalization, few-shot training, and as a basis for fine-tuning. The
compute and energy cost for training large language models is substantial [38, 52] and rises with
increasing model size. In practice, the allocated training compute budget is often known in advance:
practitioners have access to a certain number of accelerators for a given period of time. Since it
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

