Learning to Branch with Tree MDPs

Lara Scavuzzo
Delft University of Technology
l.v.scavuzzomontana@tudelft.nl

Feng Yang Chen
Polytechnique Montréal
feng-yang.chen@polymtl.ca

Didier Chételat
Polytechnique Montréal
didier.chetelat@polymtl.ca

Maxime Gasse
Mila, Polytechnique Montréal
maxime.gasse@polymtl.ca

Andrea Lodi
Jacobs Technion-Cornell Institute
Cornell Tech and Technion - IIT
andrea.lodi@cornell.edu

Neil Yorke-Smith
Delft University of Technology
n.yorke-smith@tudelft.nl

Karen Aardal
Delft University of Technology
k.i.aardal@tudelft.nl

Abstract
State-of-the-art Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP) solvers combine systematic
tree search with a plethora of hard-coded heuristics, such as the branching rule. The
idea of learning branching rules from data has received increasing attention recently,
and promising results have been obtained by learning fast approximations of the
strong branching expert. In this work, we instead propose to learn branching rules
from scratch via Reinforcement Learning (RL). We revisit the work of Etheve et al.
[11] and propose tree Markov Decision Processes, or tree MDPs, a generalization
of temporal MDPs that provides a more suitable framework for learning to branch.
We derive a tree policy gradient theorem, which exhibits a better credit assignment
compared to its temporal counterpart. We demonstrate through computational experiments that tree MDPs improve the learning convergence, and offer a promising
framework for tackling the learning-to-branch problem in MILPs.

1

Introduction

Mixed Integer Linear Programs (MILPs) offer a powerful tool for modeling combinatorial optimization problems, and are used in many real-world applications [30]. The method of choice for
solving MILPs to global optimality is the Branch-and-Bound (B&B) algorithm, which follows a
divide-and-conquer strategy. A critical component of the algorithm is the branching rule, which is
used to recursively partition the MILP search space using a space search tree. While there is little
understanding of optimal branching decisions in general settings [25], the choice of the branching
rule has a decisive impact on solving performance in practice [3]. In modern solvers, state-of-the-art
performance is obtained using hard-coded branching rules that rely on heuristics designed by domain
experts to perform well on a representative set of test instances [18].
In recent years, increasing attention has been given to approaches that use Machine Learning (ML)
to obtain good branching rules and improve upon expert-crafted heuristics [5]. Such a statistical
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

