Finding Second-Order Stationary Points in
Nonconvex-Strongly-Concave Minimax Optimization
Luo Luo
School of Data Science
Fudan University
luoluo@fudan.edu.cn

Yujun Li
Noah’s Ark Lab
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
liyujun9@huawei.com

Cheng Chen⇤
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences
Nanyang Technological University
cheng.chen@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We study the smooth minimax optimization problem minx maxy f (x, y), where
f is `-smooth, strongly-concave in y but possibly nonconvex in x. Most of
existing works focus on finding the first-order stationary points of the function
f (x, y) or its primal function P (x) , maxy f (x, y), but few of them focus
on achieving second-order stationary points. In this paper, we propose a novel
approach for minimax p
optimization, called Minimax Cubic Newton (MCN), which
could find an ", 1.5 ⇢" -second-order stationary point of P (x) with calling
p
p
O 1.5 ⇢" 1.5 times of second-order oracles and Õ 2 ⇢" 1.5 times of firstorder oracles, where  is the condition number and ⇢ is the Lipschitz continuous
constant for the Hessian of f (x, y). In addition, we propose an inexact variant
of MCN for high-dimensional problems to avoid calling expensive second-order
oracles. Instead, our method solves the cubic sub-problem inexactly via gradient
descent and matrix Chebyshev expansion. This strategy still obtains the desired
approximate second-order stationary point with high probability but only requires
p
Õ 1.5 `" 2 Hessian-vector oracle calls and Õ 2 ⇢" 1.5 first-order oracle
calls. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that considers the nonasymptotic convergence behavior of finding second-order stationary points for
minimax problems without the convex-concave assumptions.

1

Introduction

We consider minimax optimization of the form
min max f (x, y),

x2Rdx y2Rdy

(1)

where f (x, y) is `-smooth, µ-strongly-concave in y, but possibly nonconvex in x. Problem (1) can
also be written as
⇢
min P (x) , max f (x, y) .
(2)
x2Rdx

y2Rdy

This framework covers a wide range of applications in machine learning such as regularized GAN [32],
reinforcement learning [31], domain adaptation [9] and adversarial training [35].
⇤

The corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

