Giving Feedback on Interactive Student Programs
with Meta-Exploration
Evan Zheran Liu⇤, Moritz Stephan⇤, Allen Nie, Chris Piech, Emma Brunskill, Chelsea Finn
Stanford University

Abstract
Developing interactive software, such as websites or games, is a particularly
engaging way to learn computer science. However, teaching and giving feedback
on such software is time-consuming — standard approaches require instructors
to manually grade student-implemented interactive programs. As a result, online
platforms that serve millions, like Code.org, are unable to provide any feedback
on assignments for implementing interactive programs, which critically hinders
students’ ability to learn. One approach toward automatic grading is to learn
an agent that interacts with a student’s program and explores states indicative
of errors via reinforcement learning. However, existing work on this approach
only provides binary feedback of whether a program is correct or not, while
students require finer-grained feedback on the specific errors in their programs
to understand their mistakes. In this work, we show that exploring to discover
errors can be cast as a meta-exploration problem. This enables us to construct a
principled objective for discovering errors and an algorithm for optimizing this
objective, which provides fine-grained feedback. We evaluate our approach on a
set of over 700K real anonymized student programs from a Code.org interactive
assignment. Our approach provides feedback with 94.3% accuracy, improving over
existing approaches by 17.7% and coming within 1.5% of human-level accuracy.
Project web page: https://ezliu.github.io/dreamgrader.

1

Introduction

Feedback plays a critical role in
high-quality education, but can
require significant time and expertise
to provide [7]. We focus on one
area where providing feedback is
particularly burdensome: modern
computer science education, where
students are often tasked with developing interactive programs, such as
websites or games (e.g., see Figure 1).
While developing such programs
is highly engaging [35] and has
become ubiquitous in contemporary
classrooms [12], these programs
can include stochastic or creative
elements, so they cannot be graded
with traditional unit tests and must
instead be manually graded. However,
such manual grading is increasingly
⇤

!!
Score 0 : 0

Existing work (Nie et al., ‘21):
Coarse binary feedback

The program is
incorrect

This work: Fine-grained feedback
The ball incorrectly
bounces off the goal

Agent plays student program to ﬁnd bugs

Agent provides feedback

Figure 1: A learned Play-to-Grade agent for the Bounce programming assignment. The agent tests what happens when the ball is hit
into the goal, and finds that the ball incorrectly bounces out instead
of scoring a point. Whereas prior work provides coarse feedback
of whether the program is correct or not, our goal is to provide
fine-grained feedback on the specific mistakes a student has made.

Co-first authors. Correspondence to evanliu@cs.stanford.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

