Module-Aware Optimization for Auxiliary Learning

Hong Chen, Xin Wang∗, Yue Liu, Yuwei Zhou, Chaoyu Guan, Wenwu Zhu∗
Tsinghua University
{h-chen20,liuyue17,zhou-yw21,guancy19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{xin_wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Auxiliary learning is a widely adopted practice in deep learning, which aims to
improve the model performance on the primary task by exploiting the beneficial
information in the auxiliary loss. Existing auxiliary learning methods only focus
on balancing the auxiliary loss and the primary loss, ignoring the module-level
auxiliary influence, i.e., an auxiliary loss will be beneficial for optimizing specific
modules within the model but harmful to others, failing to make full use of auxiliary
information. To tackle the problem, we propose a Module-Aware Optimization
approach for Auxiliary Learning (MAOAL). The proposed approach considers the
module-level influence through the learnable module-level auxiliary importance,
i.e., the importance of each auxiliary loss to each module. Specifically, the proposed
approach jointly optimizes the module-level auxiliary importance and the model
parameters in a bi-level manner. In the lower optimization, the model parameters
are optimized with the importance parameterized gradient, while in the upper
optimization, the module-level auxiliary importance is updated with the implicit
gradient from a small developing dataset. Extensive experiments show that our
proposed MAOAL method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines for
different auxiliary losses on various datasets, demonstrating that our method can
serve as a powerful generic tool for auxiliary learning2 .

1

Introduction

Auxiliary learning is a common practice in deep learning, which utilizes auxiliary losses (generally
from related tasks) to benefit the primary task in terms of model performance or generalization
ability. The auxiliary learning paradigm has shown its effectiveness in various areas including
image classification [1, 2], recommendation [3–5], reinforcement learning [6, 7], etc. Under various
scenarios, task-specific auxiliary losses are designed for different purposes, e.g., in recommendation,
previous works [5, 3] add the click-through rate prediction loss to help the click conversion rate
prediction; in image classification [1], the self-supervised auxiliary loss is designed to improve
classification accuracy when labels are inadequate; and the losses of head pose estimation and facial
attribute inference are utilized to aid facial landmark detection [8].
Existing auxiliary learning methods focus on balancing the importance of each auxiliary loss and
the primary loss. Most of them assign a predefined weight to each auxiliary loss and then optimize
the sum of the weighted auxiliary losses and the primary loss. The predefined weights generally
need carefully tuning with Hyper-parameter Optimization (HPO) tools to prevent negative auxiliary
transfer. Recently, several works [9, 10, 6] are proposed to automatically assign weights to each
auxiliary loss based on the gradient similarity between each auxiliary loss and the primary loss. The
more recent works [11] further proposes to utilize a non-linear auxiliary loss combination to better
∗
2

Corresponding Authors.
Our code will be released at https://github.com/forchchch/MAOAL

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

