SNAKE: Shape-aware Neural 3D Keypoint Field

Chengliang Zhong1,2,3 Peixing You3 Xiaoxue Chen3 Hao Zhao4,5 Fuchun Sun2∗
Guyue Zhou3 Xiaodong Mu1 Chuang Gan6 Wenbing Huang7,8
1
Xi’an Research Institute of High-Tech 2 THUAI, Tsinghua University
3
AIR, Tsinghua University 4 Peking University 5 Intel Labs 6 MIT
7
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
8
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
zhongcl19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; hao.zhao@intel.com;
fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Detecting 3D keypoints from point clouds is important for shape reconstruction,
while this work investigates the dual question: can shape reconstruction benefit
3D keypoint detection? Existing methods either seek salient features according
to statistics of different orders or learn to predict keypoints that are invariant to
transformation. Nevertheless, the idea of incorporating shape reconstruction into
3D keypoint detection is under-explored. We argue that this is restricted by former
problem formulations. To this end, a novel unsupervised paradigm named SNAKE
is proposed, which is short for shape-aware neural 3D keypoint field. Similar to recent coordinate-based radiance or distance field, our network takes 3D coordinates
as inputs and predicts implicit shape indicators and keypoint saliency simultaneously, thus naturally entangling 3D keypoint detection and shape reconstruction. We
achieve superior performance on various public benchmarks, including standalone
object datasets ModelNet40, KeypointNet, SMPL meshes and scene-level datasets
3DMatch and Redwood. Intrinsic shape awareness brings several advantages as
follows. (1) SNAKE generates 3D keypoints consistent with human semantic
annotation, even without such supervision. (2) SNAKE outperforms counterparts
in terms of repeatability, especially when the input point clouds are down-sampled.
(3) the generated keypoints allow accurate geometric registration, notably in a
zero-shot setting. Codes are available at https://github.com/zhongcl-thu/SNAKE.

1

Introduction

2D sparse keypoints play a vital role in reconstruction [32], recognition [22] and pose estimation
[43], with scale invariant feature transform (SIFT) [19] being arguably the most important preDeep Learning (DL) computer vision algorithm. Altough dense alignment using photometric or
featuremetric losses is also successful in various domains [2, 36, 8], sparse keypoints are usually
preferred due to compactness in storage/computation and robustness to illumination/rotation. Just like
their 2D counterparts, 3D keypoints have also drawn a lot of attention from the community in both
pre-DL [13, 35] and DL [15, 1, 38] literature, with various applications in reconstruction [45, 41]
and recognition[26, 34].
However, detecting 3D keypoints from raw point cloud data is very challenging due to sampling
sparsity. No matter how we obtain raw point clouds (e.g., through RGB-D cameras [40], stereo
[4], or LIDAR [10]), they are only a discrete representation of the underlying 3D shape. This fact
drives us to explore the question of whether jointly reconstructing underlying 3D shapes helps 3D
∗

Corresponding author: Fuchun Sun.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

