TransTab: Learning Transferable Tabular
Transformers Across Tables
Zifeng Wang1 and Jimeng Sun1,2
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
Carle Illinois College of Medicine, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
1

{zifengw2,jimeng}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Tabular data (or tables) are the most widely used data format in machine learning (ML). However, ML models often assume the table structure keeps fixed in
training and testing. Before ML modeling, heavy data cleaning is required to
merge disparate tables with different columns. This preprocessing often incurs
significant data waste (e.g., removing unmatched columns and samples). How to
learn ML models from multiple tables with partially overlapping columns? How to
incrementally update ML models as more columns become available over time?
Can we leverage model pretraining on multiple distinct tables? How to train an ML
model which can predict on an unseen table?
To answer all those questions, we propose to relax fixed table structures by introducing a Transferable Tabular Transformer (TransTab) for tables. The goal
of TransTab is to convert each sample (a row in the table) to a generalizable
embedding vector, and then apply stacked transformers for feature encoding. One
methodology insight is combining column description and table cells as the raw
input to a gated transformer model. The other insight is to introduce supervised and
self-supervised pretraining to improve model performance. We compare TransTab
with multiple baseline methods on diverse benchmark datasets and five oncology
clinical trial datasets. Overall, TransTab ranks 1.00, 1.00, 1.78 out of 12 methods
in supervised learning, feature incremental learning, and transfer learning scenarios,
respectively; and the proposed pretraining leads to 2.3% AUC lift on average over
the supervised learning.

1

Introduction

Tabular data are ubiquitous in healthcare, engineering, advertising, and finance [1, 2, 3, 4]. They
are often stored in a relational database as tables or spreadsheets. Table rows represent the data
samples, and columns represent the feature variables of diverse data types (e.g., categorical, numerical,
binary, and textual). Recent works enhance tabular ML modeling using deep networks [5, 6, 7, 8]
or designing self-supervision [2, 9, 10, 11]. Those existing works require the same table structure
in training and testing data. However, there can be multiple tables sharing partially overlapped
columns in the real world. Hence, learning across tables is inapplicable. The traditional remedy is
to perform data cleaning by removing non-overlapping columns and mismatched samples before
training any ML models, which waste data resources [12, 13, 14]. Therefore, learning across tables
with disparate columns and transferring knowledge across tables are crucial to extending the success
of deep learning/pretraining to the tabular domain.
Tables are highly structured yet flexible. The first step to achieve learning across tables is to rethink
the basic elements in tabular data modeling. In computer vision, the basic elements are pixels [15]
or patches, [16, 17]; in natural language processing (NLP), the basic elements are words [18] or
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

