One-Inlier is First: Towards Efficient Position
Encoding for Point Cloud Registration

Fan Yang
Lin Guo
Zhi Chen
Wenbing Tao∗
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
{fanyang,linguo,z_chen,wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Transformer architecture has shown great potential for many visual tasks, including
point cloud registration. As an order-aware module, position encoding plays an
important role in Transformer architecture applied to point cloud registration task.
In this paper, we propose OIF-PCR, a one-inlier based position encoding method
for point cloud registration network. Specifically, we first find one correspondence
by a differentiable optimal transport layer, and use it to normalize each point for
position encoding. It can eliminate the challenges brought by the different reference
frames of two point clouds, and mitigate the feature ambiguity by learning the
spatial consistency. Then, we propose a joint approach for establishing correspondence and position encoding, presenting an iterative optimization process. Finally,
we design a progressive way for point cloud alignment and feature learning to
gradually optimize the rigid transformation. The proposed position encoding is
very efficient, requiring only a small addition of memory and computing overhead.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the proposed method can achieve competitive
performance with the state-of-the-art methods in both indoor and outdoor scenes.

1

Introduction

Point cloud registration is a fundamental research topic in many applications including scene reconstruction, autonomous driving, robotics, etc. The goal of it is to align two partially overlapped point
clouds by estimating a rigid transformation between them. The commonly used feature-based point
cloud registration involves two aspects: establishing point correspondences and estimating the rigid
transformation. Although it has been widely studied in past decades, it is still challenging due to the
difficulties such as low-overlap, repetitive patterns.
In recent years, learning-based works [28, 44, 50, 8] have made great advances in 3D representation.
In addition to utilizing deep neural networks to learn better local feature descriptions [1, 9, 11], recent
methods [18, 48, 29, 47] try to introduce Transformer [41] architecture to establish correspondences.
One of the most important strategies of Transformer is position encoding, which has been proven
crucial when applying Transformer to many computer vision tasks [22, 34, 35]. However, how to
adopt the position encoding to the domain of 3D point cloud registration is still challenging. Different
from other one-instance tasks (e.g., classification, segmentation and detection), which handle one
image or point cloud in an inference, point cloud registration is a two-instance task. It needs to learn
features of two point clouds simultaneously and match them. Since the two point clouds are under
uncorrelated reference frames, the straightforward position encoding is not a good idea [24].
Recently, some methods attempt to design specific position encoding techniques [26, 24, 29] for
point cloud registration. Geotransformer [29] calculates the relative positions between all points, then
combines the position encoding with self-attention. This approach is equivalent to treating all points
as reference points. It works well, but adds a lot of computational overhead due to the additional
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

