Pruning has a disparate impact on model accuracy

Cuong Tran
Department of Computer Science
Syracuse University
cutran@syr.edu

Ferdinando Fioretto
Department of Computer Science
Syracuse University
ffiorett@syr.edu

Jung-Eun Kim∗
Department of Computer Science
North Carolina State University
jung-eun.kim@ncsu.edu

Rakshit Naidu
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
rnemakal@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Network pruning is a widely-used compression technique that is able to significantly
scale down overparameterized models with minimal loss of accuracy. This paper
shows that pruning may create or exacerbate disparate impacts. The paper sheds
light on the factors to cause such disparities, suggesting differences in gradient
norms and distance to decision boundary across groups to be responsible for this
critical issue. It analyzes these factors in detail, providing both theoretical and
empirical support, and proposes a simple, yet effective, solution that mitigates the
disparate impacts caused by pruning.

1

Introduction

As deep learning models evolve and become more powerful, they also become larger and more
costly to store and execute. The trend hinders their deployment in resource-constrained platforms,
such as embedded systems or edge devices, which require efficient models in time and space.
To address this challenge, studies have developed a variety of techniques to prune the relatively
insignificant or insensitive parameters from a neural network while ensuring competitive accuracy
[1, 5, 7, 30, 31, 32, 40]. When a model needs to be developed to fit given and certain requirements in
size and resource consumption, a pruned model which is derived from a large, rigorously-trained,
and (often) over-parameterized model, is regarded as a de-facto standard. That is because it performs
incomparably better than a same-size dense model which is trained from scratch, when the same
amount of effort and resources are invested.
In spite of its strengths, pruning has been showed to induce or exacerbate disparate effects in the
accuracy of the resulting reduced models [20, 19]. Intuitively, the removal of model weights affects
the process in which the network separates different classes, which can have contrasting consequences
for different groups of individuals. This paper further shows that the accuracy of the pruned models
tends to increase (decrease) more in classes that had already high (low) accuracy in the original model,
leading to a “the rich get richer” and “the poor get poorer” effect. This Matthew effect is illustrated in
Figure 1. The figure shows the accuracy of a facial recognition task on different demographic groups
for several pruning rates (indicating the percentage of parameters removed from the original models).
Notice how the accuracy of the majority group (White) tends to increase while that of the minority
groups tends to decrease as the pruning ratio increases.
Following these observations, we shed light on the factors to cause such disparities. The theoretical
findings suggest the presence of two key factors responsible for why accuracy disparities arise in
∗

This work was also conducted when Jung-Eun Kim was an assistant professor at Syracuse University.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

