Sparse Gaussian Process Hyperparameters: Optimize
or Integrate?
Vidhi Lalchand
Department of Physics
University of Cambridge
vr308@cam.ac.uk

Wessel P. Bruinsma
Microsoft Research AI4Science
wbruinsma@microsoft.com

David R. Burt
LIDS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
dburt@mit.edu

Carl E. Rasmussen
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
cer54@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
The kernel function and its hyperparameters are the central model selection choice
in a Gaussian process [Rasmussen and Williams, 2006]. Typically, the hyperparameters of the kernel are chosen by maximising the marginal likelihood, an
approach known as Type-II maximum likelihood (ML-II). However, ML-II does
not account for hyperparameter uncertainty, and it is well-known that this can
lead to severely biased estimates and an underestimation of predictive uncertainty.
While there are several works which employ a fully Bayesian characterisation
of GPs, relatively few propose such approaches for the sparse GPs paradigm. In
this work we propose an algorithm for sparse Gaussian process regression which
leverages MCMC to sample from the hyperparameter posterior within the variational inducing point framework of [Titsias, 2009]. This work is closely related
to Hensman et al. [2015b], but side-steps the need to sample the inducing points,
thereby significantly improving sampling efficiency in the Gaussian likelihood case.
We compare this scheme against natural baselines in literature along with stochastic
variational GPs (SVGPs) along with an extensive computational analysis.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are a prominent class of models for supervised learning which can quantify
uncertainty and incorporate inductive biases in function space via the kernel function. Hand-crafting a
kernel function is a powerful way to incorporate prior knowledge. In many instances not all properties
of a kernel function can be specified from prior knowledge alone, and parameters are chosen via MLII. However, defining a complex kernel function with a large number of hyperparameters can make
the marginal likelihood prone to multiple local optima and overfitting. Further, several local optima
may correspond to priors that do not sensibly model the data. Weakly identified hyperparameters
can manifest in flat ridges in the marginal likelihood surface1 making gradient based optimisation
extremely sensitive to starting values [Warnes and Ripley, 1987]. Overall, the ML-II point estimates
for the hyperparameters are subject to high variability and underestimate prediction uncertainty.
The problem of ridges in the marginal likelihood surface also does not necessarily go away as more
observations are
p collected. For example, if f1 and f2 are Brownian motions, f1 (x/`) is equal in
distribution to ↵ f2 (x/↵`), which means observations do not provide any information about the
product `. More generally, for a greater class of kernels, including the Matérn–1/2 kernel, f1 (x/`)
1

where different combinations of hyperparameters give very similar marginal likelihood values

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

