Fast Neural Kernel Embeddings
for General Activations
Insu Han1 Amir Zandieh2
Roman Novak3 Lechao Xiao3
1

Yale University

2

Jaehoon Lee3
Amin Karbasi1,3

Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik

3

Google Research

Abstract
Infinite width limit has shed light on generalization and optimization aspects of
deep learning by establishing connections between neural networks and kernel
methods. Despite their importance, the utility of these kernel methods was limited
in large-scale learning settings due to their (super-)quadratic runtime and memory
complexities. Moreover, most prior works on neural kernels have focused on
the ReLU activation , mainly due to its popularity but also due to the difficulty
of computing such kernels for general activations. In this work, we overcome
such difficulties by providing methods to work with general activations. First, we
compile and expand the list of activation functions admitting exact dual activation
expressions to compute neural kernels. When the exact computation is unknown,
we present methods to effectively approximate them. We propose a fast sketching
method that approximates any multi-layered Neural Network Gaussian Process
(NNGP) kernel and Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) matrices for a wide range of
activation functions, going beyond the commonly analyzed ReLU activation. This is
done by showing how to approximate the neural kernels using the truncated Hermite
expansion of any desired activation functions. While most prior works require data
points on the unit sphere, our methods do not suffer from such limitations and are
applicable to any dataset of points in Rd . Furthermore, we provide a subspace
embedding for NNGP and NTK matrices with near input-sparsity runtime and
near-optimal target dimension which applies to any homogeneous dual activation
functions with rapidly convergent Taylor expansion. Empirically, with respect
to exact convolutional NTK (CNTK) computation, our method achieves 106×
speedup for approximate CNTK of a 5-layer Myrtle network on CIFAR-10 dataset.

1

Introduction

Infinite width limit has enabled fundamental understandings of deep neural networks by establishing a
correspondence to kernel methods. In this limit, the network’s function prior is a Gaussian process [1±
3] and under gradient descent training with squared loss, the network behaves as a linearized
function [4, 5]. Underlying these limit, a core object is a neural kernel which encapsulates architectural
inductive prior in its functional form [6]. The kernel describing gradient descent dynamics, the Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK) [4], and Neural Network Gaussian Process (NNGP) [2] kernel have been
extensively studied [7±12] since they were initially identified. In particular, the infinite width
theory has shed light on powerful abilities of deep neural networks including optimization [13±16],
generalization [17±19], regularization [20±22] and robustness [23, 24]. Beyond theoretical findings,
it has been extensively reported that neural kernels can enhance practical applications including small
data classification/regression tasks [25], neural architect search [26, 27], dataset distillation [28, 29],
federated learning [30], meta learning [31], generalization attack [32], just to name a few.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

