Left Heavy Tails and the Effectiveness of the Policy
and Value Networks in DNN-based best-first search for
Sokoban Planning

Dieqiao Feng
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
dqfeng@cs.cornell.edu

Carla Gomes
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
gomes@cs.cornell.edu

Bart Selman
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
selman@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Despite the success of practical solvers in various NP-complete domains such
as SAT and CSP as well as using deep reinforcement learning to tackle twoplayer games such as Go, certain classes of PSPACE-hard planning problems have
remained out of reach. Even carefully designed domain-specialized solvers can
fail quickly due to the exponential search space on hard instances. Recent works
that combine traditional search methods, such as best-first search and Monte Carlo
tree search, with Deep Neural Networks’ (DNN) heuristics have shown promising
progress and can solve a significant number of hard planning instances beyond
specialized solvers. To better understand why these approaches work, we studied
the interplay of the policy and value networks of DNN-based best-first search
on Sokoban and show the surprising effectiveness of the policy network, further
enhanced by the value network, as a guiding heuristic for the search. To further
understand the phenomena, we studied the cost distribution of the search algorithms
and found that Sokoban instances can have heavy-tailed runtime distributions, with
tails both on the left and right-hand sides. In particular, for the first time, we
show the existence of left heavy tails and propose an abstract tree model that can
empirically explain the appearance of these tails. The experiments show the critical
role of the policy network as a powerful heuristic guiding the search, which can
lead to left heavy tails with polynomial scaling by avoiding exploring exponentially
sized subtrees. Our results also demonstrate the importance of random restarts,
as are widely used in traditional combinatorial solvers, for DNN-based search
methods to avoid left and right heavy tails.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial search is a key domain for artificial intelligence. Unfortunately, combinatorial domains
commonly have intractable theoretical complexity, such as NP-complete, PSPACE-complete, or even
undecidable. In the past few decades, we have observed tremendous progress for practical problemsolving in NP-hard domains with wide applicability in, for example, circuit design Hong et al. [2010],
hardware verification Gupta et al. [2006], and mathematical discovery Konev and Lisitsa [2014].
SAT solvers based on conflict-driven clause learning can solve instances with thousands of variables
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

