Phase Transition from Clean Training to Adversarial
Training
Yue Xing
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
xing49@purdue.edu

Qifan Song
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
qfsong@purdue.edu

Guang Cheng
Department of Statistics
University of California, Los Angeles
guangcheng@ucla.edu

Abstract
Adversarial training is one important algorithm to achieve robust machine learning
models. However, numerous empirical results show a great performance degradation from clean training to adversarial training (e.g., 90+% vs 67% testing accuracy
on CIFAR-10 dataset), which does not match the theoretical guarantee delivered
by the existing studies. Such a gap inspires us to explore the existence of an
(asymptotic) phase transition phenomenon with respect to the attack strength:
adversarial training is as well behaved as clean training in the small-attack regime,
but there is a sharp transition from clean training to adversarial training in the
large-attack regime. We validate this conjecture in linear regression models, and
conduct comprehensive experiments in deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

Among various algorithms towards adversarially robust models, adversarial training is a popular and
simple way to improve the adversarial robustness of the model. Many studies improve adversarial
training from either theoretical or empirical aspects.
To justify the theoretical properties, an abundant literature studies the performance of adversarially
robust models under common statistical models, e.g., linear regression, Gaussian mixture model and
etc. in Javanmard et al. (2020); Mehrabi et al. (2021); Javanmard and Soltanolkotabi (2020); Dan
et al. (2020); Taheri et al. (2020); Xing et al. (2021c,a). Besides, some other studies work on deep
learning models. For example, Gao et al. (2019); Zhang et al. (2020b); Allen-Zhu and Li (2020) show
the convergence of adversarial training in neural networks when the attack strength is sufficiently
small. Other literature, e.g., Zhang et al. (2019); Wang et al. (2019b,a), propose improvements in the
training loss of adversarial training.
However, there are some gaps between the promising theoretical results and the actual performance
of adversarial training in real practice. First, the aforementioned theoretical works consider either
simple models or sufficiently small attack strength. For simple models, adversarial training is wellbehaved because the adversarial loss is still convex. For complicated models with small attacks, they
conduct a similar analysis for adversarial training as for clean training, in the sense that adversarial
training only introduces some additional diminishing error. Such settings are different from the
setups used in real practice. Second, some other studies also reveal several potential concerns of
adversarial training in deep learning, e.g., the smoothness problem Lee and Chandrakasan (2020);
Xie et al. (2020); Xing et al. (2021a), overfitting issue Rice et al. (2020); Wu et al. (2020). Based
on RobustBench (https://robustbench.github.io/), the best robust accuracy for CIFAR-10
using state-of-the-art methods is 66.6% Rebuffi et al. (2021), much worse than the clean accuracy of
above 90% in clean training.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

