Structuring Representations Using Group Invariants

Mehran Shakerinava† , Arnab Kumar Mondal† , Siamak Ravanbakhsh
McGill University and Mila, Montréal, Canada
{mehran.shakerinava, arnab.mondal, siamak.ravanbakhsh}@mila.quebec

Abstract
A finite set of invariants can identify many interesting transformation groups. For
example, distances, inner products and angles are preserved by Euclidean, Orthogonal and Conformal transformations, respectively. In an equivariant representation,
the group invariants should remain constant on the embedding as we transform
the input. This gives a procedure for learning equivariant representations without
knowing the possibly nonlinear action of the group in the input space. Rather than
enforcing such hard invariance constraints on the latent space, we show how to use
invariants for “symmetry regularization” of the latent while guaranteeing equivariance through other means. We also show the feasibility of learning disentangled
representations using this approach and provide favorable qualitative and quantitative results on downstream tasks, including world modeling and reinforcement
learning.

1

Introduction

Sample efficient representation learning is a critical open challenge in deep learning for AI. When
we have prior information about transformations that are relevant to a particular domain, building
representations that are aware of these transformations can lead to better sample efficiency and
generalization. One way to use such symmetry priors is to make the network invariant to the given
transformations. A generalization of this idea is called equivariance, where transforming the input
transforms the output in a specific way. An equivariant network that makes good predictions for a
particular input also generalizes to all input transformations, making symmetry a useful prior.
While recent years have witnessed a range of exciting equivariant deep models, there are several
limitations. First, most equivariant networks constrain the network architecture, often requiring
specialized implementations. Moreover, transformations considered by the existing methods are
often assumed to be linear in both input and representation space. This is the case for architectures
designed for finite permutation groups and continuous Lie groups. Approaches that go beyond linear
transformations in the input space often assume access to group information – i.e., the group member
that transforms one input to another is known. This paper introduces a simple approach that addresses
all of these limitations.
Our approach uses the invariants of a given linear representation of a transformation group. Previously invariants were used to connect different geometries, and group theory in Klein’s Erlangen
program [32]. According to this view, geometries are concerned with invariant quantities under
certain transformations. For example, Euclidean geometry is concerned with the length, angle, and
parallelism of lines, among others, because Euclidean transformations preserve these. However,
moving to the more general and less structured Affine geometry, notions of distance and angle are no
longer relevant, while parallelism remains an invariant of the geometry. The corresponding symmetry
groups are examples of Lie groups that have a subgroup relation, E(n) < Af f (n), thereby enabling
the groups to characterize a hierarchy (or lattice) of different geometries.
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

