Certifying Robust Graph Classification under
Orthogonal Gromov-Wasserstein Threats

Hongwei Jin∗
Mathematics and Computer Science Division
Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, IL 60439
jinh@anl.gov

Zishun Yu, Xinhua Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{zyu32,zhangx}@uic.edu

Abstract
Graph classifiers are vulnerable to topological attacks. Although certificates of
robustness have been recently developed, their threat model only counts local and
global edge perturbations, which effectively ignores important graph structures
such as isomorphism. To address this issue, we propose measuring the perturbation
with the orthogonal Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy, and building its Fenchel
biconjugate to facilitate convex optimization. Our key insight is drawn from the
matching loss whose root connects two variables via a monotone operator, and it
yields a tight outer convex approximation for resistance distance on graph nodes.
When applied to graph classification by graph convolutional networks, both our
certificate and attack algorithm are demonstrated effective.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art graph classifiers such as graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have been recently
revealed vulnerable to adversarial structural attacks, namely adding and removing edges [1, 2]. Due
to the hardness of finding the strongest attack, an alternative strategy aims to certify robustness,
i.e., proving that no perturbation in the threat model can successfully attack the classifier. To this
end, [3, 4] extended randomized smoothing to discrete noises with applications in, e.g., community
detection. Although our focus is on graph classification, certificates have been studied for node
classification using, e.g., convex outer adversarial polytope [5, 6]. Most relevant to our method is [7],
which constructed the tightest lower bound of the margin via Fenchel biconjugation.
However, all existing threat models only count the total edges removed or added (global budget) or the
change of each node’s degree (local budget), while overlooking the important notion of isomorphism.
In contrast, there has been a wealth of more refined discrepancy measures between graphs, including
kernels [8, 9] and GCNs [10, 11]. Recently, the Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy [GW, 12], which
extends the Gromov-Wasserstein distance [13], has emerged as an effective transportation distance
between structured data, alleviating the incomparability issue between different structures by aligning
the intra-relational geometries. Thanks to its favorable properties such as efficiency and awareness of
isomorphism, GW has been extensively applied to domain adaptation [14], word embedding [15],
graph classification [16], metric alignment [17], generative modeling [18], and graph matching and
node embedding [19, 20]. Therefore, it is clearly natural to adopt such a measure in the certification
of graph robustness. Analogously, Wasserstein distance has already been employed in distributional
robustness [21] and in attacking images [22], where perturbations can be found that better reflect the
image content compared with the standard ℓp attacks.
Unfortunately, GW is not tractable to evaluate, differing from the standard Wasserstein distance
which is a linear program. So all existing optimization techniques settle for local solutions, lacking
∗

Work done when the author was at the University of Illinois Chicago

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

