TreeMoCo: Contrastive Neuron Morphology
Representation Learning

Hanbo Chen∗,†
Tencent AI Lab
hanbochen@tencent.com

Jiawei Yang∗,†
University of California, Los Angeles
jiawei118@ucla.edu

Daniel Maxim Iascone
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
daniel.iascone@pennmedicine.upenn.edu
Lei He
University of California, Los Angeles
lhe@ee.ucla.edu

Lijuan Liu
Southeast University, Nanjing
juan-liu@seu.edu.cn
Hanchuan Peng
Southeast University, Nanjing
h@braintell.org

Jianhua Yao‡
Tencent AI Lab
jianhuayao@tencent.com

Abstract
Morphology of neuron trees is a key indicator to delineate neuronal cell-types, analyze brain development process, and evaluate pathological changes in neurological
diseases. Traditional analysis mostly relies on heuristic features and visual inspections. A quantitative, informative, and comprehensive representation of neuron
morphology is largely absent but desired. To fill this gap, in this work, we adopt a
Tree-LSTM network to encode neuron morphology and introduce a self-supervised
learning framework named TreeMoCo to learn features without the need for labels.
We test TreeMoCo on 2403 high-quality 3D neuron reconstructions of mouse brains
from three different public resources. Our results show that TreeMoCo is effective
in both classifying major brain cell-types and identifying sub-types. To our best
knowledge, TreeMoCo is the very first to explore learning the representation of
neuron tree morphology with contrastive learning. It has a great potential to shed
new light on quantitative neuron morphology analysis. Code is available at https:
//github.com/TencentAILabHealthcare/NeuronRepresentation.

1

Introduction

The central nervous system is composed of hundreds to thousands of neuronal subtypes. Subtype is
the critical determinant of neuronal function within local and long-range circuits and is identified by
a combination of gene expression patterns, dendrite/axon morphology, synaptic connectivity, and
electrophysiological properties. In particular, dendritic morphology is a central node of neuronal
subtype identity, as dendritic branches receive the vast majority of the presynaptic input onto each
neuron and directly shape the electrophysiological properties of the neuron that governs its firing
output. Delineating neuron cell-types based on their dendritic morphology is one of the core problems
of neuroscience for the past century [51].
⋆

: Equal contribution. † : Work done when authors were at Tencent AI Lab. ‡ : Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

