Multi-Scale Adaptive Network
for Single Image Denoising

Yuanbiao Gou1 , Peng Hu1 , Jiancheng Lv1 , Joey Tianyi Zhou2 , Xi Peng1∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China.
2
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore.
{gouyuanbiao, penghu.ml, joey.tianyi.zhou, pengx.gm}@gmail.com
lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-scale architectures have shown effectiveness in a variety of tasks thanks to
appealing cross-scale complementarity. However, existing architectures treat different scale features equally without considering the scale-specific characteristics, i.e.,
the within-scale characteristics are ignored in the architecture design. In this paper,
we reveal this missing piece for multi-scale architecture design and accordingly propose a novel Multi-Scale Adaptive Network (MSANet) for single image denoising.
Specifically, MSANet simultaneously embraces the within-scale characteristics and
the cross-scale complementarity thanks to three novel neural blocks, i.e., adaptive
feature block (AFeB), adaptive multi-scale block (AMB), and adaptive fusion
block (AFuB). In brief, AFeB is designed to adaptively preserve image details
and filter noises, which is highly expected for the features with mixed details and
noises. AMB could enlarge the receptive field and aggregate the multi-scale information, which meets the need of contextually informative features. AFuB devotes
to adaptively sampling and transferring the features from one scale to another scale,
which fuses the multi-scale features with varying characteristics from coarse to fine.
Extensive experiments on both three real and six synthetic noisy image datasets
show the superiority of MSANet compared with 12 methods. The code could be
accessed from https://github.com/XLearning-SCU/2022-NeurIPS-MSANet.

1

Introduction

In the real world, images are often contaminated by various signal-dependent or -independent noises
during the image acquisition process. As a result, the imaging quality will deteriorate, thus hindering
people and computers from receiving image information. To solve this problem, image denoising, as
an essential step for image perception, has been extensively studied in the past decades [10, 19, 27, 50].
In the early, filtering-based methods remove the image noise by manually designing low-pass filters,
e.g., median filtering [8], bilateral filtering [36], and wiener filtering [7]. Afterward, model-based
methods remove the image noise by optimizing a problem of maximum a posteriori [13, 40, 43].
For instance, ITS [40] proposed an intrinsic tensor sparsity regularization on the non-local similar
image patches by assuming they could be sparsely represented. Looking from the other side, both the
filtering- and model-based methods are based on image priors from the statistics of natural images,
and thus could be referred to as prior-based methods. Although remarkable performance has been
achieved, an unpleasant denoising result will be obtained once the priors are inconsistent with the
real data distribution. To avoid prior engineering, learning-based methods adopt a data-driven fashion
to remove noise by learning the mapping from the noisy image to the corresponding clean image.
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

