Is L2 Physics-Informed Loss Always Suitable for
Training Physics-Informed Neural Network?

Chuwei Wang1∗ , Shanda Li2,5∗, Di He3† , Liwei Wang3,4†
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Machine Learning Department, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
3
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Center for Data Science, Peking University 5 Zhejiang Lab
chuwei.wang@pku.edu.cn, shandal@cs.cmu.edu
dihe@pku.edu.cn, wanglw@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN) approach is a new and promising
way to solve partial differential equations using deep learning. The L2 PhysicsInformed Loss is the de-facto standard in training Physics-Informed Neural Networks. In this paper, we challenge this common practice by investigating the
relationship between the loss function and the approximation quality of the learned
solution. In particular, we leverage the concept of stability in the literature of
partial differential equation to study the asymptotic behavior of the learned solution as the loss approaches zero. With this concept, we study an important class
of high-dimensional non-linear PDEs in optimal control, the Hamilton-JacobiBellman (HJB) Equation, and prove that for general Lp Physics-Informed Loss,
a wide class of HJB equation is stable only if p is sufficiently large. Therefore,
the commonly used L2 loss is not suitable for training PINN on those equations,
while L∞ loss is a better choice. Based on the theoretical insight, we develop a
novel PINN training algorithm to minimize the L∞ loss for HJB equations which
is in a similar spirit to adversarial training. The effectiveness of the proposed
algorithm is empirically demonstrated through experiments. Our code is released
at https://github.com/LithiumDA/L_inf-PINN.

1

Introduction

Recently, with the explosive growth of available data and computational resources, there have been
growing interests in developing machine learning approaches to solve partial differential equations
(PDEs) [14, 13, 33, 28]. One seminal work in this direction is the Physics-Informed Neural Network
(PINN) approach [28] which parameterizes the PDE’s solution as a neural network. By defining
differentiable loss functionals that measure how well the model fits the PDE and boundary conditions,
the network parameters can be efficiently optimized using gradient-based approaches. L2 distance is
one of the most popularly used measures, which calculates the L2 norm of the PDE and boundary
residual on the domain and boundary, respectively. Previous works demonstrated that PINN could
solve a wide range of PDE problems using the L2 Physics-Informed Loss, such as Poisson equation,
Burgers’ equation, and Navier-Stokes equation [28, 6].
Although previous works empirically demonstrated promising results using L2 Physics-Informed
Loss, we argue the plausibility of using this loss for (high-dimensional) non-linear PDE problems.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Liwei Wang <wanglw@pku.edu.cn> and Di He <dihe@pku.edu.cn>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

