Exploring the Whole Rashomon Set of Sparse Decision
Trees
Rui Xin1∗ Chudi Zhong1∗ Zhi Chen1∗
Takuya Takagi2

Margo Seltzer3

Cynthia Rudin1

1

Duke University 2 Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd. 3 The University of British Columbia
{rui.xin926, chudi.zhong, zhi.chen1}@duke.edu
takagi.takuya@fujitsu.com, mseltzer@cs.ubc.ca, cynthia@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
In any given machine learning problem, there might be many models that explain
the data almost equally well. However, most learning algorithms return only one
of these models, leaving practitioners with no practical way to explore alternative
models that might have desirable properties beyond what could be expressed by
a loss function. The Rashomon set is the set of these all almost-optimal models.
Rashomon sets can be large in size and complicated in structure, particularly
for highly nonlinear function classes that allow complex interaction terms, such
as decision trees. We provide the first technique for completely enumerating the
Rashomon set for sparse decision trees; in fact, our work provides the first complete
enumeration of any Rashomon set for a non-trivial problem with a highly nonlinear
discrete function class. This allows the user an unprecedented level of control over
model choice among all models that are approximately equally good. We represent
the Rashomon set in a specialized data structure that supports efficient querying
and sampling. We show three applications of the Rashomon set: 1) it can be used to
study variable importance for the set of almost-optimal trees (as opposed to a single
tree), 2) the Rashomon set for accuracy enables enumeration of the Rashomon sets
for balanced accuracy and F1-score, and 3) the Rashomon set for a full dataset
can be used to produce Rashomon sets constructed with only subsets of the data
set. Thus, we are able to examine Rashomon sets across problems with a new lens,
enabling users to choose models rather than be at the mercy of an algorithm that
produces only a single model.

1

Introduction

The Rashomon set is the set of almost-equally-optimal models [1, 2]. Rashomon sets were named for
the Rashomon effect of Leo Breiman, whereby many equally good models could explain the data
well [3]. The Rashomon effect helps us understand that there is not just one “best” explanation for
the data, but many diverse equally predictive models. The existence of Rashomon sets has important
practical implications: practitioners may not want to use the single model from the Rashomon set that
was output by a machine learning algorithm. Instead, they may want to explore the Rashomon set to
find models with important properties, such as interpretability, fairness, or use of specific variables,
or they may want to choose a model that agrees with possible causal hypotheses, monotonicity trends,
ease of calculation, or simply domain intuition. In light of viewing the learning problem this way, the
whole paradigm that machine learning should provide only one “optimal” model makes little sense:
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

