VCT: A Video Compression Transformer

Fabian Mentzer
Google Research

George Toderici
Google Research

David Minnen
Google Research

mentzer@google.com

gtoderici@google.com

dminnen@google.com

Sung Jin Hwang
Google Research

Sergi Caelles
Google Research

Mario Lucic
Google Research

Eirikur Agustsson
Google Research

sjhwang@google.com

scaelles@google.com

lucic@google.com

eirikur@google.com

Abstract
We show how transformers can be used to vastly simplify neural video compression.
Previous methods have been relying on an increasing number of architectural biases
and priors, including motion prediction and warping operations, resulting in complex models. Instead, we independently map input frames to representations and
use a transformer to model their dependencies, letting it predict the distribution of
future representations given the past. The resulting video compression transformer
outperforms previous methods on standard video compression data sets. Experiments on synthetic data show that our model learns to handle complex motion
patterns such as panning, blurring and fading purely from data. Our approach is
easy to implement, and we release code to facilitate future research.

1

Introduction

Neural network based video compression techniques have recently emerged to rival their non-neural
counter parts in rate-distortion performance [e.g., 1, 17, 30, 42]. These novel methods tend to incorporate various architectural biases and priors inspired by the classic, non-neural approaches. While
many authors tend to draw a line between “hand-crafted” classical codecs and neural approaches,
the neural approaches themselves are increasingly “hand-crafted”, with authors introducing complex
connections between the many sub-components. The resulting methods are complicated, challenging
to implement, and constrain themselves to work well only on data that matches the architectural
biases. In particular, many methods rely on some form of motion prediction followed by a warping
operation [e.g., 1, 17, 19, 23, 42, 41]. These methods warp previous reconstructions with the predicted
flow, and calculate a residual.
In this paper, we replace flow prediction, warping, and residual compensation, with an elegantly
simple but powerful transformer-based temporal entropy model. The resulting video compression
transformer (VCT) outperforms previous methods on standard video compression data sets, while
being free from their architectural biases and priors. Furthermore, we create synthetic data to explore
the effect of architectural biases, and show that we compare favourably to previous approaches on
the types videos that the architectural components were designed for (panning on static frames,
or blurring), despite our transformer not relying on any of these components. More crucially, we
outperform previous approaches on videos that have no obvious matching architectural component
(sharpening, fading between scenes), showing the benefit of removing hand-crafted elements and
letting a transformer learn everything from data.
We use transformers to compress videos in two steps (see Fig. 1): First, using lossy transform
coding [3], we map frames xi from image space to quantized representations yi , independently for
each frame. From yi we can recover a reconstruction x̂i . Second, we let a transformer leverage
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

