Learning Viewpoint-Agnostic Visual Representations
by Recovering Tokens in 3D Space
Jinghuan Shang1
Srijan Das1,2
Michael S. Ryoo1
Department of Computer Science
1
Stony Brook University, 2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte
1
{jishang, mryoo}@cs.stonybrook.edu, 2 sdas24@uncc.edu

Abstract
Humans are remarkably flexible in understanding viewpoint changes due to visual
cortex supporting the perception of 3D structure. In contrast, most of the computer
vision models that learn visual representation from a pool of 2D images often fail
to generalize over novel camera viewpoints. Recently, the vision architectures
have shifted towards convolution-free architectures, visual Transformers, which
operate on tokens derived from image patches. However, these Transformers do not
perform explicit operations to learn viewpoint-agnostic representation for visual
understanding. To this end, we propose a 3D Token Representation Layer (3DTRL)
that estimates the 3D positional information of the visual tokens and leverages it for
learning viewpoint-agnostic representations. The key elements of 3DTRL include a
pseudo-depth estimator and a learned camera matrix to impose geometric transformations on the tokens, trained in an unsupervised fashion. These enable 3DTRL to
recover the 3D positional information of the tokens from 2D patches. In practice,
3DTRL is easily plugged-in into a Transformer. Our experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of 3DTRL in many vision tasks including image classification, multiview video alignment, and action recognition. The models with 3DTRL outperform
their backbone Transformers in all the tasks with minimal added computation. Our
code is available at https://github.com/elicassion/3DTRL.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, computer vision models have developed rapidly from CNNs [6, 26, 58] to
now Transformers [16, 24, 59]. With these models, we can now accurately classify objects in an
image, align image frames among video pairs, classify actions in videos, and more. Despite their
successes, many of the models neglect that the world is in 3D and do not extend beyond the XY
image plane [20]. While humans can readily estimate the 3D structure of a scene from 2D pixels of an
image, most of the existing vision models with 2D images do not take the 3D structure of the world
into consideration. This is one of the reasons why humans are able to recognize objects in images
and actions in videos regardless of their viewpoint, but the vision models often fail to generalize over
novel viewpoints [11, 20, 42].
Consequently, in this paper, we develop an approach to learn viewpoint-agnostic representations for a
robust understanding of the visual data. Naive solutions to obtain viewpoint-agnostic representation
would be either supervising the model with densely annotated 3D data, or learning representation
from a large scale 2D datasets with samples encompassing different viewpoints. Given the fact that
such high quality data are expensive to acquire and hard to scale, an approach with a higher sample
efficiency without 3D supervision is desired.
To this end, we propose a 3D Token Representation Layer (3DTRL), incorporating 3D camera
transformations into the recent successful visual Transformers [7, 16, 36, 59]. 3DTRL first recovers
camera-centered 3D coordinates of each token by depth estimation. Then 3DTRL estimates a camera
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

