Neural Conservation Laws:
A Divergence-Free Perspective

Jack Richter-Powell
Vector Institute
jack.richter-powell@mcgill.ca

Yaron Lipman
Meta AI
ylipman@meta.com

Ricky T. Q. Chen
Meta AI
rtqichen@meta.com

Abstract
We investigate the parameterization of deep neural networks that by design satisfy
the continuity equation, a fundamental conservation law. This is enabled by
the observation that any solution of the continuity equation can be represented
as a divergence-free vector field. We hence propose building divergence-free
neural networks through the concept of differential forms, and with the aid of
automatic differentiation, realize two practical constructions. As a result, we can
parameterize pairs of densities and vector fields that always exactly satisfy the
continuity equation, foregoing the need for extra penalty methods or expensive
numerical simulation. Furthermore, we prove these models are universal and so can
be used to represent any divergence-free vector field. Finally, we experimentally
validate our approaches by computing neural network-based solutions to fluid
equations, solving for the Hodge decomposition, and learning dynamical optimal
transport maps.

1

Introduction

Modern successes in deep learning are often attributed to the expressiveness of black-box neural
networks. These models are known to be universal function approximators [Hornik et al., 1989]—but
this flexibility comes at a cost. In contrast to other parametric function approximators such as Finite
Elements [Schroeder and Lube, 2017], it is hard to bake exact constraints into neural networks.
Existing approaches often resort to penalty methods to approximately satisfy constraints—but these
increase the cost of training and can produce inaccuracies in downstream applications when the
constraints are not exactly satisfied. For the same reason, theoretical analysis of soft-constrained
models also becomes more difficult. On the other hand, enforcing hard constraints on the architecture
can be challenging, and even once enforced, it is often unclear whether the model remains sufficiently
expressive within the constrained function class.
In this work, we discuss an approach to directly bake in two constraints into deep neural networks: (i)
having a divergence of zero, and (ii) exactly satisfying the continuity equation. One of our key
insights is that the former directly leads into the latter, so the first portion of the paper focuses on
divergence-free vector fields. These represent a special class of vector fields which have widespread
use in the physical sciences. In computational fluid dynamics, divergence-free vector fields are used
to model incompressible fluid interactions formalized by the Euler or Navier-Stokes equations. In
R3 we know that the curl of a vector field has a divergence of zero, which has seen many uses in
graphics simulations (e.g., Eisenberger et al. [2018]). Perhaps less well-known is that lurking behind
this fact is the generalization of divergence and curl through differential forms [Cartan, 1899], and
the powerful identity d2 = 0. We first explore this generalization, then discuss two constructions
derived from it for parmaterizing divergence-free vector fields. While this approach has been partially
discussed previously [Barbarosie, 2011, Kelliher, 2021], it is not extensively known and to the best of
our knowledge has not been explored by the machine learning community.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

