PhysGNN: A Physics–Driven Graph Neural Network
Based Model for Predicting Soft Tissue Deformation in
Image–Guided Neurosurgery

Yasmin Salehi, Dennis Giannacopoulos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
McGill University
Montreal, QC, Canada
yasmin.salehi@mail.mcgill.ca, dennis.giannacopoulos@mcgill.ca

Abstract
Correctly capturing intraoperative brain shift in image-guided neurosurgical procedures is a critical task for aligning preoperative data with intraoperative geometry
for ensuring accurate surgical navigation. While the finite element method (FEM)
is a proven technique to effectively approximate soft tissue deformation through
biomechanical formulations, their degree of success boils down to a trade-off
between accuracy and speed. To circumvent this problem, the most recent works
in this domain have proposed leveraging data-driven models obtained by training various machine learning algorithms—e.g., random forests, artificial neural
networks (ANNs)—with the results of finite element analysis (FEA) to speed up
tissue deformation approximations by prediction. These methods, however, do
not account for the structure of the finite element (FE) mesh during training that
provides information on node connectivities as well as the distance between them,
which can aid with approximating tissue deformation based on the proximity of
force load points with the rest of the mesh nodes. Therefore, this work proposes a
novel framework, PhysGNN, a data-driven model that approximates the solution
of the FEM by leveraging graph neural networks (GNNs), which are capable of
accounting for the mesh structural information and inductive learning over unstructured grids and complex topological structures. Empirically, we demonstrate
that the proposed architecture, PhysGNN, promises accurate and fast soft tissue
deformation approximations, and is competitive with the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
algorithms while promising enhanced computational feasibility, therefore suitable
for neurosurgical settings.

1

Introduction

Exploiting high-quality preoperative images for surgical planning is a common practice among
neurosurgeons. With the recent advances in surgical tools, medical imagery techniques have especially
made their way into operating rooms to enhance surgical visualization and navigation, giving rise to
image-guided neurosurgical techniques, where correctly aligning patient’s intraoperative anatomical
geometry with preoperative images has a significant impact on the accuracy of surgical navigation
[Hagemann et al., 1999, Warfield et al., 2000, Ferrant et al., 2002, Sun et al., 2004, Vigneron et al.,
2004, Choi et al., 2004a, Miller et al., 2007, Wittek et al., 2009, Joldes et al., 2009, Vigneron et al.,
2010, Wittek et al., 2010, Li et al., 2014, Miller et al., 2019]. This task, however, poses a challenge.
During the neurosurgical procedure, the brain continuously undergoes a series of anatomical changes

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

