Active Surrogate Estimators: An Active Learning
Approach to Label–Efficient Model Evaluation

Jannik Kossen1∗
1

Sebastian Farquhar1,3

Yarin Gal1

Tom Rainforth2

OATML, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
3
DeepMind

Abstract
We propose Active Surrogate Estimators (ASEs), a new method for label-efficient
model evaluation. Evaluating model performance is a challenging and important
problem when labels are expensive. ASEs address this active testing problem using
a surrogate-based estimation approach that interpolates the errors of points with
unknown labels, rather than forming a Monte Carlo estimator. ASEs actively learn
the underlying surrogate, and we propose a novel acquisition strategy, XWED, that
tailors this learning to the final estimation task. We find that ASEs offer greater
label-efficiency than the current state-of-the-art when applied to challenging model
evaluation problems for deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

Machine learning research routinely assumes access to large, labeled datasets for supervised learning.
Practitioners often do not have that luxury. Instead, no labeled data might be available initially,
and label acquisition often involves significant cost: it might require medical experts to analyze
x-ray images, physicists to perform experiments in particle accelerators, or chemists to synthesize
molecules. In these situations, we should carefully acquire only those labels that are most informative
for the task at hand, maximizing performance while minimizing labeling cost [1, 62, 27, 43].
While a wide array of active learning methods [1, 62] have been developed to address the problem
of training models when labels are expensive, much less attention has been given to the problem of
label-efficient model evaluation. Such model evaluation is important, e.g. for performance analysis,
model selection, or hyperparameter optimization. Indeed, Lowell et al. [45] argue that a lack of
efficient approaches to model evaluation holds back adoption of active learning methods in practice.
Prior work in label-efficient model evaluation has focused on using importance sampling (IS) techniques to reduce the variance of Monte Carlo (MC) estimates [38, 59, 70]. In particular, recent
approaches [38, 18] have iteratively refined the proposal using information from previous evaluations,
producing adaptive IS (AIS) estimators with state-of-the-art performance.
Though these methods provide substantial label-efficiency gains over naive sampling, they have some
clear weaknesses that suggest improvements should be possible. Firstly, the AIS weights assigned
to samples depend on the acquisition proposal used at that iteration. Thus, early samples are often
inappropriately weighted, because we are yet to learn an effective proposal. This can significantly
increase the variance of the resulting estimator. Secondly, MC estimates can be inefficient at dealing
with label noise: constraining the estimate to be a weighted sum of observed losses is limiting when
the losses themselves are noisy. Finally, IS methods can be restrictive on the acquisition strategies
used to choose points to label: acquisition must be stochastic with known probabilities.
∗

Correspondence to jannik.kossen@cs.ox.ac.uk.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

