Doubly-Asynchronous Value Iteration:
Making Value Iteration Asynchronous in Actions

Tian Tian Kenny Young Richard S. Sutton
University of Alberta and Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
{ttian, kjyoung, rsutton}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Value iteration (VI) is a foundational dynamic programming method, important for
learning and planning in optimal control and reinforcement learning. VI proceeds
in batches, where the update to the value of each state must be completed before
the next batch of updates can begin. Completing a single batch is prohibitively
expensive if the state space is large, rendering VI impractical for many applications.
Asynchronous VI helps to address the large state space problem by updating one
state at a time, in-place and in an arbitrary order. However, Asynchronous VI
still requires a maximization over the entire action space, making it impractical
for domains with large action space. To address this issue, we propose doublyasynchronous value iteration (DAVI), a new algorithm that generalizes the idea of
asynchrony from states to states and actions. More concretely, DAVI maximizes
over a sampled subset of actions that can be of any user-defined size. This simple
approach of using sampling to reduce computation maintains similarly appealing
theoretical properties to VI without the need to wait for a full sweep through the
entire action space in each update. In this paper, we show DAVI converges to
the optimal value function with probability one, converges at a near-geometric
rate with probability 1 − δ, and returns a near-optimal policy in computation time
that nearly matches a previously established bound for VI. We also empirically
demonstrate DAVI’s effectiveness in several experiments.

1

Introduction

Dynamic programming has been used to solve many important real-world problems, including but not
limited to wireless networks (Levorato et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2017, 2019) resource allocation (Powell
et al., 2002), and inventory problems (Bensoussan, 2011). Value iteration (VI) is a foundational
dynamic programming algorithm central to learning and planning in optimal control and reinforcement
learning.
VI is one of the most widely studied dynamic programming algorithm (Williams and Baird III, 1993;
Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996; Puterman, 1994). VI starts from an arbitrary value function and
proceeds by updating the value of all states in batches. The value estimate for each state in the state
space S must be computed before the next batch of updates will even begin:
(
)
X
v(s) ← max r(s, a) + γ
p(s′ |s, a)v̄(s′ )
for all s ∈ S,
(1)
a∈A

s′ ∈S

where s′ ∈ S is the next state, p(s′ |s, a) is the transition probability, and r(s, a) is the reward. VI
.
maintains two arrays of real values v, v̄, both the size of state space S = |S|, with v̄ being used to
make the update and v being used to keep track of the updated values. In domains with large state
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

