Towards Robust Blind Face Restoration with
Codebook Lookup Transformer

Shangchen Zhou Kelvin C.K. Chan Chongyi Li Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{s200094, chan0899, chongyi.li, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
https://shangchenzhou.com/projects/CodeFormer

Abstract
Blind face restoration is a highly ill-posed problem that often requires auxiliary
guidance to 1) improve the mapping from degraded inputs to desired outputs, or 2)
complement high-quality details lost in the inputs. In this paper, we demonstrate
that a learned discrete codebook prior in a small proxy space largely reduces the
uncertainty and ambiguity of restoration mapping by casting blind face restoration
as a code prediction task, while providing rich visual atoms for generating highquality faces. Under this paradigm, we propose a Transformer-based prediction
network, named CodeFormer, to model the global composition and context of the
low-quality faces for code prediction, enabling the discovery of natural faces that
closely approximate the target faces even when the inputs are severely degraded. To
enhance the adaptiveness for different degradation, we also propose a controllable
feature transformation module that allows a flexible trade-off between fidelity and
quality. Thanks to the expressive codebook prior and global modeling, CodeFormer
outperforms the state of the arts in both quality and fidelity, showing superior
robustness to degradation. Extensive experimental results on synthetic and realworld datasets verify the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Face images captured in the wild often suffer from various degradation, such as compression, blur, and
noise. Restoring such images is highly ill-posed as the information loss induced by the degradation
leads to infinite plausible high-quality (HQ) outputs given a low-quality (LQ) input. The ill-posedness
is further elevated in blind restoration, where the specific degradation is unknown. Despite the
progress made with the emergence of deep learning, learning a LQ-HQ mapping without additional
guidance in the huge image space is still intractable, leading to the suboptimal restoration quality
of earlier approaches. To improve the output quality, auxiliary information that 1) reduces the
uncertainty of LQ-HQ mapping and 2) complements high-quality details is indispensable.
Various priors have been used to mitigate the ill-posedness of this problem, including geometric
priors [5, 6, 30, 44], reference priors [24–26], and generative priors [2, 37, 43]. Although improved
textures and details are observed, these approaches often suffer from high sensitivity to degradation or
limited prior expressiveness. These priors provide insufficient guidance for face restoration, thus their
networks essentially resort to the information of LQ input images that are usually highly corrupted.
As a result, the LQ-HQ mapping uncertainty still exists, and the output quality is deteriorated by the
degradation of the input images. Most recently, based on generative prior, some methods project the
degraded faces into a continuous infinite space via iterative latent optimization [27] or direct latent
encoding [29]. Despite great realness of outputs, it is difficult to find the accurate latent vectors in
case of severe degradation, resulting in low-fidelity results (Fig. 1(d)). To enhance the fidelity, skip
connections between encoder and decoder are usually required in this kind of methods [37, 43, 2], as
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

