NeuroSchedule: A Novel Effective GNN-based
Scheduling Method for High-level Synthesis

Jun Zeng∗
Tsinghua University

Mingyang Kou∗
Tsinghua University

Xu-Cheng Yin
University of Science and Technology Beijing

Hailong Yao†
Tsinghua University

Haili Wang
Hercules Microelectronics Co., Ltd

Abstract
High-level synthesis (HLS) is widely used for transferring behavior-level specifications into circuit-level implementations. As a critical step in HLS, scheduling
arranges the execution order of operations for enhanced performance. However,
existing scheduling methods suffer from either exponential runtime or poor quality
of solutions.
This paper proposes an efficient and effective GNN-based scheduling method
called NeuroSchedule, with both fast runtime and enhanced solution quality. Major
features are as follows: (1) The learning problem for HLS scheduling is formulated
for the first time, and a new machine learning framework is proposed. (2) Pretraining models are adopted to further enhance the scalability for various scheduling
problems with different settings. Experimental results show that NeuroSchedule
obtains near-optimal solutions while achieving more than 50,000× improvement
in runtime compared with the ILP-based scheduling method. At the same time,
NeuroSchedule improves the scheduling results by 6.10% on average compared
with state-of-the-art entropy-directed method. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first GNN-based scheduling method for HLS.

1

Introduction

Recently, FPGA has been playing an important role in accelerating computations from the cloud to
the edge [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. As a reconfigurable computing device, FPGA gains increasing popularity
for its high performance and great energy efficiency. However, developers are required to write
programs using the hardware description language (HDL) to implement applications in FPGAs,
which is time-consuming and error-prone. Therefore, the utilization of FPGA’s enormous computing
power is limited by the cumbersome developing process.
As a result, the concept of high-level synthesis (HLS) is proposed in the EDA community to speed up
the developing process [6, 7, 8]. HLS automatically transfers high-level specifications (written in highlevel languages like C/C++) to behavior-level implementations (written in HDLs like Verilog/VHDL).
Figure 1 presents the whole flow of HLS. As shown in the figure, HLS mainly comprises three parts:
compilation, synthesis, and generation. For compilation, high-level languages are transferred to
Control Data Flow Graphs (CDFGs) with the assistance of modern compilers like GCC or LLVM.
During the synthesis process, hardware resources (e.g. functional units, storage, and wires) are first
allocated. According to the allocated hardware resources, the operations in CDFG (such as ADD and
MUL) are scheduled to certain time steps. After scheduling, the allocated hardware resources are
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding author: Hailong Yao (hailongyao@tsinghua.edu.cn).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

