Distributed Inverse Constrained Reinforcement
Learning for Multi-agent Systems

Shicheng Liu & Minghui Zhu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA
{sfl5539,muz16}@psu.edu

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of recovering the policies of multiple interacting experts by estimating their reward functions and constraints where the demonstration data of the experts is distributed to a group of learners. We formulate
this problem as a distributed bi-level optimization problem and propose a novel
bi-level “distributed inverse constrained reinforcement learning” (D-ICRL) algorithm that allows the learners to collaboratively estimate the constraints in the
outer loop and learn the corresponding policies and reward functions in the inner
loop from the distributed demonstrations through intermittent communications.
We formally guarantee that the distributed learners asymptotically achieve consensus which belongs to the set of stationary points of the bi-level optimization
problem. Simulations are done to validate the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent systems (MASs) have become an effective way to model large-scale networked systems,
e.g., multi-robot systems and the Internet-of-Things. Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is
a systematic framework to coordinate MASs. It extends RL to address the decision-making problem
of multiple interacting agents [1]. One challenge in (MA)RL is that manually crafting the reward
functions or predesigning the policies can be infeasible for humans when the tasks are too complicated. Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) presents a way to tackle this problem where a learner
aims to recover a reward function (and a corresponding policy) that best explains the behavior in the
demonstrations of an expert. Current state-of-the-arts on IRL [2, 3, 4, 5] can successfully solve the
reward function inference problem but still face two other major challenges in MARL and MASs:
(i) it is often the case that the expected behavior (experts’ behavior) is more precisely explained by
a reward function combined with a set of constraints instead of a single reward function; (ii) the
demonstration data in MASs is usually distributed over multiple learners and unable to be shared
due to some practical reasons including privacy concerns and communication burdens. This paper
aims to bridge the gap and proposes the first algorithm to solve the three challenges (i.e., reward
function inference, constraint inference, and distributed demonstration data) at once.
Related works. IRL is an ambiguous problem [6] as different reward functions could explain the
demonstrations. To solve this problem, several fundamental approaches are proposed including
feature expectation matching [7], maximum margin planning [8], maximum entropy (ME) [9], and
maximum causal entropy (MCE) [10]. Recently, some advanced techniques baring more features
are proposed. Paper [2] uses adversarial learning to learn reward functions robust to environmental
changes, paper [4] applies strongly convex regularizers to the learner’s policy to avoid the ambiguity
problem, and paper [5] proposes a scalable Bayesian-based method working for large control tasks.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

