BayesPCN: A Continually Learnable
Predictive Coding Associative Memory

Jason Yoo
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
jasony97@cs.ubc.ca

Frank Wood
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
fwood@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Associative memory plays an important role in human intelligence and its mechanisms have been linked to attention in machine learning. While the machine
learning community’s interest in associative memories has recently been rekindled,
most work has focused on memory recall (read) over memory learning (write).
In this paper, we present BayesPCN, a hierarchical associative memory capable of
performing continual one-shot memory writes without meta-learning. Moreover,
BayesPCN is able to gradually forget past observations (f orget) to free its memory.
Experiments show that BayesPCN can recall corrupted i.i.d. high-dimensional data
observed hundreds to a thousand “timesteps” ago without a large drop in recall
ability compared to the state-of-the-art offline-learned parametric memory models.

1

Introduction

One of the hallmarks of biological intelligence is the ability to robustly recall learned associations.
Biological agents are able to associate stimuli of various modalities and rely on their memories to
perform everyday tasks from navigation to entity recognition. Yet these agents are not only good
at recall but can quickly and continually form new memories from as little as a single experience.
How do biological agents achieve this feat while mitigating catastrophic forgetting [French, 1999]?
And how can we build neural networks that demonstrate these properties? This paper addresses these
questions, focusing on fast, continual learning of neural artifacts that perform robust recall of i.i.d.
high-dimensional observations.
Associative memory models have been of interest in machine learning for decades [Steinbuch,
1961, Hopfield, 1982]. They have been used to solve a wide range of problems from sequence
processing [Schmidhuber, 1992, Graves et al., 2014, Schlag et al., 2021] to pattern detection [Widrich
et al., 2020, 2021, Seidl et al., 2021]. Their study has allowed us to build models that replicate
aspects of biological intelligence [Kanerva, 1988, Hawkins and Blakeslee, 2004] and provided novel
perspectives on machine learning toolsets like dot-product attention, transformers, and linear layers
of deep neural networks [Ramsauer et al., 2020, Bricken and Pehlevan, 2021, Irie et al., 2022].
Our main aim is to recall exact memories from a neural network that can rapidly and continually learn
from a stream of data. Towards this end we introduce BayesPCN, a Bayesian take on the generative
predictive coding network (GPCN) [Salvatori et al., 2021] that combines predictive coding and locally
conjugate Bayesian updates1 . There are currently a number of associative memory systems that are
continually learnable [Hopfield, 1982, Kanerva, 1988, Hawkins and George, 2007, Ramsauer et al.,
2020, Sharma et al., 2022]. However, to our knowledge, BayesPCN is the first parametric associative
memory model to continually learn hundreds of high-dimensional observations while maintaining
1

Code is available at https://github.com/plai-group/bayes-pcn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

