Photorealistic Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
with Deep Language Understanding

Chitwan Saharia∗, William Chan∗, Saurabh Saxena†, Lala Li†, Jay Whang†,
Emily Denton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan,
S. Sara Mahdavi, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Tim Salimans,
Jonathan Ho†, David J Fleet†‡, Mohammad Norouzi∗
{sahariac,williamchan,mnorouzi}@google.com
{srbs,lala,jwhang,jonathanho,davidfleet}@google.com
Google Research, Brain Team
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Abstract
We present Imagen, a text-to-image diffusion model with an unprecedented degree
of photorealism and a deep level of language understanding. Imagen builds on the
power of large transformer language models in understanding text and hinges on the
strength of diffusion models in high-fidelity image generation. Our key discovery
is that generic large language models (e.g. T5), pretrained on text-only corpora, are
surprisingly effective at encoding text for image synthesis: increasing the size of
the language model in Imagen boosts both sample fidelity and image-text alignment
much more than increasing the size of the image diffusion model. Imagen achieves
a new state-of-the-art FID score of 7.27 on the COCO dataset, without ever training
on COCO, and human raters find Imagen samples to be on par with the COCO
data itself in image-text alignment. To assess text-to-image models in greater
depth, we introduce DrawBench, a comprehensive and challenging benchmark for
text-to-image models. With DrawBench, we compare Imagen with recent methods
including VQ-GAN+CLIP, Latent Diffusion Models, GLIDE and DALL-E 2, and
find that human raters prefer Imagen over other models in side-by-side comparisons,
both in terms of sample quality and image-text alignment.

1

Introduction

Multimodal learning has come into prominence recently, with text-to-image synthesis [55, 12, 59]
and image-text contrastive learning [51, 32, 77] at the forefront. These models have transformed
the research community and captured widespread public attention with creative image generation
[22, 56] and editing applications [21, 43, 36]. To pursue this research direction further, we introduce
Imagen, a text-to-image diffusion model that combines the power of transformer language models
(LMs) [15, 54] with high-fidelity diffusion models [28, 29, 16, 43] to deliver an unprecedented
degree of photorealism and a deep level of language understanding in text-to-image synthesis. In
contrast to prior work that uses only image-text data for model training [e.g., 55, 43], the key finding
behind Imagen is that text embeddings from large LMs [54, 15], pretrained on text-only corpora, are
remarkably effective for text-to-image synthesis. See Fig. 1 for select samples.
Imagen comprises a frozen T5-XXL [54] encoder to map input text into a sequence of embeddings
and a 64×64 image diffusion model, followed by two super-resolution diffusion models for generating
∗

Equal contribution.
Core contribution.
‡
DF is also affiliated with the University of Toronto and the Vector Institute
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

