Tractable Function-Space Variational Inference in
Bayesian Neural Networks
Tim G. J. Rudner⇤
Zonghao Chen
Yee Whye Teh
Yarin Gal
University of Oxford University College London University of Oxford University of Oxford

Abstract
Reliable predictive uncertainty estimation plays an important role in enabling the
deployment of neural networks to safety-critical settings. A popular approach
for estimating the predictive uncertainty of neural networks is to define a prior
distribution over the network parameters, infer an approximate posterior distribution, and use it to make stochastic predictions. However, explicit inference
over neural network parameters makes it difficult to incorporate meaningful prior
information about the data-generating process into the model. In this paper, we
pursue an alternative approach. Recognizing that the primary object of interest in
most settings is the distribution over functions induced by the posterior distribution
over neural network parameters, we frame Bayesian inference in neural networks
explicitly as inferring a posterior distribution over functions and propose a scalable function-space variational inference method that allows incorporating prior
information and results in reliable predictive uncertainty estimates. We show that
the proposed method leads to state-of-the-art uncertainty estimation and predictive
performance on a range of prediction tasks and demonstrate that it performs well
on a challenging safety-critical medical diagnosis task in which reliable uncertainty
estimation is essential.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models succeed at an increasingly wide range of narrowly defined tasks [Krizhevsky
et al., 2012, Mnih et al., 2013, Silver et al., 2016, Jumper et al., 2021] but may fail without warning
when used on inputs that are meaningfully different from the data they were trained on [Amodei et al.,
2016, Hendrycks et al., 2021, Rudner and Toner, 2021a,b]. To deploy machine learning models in
safety-critical environments where failures are costly or may endanger human lives, machine learning
methods must be reliable and have the ability to ‘fail gracefully.’ A promising tool for incorporating
fail-safe mechanisms into machine learning systems, predictive uncertainty quantification allows
machine learning models to express their confidence in the correctness of their predictions.
In this paper, we develop a method for obtaining reliable uncertainty estimates in Bayesian neural
networks (BNNs, Neal [1996]). While BNNs have promised to combine the advantages of deep
learning and Bayesian inference, existing approaches for approximate inference in BNNs fall short of
this promise and have been demonstrated to result in approximate posterior predictive distributions
that underperform ‘non-Bayesian’ methods both in terms of predictive accuracy and uncertainty
quantification—making them of limited use in practice [Ovadia et al., 2019, Foong et al., 2019,
Farquhar et al., 2020a, Band et al., 2021]. A potential reason for this shortcoming is that commonly
used parameter-space inference methods make it difficult to define meaningful priors that effectively
incorporate information about the data-generating process into inference.
⇤

Corresponding author. Email: <tim.rudner@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

