Zero-shot Transfer Learning within a Heterogeneous
Graph via Knowledge Transfer Networks

Minji Yoon∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Ziniu Hu∗
University of California Los Angeles

John Palowitch
Google Research
Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Carnegie Mellon University

Dustin Zelle
Google Research
Bryan Perozzi
Google Research

Abstract
Data continuously emitted from industrial ecosystems such as social or e-commerce
platforms are commonly represented as heterogeneous graphs (HG) composed
of multiple node/edge types. State-of-the-art graph learning methods for HGs
known as heterogeneous graph neural networks (HGNNs) are applied to learn
deep context-informed node representations. However, many HG datasets from
industrial applications suffer from label imbalance between node types. As there
is no direct way to learn using labels rooted at different node types, HGNNs have
been applied on only a few node types with abundant labels. We propose a zeroshot transfer learning module for HGNNs called a Knowledge Transfer Network
(KTN) that transfers knowledge from label-abundant node types to zero-labeled
node types through rich relational information given in the HG. KTN is derived
from the theoretical relationship, which we introduce in this work, between distinct
feature extractors for each node types given in a HGNN model. KTN improves
performance of 6 different types of HGNN models by up to 960% for inference on
zero-labeled node types and outperforms state-of-the-art transfer learning baselines
by up to 73% across 18 different transfer learning tasks on HGs.

1

Introduction

Large technology companies commonly maintain large relational datasets, derived from their internal
logs, that can be represented as or joined into a massive heterogeneous graph (HG) composed of
nodes and edges with multiple types (30). For instance, in e-commerce networks, there are product,
user, and review nodes, all interconnected by many edge types that represent forms of interactions
such as spending (user-product), reviewing (user-review), and reviews-of (product-review). To learn
powerful features representing the complex multimodal structure of HGs, various heterogeneous
graph neural networks (HGNN) have been proposed (15; 26; 35; 43).
A common issue in these industrial applications of HGNNs is the label imbalance among different
node types. For instance, publicly available content nodes – such as those representing video, text,
and image content – are abundantly labelled, whereas labels for other types (such as user or account
nodes) may be much more expensive to collect (or even not available, e.g. due to privacy restrictions).
This means that in most standard training settings, HGNN models can only learn to make good
inferences for a few label-abundant node types, and can usually not make any inferences for the
remaining node types, given the absence of any labels for them.
If there is a pair of label-abundant and zero-labeled node types which share an inference task, could we
transfer knowledge between them? One body of work has focused on transferring knowledge between
∗

Work done while interning at Google

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

