HyperDomainNet: Universal Domain Adaptation for
Generative Adversarial Networks
Aibek Alanov⇤ †
HSE University, AIRI‡
Moscow, Russia
alanov.aibek@gmail.com

Vadim Titov⇤ †
MIPT§, AIRI‡
Moscow, Russia
titov.vn@phystech.edu

Dmitry Vetrov
HSE University, AIRI‡
Moscow, Russia
vetrovd@yandex.ru

Abstract
Domain adaptation framework of GANs has achieved great progress in recent years
as a main successful approach of training contemporary GANs in the case of very
limited training data. In this work, we significantly improve this framework by
proposing an extremely compact parameter space for fine-tuning the generator.
We introduce a novel domain-modulation technique that allows to optimize only
6 thousand-dimensional vector instead of 30 million weights of StyleGAN2 to
adapt to a target domain. We apply this parameterization to the state-of-art domain
adaptation methods and show that it has almost the same expressiveness as the
full parameter space. Additionally, we propose a new regularization loss that
considerably enhances the diversity of the fine-tuned generator. Inspired by the
reduction in the size of the optimizing parameter space we consider the problem of
multi-domain adaptation of GANs, i.e. setting when the same model can adapt to
several domains depending on the input query. We propose the HyperDomainNet
that is a hypernetwork that predicts our parameterization given the target domain.
We empirically confirm that it can successfully learn a number of domains at once
and may even generalize to unseen domains. Source code can be found at this
github repository.

1

Introduction

Contemporary generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8, 14, 15, 13, 3] show remarkable performance in modeling image distributions and have applications in a wide range of computer vision
tasks (image enhancement [18, 42], editing [9, 31], image-to-image translation [12, 46, 47], etc.).
However, the training of modern GANs requires thousands of samples that limits its applicability
only to domains that are represented by a large set of images. The mainstream approach to sidestep
this limitation is transfer learning (TL), i.e. fine-tuning the generative model to a domain with few
samples starting with a pretrained source model.
The standard approach of GAN TL methods is to fine-tune almost all weights of the pretrained model
[19, 22, 38, 37, 13, 44, 24, 6, 48]. It can be reasonable in the case when the target domain is very
far from the source one, e.g. when we adapt the generator pretrained on human faces to the domain
of animals or buildings. However, there is a wide range of cases when the distance between data
domains is not so far. In particular, the majority of target domains used in works [19, 37, 24, 6, 48]
are similar to the source one and differ mainly in texture, style, geometry while keep the same content
like faces or outdoor scenes. For such cases it seems redundant to fine-tune all weights of the source
⇤

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
‡
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
§
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

