Mildly Conservative Q-Learning for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

1

Jiafei Lyu1∗, Xiaoteng Ma2∗ , Xiu Li1†, Zongqing Lu3†
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua Unversity
3
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{lvjf20,ma-xt17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) defines the task of learning from a static logged
dataset without continually interacting with the environment. The distribution shift
between the learned policy and the behavior policy makes it necessary for the
value function to stay conservative such that out-of-distribution (OOD) actions
will not be severely overestimated. However, existing approaches, penalizing the
unseen actions or regularizing with the behavior policy, are too pessimistic, which
suppresses the generalization of the value function and hinders the performance
improvement. This paper explores mild but enough conservatism for offline learning while not harming generalization. We propose Mildly Conservative Q-learning
(MCQ), where OOD actions are actively trained by assigning them proper pseudo
Q values. We theoretically show that MCQ induces a policy that behaves at least
as well as the behavior policy and no erroneous overestimation will occur for
OOD actions. Experimental results on the D4RL benchmarks demonstrate that
MCQ achieves remarkable performance compared with prior work. Furthermore,
MCQ shows superior generalization ability when transferring from offline to online, and significantly outperforms baselines. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/dmksjfl/MCQ.

1

Introduction

Continually interacting with the environment of online reinforcement learning (RL) is often infeasible
and unrealistic, since the data collection process of the agent may be expensive, difficult, or even
dangerous, especially in real-world applications. Offline RL, instead, aims at learning from a static
dataset that was previously collected by some unknown process [36], hence eliminating the need for
environmental interactions during training.
The main challenge of offline RL is the distribution shift of state-action visitation frequency between
the learned policy and the behavior policy. The evaluation of out-of-distribution (OOD) actions
causes extrapolation error [14], which can be exacerbated through bootstrapping [34] and result in
severe overestimation errors. Thus, keeping conservatism in value estimation is necessary in offline
RL [24, 50, 60]. Previous methods achieve the conservatism by compelling the learned policy to be
close to the behavior policy [14, 58, 34, 13, 57], by penalizing the learned value functions from being
over-optimistic upon out-of-distribution (OOD) actions [35, 33, 59], or by learning without querying
OOD samples [56, 8, 62, 32, 40].
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

