Polyhistor: Parameter-Efficient Multi-Task
Adaptation for Dense Vision Tasks

Yen-Cheng Liu
Georgia Tech
ycliu@gatech.edu

Chih-Yao Ma
Meta
cyma@meta.com

Junjiao Tian
Georgia Tech
jtian73@gatech.edu

Zijian He
Meta
zijian@meta.com

Zsolt Kira
Georgia Tech
zkira@gatech.edu

Abstract
Adapting large-scale pretrained models to various downstream tasks via fine-tuning
is a standard method in machine learning. Recently, parameter-efficient fine-tuning
methods show promise in adapting a pretrained model to different tasks while
training only a few parameters. Despite their success, most existing methods
are proposed in Natural Language Processing tasks with language Transformers, and adaptation to Computer Vision tasks with Vision Transformers remains
under-explored, especially for dense vision tasks. Further, in multi-task settings,
individually fine-tuning and storing separate models for different tasks is inefficient.
In this work, we provide an extensive multi-task parameter-efficient benchmark and
examine existing parameter-efficient fine-tuning NLP methods for vision tasks. Our
results on four different dense vision tasks showed that existing methods cannot
be efficiently integrated due to the hierarchical nature of the Hierarchical Vision
Transformers. To overcome this issue, we propose Polyhistor and Polyhistor-Lite,
consisting of Decomposed HyperNetworks and Layer-wise Scaling Kernels, to
share information across different tasks with a few trainable parameters. This
leads to favorable performance improvements against existing parameter-efficient
methods while using fewer trainable parameters. Specifically, Polyhistor achieves
competitive accuracy compared to the state-of-the-art while only use ∼ 10% of
their trainable parameters. Furthermore, our methods show larger performance
gains when large networks and more pretraining data are used.

1

Introduction

Foundation models trained with large-scale datasets have shown the success of adapting to a variety
of downstream NLP and vision tasks [1]. As the state-of-the-art foundation models grow to billion
or even trillion parameter models [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], individually fine-tuning all parameters of the model
wastes significant computational resources. Further, for multi-task models, both fine-tuning and storing separate models for multiple tasks become infeasible on devices with low computation resources.
To alleviate this issue, several works [7, 8, 9] have proposed parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods
to derive a better trade-off between trainable parameters and accuracy on downstream tasks. By only
training a small amount of parameters, these existing methods can substantially narrow the accuracy
gap compared to the baseline that fine-tunes all parameters. However, these existing approaches
mainly focus on NLP tasks [10, 11, 12] or single-task adaptation on image classification [9], and
Polyhistor: someone gifted or learned in multiple disciplines.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

