Holomorphic Equilibrium Propagation Computes
Exact Gradients Through Finite Size Oscillations

Axel Laborieux1

1

Friedemann Zenke1,2

{firstname.lastname}@fmi.ch
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland
2
Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland

Abstract
Equilibrium propagation (EP) is an alternative to backpropagation (BP) that allows
the training of deep neural networks with local learning rules. It thus provides
a compelling framework for training neuromorphic systems and understanding
learning in neurobiology. However, EP requires infinitesimal teaching signals,
thereby limiting its applicability in noisy physical systems. Moreover, the algorithm
requires separate temporal phases and has not been applied to large-scale problems.
Here we address these issues by extending EP to holomorphic networks. We
show analytically that this extension naturally leads to exact gradients even for
finite-amplitude teaching signals. Importantly, the gradient can be computed as
the first Fourier coefficient from finite neuronal activity oscillations in continuous
time without requiring separate phases. Further, we demonstrate in numerical
simulations that our approach permits robust estimation of gradients in the presence
of noise and that deeper models benefit from the finite teaching signals. Finally,
we establish the first benchmark for EP on the ImageNet 32 × 32 dataset and show
that it matches the performance of an equivalent network trained with BP. Our
work provides analytical insights that enable scaling EP to large-scale problems
and establishes a formal framework for how oscillations could support learning in
biological and neuromorphic systems.

1

Introduction

The backpropagation (BP) of error algorithm [1] underpins the ability of state-of-the-art deep neural
networks to learn useful representations from structured data such as speech, vision, and text [2].
BP stands out as the most successful algorithm to solve the credit assignment problem in artificial
neural networks [3, 4], which can be defined by the following question: How should a synaptic
connection be modified in order to improve the global performance of the network to perform a task,
as measured by some objective function? This is a difficult question since individual synapse may
have a complicated influence on downstream processing. BP solves credit assignment through the
chain rule of differentiation [1]. Although BP is efficiently implemented in software, it is difficult to
conceive how BP could plausibly be implemented in biological systems. The problematic aspects are
BP’s use of symmetric connections and the need for two separate phases: A nonlinear forward pass
that propagates neuronal activity and a linear backward pass that carries signed gradient signals [3].
These two types of processing are also inconvenient for training physical neural networks, since both
should be handled by the same circuit, and explicitly propagating errors does not harness the device
mismatches typical of neuromorphic hardware [5, 6]. Despite its implausibility, representations
learned with BP match representations of in-vivo data [7] better than networks trained with purely
biologically-motivated learning rules such as STDP [8, 9]. This discrepancy raises the question as to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

