The Minority Matters: A Diversity-Promoting
Collaborative Metric Learning Algorithm
Shilong Bao1,2
1

Qianqian Xu3∗
Zhiyong Yang4
Yuan He5
Xiaochun Cao6
Qingming Huang3,4,7,8∗

State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
4
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Alibaba Group
6
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University
7
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS
8
Peng Cheng Laboratory
baoshilong@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, heyuan.hy@alibaba-inc.com,
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {yangzhiyong21,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Collaborative Metric Learning (CML) has recently emerged as a popular method
in recommendation systems (RS), closing the gap between metric learning and
Collaborative Filtering. Following the convention of RS, existing methods exploit unique user representation in their model design. This paper focuses on a
challenging scenario where a user has multiple categories of interests. Under this
setting, we argue that the unique user representation might induce preference bias,
especially when the item category distribution is imbalanced. To address this issue, we propose a novel method called Diversity-Promoting Collaborative Metric
Learning (DPCML), with the hope of considering the commonly ignored minority
interest of the user. The key idea behind DPCML is to include a multiple set of
representations for each user in the system. Based on this embedding paradigm,
user preference toward an item is aggregated from different embeddings by taking
the minimum item-user distance among the user embedding set. Furthermore, we
observe that the diversity of the embeddings for the same user also plays an essential role in the model. To this end, we propose a Diversity Control Regularization
Scheme (DCRS) to accommodate the multi-vector representation strategy better.
Theoretically, we show that DPCML could generalize well to unseen test data by
tackling the challenge of the annoying operation that comes from the minimum
value. Experiments over a range of benchmark datasets speak to the efficacy of
DPCML.

1

Introduction

Recommender system (RS) is a well-known building block in eCommerce, which can assist buyers
to find products they wish to purchase by giving them the relevant recommendations. The key recipe
behind RS is to learn from user-item interaction records [45, 30, 31, 29, 19]. In practice, since user
preferences are hard to collect, such records often exist as implicit feedback [48, 1, 42] where only
indirect actions are provided (say clicks, collections, reposts, and etc.). Such a property of implicit
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

