OST: Improving Generalization of DeepFake
Detection via One-Shot Test-Time Training

Liang Chen1

Yong Zhang2∗ Yibing Song2 Jue Wang2 Lingqiao Liu1∗
The University of Adelaide 2 Tencent AI Lab

1

{liangchen527, zhangyong201303, yibingsong.cv, arphid}@gmail.com
lingqiao.liu@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
State-of-the-art deepfake detectors perform well in identifying forgeries when
they are evaluated on a test set similar to the training set, but struggle to maintain
good performance when the test forgeries exhibit different characteristics from
the training images, e.g., forgeries are created by unseen deepfake methods. Such
a weak generalization capability hinders the applicability of current deepfake
detectors. In this paper, we introduce a new learning paradigm specially designed
for the generalizable deepfake detection task. Our key idea is to construct a testsample-specific auxiliary task to update the model before applying it to the sample.
Specifically, we synthesize pseudo-training samples from each test image and create
a test-time training objective to update the model. Moreover, we propose to leverage
meta-learning to ensure that a fast single-step test-time gradient descent, dubbed
one-shot test-time training (OST), can be sufficient for good deepfake detection
performance. Extensive results across several benchmark datasets demonstrate that
our approach performs favorably against existing arts in terms of generalization to
unseen data and robustness to different post-processing steps.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network models have brought remarkable advances to image editing and generation
techniques. While such progress is revolutionizing the multimedia production industry, it also creates
negative social impacts since it has never been easier to create highly deceivable forgery images.
Among those new technologies, deepfake, which uses deep learning models to substitute the identity
of one person with another or alter the facial features in a portrait, is particularly harmful since it
can lead to severe digital crime and undermine the social trust system. To counteract such a negative
impact, deepfake detection technique is developed to automatically recognize pristine or forgery and is
receiving increasing attention in the research community [28, 35, 57, 23, 42, 4, 39, 58, 16, 24, 22, 9].
So far, existing deepfake detection methods achieve favorable performances when training and test
forgeries are from the same dataset and generated by the same deepfake method. In practice, the test
forgeries are usually generated by unknown methods or applied with different image postprocessing
approaches. This discrepancy will inevitably create a distribution drift between training and test
data. Unfortunately, existing deepfake detectors do not generalize well, and their performance tends
to decrease significantly when evaluated across datasets. This phenomenon inspires recent studies
[28, 42, 35, 57, 39] on improving model generalizations to recognize face forgeries generated from
unseen methods. For example, a two heads network is proposed in [28] to discriminate face forgeries
by amplifying blending artifacts. In [42], a face forgery frequency network is developed to mine
forgery patterns in frequency domains for better generalization. Detail discrepancies are investigated
∗

Corresponding authors. This work is done when L. Chen is an intern in Tencent AI Lab. Code is available
at https://github.com/liangchen527/OST.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

