Subquadratic Kronecker Regression with
Applications to Tensor Decomposition
Matthew Fahrbach⇤
Google Research
fahrbach@google.com

Gang Fu
Google Research
thomasfu@google.com

Mehrdad Ghadiri
Georgia Tech
ghadiri@gatech.edu

Abstract
Kronecker regression is a highly-structured least squares problem minx kKx bk22 ,
where the design matrix K = A(1) ⌦ · · · ⌦ A(N ) is a Kronecker product of factor
matrices. This regression problem arises in each step of the widely-used alternating
least squares (ALS) algorithm for computing the Tucker decomposition of a tensor.
We present the first subquadratic-time algorithm for solving Kronecker regression
to a (1 + ")-approximation that avoids the exponential term O(" N ) in the running
time. Our techniques combine leverage score sampling and iterative methods. By
extending our approach to block-design matrices where one block is a Kronecker
product, we also achieve subquadratic-time algorithms for (1) Kronecker ridge
regression and (2) updating the factor matrices of a Tucker decomposition in ALS,
which is not a pure Kronecker regression problem, thereby improving the running
time of all steps of Tucker ALS. We demonstrate the speed and accuracy of this
Kronecker regression algorithm on synthetic data and real-world image tensors.

1

Introduction

Tensor decomposition has a rich multidisciplinary history with countless applications in data mining,
machine learning, and signal processing [35, 55, 58, 31]. The most widely-used tensor decompositions are the CP decomposition and the Tucker decomposition. Similar to the singular value
decomposition of a matrix, both decompositions have natural analogs of low-rank structure. Unlike
matrix factorization, however, computing the rank of a tensor and the best rank-one tensor are NPhard [27]. Therefore, most low-rank tensor decomposition algorithms decide on the rank structure in
advance, and then optimize the variables of the decomposition to fit the data. While conceptually
simple, this approach is extremely effective in practice for many applications.
The alternating least squares (ALS) algorithm is the main workhorse for low-rank tensor decomposition, e.g., it is the first algorithm mentioned in the MATLAB Tensor Toolbox [7]. For both CP
and Tucker decompositions, ALS cyclically optimizes disjoint blocks of variables while keeping all
others fixed. As the name suggests, each step solves a linear regression problem. The core tensor
update step in ALS for Tucker decompositions is notoriously expensive but highly structured. In fact,
the design matrix of this regression problem is the Kronecker product of the factor matrices of the
Tucker decomposition K = A(1) ⌦ · · · ⌦ A(N ) . Our work builds on a line of Kronecker regression
algorithms [17, 18, 47] to give the first subquadratic-time algorithm for solving Kronecker regression
to a (1 + ")-approximation while avoiding an exponential term of O(" N ) in the running time.
We combine leverage score sampling, iterative methods, and a novel way of multiplying sparsified
Kronecker product matrices to fully exploit the Kronecker structure of the design matrix. We also
extend our approach to block-design matrices where one block is a Kronecker product, achieving
⇤
Authors are listed alphabetically. A preliminary version of this work that focuses on efficient sketching for
Tucker decompositions appears in arXiv:2107.10654 [21].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

