A Closer Look at Weakly-Supervised
Audio-Visual Source Localization
Shentong Mo
Carnegie Mellon University

Pedro Morgado
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Audio-visual source localization is a challenging task that aims to predict the location of visual sound sources in a video. Since collecting ground-truth annotations
of sounding objects can be costly, a plethora of weakly-supervised localization
methods that can learn from datasets with no bounding-box annotations have been
proposed in recent years, by leveraging the natural co-occurrence of audio and
visual signals. Despite significant interest, popular evaluation protocols have two
major flaws. First, they allow for the use of a fully annotated dataset to perform
early stopping, thus significantly increasing the annotation effort required for training. Second, current evaluation metrics assume the presence of sound sources at
all times. This is of course an unrealistic assumption, and thus better metrics are
necessary to capture the model’s performance on (negative) samples with no visible
sound sources. To accomplish this, we extend the test set of popular benchmarks,
Flickr SoundNet and VGG-Sound Sources, in order to include negative samples,
and measure performance using metrics that balance localization accuracy and
recall. Using the new protocol, we conducted an extensive evaluation of prior
methods, and found that most prior works are not capable of identifying negatives
and suffer from significant overfitting problems (rely heavily on early stopping for
best results). We also propose a new approach for visual sound source localization
that addresses both these problems. In particular, we found that, through extreme
visual dropout and the use of momentum encoders, the proposed approach combats overfitting effectively, and establishes a new state-of-the-art performance on
both Flickr SoundNet and VGG-Sound Source. Code and pre-trained models are
available at https://github.com/stoneMo/SLAVC.

1

Introduction

Humans and most other animals have evolved to localize sources of sound in their environment. This
remarkable ability relies in part on the uniqueness of different sound sources, which allows us to
recognize the sounds we hear and visually localize them in our environment. Given recent advances
in audio and visual perception research, there is broad interest in developing multi-modal systems
capable of mimicking our ability to visually localize sound sources.
One promising direction is to leverage the co-occurrence between sounds and the corresponding
sources in video data. Since audio-visual co-occurrence arises naturally, algorithms can scale to very
large datasets without requiring costly human annotations. However, despite encouraging recent
progress [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], currently accepted evaluation protocols hide two critical limitations of current
methods: (1) current methods overfit easily even when scaled up to large datasets, and (2) current
methods assume that visible sound sources are always present in the video and thus are unreliable
when deployed on realistic data where this assumption does not hold.
The first limitation remained hidden as prior works [2, 4, 6, 5] rely heavily on early stopping for
optimal performance (i.e., by continuously validating the model during training using a human36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

