MoVQ: Modulating Quantized Vectors for
High-Fidelity Image Generation
Chuanxia Zheng
Monash University
chuanxiazheng@gmail.com

Long Tung Vuong
VinAI
longvt94@gmail.com

Jianfei Cai
Monash University
Jianfei.Cai@monash.edu

Dinh Phung
Monash University
dinh.phung@monash.edu

Abstract
Although two-stage Vector Quantized (VQ) generative models allow for synthesizing high-fidelity and high-resolution images, their quantization operator encodes
similar patches within an image into the same index, resulting in a repeated artifact for similar adjacent regions using existing decoder architectures. To address
this issue, we propose to incorporate the spatially conditional normalization to
modulate the quantized vectors so as to insert spatially variant information to the
embedded index maps, encouraging the decoder to generate more photorealistic
images. Moreover, we use multichannel quantization to increase the recombination
capability of the discrete codes without increasing the cost of model and codebook.
Additionally, to generate discrete tokens at the second stage, we adopt a Masked
Generative Image Transformer (MaskGIT) to learn an underlying prior distribution
in the compressed latent space, which is much faster than the conventional autoregressive model. Experiments on two benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
proposed modulated VQGAN is able to greatly improve the reconstructed image
quality as well as provide high-fidelity image generation.

1

Introduction

The vision community has rapidly improved image synthesis results on quality, diversity and resolution over a short period of time. In particular, many powerful baseline frameworks have been
introduced, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [13], Variational AutoEncoder (VAE)
[23], Flow-based Generators [8] and Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPM) [35]. These methods are
conceptually intuitive, leading to an explosion of image synthesis works that push the boundaries of
image generation quality and diversity [14, 1, 22, 20, 21, 37, 4].

Figure 1: 256×256 image samples generated by the proposed MoVQ, with model trained on FFHQ.
Among these existing image synthesis frameworks, Vector Quantized-Variational AutoEncoder (VQVAE) [39] is a very popular nova, which learns a compressed discrete representation for each image
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

