Adversarial Training with Complementary Labels:
On the Benefit of Gradually Informative Attacks
Jianan Zhou1⇤ Jianing Zhu1⇤ Jingfeng Zhang2 Tongliang Liu3
Gang Niu2† Bo Han1† Masashi Sugiyama2,4
1

Hong Kong Baptist University 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
3
TML Lab, The University of Sydney 4 The University of Tokyo
{csjnzhou, csjnzhu, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
jingfeng.zhang@riken.jp tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au
gang.niu.ml@gmail.com sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Adversarial training (AT) with imperfect supervision is significant but receives
limited attention. To push AT towards more practical scenarios, we explore a brand
new yet challenging setting, i.e., AT with complementary labels (CLs), which specify a class that a data sample does not belong to. However, the direct combination of
AT with existing methods for CLs results in consistent failure, but not on a simple
baseline of two-stage training. In this paper, we further explore the phenomenon
and identify the underlying challenges of AT with CLs as intractable adversarial
optimization and low-quality adversarial examples. To address the above problems,
we propose a new learning strategy using gradually informative attacks, which consists of two critical components: 1) Warm-up Attack (Warm-up) gently raises the
adversarial perturbation budgets to ease the adversarial optimization with CLs; 2)
Pseudo-Label Attack (PLA) incorporates the progressively informative model predictions into a corrected complementary loss. Extensive experiments are conducted
to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on a range of benchmarked datasets.
The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/RoyalSkye/ATCL.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples [15], which motivates the development
of various defensive methods [30, 21, 24, 2] to mitigate the arisen security issue. As one of the
most effective and practical defensive methods, adversarial training (AT) [24] has been widely
studied [41, 5, 10]. Specifically, it formulates the problem as min-max optimization, which generates
adversarial data during training and minimizes the training loss of the generated adversarial variants.
In this way, the models are equipped with adversarial robustness against human-imperceptible
perturbations within the neighborhood of inputs. Although AT with perfect supervision (e.g., ordinary
labels) has been thoroughly studied by previous works [25, 33, 44, 21, 34, 43, 11], the more common
learning scenarios with imperfect supervision [45, 42] has only received limited attention.
Complementary labels (CLs) [17], which convey partial label information by identifying a class that
a data sample does not belong to, are one of those practical and promising imperfect supervision in
weakly supervised learning [3, 27]. Several works [39, 18, 7, 13, 38, 14] recently focused on learning
with CLs, where the model trained only with CLs through their designed losses (i.e., complementary
¯ is expected to predict ordinary labels accurately during inference. Their success illustrates the
loss `)
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors: Bo Han (bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk) and Gang Niu (gang.niu.ml@gmail.com).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

