Operative dimensions in unconstrained connectivity
of recurrent neural networks
Renate Krause, Matthew Cook, Sepp Kollmorgen, Valerio Mante∗ and Giacomo Indiveri∗
Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Corresponding authors: rekrau@ini.uzh.ch, valerio@ini.uzh.ch
∗
Equal contribution

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are commonly used models to study neural
computation. However, a comprehensive understanding of how dynamics in RNNs
emerge from the underlying connectivity is largely lacking. Previous work derived such an understanding for RNNs fulfilling very specific constraints on their
connectivity, but it is unclear whether the resulting insights apply more generally.
Here we study how network dynamics are related to network connectivity in RNNs
trained without any specific constraints on several tasks previously employed in
neuroscience. Despite the apparent high-dimensional connectivity of these RNNs,
we show that a low-dimensional, functionally relevant subspace of the weight
matrix can be found through the identification of operative dimensions, which we
define as components of the connectivity whose removal has a large influence on
local RNN dynamics. We find that a weight matrix built from only a few operative
dimensions is sufficient for the RNNs to operate with the original performance,
implying that much of the high-dimensional structure of the trained connectivity is
functionally irrelevant. The existence of a low-dimensional, operative subspace
in the weight matrix simplifies the challenge of linking connectivity to network
dynamics and suggests that independent network functions may be placed in specific, separate subspaces of the weight matrix to avoid catastrophic forgetting in
continual learning.

1

Introduction

A central goal in neuroscience is to understand how groups of tightly interconnected neurons generate
the complex network dynamics that underlies behavior. To this end, ever larger experimental datasets
on neural anatomy, neural activity and the corresponding behavior are collected and analyzed and
new experimental tools to extend the amount and quality of such data are continuously developed.
However, in most settings it remains an open question how the underlying neural connectivity is
able to generate the observed neural dynamics. Progress in how to inspect and interpret these
complex datasets, and in particular on the relation between neural structure and function, may come
in particular from new theoretical frameworks [1, 2].
Artificial Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are a promising tool to develop such theoretical frameworks in a well-controlled and flexible setting [3, 4, 5]. Previous work on RNNs explained how
a specifically designed connectivity can give rise to desired network dynamics [6, 7, 8]. Further
theoretical work on RNNs with random, recurrent weights provided detailed insights into the properties of neural dynamics emerging from largely unstructured connectivity [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. More
recent work related structure to function in feedforward networks [14, 15] or RNNs with specific
connectivity constraints. For example, network motifs in threshold-linear networks are used to predict
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

