CEIP: Combining Explicit and Implicit Priors for
Reinforcement Learning with Demonstrations

Kai Yan

Alexander G. Schwing
Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{kaiyan3, aschwing, yxw}@illinois.edu
https://github.com/289371298/CEIP

Abstract
Although reinforcement learning has found widespread use in dense reward settings, training autonomous agents with sparse rewards remains challenging. To
address this difficulty, prior work has shown promising results when using not
only task-specific demonstrations but also task-agnostic albeit somewhat related
demonstrations. In most cases, the available demonstrations are distilled into an
implicit prior, commonly represented via a single deep net. Explicit priors in the
form of a database that can be queried have also been shown to lead to encouraging
results. To better benefit from available demonstrations, we develop a method
to Combine Explicit and Implicit Priors (CEIP). CEIP exploits multiple implicit
priors in the form of normalizing flows in parallel to form a single complex prior.
Moreover, CEIP uses an effective explicit retrieval and push-forward mechanism
to condition the implicit priors. In three challenging environments, we find the
proposed CEIP method to improve upon sophisticated state-of-the-art techniques.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has found widespread use across domains from robotics [57] and game
AI [44] to recommender systems [6]. Despite its success, reinforcement learning is also known to be
sample inefficient. For instance, training a robot arm with sparse rewards to sort objects from scratch
still requires many training steps if it is at all feasible [46].
To increase the sample efficiency of reinforcement learning, prior work aims to leverage demonstrations [4, 34, 40]. These demonstrations can be task-specific [4, 17], i.e., they directly correspond to
and address the task of interest. More recently, the use of task-agnostic demonstrations has also been
studied [14, 16, 34, 46], showing that demonstrations for loosely related tasks can enhance sample
efficiency of reinforcement learning agents.
To benefit from either of these two types of demonstrations, most work distills the information within
the demonstrations into an implicit prior, by encoding available demonstrations in a deep net. For
example, SKiLD [34] and FIST [16] use a variational auto-encoder (VAE) to encode the “skills,” i.e.,
action sequences, in a latent space, and train a prior conditioned on states based on demonstrations
to use the skills. Differently, PARROT [46] adopts a state-conditional normalizing flow to encode a
transformation from a latent space to the actual action space. However, the idea of using the available
demonstrations as an explicit prior has not received a lot of attention. Explicit priors enable the agent
to maintain a database of demonstrations, which can be used to retrieve state-action sequences given
an agent’s current state. This technique has been utilized in robotics [32, 47] and early attempts of
reinforcement learning with demonstrations [4]. It was also implemented as a baseline in [14]. One
notable recent exception is FIST [16], which queries a database of demonstrations using the current
state to retrieve a likely next state. The use of an explicit prior was shown to greatly enhance the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

