Wild-Time: A Benchmark of in-the-Wild Distribution
Shift over Time
Huaxiu Yao1∗ , Caroline Choi1∗ , Bochuan Cao2 , Yoonho Lee1 , Pang Wei Koh1 , Chelsea Finn1
1
Stanford University, 2 Pennsylvania State University
wildtime@googlegroups.com

Abstract
Distribution shift occurs when the test distribution differs from the training distribution, and it can considerably degrade performance of machine learning models
deployed in the real world. Temporal shifts – distribution shifts arising from the
passage of time – often occur gradually and have the additional structure of timestamp metadata. By leveraging timestamp metadata, models can potentially learn
from trends in past distribution shifts and extrapolate into the future. While recent
works have studied distribution shifts, temporal shifts remain underexplored. To
address this gap, we curate Wild-Time, a benchmark of 5 datasets that reflect
temporal distribution shifts arising in a variety of real-world applications, including
patient prognosis and news classification. On these datasets, we systematically
benchmark 13 prior approaches, including methods in domain generalization,
continual learning, self-supervised learning, and ensemble learning. We use two
evaluation strategies: evaluation with a fixed time split (Eval-Fix) and evaluation
with a data stream (Eval-Stream). Eval-Fix, our primary evaluation strategy, aims
to provide a simple evaluation protocol, while Eval-Stream is more realistic for
certain real-world applications. Under both evaluation strategies, we observe an
average performance drop of 20% from in-distribution to out-of-distribution data.
Existing methods are unable to close this gap. Code is available at https://wildtime.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Distribution shift occurs when the test distribution differs from the training distribution. Temporal shifts – distribution shifts that arise from
the passage of time – are a common type of
distribution shift. Due to non-stationarity, production (i.e. test) data shifts over time [39]. This
degrades the performance of machine learning
systems deployed in the real world. For example,
Lazaridou et al. [60] found that neural language
models perform worse when predicting future utterances from beyond their training period, and
that their performance worsens with time. As
another example, flu incidence prediction from
Internet search queries performed remarkably
well in 2008 [27]. However, using the same
model in 2013 incorrectly predicted double the
∗

Distribution shift over time
Training Distribution
(acc: 97.99%)

…

Test Distribution
(acc: 79.50%)

…
Time

1930s

… 1960s … 2000s

2010s

Figure 1: An illustration of temporal distribution
shift on Yearbook. In Wild-Time, we split the
train and test sets by timestamp and observe performance drops between train and test distributions.

Huaxiu Yao and Caroline Choi contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

