Maximum Class Separation as Inductive Bias
in One Matrix
Tejaswi Kasarla
University of Amsterdam
Elise van der Pol
Microsoft Research AI4Science

Gertjan J. Burghouts
TNO, Intelligent Imaging

Max van Spengler
University of Amsterdam

Rita Cucchiara
University of Modena
and Reggio Emilia

Pascal Mettes
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
Maximizing the separation between classes constitutes a well-known inductive bias
in machine learning and a pillar of many traditional algorithms. By default, deep
networks are not equipped with this inductive bias and therefore many alternative
solutions have been proposed through differential optimization. Current approaches
tend to optimize classification and separation jointly: aligning inputs with class
vectors and separating class vectors angularly. This paper proposes a simple
alternative: encoding maximum separation as an inductive bias in the network by
adding one fixed matrix multiplication before computing the softmax activations.
The main observation behind our approach is that separation does not require
optimization but can be solved in closed-form prior to training and plugged into
a network. We outline a recursive approach to obtain the matrix consisting of
maximally separable vectors for any number of classes, which can be added with
negligible engineering effort and computational overhead. Despite its simple nature,
this one matrix multiplication provides real impact. We show that our proposal
directly boosts classification, long-tailed recognition, out-of-distribution detection,
and open-set recognition, from CIFAR to ImageNet. We find empirically that
maximum separation works best as a fixed bias; making the matrix learnable adds
nothing to the performance. The closed-form matrices and code to reproduce the
experiments are available on github.1

1

Introduction

An inductive bias of a learning algorithm describes a set of assumptions about the target function
independent of training data [37]. Inductive biases play a vital role in the design of machine learning
algorithms, consider for example inductive biases for image structures (e.g., the convolution operator),
symmetries (e.g., rotational equivariance), or relational structures (e.g., graph layers). Specifically for
categorization, an important and long-standing inductive bias is optimal class separation. Perhaps
the most well-known example of the use of this bias is Support Vector Machines, which maximize
the margin of the hyperplane between samples of two classes [6]. Given many possible hyperplanes,
the rationale is to select the one that represents the largest margin, i.e., separation, known as a
maximum-margin classifier. Similarly, boosting algorithms give weights to samples depending on
their margin, such as AdaBoost which focuses on low margin samples [14]. In such algorithms and
in many more, separation has been incorporated in their design to pull apart the classes, thereby
improving generalization in classification settings to unseen data.
1

https://github.com/tkasarla/max-separation-as-inductive-bias

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

