Communication Efficient Federated Learning for
Generalized Linear Bandits

1

Chuanhao Li1 Hongning Wang1
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
{cl5ev,hw5x}@virginia.edu

Abstract
Contextual bandit algorithms have been recently studied under the federated learning setting to satisfy the demand of keeping data decentralized and pushing the
learning of bandit models to the client side. But limited by the required communication efficiency, existing solutions are restricted to linear models to exploit their
closed-form solutions for parameter estimation. Such a restricted model choice
greatly hampers these algorithms’ practical utility. In this paper, we take the first
step to addressing this challenge by studying generalized linear bandit models under the federated learning setting. We propose a communication-efficient solution
framework that employs online regression for local update and offline regression for
global update. We rigorously proved, though the setting is more general and challenging, our algorithm can attain sub-linear rate in both regret and communication
cost, which is also validated by our extensive empirical evaluations.

1

Introduction

As a classic model for sequential decision making problems, contextual bandit has been widely used
for a variety of real-world applications, including recommender systems [19], display advertisement
[21] and clinical trials [7]. While most existing bandit solutions are designed under a centralized
setting (i.e., data is readily available at a central server), in response to the increasing application
scale and public concerns of privacy, there is increasing research effort on federated bandit learning
lately [28, 6, 27, 11, 17], where N clients collaborate with limited communication bandwidth to
minimize the overall cumulative regret incurred over a finite time horizon T , while keeping each
client’s raw data local. Compared with standard federated learning [23, 13] that works with fixed
datasets, federated bandit learning is characterized by its online interactions with the environment,
which continuously provides new data samples to the clients over time. This brings in new challenges
in addressing the conflict between the need of timely data/model aggregation for regret minimization
and the need of communication efficiency with decentralized data. A carefully designed model update
method and communication strategy become vital to strike this balance.
Existing federated bandit learning solutions only partially addressed this challenge by considering
simple bandit models, like context-free bandit [27] and contextual linear bandit [28, 6, 17], where
closed-form solution for both local and global model update exists. Therefore, efficient communication for global bandit model update is realized by directly aggregating local sufficient statistics, such
that the only concern left is how to control the communication frequency over time horizon T . However, such a solution framework does not apply to the more complicated bandit models that are often
preferred in practice, such as generalized linear bandit (GLB) [8] or neural bandit [30], where only
iterative solutions exist for parameter estimation (e.g., gradient-based optimization). To enable joint
model estimation, now the learning system needs to solve distributed optimization for multiple times
as new data is collected from the environment, and each requires iterative gradient/model aggregation
among clients. This is much more expensive compared with linear models, and it naturally leads to
the question: whether a communication efficient solution to this challenging problem is still possible?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

