Relation-Constrained Decoding for Text Generation

Xiang Chen∗, Zhixian Yang∗, Xiaojun Wan
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
Center for Data Science, Peking University
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
caspar@pku.edu.cn, yangzhixian@stu.pku.edu.cn, wanxiaojun@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The dominant paradigm for neural text generation nowadays is seq2seq learning
with large-scale pretrained language models. However, it is usually difficult to
manually constrain the generation process of these models. Prior studies have
introduced Lexically Constrained Decoding (LCD) to ensure the presence of prespecified words or phrases in the output. However, simply applying lexical constraints has no guarantee of the grammatical or semantic relations between words.
Thus, more elaborate constraints are needed. To this end, we first propose a
new constrained decoding scenario named Relation-Constrained Decoding (RCD),
which requires the model’s output to contain several given word pairs with respect
to the given relations between them. For this scenario, we present a novel plug-andplay decoding algorithm named RElation-guided probability Surgery and bEam
ALlocation (RESEAL), which can handle different categories of relations, e.g., syntactical relations or factual relations. Moreover, RESEAL can adaptively “reseal”
the relations to form a high-quality sentence, which can be applied to the inference
stage of any autoregressive text generation model. To evaluate our method, we first
construct an RCD benchmark based on dependency relations from treebanks with
annotated dependencies. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach can
achieve better preservation of the input dependency relations compared to previous
methods. To further illustrate the effectiveness of RESEAL, we apply our method
to three downstream tasks: sentence summarization, fact-based text editing, and
data-to-text generation. We observe an improvement in generation quality. The
source code is available at https://github.com/CasparSwift/RESEAL.

1

Introduction

Incorporating complex manual constraints into neural text generation is a challenging research topic.
One of the most important manual constraints is the relation constraint, i.e., to guarantee that two
pre-specified words must appear in the generated text and keep the given relation between them.
Such relation constraints have various applications. For instance, data-to-text generation [11, 20] and
fact-based text editing [17] aim to ensure the presence of given facts (entities and relations between
them) in the output. Moreover, in sentence summarization task [36], there are some key semantic
relations that must be preserved to ensure the fluency and factual constituency of the summaries.
The most prominent paradigm for text generation is seq2seq learning by finetuning the large-scale
pretrained models [21, 34] and obtaining the outputs by beam search in an autoregressive manner.
However, this paradigm often fails to satisfy the complex constraints because there is no explicit
mechanism to enforce these constraints. To tackle this problem, previous works [15, 16, 31] propose
Lexically Constrained Decoding (LCD) to preserve some given keywords in the output. However,
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

