Rethinking Value Function Learning for
Generalization in Reinforcement Learning

1

Seungyong Moon1,2 , JunYeong Lee1,2 , Hyun Oh Song1,2,3∗
Seoul National University, 2 Neural Processing Research Center, 3 DeepMetrics
{symoon11,mascheroni99,hyunoh}@mllab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Our work focuses on training RL agents on multiple visually diverse environments
to improve observational generalization performance. In prior methods, policy and
value networks are separately optimized using a disjoint network architecture to
avoid interference and obtain a more accurate value function. We identify that a
value network in the multi-environment setting is more challenging to optimize and
prone to memorizing the training data than in the conventional single-environment
setting. In addition, we find that appropriate regularization on the value network is
necessary to improve both training and test performance. To this end, we propose
Delayed-Critic Policy Gradient (DCPG), a policy gradient algorithm that implicitly
penalizes value estimates by optimizing the value network less frequently with
more training data than the policy network. This can be implemented using a single
unified network architecture. Furthermore, we introduce a simple self-supervised
task that learns the forward and inverse dynamics of environments using a single
discriminator, which can be jointly optimized with the value network. Our proposed
algorithms significantly improve observational generalization performance and
sample efficiency on the Procgen Benchmark.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in various domains,
such as robotic controls and games [27, 19, 32]. To apply RL algorithms to more practical scenarios,
such as autonomous vehicles or healthcare systems, they should be robust against the non-stationarity
of real-world environments and capable of performing well on unseen situations during deployment.
However, current state-of-the-art RL algorithms often fail to generalize to unseen test environments
with visual variations, even if they achieve high performance in their training environments [14, 41, 9].
This problem is referred to as observational overfitting [36].
Training RL agents on a finite number of visually diverse environments and testing them on unseen
environments is the standard protocol for evaluating observational generalization in RL [10]. Several
methods have attempted to improve generalization in this framework by adopting the regularization
techniques that originate from supervised learning or training robust state representations via selfsupervised learning [9, 20, 30, 26]. However, these methods have mainly focused on developing new
auxiliary objectives on the existing RL algorithms intended for the conventional single-environment
setting such as PPO [34]. Some recent works have investigated the interference between policy and
value function optimization arising from the multiple training environments and proposed new training
schemes that decouple the policy and value network training with a separate network architecture to
obtain an accurate value function [11, 29].
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

