S2P: State-conditioned Image Synthesis for
Data Augmentation in Offline Reinforcement Learning

Daesol Cho∗
Seoul National University
Automation and Systems Research Institute (ASRI)

Dongseok Shim∗
Seoul National University
Interdisciplinary Program in AI

H. Jin Kim
Seoul National University
Artificial Intelligence Institute of Seoul National University (AIIS)
{dscho1234, tlaehdtjr01, hjinkim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (Offline RL) suffers from the innate distributional
shift as it cannot interact with the physical environment during training. To alleviate
such limitation, state-based offline RL leverages a learned dynamics model from
the logged experience and augments the predicted state transition to extend the data
distribution. For exploiting such benefit also on the image-based RL, we firstly
propose a generative model, S2P (State2Pixel), which synthesizes the raw pixel
of the agent from its corresponding state. It enables bridging the gap between the
state and the image domain in RL algorithms, and virtually exploring unseen image
distribution via model-based transition in the state space. Through experiments,
we confirm that our S2P-based image synthesis not only improves the imagebased offline RL performance but also shows powerful generalization capability on
unseen tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning algorithms have shown significant development thanks to the large pre-collected dataset, such as
SQuAD [47] in natural language processing (NLP), and
ImageNet [4] in computer vision. On the contrary, reinforcement learning (RL) requires an online trial-and-error
in training process to collect the data by interacting with
the environment, which hinders its utilization in many
real-world applications. Due to this intrinsic property of
current online RL algorithms, there exist some approaches
that try to deploy large and diverse pre-recorded datasets
without online interaction with the environment, which is
called offline RL.

Out of
Distribution

Virtual
Exploration

Extended
Distribution

Image Distribution

However, recent studies have observed that the current Figure 1: S2P generates the dynamicsonline RL algorithms [10, 35] perform poorly in an offline consistent image transition data by virtusetting. It is primarily attributed to the large extrapola- ally exploring in the state space to extend
tion error when the Q-function is evaluated on out-of- the distribution of the offline datasets.
distribution actions, which is called the distributional shift [25, 22, 8]. That is, due to the offline
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

