Global Convergence of Direct Policy Search for
State-Feedback H1 Robust Control: A Revisit of
Nonsmooth Synthesis with Goldstein Subdifferential
Xingang Guo,
Bin Hu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{xingang2,binhu7}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Direct policy search has been widely applied in modern reinforcement learning and
continuous control. However, the theoretical properties of direct policy search on
nonsmooth robust control synthesis have not been fully understood. The optimal
H1 control framework aims at designing a policy to minimize the closed-loop
H1 norm, and is arguably the most fundamental robust control paradigm. In this
work, we show that direct policy search is guaranteed to find the global solution of
the robust H1 state-feedback control design problem. Notice that policy search
for optimal H1 control leads to a constrained nonconvex nonsmooth optimization
problem, where the nonconvex feasible set consists of all the policies stabilizing the
closed-loop dynamics. We show that for this nonsmooth optimization problem, all
Clarke stationary points are global minimum. Next, we identify the coerciveness
of the closed-loop H1 objective function, and prove that all the sublevel sets of
the resultant policy search problem are compact. Based on these properties, we
show that Goldstein’s subgradient method and its implementable variants can be
guaranteed to stay in the nonconvex feasible set and eventually find the global
optimal solution of the H1 state-feedback synthesis problem. Our work builds a
new connection between nonconvex nonsmooth optimization theory and robust
control, leading to an interesting global convergence result for direct policy search
on optimal H1 synthesis.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive performance on many continuous control
tasks [59, 40], and policy optimization is one of the main workhorses for such applications [18, 65, 58,
60]. Recently, there have been extensive research efforts studying the global convergence properties
of policy optimization methods on benchmark control problems including linear quadratic regulator
(LQR) [21, 7, 41, 70, 44, 22, 29], stabilization [52, 51], linear robust/risk-sensitive control [73, 72, 26,
74, 75, 12], Markov jump linear quadratic control [32, 31, 33, 55], Lur’e system control [53], output
feedback control [20, 77, 39, 17, 16, 43, 76], and dynamic filtering [68]. For all these benchmark
problems, the objective function in the policy optimization formulation is always differentiable over
the entire feasible set, and the existing convergence theory heavily relies on this fact. Consequently,
an important open question remains whether direct policy search can enjoy similar global convergence
properties when applied to the famous H1 control problem whose objective function can be nondifferentiable over certain points in the policy space [1–3, 28, 9, 13, 48]. Different from LQR which
considers stochastic disturbance sequences, H1 control directly addresses the worst-case disturbance,
and provides arguably the most fundamental robust control paradigm [78, 19, 62, 4, 15, 23]. Regarding
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

