QueryPose: Sparse Multi-Person Pose Regression via
Spatial-Aware Part-Level Query

Yabo Xiao
BUPT
Beijing, China
xiaoyabo@bupt.edu.cn

Kai Su
ByteDance Inc.
Shanghai, China
sukai@bytedance.com

Dongdong Yu
OPPO Research Institute
Beijing, China
yudongdong@oppo.com
Mingshu He
BUPT
Beijing, China
hemingshu@bupt.edu.cn

Xioajuan Wang ∗
BUPT
Beijing, China
wj2718@bupt.edu.cn

Lei Jin
BUPT
Beijing, China
jinlei@bupt.edu.cn
Zehuan Yuan ∗
ByteDance Inc.
Beijing, China
yuanzehuan@bytedance.com

Abstract
We propose a sparse end-to-end multi-person pose regression framework, termed
QueryPose, which can directly predict multi-person keypoint sequences from the
input image. The existing end-to-end methods rely on dense representations to
preserve the spatial detail and structure for precise keypoint localization. However,
the dense paradigm introduces complex and redundant post-processes during inference. In our framework, each human instance is encoded by several learnable
spatial-aware part-level queries associated with an instance-level query. First, we
propose the Spatial Part Embedding Generation Module (SPEGM) that considers
the local spatial attention mechanism to generate several spatial-sensitive part
embeddings, which contain spatial details and structural information for enhancing
the part-level queries. Second, we introduce the Selective Iteration Module (SIM)
to adaptively update the sparse part-level queries via the generated spatial-sensitive
part embeddings stage-by-stage. Based on the two proposed modules, the part-level
queries are able to fully encode the spatial details and structural information for
precise keypoint regression. With the bipartite matching, QueryPose avoids the
hand-designed post-processes and surpasses the existing dense end-to-end methods
with 73.6 AP on MS COCO mini-val set and 72.7 AP on CrowdPose test set. Code
is available at https://github.com/buptxyb666/QueryPose.

1

Introduction

Multi-person pose estimation (MPPE) aims to locate all person keypoints from the input image,
which is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision. With the prevalence of deep learning
techniques [1, 2, 3], MPPE has achieved remarkable progress and played an important role in many
other vision tasks, such as activity recognition [4, 5, 6, 7] and pose tracking [8, 9].
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

