Pythae: Unifying Generative Autoencoders in Python
A Benchmarking Use Case

Clément Chadebec
Université Paris Cité, INRIA, Inserm, SU
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers ∗
clement.chadebec@inria.fr

Louis J. Vincent
Implicity †
Université Paris Cité, INRIA, Inserm, SU
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers ∗
louis.vincent@inria.fr

Stéphanie Allassonnière
Université Paris Cité, INRIA, Inserm, SU
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers ∗
stephanie.allassonniere@inria.fr

Abstract
In recent years, deep generative models have attracted increasing interest due to
their capacity to model complex distributions. Among those models, variational
autoencoders have gained popularity as they have proven both to be computationally
efficient and yield impressive results in multiple fields. Following this breakthrough,
extensive research has been done in order to improve the original publication,
resulting in a variety of different VAE models in response to different tasks. In
this paper we present Pythae, a versatile open-source Python library providing
both a unified implementation and a dedicated framework allowing straightforward,
reproducible and reliable use of generative autoencoder models. As an example
of application, we propose to use this library to perform a case study benchmark
where we present and compare 19 generative autoencoder models representative of
some of the main improvements on downstream tasks such as image reconstruction,
generation, classification, clustering and interpolation. The open-source library can
be found at https://github.com/clementchadebec/benchmark_VAE.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, generative models have proven to be a promising approach for modelling
datasets with complex inherent distributions such a natural images. Among those, Variational
AutoEncoders (VAE) [35, 54] have gained popularity due to their computational efficiency and
scalability, leading to many applications such as speech modelling [10], clustering [24, 66], data
augmentation [14] or image generation [52]. Similarly to autoencoders, these models encourage good
reconstruction of an observed input data from a latent representation, but they further assume latent
vectors to be random variables involved in the generation process of the observed data. This imposes
a latent structure wherein latent variables are driven to follow a prior distribution that can then be used
to generate new data. Since this breakthrough, various contributions have been made to enrich the
original VAE scheme through new generating strategies [24, 63, 27, 5, 48], reconstruction objectives
[39, 59] and more adapted latent representations [29, 34, 64, 3, 14] to cite a few. A drawback of
VAEs is that due to the intractability of the log-likelihood objective function, VAEs have to resort
∗
†

15 Rue de l’École de Médecine, 75006 Paris
https://www.implicity.com - Implicity Paris, France.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

