Contrastive Adapters for
Foundation Model Group Robustness
Michael Zhang and Christopher Ré
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{mzhang, chrismre}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
While large pretrained foundation models (FMs) have shown remarkable zero-shot
classification robustness to dataset-level distribution shifts, their robustness to subpopulation or group shifts is relatively underexplored. We study this problem, and
find that foundation models such as CLIP may not be robust to various group shifts.
Across 9 robustness benchmarks, zero-shot classification with their embeddings results in gaps of up to 80.7 percentage points (pp) between average and worst-group
accuracy. Unfortunately, existing methods to improve robustness require retraining,
which can be prohibitively expensive on large foundation models. We also find
that efficient ways to improve model inference (e.g., via adapters, lightweight
networks that transform FM embeddings) do not consistently improve and can
sometimes hurt group robustness compared to zero-shot. We therefore develop an
adapter training strategy to effectively and efficiently improve FM group robustness.
Our motivating observation is that while poor robustness results from groups in
the same class being embedded far apart in the foundation model “embedding
space,” standard adapter training may not actually bring these points closer together. We thus propose contrastive adapting, which contrastively trains adapters
to bring sample embeddings close to both their ground-truth class embeddings and
same-class sample embeddings. Across the 9 robustness benchmarks, contrastive
adapting consistently improves group robustness, raising worst-group accuracy by
8.5 to 56.0 pp over zero-shot. Our approach is also efficient, doing so without any
FM finetuning and only a fixed set of FM embeddings. On popular benchmarks
such as Waterbirds and CelebA, this leads to worst-group accuracy comparable to
state-of-the-art methods, while only training 1% of the model parameters.

1

Introduction

Foundation models (FMs)—large pretrained models trained on massive datasets—offer an exciting
new paradigm for deep learning. Recent works have shown that without any finetuning, foundation
models can generalize well to various datasets [11, 36, 59, 69] and exhibit impressive robustness to
certain distribution shifts [42, 76]. Under this zero-shot paradigm, practitioners can avoid training
task-specific models, and instead use FM embeddings for efficient and effective inference.
However, an underexplored question is how robust this zero-shot inference is to “group shifts,”
distribution shifts between subpopulations or meaningful groups in data. Prior works have established
that group robustness—i.e. performing well on all groups—is a fundamental and real-world challenge
for modern deep learning [5, 12, 40, 51, 55, 66, 71]. Yet most prior foundation model evaluations
focus on overall or average performance [42, 59, 76]; few works consider FM accuracy across groups.
In this work, we thus study foundation model group robustness. We motivate this problem by first
showing that foundation models can have poor zero-shot group robustness. Evaluating 11 foundation
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

