Delving into Out-of-Distribution Detection with
Vision-Language Representations
Yifei Ming1 Ziyang Cai1 Jiuxiang Gu2 Yiyou Sun1 Wei Li3 Yixuan Li1
1
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
Adobe 3 Google Research
{alvinming,ziyangc,sunyiyou,sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu
jigu@adobe.com mweili@google.com

Abstract
Recognizing out-of-distribution (OOD) samples is critical for machine learning
systems deployed in the open world. The vast majority of OOD detection methods
are driven by a single modality (e.g., either vision or language), leaving the rich
information in multi-modal representations untapped. Inspired by the recent success
of vision-language pre-training, this paper enriches the landscape of OOD detection
from a single-modal to a multi-modal regime. Particularly, we propose Maximum
Concept Matching (MCM), a simple yet effective zero-shot OOD detection method
based on aligning visual features with textual concepts. We contribute in-depth
analysis and theoretical insights to understand the effectiveness of MCM. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that MCM achieves superior performance on a wide
variety of real-world tasks. MCM with vision-language features outperforms a
common baseline with pure visual features on a hard OOD task with semantically
similar classes by 13.1% (AUROC). Code is available at https://github.com/
deeplearning-wisc/MCM.

1

Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is critical for deploying machine learning models in the wild,
where samples from novel classes can naturally emerge and should be flagged for caution. Despite
increasing attention, the vast majority of OOD detection methods are driven by single-modal learning [26, 29, 34, 68, 89, 93, 95, 98]. For example, labels are typically encoded as one-hot vectors
in image classification, leaving the semantic information encapsulated in texts largely unexploited.
OOD detection relying on pure visual information can inherit the limitations, e.g., when an OOD
input may be visually similar to in-distribution (ID) data yet semantically different from any ID class.
In this paper, we delve into a new landscape for OOD detection, departing from the classic singlemodal toward a multi-modal regime. While the motivation is appealing, a core challenge remains: how
to effectively utilize joint vision-language features for OOD detection? In the visual domain, existing
methods typically require good feature representations [66, 72], and a distance metric under which
OOD data points are relatively far away from the in-distribution (ID) data [42, 71]. These approaches,
however, do not directly translate into the multi-modal regime. On the representation learning side,
recent vision-language pre-training schemes such as CLIP [59] and ALIGN [33] have emerged as
promising alternatives for visual representation learning. The main idea is to align an image with
its corresponding textual description in the feature space. While the resulting representations are
powerful, OOD detection based on such aligned multi-modal features is still in its infancy.
We bridge the gap by exploring a distance-based OOD detection approach, leveraging the joint
vision-language representations. Our method capitalizes on the compatibility between visual features
and textual features. By defining the textual features as the “concept prototypes” for each ID class,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

