Instability and Local Minima in GAN Training with
Kernel Discriminators
Evan Becker
Dept. CS
UCLA
evbecker@cs.ucla.edu

Parthe Pandit
HDSI
UC, San Diego
parthepandit@ucsd.edu

Sundeep Rangan
Dept. ECE
NYU
srangan@nyu.edu

Alyson K. Fletcher
Dept. Statistics
UCLA
akfletcher@ucla.edu

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are a widely-used tool for generative
modeling of complex data. Despite their empirical success, the training of GANs
is not fully understood due to the min-max optimization of the generator and
discriminator. This paper analyzes these joint dynamics when the true samples
as well as the generated samples are discrete, finite sets, and the discriminator is
kernel-based. A simple yet expressive framework for analyzing training called
the Isolated Points Model is introduced. In the proposed model, the distance
between true samples greatly exceeds the kernel width, so each generated point is
influenced by at most one true point. Our model enables precise characterization
of the conditions for convergence, both to good and bad minima. In particular, the
analysis explains two common failure modes: (i) an approximate mode collapse
and (ii) divergence. Numerical simulations are provided that predictably replicate
these behaviors.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are the most widely-used method for learning generative
models of complex and structured data in an unsupervised manner. Indeed, GANs have seen incredible
empirical success in a wide variety of domains ranging from image generation, speech generation, text
generation, and many more. Models trained in this manner have also become critical in downstream
applications. See [1, 29] for an overview.
In the GAN methodology, a generator model is trained to output samples that emulate a target
dataset, which we call true samples. A critic model, called the discriminator, is trained to tell
apart (discriminate) the true and generated samples. The generator is trained in parallel to fool the
discriminator.
Correctly tuning the joint training of the discriminator and generator is one of the key challenges in
GANs and is the source of several empirically observed problematic phenomena. For example, it is
well-known that the resulting distributions can suffer from mode collapse and catastrophic forgetting.
The optimization can also lead to divergence or slow convergence of min-max optimization algorithms.
See [10, 19] for more details. Practical GANs methods overcome these issues with a combination
of careful hyper-parameter optimization and heuristics. Significant effort has strived to develop
theoretical frameworks that can better analyze and optimize GAN training.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

