A Stochastic Linearized Augmented Lagrangian
Method for Decentralized Bilevel Optimization

Songtao Lu†
Siliang Zeng‡
Xiaodong Cui†
Mark S. Squillante†
†
†
∗
Lior Horesh
Brian Kingsbury
Jia Liu
Mingyi Hong‡
†
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
songtao@ibm.com,{cuix,mss,lhoresh,bedk}@us.ibm.com
‡
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455
{zeng0176,mhong}@umn.edu
∗
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210
liu@ece.osu.edu

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has been shown to be a powerful framework for formulating
multi-task machine learning problems, e.g., reinforcement learning (RL) and metalearning, where the decision variables are coupled in both levels of the minimization
problems. In practice, the learning tasks would be located at different computing
resource environments, and thus there is a need for deploying a decentralized
training framework to implement multi-agent and multi-task learning. We develop
a stochastic linearized augmented Lagrangian method (SLAM) for solving general
nonconvex bilevel optimization problems over a graph, where both upper and lower
optimization variables are able to achieve a consensus. We also establish that the
theoretical convergence rate of the proposed SLAM to the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker
(KKT) points of this class of problems is on the same order as the one achieved by
the classical distributed stochastic gradient descent for only single-level nonconvex
minimization problems. Numerical results tested on multi-agent RL problems
showcase the superiority of SLAM compared with the benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following general decentralized bilevel optimization (DBO) framework
with applications to machine learning problems. Suppose that there are n nodes over a connected
graph G = {E, V}, where E and V represent the edges and vertices. Let Ni denote the set of
neighboring nodes for node i. Then the goal of DBO is to have these nodes jointly minimize two
levels of optimization problems. More formally, DBO is expressed as
n

min

x1 ,...,xn

1X
∗
∗
fi (xi , yi,1
(xi ), . . . , yi,m
(xi ))
n i=1

s.t. xi = xj , j ∈ Ni , ∀i ∈ [n]
yk∗ (x) = arg

(1a)
(1b)

n
X

1
gi,k (xi , yi,k ) s.t. yi,k = yj,k , j ∈ Ni , ∀k ∈ [m], (1c)
y1,k ,...,yn,k n
i=1
min

where vector xi is the upper level (UL) optimization variable at each node i, vector yi,k denotes
the lower level (LL) decision variable for the kth learning task at node i, fi (; ) is a (smooth) UL
loss function and possibly nonconvex with respect to (w.r.t.) both the UL and LL variables, gi,k (, )
denotes the LL objective function of the kth task at node i, m represents the total number of LL
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

