Meta-Auto-Decoder for Solving Parametric Partial
Differential Equations

Xiang Huang∗
sahx@mail.ustc.edu.cn
University of Science and
Technology of China

Zhanhong Ye∗
yezhanhong@pku.edu.cn
Peking University

Beiji Shi
shibeiji@huawei.com
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

Zidong Wang
wang1@huawei.com
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

Kang Yang
yangkang22@huawei.com
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

Yang Li
liyang477@huawei.com
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

Min Wang
wangmin106@huawei.com
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

Haotian Chu
chuhaotian2@huawei.com
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

Fan Yu
fan.yu@huawei.com
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

Hongsheng Liu
liuhongsheng4@huawei.com
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

Bei Hua
bhua@ustc.edu.cn
University of Science and
Technology of China

Lei Chen
leichen@cse.ust.hk
Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology

Bin DongB
dongbin@math.pku.edu.cn
Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research, Peking University
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University

Abstract
Many important problems in science and engineering require solving the so-called
parametric partial differential equations (PDEs), i.e., PDEs with different physical
parameters, boundary conditions, shapes of computation domains, etc. Recently,
building learning-based numerical solvers for parametric PDEs has become an
emerging new field. One category of methods such as the Deep Galerkin Method
(DGM) and Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) aim to approximate
the solution of the PDEs. They are typically unsupervised and mesh-free, but
require going through the time-consuming network training process from scratch
for each set of parameters of the PDE. Another category of methods such as
Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) and Deep Operator Network (DeepONet) try to
approximate the solution mapping directly. Being fast with only one forward
inference for each PDE parameter without retraining, they often require a large
corpus of paired input-output observations drawn from numerical simulations, and
most of them need a predefined mesh as well. In this paper, we propose Meta-AutoDecoder (MAD), a mesh-free and unsupervised deep learning method that enables
∗
The first two authors contributed equally to this paper, and Bin Dong is the corresponding author. Zhanhong
Ye proposed MAD-L and explain the effectiveness of the MAD method from the perspective of manifold learning.
Huang Xiang proposed MAD-LM on the basis of MAD-L and completed all the experiments in the paper. Xiang
Huang performed this work during an internship at Huawei.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

