GriddlyJS: A Web IDE for Reinforcement Learning

Christopher Bamford∗
Queen Mary University
c.d.j.bamford@qmul.ac.uk

Minqi Jiang
Meta AI & UCL
msj@meta.com

Mikayel Samvelyan
Meta AI & UCL
samvelyan@meta.com

Tim Rocktäschel
UCL
tim.rocktaschel@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Progress in reinforcement learning (RL) research is often driven by the design of
new, challenging environments—a costly undertaking requiring skills orthogonal
to that of a typical machine learning researcher. The complexity of environment development has only increased with the rise of procedural-content generation (PCG)
as the prevailing paradigm for producing varied environments capable of testing
the robustness and generalization of RL agents. Moreover, existing environments
often require complex build processes, making reproducing results difficult. To
address these issues, we introduce GriddlyJS, a web-based Integrated Development
Environment (IDE) based on the Griddly engine. GriddlyJS allows researchers
to visually design and debug arbitrary, complex PCG grid-world environments
using a convenient graphical interface, as well as visualize, evaluate, and record
the performance of trained agent models. By connecting the RL workflow to
the advanced functionality enabled by modern web standards, GriddlyJS allows
publishing interactive agent-environment demos that reproduce experimental results directly to the web. To demonstrate the versatility of GriddlyJS, we use it to
quickly develop a complex compositional puzzle-solving environment alongside
arbitrary human-designed environment configurations and their solutions for use in
automatic curriculum learning and offline RL. The GriddlyJS IDE is open source
and freely available at https://griddly.ai.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has seen rapid progress over the past decade, with recent methods
producing policies that match or exceed human experts in tasks ranging from games like Go and
Chess [52, 53] to advanced scientific applications such as plasma control [14] and chip design [37].
Concurrent with this progress is the proliferation of increasingly challenging RL environments that
serve as the necessary experimental substrates for such research breakthroughs [12, 35]. In RL,
environments testing specific agent capabilities serve as crucial measuring sticks against which
progress is assessed, playing an analogous role to benchmarks such as MNIST [16], ImageNet [15],
and GLUE [61] in supervised learning. For example, the Procgen Benchmark tests for generalization
[12], and D4RL, for offline RL performance [21]. Developing RL methods for new problem settings
requires new environments specifically embodying such settings. Environment development thus
plays a crucial role in research progress. Moreover, the availability of a large, diverse selection of
environments mitigates the risk of overfitting our methods to a small set of tasks [12, 35].
∗

Work done at Meta AI.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

