Reinforcement Learning with Logarithmic Regret
and Policy Switches
Grigoris Velegkas
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Zhuoran Yang
Yale University
zhuoran.yang@yale.edu

Amin Karbasi
Yale University, Google Research
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of regret minimization for episodic Reinforcement Learning (RL) both in the model-free and the model-based setting. We
focus on learning with general function classes and general model classes, and
we derive results that scale with the eluder dimension of these classes. In contrast
to the existing body of work that mainly establishes instance-independent regret
guarantees, we focus on the instance-dependent setting and show that the regret
scales logarithmically with the horizon T , provided that there is a gap between
the best and the second best action in every state. In addition, we show that such
a logarithmic regret bound is realizable by algorithms with O(log T ) switching
cost (also known as adaptivity complexity). In other words, these algorithms rarely
switch their policy during the course of their execution. Finally, we complement
our results with lower bounds which show that even in the tabular setting, we
cannot hope for regret guarantees lower than O(log T ).

1

Introduction

The main goal of Reinforcement Learning (RL) is the design and analysis of algorithms for automated decision making in complex and unknown environments. The environment is modeled as
a state space and the available decisions are modeled as an action space. In recent years, RL has
seen tremendous success in practical applications including, but not limited to, games and robotics
[MKS+ 15, SHM+ 16, DCH+ 16, SSS+ 17, VBC+ 19]. Despite this success, a theoretical understanding of the algorithms that are deployed in these settings remains elusive. Traditionally, theoretical
RL approaches have focused on the tabular setting where the complexity of the algorithms depends
on the cardinality of the aforementioned spaces [SB18]. Thus, they are not suitable for applications
where the state-action space is very large.
A different approach that has gained a lot of attention recently is the function approximation regime
where the cumulative reward of the algorithm is modeled through a function, such as linear functions
over some feature space. The advantage of this approach is that the algorithm can perform its search
over a lower-dimensional space. There is a long line of work that provides regret guarantees for
RL in the function approximation setting [OVR14, OVRW16, YW20, JYWJ20, AJS+ 20, CYJW20,
KKL+ 20, ZBB+ 20, HZG21, KSWY21, ZHG21, ICN+ 21].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

