Unpacking Reward Shaping: Understanding the
Benefits of Reward Engineering on Sample Complexity
Abhishek Gupta⇤
University of Washington
abhgupta@cs.washington.edu

Aldo Pacchiano⇤
Microsoft Research, NYC
apacchiano@microsoft.com

Yuexiang Zhai
UC Berkeley, EECS
simonzhai@berkeley.edu

Sham M. Kakade
Harvard University
sham@seas.harvard.edu

Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley, EECS
svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning provides an automated framework for learning behaviors
from high-level reward specifications, but in practice the choice of reward function
can be crucial for good results – while in principle the reward only needs to specify
what the task is, in reality practitioners often need to design more detailed rewards
that provide the agent with some hints about how the task should be completed.
The idea of this type of “reward-shaping” has been often discussed in the literature,
and is often a critical part of practical applications, but there is relatively little
formal characterization of how the choice of reward shaping can yield benefits
in sample complexity. In this work, we build on the framework of novelty-based
exploration to provide a simple scheme for incorporating shaped rewards into
RL along with an analysis tool to show that particular choices of reward shaping
provably improve sample efficiency. We characterize the class of problems where
these gains are expected to be significant and show how this can be connected to
practical algorithms in the literature. We confirm that these results hold in practice
in an experimental evaluation, providing an insight into the mechanisms through
which reward shaping can significantly improve the complexity of reinforcement
learning while retaining asymptotic performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) in its most general form presents a very difficult optimization problem:
when there are no constraints on the reward function or dynamics, a learning algorithm may need to
exhaustively explore the entire state space to discover high-reward regions. Naïve algorithms that
rely entirely on random exploration are known to be exponentially expensive [26, 3], and much of the
theoretical work on efficient RL algorithms has focused on smarter exploration strategies that aim
to more efficiently cover state space, typically in time polynomial in the state space cardinality [6,
8, 24, 55, 27, 32, 52]. Much of this work is based on upper confidence bound (UCB) principles
and prescribes some kind of exploration bonus to prioritize exploration of rarely visited regions.
Analogous strategies have also been employed in a number of practical RL algorithms [41, 40, 10,
⇤ Equal Contributions

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

