Sample Efficiency Matters: A Benchmark for Practical
Molecular Optimization
Wenhao Gao1⇤ , Tianfan Fu2⇤ , Jimeng Sun3,4 , Connor W. Coley1,5
Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
2
Department of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
4
Carle Illinois College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
5
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
⇤
Equal Contributions
1

{whgao,ccoley}@mit.edu, tfu42@gatech.edu, jimeng@illinois.edu

Abstract
Molecular optimization is a fundamental goal in the chemical sciences and is of
central interest to drug and material design. In recent years, significant progress has
been made in solving challenging problems across various aspects of computational
molecular optimizations, emphasizing high validity, diversity, and, most recently,
synthesizability. Despite this progress, many papers report results on trivial or selfdesigned tasks, bringing additional challenges to directly assessing the performance
of new methods. Moreover, the sample efficiency of the optimization—the number
of molecules evaluated by the oracle—is rarely discussed, despite being an essential
consideration for realistic discovery applications.
To fill this gap, we have created an open-source benchmark for practical molecular
optimization, PMO, to facilitate the transparent and reproducible evaluation of
algorithmic advances in molecular optimization. This paper thoroughly investigates
the performance of 25 molecular design algorithms on 23 single-objective (scalar)
optimization tasks with a particular focus on sample efficiency. Our results show
that most “state-of-the-art” methods fail to outperform their predecessors under
a limited oracle budget allowing 10K queries and that no existing algorithm can
efficiently solve certain molecular optimization problems in this setting. We analyze
the influence of the optimization algorithm choices, molecular assembly strategies,
and oracle landscapes on the optimization performance to inform future algorithm
development and benchmarking. PMO provides a standardized experimental setup to
comprehensively evaluate and compare new molecule optimization methods with
existing ones. All code can be found at https://github.com/wenhao-gao/
mol_opt.

1

Introduction

Designing new functional molecules is a constrained multi-objective optimization problem that aims
to find molecules with desired properties such as selective inhibition against a disease target, with
additional desiderata and constraints to ensure the structures are stable and synthesizable. The importance of molecular design problems has attracted significant efforts to develop systematical molecular
design methodologies instead of exhaustive searches, leveraging combinatorial optimization algorithms [1, 2], predictive machine learning models [3, 4], and generative models [5, 6]. Especially
in recent years, we have witnessed significant progress in solving challenging problems across
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

