Advancing Model Pruning via Bi-level Optimization

Yihua Zhang1,*

Yuguang Yao1,*

Mingyi Hong5
1

Parikshit Ram2

Pu Zhao3

Yanzhi Wang3

Tianlong Chen4

Sijia Liu1,2

Michigan State University, 2 IBM Research, 3 Northeastern University,
University of Texas at Austin, 5 University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
*
Equal contribution

4

Abstract
The deployment constraints in practical applications necessitate the pruning of
large-scale deep learning models, i.e., promoting their weight sparsity. As illustrated by the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH), pruning also has the potential of
improving their generalization ability. At the core of LTH, iterative magnitude
pruning (IMP) is the predominant pruning method to successfully find ‘winning
tickets’. Yet, the computation cost of IMP grows prohibitively as the targeted
pruning ratio increases. To reduce the computation overhead, various efficient
‘one-shot’ pruning methods have been developed but these schemes are usually
unable to find winning tickets as good as IMP. This raises the question of how to
close the gap between pruning accuracy and pruning efficiency? To tackle it, we
pursue the algorithmic advancement of model pruning. Specifically, we formulate
the pruning problem from a fresh and novel viewpoint, bi-level optimization (BLO).
We show that the BLO interpretation provides a technically-grounded optimization
base for an efficient implementation of the pruning-retraining learning paradigm
used in IMP. We also show that the proposed bi-level optimization-oriented pruning
method (termed B I P) is a special class of BLO problems with a bi-linear problem
structure. By leveraging such bi-linearity, we theoretically show that B I P can
be solved as easily as first-order optimization, thus inheriting the computation
efficiency. Through extensive experiments on both structured and unstructured
pruning with 5 model architectures and 4 data sets, we demonstrate that B I P
can find better winning tickets than IMP in most cases, and is computationally
as efficient as the one-shot pruning schemes, demonstrating 2-7× speedup over
IMP for the same level of model accuracy and sparsity. Codes are available at
https://github.com/OPTML-Group/BiP.

1

Introduction

While over-parameterized structures are key to the improved generalization of deep neural networks
(DNNs) [1–3], they create new problems – the millions or even billions of parameters not only
increase computational costs during inference, but also pose serious deployment challenges on
resource-limited devices [4]. As a result, model pruning has seen a lot of research interest in recent
years, focusing on reducing model sizes by removing (or pruning) redundant parameters [4–8].
Model sparsity (achieved by pruning) also benefits adversarial robustness [9], out-of-distribution
generalization [10], and transfer learning [11]. Some pruning methods (towards structured sparsity)
facilitate model deployment on hardware [12, 13].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

