A Theory of PAC Learnability under Transformation
Invariances
Han Shao
Toyota Technological Institute Chicago
Chicago, 60637
han@ttic.edu

Omar Montasser
Toyota Technological Institute Chicago
Chicago, 60637
omar@ttic.edu

Avrim Blum
Toyota Technological Institute Chicago
Chicago, 60637
avrim@ttic.edu

Abstract
Transformation invariances are present in many real-world problems. For example,
image classification is usually invariant to rotation and color transformation: a
rotated car in a different color is still identified as a car. Data augmentation, which
adds the transformed data into the training set and trains a model on the augmented
data, is one commonly used technique to build these invariances into the learning
process. However, it is unclear how data augmentation performs theoretically and
what the optimal algorithm is in presence of transformation invariances. In this
paper, we study PAC learnability under transformation invariances in three settings
according to different levels of realizability: (i) A hypothesis fits the augmented
data; (ii) A hypothesis fits only the original data and the transformed data lying in
the support of the data distribution; (iii) Agnostic case. One interesting observation
is that distinguishing between the original data and the transformed data is necessary to achieve optimal accuracy in setting (ii) and (iii), which implies that any
algorithm not differentiating between the original and transformed data (including
data augmentation) is not optimal. Furthermore, this type of algorithms can even
“harm” the accuracy. In setting (i), although it is unnecessary to distinguish between
the two data sets, data augmentation still does not perform optimally. Due to such
a difference, we propose two combinatorial measures characterizing the optimal
sample complexity in setting (i) and (ii)(iii) and provide the optimal algorithms.

1

Introduction

Transformation invariances are present in many real-world learning problems. That is, given a certain
set of transformations, the label of an instance is preserved under any transformation from the set.
Image classification is often invariant to rotation/flip/color translation. Syntax parsing is invariant to
exchange of noun phrases in a sentence. Such invariances are often built into the learning process by
two ways. One is designing new architectures in neural networks to learn a transformation invariant
feature, which is usually task-specific and challenging. A more universally applicable and easier way
is data augmentation (DA)1 , that is, adding the transformed data into the training set and training a
model with the augmented data. Although DA performs well empirically, it is unclear whether and
when DA “helps”. In this paper, we focus on answering two questions:
1

Throughout the paper, we refer to ERM over the augmented data by DA.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

