On the Relationship Between Variational Inference
and Auto-Associative Memory

Louis Annabi
ETIS UMR 8051
CY Cergy Paris Université, ENSEA, CNRS
Cergy, France
louis.annabi@gmail.com

Alexandre Pitti
ETIS UMR 8051
CY Cergy Paris Université, ENSEA, CNRS
Cergy, France
alexandre.pitti@ensea.fr

Mathias Quoy
ETIS UMR 8051
CY Cergy Paris Université, ENSEA, CNRS
Cergy, France
mathias.quoy@ensea.fr

Abstract
In this article, we propose a variational inference formulation of auto-associative
memories, allowing us to combine perceptual inference and memory retrieval
into the same mathematical framework. In this formulation, the prior probability
distribution onto latent representations is made memory dependent, thus pulling
the inference process towards previously stored representations. We then study
how different neural network approaches to variational inference can be applied
in this framework. We compare methods relying on amortized inference such
as Variational Auto Encoders and methods relying on iterative inference such as
Predictive Coding and suggest combining both approaches to design new autoassociative memory models. We evaluate the obtained algorithms on the CIFAR10
and CLEVR image datasets and compare them with other associative memory
models such as Hopfield Networks, End-to-End Memory Networks and Neural
Turing Machines.

1

Introduction

In the recent years, many methods have been proposed in order to augment deep learning models
with long-term memories. These models provide writing and reading mechanisms allowing to store
and retrieve certain patterns inside a memory. Among these models, associative memories are
memories that perform content-based addressing, meaning that they retrieve stored patterns based on
an approximate or incomplete version of those.
While many models consider one-step reading mechanisms to retrieve patterns from the memory,
biological memory retrieval is an iterative process that can take a variable amount of time. Taking
this into consideration, Hopfield networks [15] have been proposed as an Associative Memory (AM)
implemented by a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). Hopfield networks perform memory retrieval
as an iterative process where stored patterns constitute local attractors of the RNN dynamics.
In this work, we show how AM models such as Hopfield networks can be formulated as variational
inference methods using a memory dependent probabilistic model of the observed data. In variational
inference algorithms such as Variational Auto-Encoders (VAE) [19, 32] and Predictive Coding (PC)
[31, 12], the representation inferred from the observed data tries to minimize an energy function
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

