UQGAN: A Unified Model for Uncertainty
Quantification of Deep Classifiers trained via
Conditional GANs
Philipp Oberdiek
Department of Computer Science
TU Dortmund University
philipp.oberdiek@cs.tu-dortmund.de

Gernot A. Fink
Department of Computer Science
TU Dortmund University
gernot.fink@cs.tu-dortmund.de

Matthias Rottmann
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL
School of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Wuppertal
matthias.rottmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
We present an approach to quantifying both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty
for deep neural networks in image classification, based on generative adversarial
networks (GANs). While most works in the literature that use GANs to generate
out-of-distribution (OoD) examples only focus on the evaluation of OoD detection,
we present a GAN based approach to learn a classifier that produces proper uncertainties for OoD examples as well as for false positives (FPs). Instead of shielding
the entire in-distribution data with GAN generated OoD examples which is stateof-the-art, we shield each class separately with out-of-class examples generated
by a conditional GAN and complement this with a one-vs-all image classifier. In
our experiments, in particular on CIFAR10, CIFAR100 and Tiny ImageNet, we
improve over the OoD detection and FP detection performance of state-of-the-art
GAN-training based classifiers. Furthermore, we also find that the generated GAN
examples do not significantly affect the calibration error of our classifier and result
in a significant gain in model accuracy.

Figure 1: Toy example of two slightly overlapping Gaussian distributions. From left to right: 1.
OoD heatmap with orange indicating a high probability of being OoD and white of in-distribution;
2. Aleatoric uncertainty (entropy over Equation (3)) with orange indicating high and white low
uncertainty. Triangles indicate GAN-generated out-of-class examples and crosses correspond to the
in-distribution data, while their color is coding the class membership.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

