Learning to Share in Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning

Yuxuan Yi1

Ge Li1 Yaowei Wang2
1
Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Lab
{touma,geli}@pku.edu.cn wangyw@pcl.ac.cn

Zongqing Lu1†

zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of networked multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), where a number of agents are deployed as a partially connected
network and each interacts only with nearby agents. Networked MARL requires all
agents to make decisions in a decentralized manner to optimize a global objective
with restricted communication between neighbors over the network. Inspired by the
fact that sharing plays a key role in human’s learning of cooperation, we propose
LToS, a hierarchically decentralized MARL framework that enables agents to learn
to dynamically share reward with neighbors so as to encourage agents to cooperate
on the global objective through collectives. For each agent, the high-level policy
learns how to share reward with neighbors to decompose the global objective, while
the low-level policy learns to optimize the local objective induced by the high-level
policies in the neighborhood. The two policies form a bi-level optimization and
learn alternately. We empirically demonstrate that LToS outperforms existing
methods in both social dilemma and networked MARL scenarios across scales.

1

Introduction

In fully cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), there are multiple agents interacting
with the environment via their joint action to cooperatively optimize an objective. Many methods of
centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) have been proposed for cooperative MARL,
such as COMA (Foerster et al., 2018), QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), QPLEX (Wang et al., 2021),
and FOP (Zhang et al., 2021). However, these methods suffer from the overgeneralization issue:
employed value functions cannot estimate well because agents sometimes choose uncoordinated
actions, and thus the optimal policy cannot be learned (Castellini et al., 2019). Moreover, they may
not easily scale up with the number of agents due to centralized learning (Qu et al., 2020a).
In many MARL applications, there are a large number of agents that are deployed as a partially
connected network and collaboratively make decisions to optimize the globally averaged return, such
as communication networks (Kim et al., 2019) and traffic signal control (Wei et al., 2019). To deal
with such scenarios, networked MARL is formulated to decompose the dependency among all agents
into dependencies between only neighbors. To avoid decision-making with insufficient information,
agents are permitted to exchange messages with neighbors over the network. In such settings, it is
feasible for agents to learn to make decisions in a decentralized way (Zhang et al., 2018; Qu et al.,
2020b). However, there are still difficulties of dependency if anyone attempts to make decisions
independently, e.g., prisoner’s dilemma and tragedy of the commons (Pérolat et al., 2017). Existing
methods tackle these problems by consensus update of value function (Zhang et al., 2018), credit
assignment (Wang et al., 2020), or reward shaping (Chu et al., 2020). However, these methods rely on
†

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

