A Regret-Variance Trade-Off in Online Learning

Dirk van der Hoeven
dirk@dirkvanderhoeven.com
Dept. of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy

Nikita Zhivotovskiy
zhivotovskiy@berkeley.edu
Dept. of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it
Dept. of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy

Abstract
We consider prediction with expert advice for strongly convex and bounded losses,
and investigate trade-offs between regret and “variance” (i.e., squared difference of
learner’s predictions and best expert predictions). With K experts, the Exponentially Weighted Average (EWA) algorithm is known to achieve O(log K) regret.
We prove that a variant of EWA either achieves a negative regret (i.e., the algorithm
outperforms the best expert), or guarantees a O(log K) bound on both variance
and regret. Building on this result, we show several examples of how variance
of predictions can be exploited in learning. In the online to batch analysis, we
show that a large empirical variance allows to stop the online to batch conversion
early and outperform the risk of the best predictor in the class. We also recover
the optimal rate of model selection aggregation when we do not consider early
stopping. In online prediction with corrupted losses, we show that the effect of
corruption on the regret can be compensated by a large variance. In online selective
sampling, we design an algorithm that samples less when the variance is large,
while guaranteeing the optimal regret bound in expectation. In online learning with
abstention, we use a similar term as the variance to derive the first high-probability
O(log K) regret bound in this setting. Finally, we extend our results to the setting
of online linear regression.

1

Introduction

In the online learning protocol, the learner interacts with an unknown environment in a sequence of
rounds. In each round t = 1, 2, . . . , T the learner makes a prediction ybt ∈ [− 21 M, 12 M ] and suffers
loss ℓt (b
yt ), where ℓ1 , ℓ2 . . . is a sequence of differentiable loss functions unknown to the learner.

PT
The goal is to achieve small regret RT , defined by RT = t=1 ℓt (b
yt ) − ℓt (yt⋆ ) where yt⋆ are
the predictions of some reference forecaster. We consider two special cases of online learning. In
prediction with expert advice, the learner receives the predictions yt (1), . . . , yK (t) ∈ [− 12 M, 12 M ]
of K experts at the beginning of each round t. The learner then predicts with a convex
 combination
PK
ybt = i=1 pt (i)yt (i) of the experts’ predictions, where pt = pt (1), . . . , pt (K) is a probability
distribution over experts updated after each round. The goal in this setting is to have small regret
with respect to the predictions yt⋆ = yt (i⋆ ) of any fixed expert i⋆ . In online linear regression, the
learner has access to a feature vector xt ∈ Rd at each round. This is used to compute predictions
ybt = ⟨wt , xt ⟩, where wt ∈ Rd is a parameter vector to be updated at the end of the round. The goal
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

