The First Optimal Acceleration of High-Order
Methods in Smooth Convex Optimization

Dmitry Kovalev
KAUST∗
dakovalev1@gmail.com

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT†, IITP RAS‡, HSE§
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Abstract
In this paper, we study the fundamental open question of finding the optimal highorder algorithm for solving smooth convex minimization
problems. Arjevani et al.

(2019) established the lower bound Ω ϵ−2/(3p+1) on the number of the p-th order
oracle calls required by an algorithm to find an ϵ-accurate solution to the problem,
where the p-th order oracle stands for the computation of the objective function
value and the derivatives up to the order p. However, the existing state-of-theart high-order methods of Gasnikov et al. (2019b); Bubeck et al. (2019); Jiang
et al. (2019) achieve the oracle complexity O ϵ−2/(3p+1) log(1/ϵ) , which does
not match the lower bound. The reason for this is that these algorithms require
performing a complex binary search procedure, which makes them neither optimal
nor practical. We
 fix this fundamental issue by providing the first algorithm with
O ϵ−2/(3p+1) p-th order oracle complexity.

1

Introduction

Let Rd be a finite-dimensional Euclidean space and let f (x) : Rd → R be a convex, p times
continuously differentiable function with Lp -Lipschitz p-th order derivatives. Our goal is to solve the
following convex minimization problem:
f ∗ = min f (x).
x∈Rd

(1)

In this work, we assume access to the p-th order oracle associated with function f (x). That is, given
an arbitrary point x ∈ Rd , we can compute the function value and the derivatives of function f (x) up
to order p.
First-order methods. When p = 1, first-order methods, such as gradient descent, are typically
used for solving problem (1). The lower bound Ω(ϵ−1/2 ) on the number of the gradient evaluations
required by these algorithms to find an ϵ-accurate solution was established by Nemirovskij and Yudin
(1983); Nesterov (2003), while the optimal algorithm matching this lower bound is called Accelerated
Gradient Descent and was developed by Nesterov (1983).
Second-order methods. In contrast to the first-order methods, the understanding of the secondorder methods (p = 2) was developed relatively recently. Nesterov and Polyak (2006) developed
the cubic regularized variant of Newton’s method. This algorithm achieves global convergence with
∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
‡
Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS, Moscow, Russia
§
National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

