Effectiveness of Vision Transformer for Fast and
Accurate Single-Stage Pedestrian Detection

Jing Yuan
Department of Electric and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London
j.yuan20@imperial.ac.uk

Panagiotis Barmpoutis
Department of Computer Science
University College London
p.barmpoutis@ucl.ac.uk

Tania Stathaki
Department of Electric and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London
t.stathaki@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Vision transformers have demonstrated remarkable performance on a variety of
computer vision tasks. In this paper, we illustrate the effectiveness of the deformable vision transformer for single-stage pedestrian detection and propose a
spatial and multi-scale feature enhancement module, which aims to achieve the optimal balance between speed and accuracy. Performance improvement with vision
transformers on various commonly used single-stage structures is demonstrated.
The design of the proposed architecture is investigated in depth. Comprehensive
comparisons with state-of-the-art single- and two-stage detectors on different pedestrian datasets are performed. The proposed detector achieves leading performance
on Caltech and Citypersons datasets among single- and two-stage methods using
fewer parameters than the baseline. The log-average miss rates for Reasonable
and Heavy are decreased to 2.6% and 28.0% on the Caltech test set, and 10.9%
and 38.6% on the Citypersons validation set, respectively. The proposed method
outperforms SOTA two-stage detectors in the Heavy subset on the Citypersons
validation set with considerably faster inference speed.

1

Introduction

Pedestrian detection is a popular task subordinate to object detection in computer vision. This task
aims to locate and classify pedestrians in images or videos accurately. Pedestrian detection is very
important as it serves as the prerequisite of various vision tasks [1], such as human-centric tasks
(person re-identification [2, 3], person search [4], human pose estimation [5] etc.) and more generic
multi-object tracking [6]. It has been applied to autonomous driving [7, 8], video surveillance [9] and
action tracking. In this paper, we focus on the detection based on RGB images.
Pedestrian detection suffers from significant occlusion and varying scales. Intra- and inter-class
occlusion occur when a pedestrian is occluded by other pedestrians or objects like cars, bicycles etc.
Both significantly reduce the discriminative features and destroy the regular shape of pedestrians. For
varying scales, large pedestrians tend to have more informative features. Still, they are difficult to
fully extract from a vast region, while features of small targets are compact but relatively ambiguous
with less preserved details. In summary, the fluctuating amount and varying shape of effective features
are the core problems. They challenge the capabilities of feature extraction modules, which act as a
long-standing bottleneck in pedestrian detection.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

