Implicit Warping for Animation with Image Sets
Arun Mallya
amallya@nvidia.com

Ting-Chun Wang
tingchunw@nvidia.com
NVIDIA

Ming-Yu Liu
mingyul@nvidia.com

Abstract
We present a new implicit warping framework for image animation using sets of
source images through the transfer of the motion of a driving video. A single crossmodal attention layer is used to find correspondences between the source images
and the driving image, choose the most appropriate features from different source
images, and warp the selected features. This is in contrast to the existing methods
that use explicit flow-based warping, which is designed for animation using a
single source and does not extend well to multiple sources. The pick-and-choose
capability of our framework helps it achieve state-of-the-art results on multiple
datasets for image animation using both single and multiple source images.

1

Introduction

We study the task of generating videos by animating a set of source images of the same subject using
the motions of a driving video possibly containing a different subject. This is more general than the
setting of animating a single source image studied in the prior works [26, 27, 41, 50] as it is a special
case when the set contains just one image. Moreover, having the capability of animating a set of
images, especially those representing different views when available, is of great practical value. A
single image often cannot fully describe the subject due to occlusions, limited pose information, etc.
Diverse source images provide more appearance information and reduce the burden of hallucination
that an image generator has to perform. As shown in Fig. 1, multiple source images provide more
complete information, such as the color of the eyes, the texture of the background, etc. This allows
for potentially generating an output image that is more faithful to the source setting.
The single-source-based prior works [26, 27, 41, 50] ubiquitously rely on explicit flow-based warping
of the source image conditional on the pose of the driving image. Due to this architectural choice,
they often have to be modified in ad-hoc ways to take advantage of multiple source images. One
scheme is to train an additional pre-processing network to select the most appropriate source image
for the given driving image. This would, however, not allow for the use of features from multiple
source images at a time. The other possibility is to warp each source image to the driving pose and
then average the now-aligned warped features for the generator input. But as is visible in Fig. 1 and
later measured in Section 4, this leads to sub-optimal results due to the misalignment of warped
features and inconsistent predictions across views.
In this work, we introduce a novel implicit warping mechanism that overcomes the above drawbacks—
(1) It operates on a set of images and naturally scales from a single source image to multiple source
images; and (2) Without predicting explicit per-source flow, a single layer finds correspondences
between the source images and the driving image, chooses the aptest features from different source
images, and performs warping of the selected features. Our novel layer and the ability to pick-andchoose appropriate features from a set of source images allows our method to achieve state-of-the-art
image animation quality in the multiple source image setting, as well as the single source image
setting. The benefits of our framework are obvious in Fig. 1, in the image reconstruction and
cross-identity motion transfer tasks. In the top row, the inability of prior works of FOMM [26] and
face-vid2vid [41] to pick-and-choose features results in an incorrect output eye color. Only our
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

