Understanding the Generalization Benefit of
Normalization Layers: Sharpness Reduction

Kaifeng Lyu
Zhiyuan Li
Sanjeev Arora
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
{klyu,zhiyuanli,arora}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Normalization layers (e.g., Batch Normalization, Layer Normalization) were introduced to help with optimization difficulties in very deep nets, but they clearly also
help generalization, even in not-so-deep nets. Motivated by the long-held belief
that flatter minima lead to better generalization, this paper gives mathematical
analysis and supporting experiments suggesting that normalization (together with
accompanying weight-decay) encourages GD to reduce the sharpness of loss surface. Here “sharpness” is carefully defined given that the loss is scale-invariant, a
known consequence of normalization. Specifically, for a fairly broad class of neural
nets with normalization, our theory explains how GD with a finite learning rate
enters the so-called Edge of Stability (EoS) regime, and characterizes the trajectory
of GD in this regime via a continuous sharpness-reduction flow.

1

Introduction

Training modern deep neural nets crucially relies on normalization layers to make the training process
less sensitive to hyperparameters and initialization. The two of the most popular normalization layers
are Batch Normalization (BN) [55] for vision tasks and Layer Normalization (LN) [9] for language
tasks. Recent works also proposed other normalization layers aiming for better performance, most notably including Group Normalization (GN) [120], Weight Normalization (WN) [102], Scaled Weight
Standardization (SWS) [97, 53, 14], etc. Most normalization layers amount to a reparametrization of
the neural net so that the loss becomes invariant to the scale of most parameters, and with a minor
change, to all parameters: L(cw) = L(w) for all scalings c > 0 [55, 7, 77]. The current paper
assumes this scale-invariance for all parameters and analyzes the trajectory of gradient descent with
weight decay (WD):
wt+1 ← (1 − η̂ λ̂)wt − η̂∇L(wt ).
(1)
The use of WD is a common practice that has been adopted in training state-of-the-art neural nets,
such as ResNets [46, 47] and Transformers [29, 15]. Previous ablation studies showed that adding
WD to normalized nets indeed leads to better generalization [126, 72, 125]. More notably, Liu
et al. [83] conducted experiments of training ResNets initialized from global minima with poor test
accuracy, and showed that SGD with WD escapes from those bad global minima and attains good
test accuracy. In contrast, training with vanilla SGD yields significant generalization degradation.
In the traditional view, WD regularizes the model by penalizing the parameter norm, but this
may appear nonsensical for scale-invariant loss because one can scale down the norm arbitrarily
without changing the loss value. However, the scale of the parameter does matter in backward
propagation, and thus WD can affect the training dynamics. In particular, simple calculus shows
1
w
1
1
w
1
2
∇L(w) = kwk
∇L( kwk
) ∝ kwk
and ∇2 L(w) = kwk
2 ∇ L( kwk ) ∝ kwk2 , so WD is in effect
2
2
2
2
2
2
trying to enlarge the gradient and Hessian in training. This makes the training dynamics very different
from unnormalized nets and requires revisiting classical convergence analyses [77, 78, 84, 80].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

