Locally Hierarchical Auto-Regressive Modeling
for Image Generation

Tackgeun You3,5∗
Saehoon Kim4
tackgeun.you@postech.ac.kr
shkim@kakaobrain.com
Chiheon Kim4
Doyup Lee4
Bohyung Han1,2,3
chiheon.kim@kakaobrain.com
doyup.lee@kakaobrain.com
bhhan@snu.ac.kr
1
ECE, 2 IPAI, 3 AIIS, Seoul National University, Korea
4
Kakao Brain, Korea
5
CSE, POSTECH, Korea

Abstract
We propose a locally hierarchical auto-regressive model with multiple resolutions
of discrete codes. In the first stage of our algorithm, we represent an image with a
pyramid of codes using Hierarchically Quantized Variational AutoEncoder (HQVAE), which disentangles the information contained in the multi-level codes. For
an example of two-level codes, we create two separate pathways to carry high-level
coarse structures of input images using top codes while compensating for missing
fine details by constructing a residual connection for bottom codes. An appropriate
selection of resizing operations for code embedding maps enables top codes to
capture maximal information within images and the first stage algorithm achieves
better performance on both vector quantization and image generation. The second
stage adopts Hierarchically Quantized Transformer (HQ-Transformer) to process a
sequence of local pyramids, which consist of a single top code and its corresponding
bottom codes. Contrary to other hierarchical models, we sample bottom codes
in parallel by exploiting the conditional independence assumption on the bottom
codes. This assumption is naturally harvested from our first-stage model, HQ-VAE,
where the bottom code learns to describe local details. On class-conditional and
text-conditional generation benchmarks, our model shows competitive performance
to previous AR models in terms of fidelity of generated images while enjoying
lighter computational budgets.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models [1, 2, 3] have become the fundamental basis for synthesizing diverse images
of high-resolution from various forms of input supervision, including class conditions [2, 4], text
prompts [5, 6], and segmentation maps [7] to name a few. Most approaches in this paradigm are
roughly categorized into two groups depending on whether they explicitly maximize data likelihood or
not. GANs implicitly estimate underlying data distribution to generate novel and crispy samples, but
it typically suffers from a lack of diversity [1]. In contrast, it is widely accepted that likelihood-based
models are capable of generating diverse examples, compared to GANs, since they aim to cover
all modes of a data distribution [8]. This work focuses on auto-regressive models among many
likelihood-based approaches motivated by the existing works validating scalability [5, 9].
Auto-Regressive (AR) models factorize a data likelihood into a product of conditionals in the predefined generation order. Since AR models already have mode-coverage property, we only need
∗

This work was done during an internship of this author at Kakao Brain.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

