No Free Lunch from Deep Learning in Neuroscience:
A Case Study through Models of the
Entorhinal-Hippocampal Circuit

Rylan Schaeffer
Computer Science
Stanford
rschaef@cs.stanford.edu

Mikail Khona
Physics
MIT
mikail@mit.edu

Ila Rani Fiete
Brain and Cognitive Sciences
MIT
fiete@mit.edu

Abstract
Research in Neuroscience, as in many scientific disciplines, is undergoing a renaissance based on deep learning. Unique to Neuroscience, deep learning models
can be used not only as a tool but interpreted as models of the brain. The central claims of recent deep learning-based models of brain circuits are that they
make novel predictions about neural phenomena or shed light on the fundamental
functions being optimized. We show, through the case-study of grid cells in the
entorhinal-hippocampal circuit, that one may get neither. We begin by reviewing
the principles of grid cell mechanism and function obtained from first-principles
modeling efforts, then rigorously examine the claims of deep learning models of
grid cells. Using large-scale architectural and hyperparameter sweeps and theorydriven experimentation, we demonstrate that the results of such models may be
more strongly driven by particular, non-fundamental, and post-hoc implementation
choices than fundamental truths about neural circuits or the loss function(s) they
might optimize. We discuss why these models cannot be expected to produce accurate models of the brain without the addition of substantial amounts of inductive
bias, an informal No Free Lunch result for Neuroscience. Based on first principles
work, we provide hypotheses for what additional loss functions will produce grid
cells more robustly. In conclusion, circumspection and transparency, together with
biological knowledge, are warranted in building and interpreting deep learning
models in Neuroscience.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, deep learning (DL) has underpinned nearly every success story in machine
learning, e.g., [57, 6] and increasingly many advances in fundamental science research, e.g., [36]. In
neuroscience, DL is similarly gaining widespread adoption as an indispensable method for behavioral
and neural data analysis [52, 50, 28, 43, 40, 46].
But DL offers a unique contribution to neuroscience that goes beyond its role in other fields, in that
deep networks can be viewed as models of the brain. The success of DL in matching or surpassing
human performance suggests it is now possible to construct models of circuits that may underlie
human intelligence. As a recent review wrote, “researchers are excited by the possibility that deep
neural networks may offer theories of perception, cognition and action for biological brains. This
approach has the potential to radically reshape our approach to understanding neural systems" [54].
Further, DL is a democratizing force for building neural circuit models of complex function.
Here, we examine the essential claims (and promises) of DL-based models of the brain, which are that
1) Because the models are trained on a specific optimization problem, if the resulting representations
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

