Langevin Autoencoders for Learning Deep Latent
Variable Models
Shohei Taniguchi
The University of Tokyo
taniguchi@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yusuke Iwasawa
The University of Tokyo
iwasawa@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Wataru Kumagai
The University of Tokyo
kumagai@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yutaka Matsuo
The University of Tokyo
matsuo@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), such as Langevin dynamics, is valid for
approximating intractable distributions. However, its usage is limited in the context
of deep latent variable models owing to costly datapoint-wise sampling iterations
and slow convergence. This paper proposes the amortized Langevin dynamics
(ALD), wherein datapoint-wise MCMC iterations are entirely replaced with updates
of an encoder that maps observations into latent variables. This amortization
enables efficient posterior sampling without datapoint-wise iterations. Despite its
efficiency, we prove that ALD is valid as an MCMC algorithm, whose Markov
chain has the target posterior as a stationary distribution under mild assumptions.
Based on the ALD, we also present a new deep latent variable model named
the Langevin autoencoder (LAE). Interestingly, the LAE can be implemented by
slightly modifying the traditional autoencoder. Using multiple synthetic datasets,
we first validate that ALD can properly obtain samples from target posteriors. We
also evaluate the LAE on the image generation task, and show that our LAE can
outperform existing methods based on variational inference, such as the variational
autoencoder, and other MCMC-based methods in terms of the test likelihood.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) and Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) are two practical tools to
approximate intractable distributions. Recently, VI has been dominantly used in deep latent variable
models (DLVMs) to approximate the posterior distribution over the latent variable z given the
observation x, i.e., p (z | x). At the core of the success of VI is the invention of amortized variational
inference (AVI) [Kingma and Welling, 2013, Rezende et al., 2014], which replaces optimization of
datapoint-wise variational parameters with an encoder that predicts latent variables from observations.
The framework of learning DLVMs based on AVI is called the variational autoencoder (VAE), which
is widely used in applications [Kingma et al., 2014, An and Cho, 2015, Zhang et al., 2016, Eslami
et al., 2018, Kumar et al., 2018]. An important advantage of AVI over traditional VI is that the
optimized encoder can be used to infer a latent representation even for new data in test time, expecting
its generalization ability. On the other hand, the approximation power of AVI (or VI itself) is limited
because it relies on tractable distributions for complex posterior approximations of DLVMs as shown
in Figure 1 (a). Although there have been attempts to improve their flexibility (e.g., normalizing
flows [Rezende and Mohamed, 2015, Kingma et al., 2016, Van Den Berg et al., 2018, Huang et al.,
2018]), such methods typically have architectural constraints (e.g., invertibility in normalizing flows).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

