Retrieval-Augmented Diffusion Models

Andreas Blattmann∗ Robin Rombach∗ Kaan Oktay Jonas Müller Björn Ommer
LMU Munich, MCML & IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany

Abstract
Novel architectures have recently improved generative image synthesis leading
to excellent visual quality in various tasks. Much of this success is due to the
scalability of these architectures and hence caused by a dramatic increase in
model complexity and in the computational resources invested in training these
models. Our work1 questions the underlying paradigm of compressing large
training data into ever growing parametric representations. We rather present
an orthogonal, semi-parametric approach. We complement comparably small
diffusion or autoregressive models with a separate image database and a retrieval
strategy. During training we retrieve a set of nearest neighbors from this external
database for each training instance and condition the generative model on these
informative samples. While the retrieval approach is providing the (local) content,
the model is focusing on learning the composition of scenes based on this content.
As demonstrated by our experiments, simply swapping the database for one with
different contents transfers a trained model post-hoc to a novel domain. The
evaluation shows competitive performance on tasks which the generative model
has not been trained on, such as class-conditional synthesis, zero-shot stylization or
text-to-image synthesis without requiring paired text-image data. With negligible
memory and computational overhead for the external database and retrieval we
can significantly reduce the parameter count of the generative model and still
outperform the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Deep generative modeling has made tremendous leaps; especially in language modeling as well as in generative synthesis
of high-fidelity images and other data types. In particular for images, astounding results have recently been achieved [22, 15, 56,
59], and three main factors can be identified as the driving forces
behind this progress: First, the success of the transformer [88]
has caused an architectural revolution in many vision tasks [19],
for image synthesis especially through its combination with autoregressive modeling [22, 58]. Second, since their rediscovery,
diffusion models have been applied to high-resolution image
generation [76, 78, 33] and, within a very short time, set new
standards in generative image modeling [15, 34, 63, 59]. Third,
these approaches scale well [58, 59, 37, 81]; in particular when
considering the model- and batch sizes involved for high-quality
models [15, 56, 58, 59] there is evidence that this scalability is
of central importance for their performance.

Figure 1: Our semi-parametric model
outperforms the unconditional SOTA
model ADM [15] on ImageNet [13]
and even reaches the class-conditional
ADM (ADM w/ classifier), while reducing parameter count. |D|: Number
of instances in database at inference;
|θ|: Number of trainable parameters.

However, the driving force underlying this training paradigm are models with ever growing numbers of
parameters [81] that require huge computational resources. Besides the enormous demands in energy
consumption and training time, this paradigm renders future generative modeling more and more
exclusive to privileged institutions, thus hindering the democratization of research. Therefore, we here
∗
1

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
Code is available at https://github.com/CompVis/retrieval-augmented-diffusion-models

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

