Adversarial Reprogramming Revisited

Matthias Englert∗
University of Warwick
m.englert@warwick.ac.uk

Ranko Lazić∗
University of Warwick
r.s.lazic@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Adversarial reprogramming, introduced by Elsayed, Goodfellow, and SohlDickstein, seeks to repurpose a neural network to perform a different task, by
manipulating its input without modifying its weights. We prove that two-layer
ReLU neural networks with random weights can be adversarially reprogrammed to
achieve arbitrarily high accuracy on Bernoulli data models over hypercube vertices,
provided the network width is no greater than its input dimension. We also substantially strengthen a recent result of Phuong and Lampert on directional convergence
of gradient flow, and obtain as a corollary that training two-layer ReLU neural
networks on orthogonally separable datasets can cause their adversarial reprogramming to fail. We support these theoretical results by experiments that demonstrate
that, as long as batch normalisation layers are suitably initialised, even untrained
networks with random weights are susceptible to adversarial reprogramming. This
is in contrast to observations in several recent works that suggested that adversarial
reprogramming is not possible for untrained networks to any degree of reliability.

1

Introduction

Elsayed, Goodfellow, and Sohl-Dickstein [2019] proposed adversarial reprogramming: given a
e → Ye ,
neural network N which performs a task F : X → Y and given an adversarial task G : X
e → X and hout : Y → Ye such that
repurpose N to perform G by finding mappings hin : X
G ≈ hout ◦F ◦hin . They focused on a setting where F and G are image classification tasks, X consists
e consists of small images, and hin and hout are simple and computationally
of large images, X
inexpensive: hin (e
x) = p + x
e draws the input x
e at the centre of the adversarial program p, and hout is
a hard coded mapping from the class labels Y to the class labels Ye . Then the challenge of adversarial
reprogramming is to find p such that hout ◦ F ◦ hin approximates well the adversarial task G.
Remarkably, Elsayed et al. [2019] showed that a range of realistic neural networks can be adversarially
reprogrammed to perform successfully several tasks. They considered six architectures trained on
ImageNet [Russakovsky, Deng, Su, Krause, Satheesh, Ma, Huang, Karpathy, Khosla, Bernstein, Berg,
and Fei-Fei, 2015] and found adversarial programs that achieve very good accuracies on a counting
task, MNIST [LeCun, Bottou, Bengio, and Haffner, 1998], and CIFAR-10 [Krizhevsky, 2009]. In
addition to the basic setting, they investigated limiting the visibility of the adversarial program by
restricting its size or scale, or even concealing both the input and the adversarial program by hiding
them within a normal image from ImageNet, and obtained good results.
Adversarial reprogramming can be seen as taking the crafting of adversarial examples [Biggio, Corona,
Maiorca, Nelson, Šrndić, Laskov, Giacinto, and Roli, 2013, Szegedy, Zaremba, Sutskever, Bruna,
Erhan, Goodfellow, and Fergus, 2014] to a next level. Like the universal adversarial perturbation of
Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, Fawzi, and Frossard [2017], a single adversarial program is combined
with every input from the adversarial task, but in contrast to the former where the goal is to cause
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

