A Large Scale Search Dataset for
Unbiased Learning to Rank

Lixin Zou1∗, Haitao Mao2∗†, Xiaokai Chu1† , Jiliang Tang2 ,
Shuaiqiang Wang1 , Wenwen Ye1 , Dawei Yin1‡
1
Baidu Inc., 2 Michigan State University
{zoulixin15,xiaokaichu, two_ye, shqiang.wang}@gmail.com
{haitaoma,tangjili}@msu.edu, yindawei@acm.org

Abstract
The unbiased learning to rank (ULTR) problem has been greatly advanced by recent
deep learning techniques and well-designed debias algorithms. However, promising
results on the existing benchmark datasets may not be extended to the practical
scenario due to some limitations of existing datasets. First, their semantic feature
extractions are outdated while state-of-the-art large-scale pre-trained language
models like BERT cannot be utilized due to the lack of original text. Second,
display features are incomplete; thus in-depth study on ULTR is impossible such
as the displayed abstract for analyzing the click necessary bias. Third, synthetic
user feedback has been adopted by most existing datasets and real-world user
feedback is greatly missing. To overcome these disadvantages, we introduce the
Baidu-ULTR dataset. It involves randomly sampled 1.2 billion searching sessions
and 7,008 expert annotated queries (397,572 query document pairs). Baidu-ULTR
is the first billion-level dataset for ULTR. Particularly, it offers: (1) the original
semantic features and pre-trained language models of different sizes; (2) sufficient
display information such as position, displayed height, and displayed abstract,
enabling the comprehensive study of multiple displayed biases; and (3) rich user
feedback on search result pages (SERPs) like dwelling time, allowing for user
engagement optimization and promoting the exploration of multi-task learning
in ULTR. Furthermore, we present the design principle of Baidu-ULTR and the
performance of representative ULTR algorithms on Baidu-ULTR. The BaiduULTR dataset and corresponding baseline implementations are available at https:
//github.com/ChuXiaokai/baidu_ultr_dataset. The dataset homepage is
available at https://searchscience.baidu.com/dataset.html.

1

Introduction

Learning to Rank (LTR) that aims to measure documents’ relevance w.r.t. queries is a popular
research topic with applications in web search engines, e-commerce, and multiple different streaming
services [22]. With the rise of deep learning, the heavy burden of data annotation drives the academia
and industry communities to the study of learning to rank using implicit user feedback (e.g., user
click). However, directly optimizing the model with click data results in unsatisfied performance
due to the existence of biases, such as position bias [18], trust bias [1], and click necessary bias [21].
Unbiased learning to rank (ULTR) has been proposed for mitigating biases in user feedback with
counterfactual learning algorithms [18, 29, 30]. To meet the demand of ULTR, numerous datasets have
∗

Equal contribution.
Work conducted during an internship at Baidu Inc.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

