Regret Bounds for Multilabel Classification
in Sparse Label Regimes

Róbert Busa-Fekete
Google Research
busarobi@google.com

Heejin Choi
Google
heejinc@google.com

Krzysztof Dembczyński
Yahoo Research
Poznan University of Technology
kdembczynski@cs.put.poznan.pl

Claudio Gentile
Google Research
cgentile@google.com

Henry W. Reeve
University of Bristol
henry.reeve@bristol.ac.uk

Balázs Szörényi
Yahoo Research
szorenyibalazs@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-label classification (MLC) has wide practical importance, but the theoretical
understanding of its statistical properties is still limited. As an attempt to fill this
gap, we thoroughly study upper and lower regret bounds for two canonical MLC
performance measures, Hamming loss and Precision@κ. We consider two different
statistical and algorithmic settings, a non-parametric setting tackled by plug-in
classifiers à la k-nearest neighbors, and a parametric one tackled by empirical
risk minimization operating on surrogate loss functions. For both, we analyze
the interplay between a natural MLC variant of the low noise assumption, widely
studied in binary classification, and the label sparsity, the latter being a natural
property of large-scale MLC problems. We show that those conditions are crucial
in improving the bounds, but the way they are tangled is not obvious, and also
different across the two settings.

1

Introduction

Multi-label classification (MLC) is a natural generalization of binary classification and multi-class
classification. It can be seen as a composition of several binary problems for the same instances, or
as a multi-class problem where more than one label can be assigned to a given instance. Several
applications can be naturally modeled as a multi-label problem, including image and video annotation
for multimedia search [13], tagging text documents for categorization of Wikipedia articles [9],
recommendation of bid words for online ads [27], and beyond. MLC is a well-established sub-field
of supervised learning, that has generated a tremendous interest, mainly of experimental nature,
introducing a lot of interesting and diverse approaches (for example, [10, 26, 17, 34, 33, 19] ). They
have also been described in multiple survey papers across years, e.g., [30, 4]. The main concerns in
MLC research are label dependencies (marginal and conditional, see the discussion in [12]), label
sparsity [18, 34], and minimization of a wide spectrum of performance metrics.
Interestingly, the theoretical understanding of MLC learning problems is still limited. This might
be due to the daunting presence of multiple and diverse loss functions that can be defined over
subsets of labels. Popular loss functions include Hamming loss, Precision@κ, or subset 0/1 loss.
Each such MLC loss function has its pros and cons, and there is no consensus among researchers
what is the right performance metric to be used [12, 20], as the choice is certainly domain specific.
The theoretical results obtained so far mainly deal with the analysis of Bayes optimal classifiers for
the wide variety of MLC loss functions [12, 31, 24, 25], Fisher-like consistency results [11, 16], or
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

