On Optimal Learning Under Targeted Data Poisoning
Steve Hanneke
Purdue University, USA
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Amin Karbasi
Yale University, USA and Google Research
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Mohammad Mahmoody
University of Virginia, USA
mohammad@virginia.edu

Idan Mehalel
Technion, Israel
idanmehalel@gmail.com

Shay Moran
Technion, Israel and Google Research
shaymoran1@gmail.com

Abstract
Consider the task of learning a hypothesis class H in the presence of an adversary
that can replace up to an ⌘ fraction of the examples in the training set with arbitrary
adversarial examples. The adversary aims to fail the learner on a particular target
test point x which is known to the adversary but not to the learner. In this work
we aim to characterize the smallest achievable error " = "(⌘) by the learner in
the presence of such an adversary in both realizable and agnostic settings. We
fully achieve this in the realizable setting, proving that " = ⇥(VC(H) · ⌘), where
VC(H) is the VC dimension of H. Remarkably, we show that the upper bound
can be attained by a deterministic learner. In the agnostic setting we reveal a
more elaborate landscape: we devise a deterministic learner with a multiplicative
regret guarantee of "  C · OPT + O(VC(H) · ⌘), where C > 1 is a universal
numerical constant. We complement this by showing that for any deterministic
learner there is an attack which worsens its error to at least 2 · OPT. This implies
that a multiplicative deterioration in the regret is unavoidable in this case. Finally,
the algorithms we develop for achieving the optimal rates are inherently improper.
Nevertheless, we show that for a variety of natural concept classes, such as linear
classifiers, it is possible to retain the dependence " = ⇥H (⌘) by a proper algorithm
in the realizable setting. Here ⇥H conceals a polynomial dependence on VC(H).

1

Introduction

A basic goal in machine learning is to develop a predicting model from labeled examples (i.e., training
data) that can reliably generalize to unseen examples (i.e., test data). In its simplest form, namely,
binary classification, a learner Lrn is given a training set S = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )}, usually
assumed to be i.i.d. samples drawn from an unknown distribution D of labeled examples where xi ’s
are the domain instances (or data points) and yi 2 {0, 1} are the labels. The aim is to produce a
mapping h = Lrn(S) that predicts the labels of fresh examples (x, y) ⇠ D as accurately as possible,
i.e., to minimize the population loss LD (h) = Pr(x,y)⇠D [h(x) 6= y]. This classical setting has
been extensively studied in the last half a century. This accumulated work resulted in fundamental
mathematical characterizations regarding the nature of learnability when the training samples are
truly i.i.d without any tampering by an adversary [Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014]. The goal
of this paper is to offer a similar characterization in the presence of an adversary who can tamper
with a subset of the training data.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

