Deep Counterfactual Estimation with Categorical
Background Variables
Edward De Brouwer
ESAT-STADIUS
KU Leuven
edward.debrouwer@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Referred to as the third rung of the causal inference ladder, counterfactual queries
typically ask the "What if ?" question retrospectively. The standard approach to
estimate counterfactuals resides in using a structural equation model that accurately
reflects the underlying data generating process. However, such models are seldom available in practice and one usually wishes to infer them from observational
data alone. Unfortunately, the correct structural equation model is in general not
identifiable from the observed factual distribution. Nevertheless, in this work, we
show that under the assumption that the main latent contributors to the treatment
responses are categorical, the counterfactuals can be still reliably predicted. Building upon this assumption, we introduce CounterFactual Query Prediction (CFQP),
a novel method to infer counterfactuals from continuous observations when the
background variables are categorical. We show that our method significantly outperforms previously available deep-learning-based counterfactual methods, both
theoretically and empirically on time series and image data. Our code is available
at https://github.com/edebrouwer/cfqp.

1

Introduction

Counterfactual queries aim at inferring the impact of a treatment conditioned on another observed
treatment outcome. Typically, given an individual, a treatment assignment, and a treatment outcome,
the counterfactual question asks what would have happened to that individual, had it been given
another treatment, everything else being equal. An illustrative and motivating example is the case of
clinical time series. Based on the observation of the outcome of treatment A on a particular patient,
counterfactual queries ask what would have been the outcome for this patient, had it been given
treatment B instead. Notably, counterfactual prediction differs from interventional prediction, which
is also referred to as counterfactual potential outcomes [23] and constitutes the second rung of the
causation ladder [19]. Counterfactual predictions are retrospective, as they condition on an observed
treatment outcome. In contrast, interventional predictions are prospective as they only condition on
observations obtained before treatment assignment.
Much more than a statistical curiosity, counterfactual reasoning reflects complex cognitive abilities
that are deeply ingrained in the human brain [22] and emerges in the early stages of cognitive
development [7]. The ability to reason counterfactually can indeed help to identify causes of
outcomes retrospectively, has been suggested to be central in the formation of rational intention,
and supports key theories of human cognition [28]. The importance of counterfactual reasoning in
the human cognitive process has thus motivated researchers to endow artificially intelligent systems
with the same ability [21]. However, counterfactual inference is not possible from observational and
interventional data alone [20].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

