Distinguishing Learning Rules with Brain Machine
Interfaces
Jacob P. Portes
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
Columbia University
j.portes@columbia.edu

Christian Schmid
Institute of Neuroscience
University of Oregon
cschmid9@uoregon.edu

James M. Murray∗
Institute of Neuroscience
University of Oregon
jmurray9@uoregon.edu

Abstract
Despite extensive theoretical work on biologically plausible learning rules, clear evidence about whether and how such rules are implemented in the brain has been difficult to obtain. We consider biologically plausible supervised- and reinforcementlearning rules and ask whether changes in network activity during learning can be
used to determine which learning rule is being used. Supervised learning requires
a credit-assignment model estimating the mapping from neural activity to behavior,
and, in a biological organism, this model will inevitably be an imperfect approximation of the ideal mapping, leading to a bias in the direction of the weight updates
relative to the true gradient. Reinforcement learning, on the other hand, requires
no credit-assignment model and tends to make weight updates following the true
gradient direction. We derive a metric to distinguish between learning rules by
observing changes in the network activity during learning, given that the mapping
from brain to behavior is known by the experimenter. Because brain-machine interface (BMI) experiments allow for precise knowledge of this mapping, we model
a cursor-control BMI task using recurrent neural networks, showing that learning
rules can be distinguished in simulated experiments using only observations that a
neuroscience experimenter would plausibly have access to.

1

Introduction

In order to update synaptic weights effectively during learning, a biological or artificial neural network
must solve the problem of credit assignment. That is, a neuron must infer whether it should increase
or decrease its activity in order to decrease the error in the behavior that it is driving. Supervised
learning (SL) provides one approach for solving the credit assignment problem by endowing the
synaptic learning rule with a credit assignment mapping, i.e. an estimate of how each neuron’s
activity affects the behavioral readout. Indeed, gradient-based methods such as backpropagation
for feedforward networks and backpropagation through time for recurrent networks do exactly this
by multiplying a (possibly multi-dimensional) readout error by the downstream readout weights in
order to update hidden-layer synaptic weights. However, because neurons in a biological neural
network likely lack complete information about their downstream projections, ideal credit assignment
mappings such as those used in gradient-based methods are biologically implausible–an issue known
as the weight transport problem [1, 2, 3]. Recent work has shown that effective supervised learning
∗

corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

