Factored DRO: Factored Distributionally Robust
Policies for Contextual Bandits
Tong Mu
Stanford university
tongm@cs.stanford.edu

Yash Chandak
University of Massachusetts
ychandak@cs.umass.edu

Tatsunori Hashimoto
Stanford University
thashim@stanford.edu

Emma Brunskill
Stanford University
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
While there has been extensive work on learning from offline data for contextual
multi-armed bandit settings, existing methods typically assume there is no environment shift: that the learned policy will operate in the same environmental process
as that of data collection. However, this assumption may limit the use of these
methods for many practical situations where there may be distribution shifts. In this
work we propose Factored Distributionally Robust Optimization (Factored-DRO)1 ,
which is able to separately handle distribution shifts in the context distribution
and shifts in the reward generating process. Prior work that either ignores potential shifts in the context, or considers them jointly, can lead to performance
that is too conservative, especially under certain forms of reward feedback. Our
Factored-DRO objective mitigates this by considering the shifts separately, and our
proposed estimators are consistent and converge asymptotically. We also introduce
a practical algorithm and demonstrate promising empirical results in environments
based on real-world datasets, such as voting outcomes and scene classification.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications we often have access to historical data about past decisions and
their associated outcomes. This data can be leveraged for off-policy learning to optimize for a
decision making rule, called a policy, that is more effective for the given application than that
used for data collection. Off-policy learning from historical data for contextual multi-armed bandit
settings has been well studied, due in part to the myriad of potential applications; from personalized
recommendation [Strehl et al., 2010] to optimizing medical treatment [Kim et al., 2011]. Prior
methods often focus on the stationary setting, where the learned policy will be deployed in a setting
with the same underlying data generation process that produces the observed contexts, and rewards
upon intervention [Precup, 2000, Liu et al., 2018, Kallus and Uehara, 2020a,b, Liu et al., 2020].
However, in many settings, this assumption is not true and the distributions may shift.
As a motivating example, consider the problem of increasing political participation during elections using various interventions to encourage voting. In the past, different strategies have been
implemented, ranging from reminding people of their own voting history, to reminding them of the
voting history of their neighborhood, etc. [Gerber et al., 2008]. Leveraging this historical data, an
important question is: what strategy should be used during the next election to maximize political
participation? Addressing this question requires careful consideration of two potential sources of
1

Code: https://github.com/StanfordAI4HI/FactoredDRO

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

