Collaborative Decision Making
Using Action Suggestions
Dylan M. Asmar
Stanford Intelligent Systems Laboratory
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
asmar@stanford.edu

Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Stanford Intelligent Systems Laboratory
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
mykel@stanford.edu

Abstract
The level of autonomy is increasing in systems spanning multiple domains, but
these systems still experience failures. One way to mitigate the risk of failures is
to integrate human oversight of the autonomous systems and rely on the human
to take control when the autonomy fails. In this work, we formulate a method
of collaborative decision making through action suggestions that improves action
selection without taking control of the system. Our approach uses each suggestion
efficiently by incorporating the implicit information shared through suggestions to
modify the agent’s belief and achieves better performance with fewer suggestions
than naively following the suggested actions. We assume collaborative agents
share the same objective and communicate through valid actions. By assuming
the suggested action is dependent only on the state, we can incorporate the suggested action as an independent observation of the environment. The assumption
of a collaborative environment enables us to use the agent’s policy to estimate the
distribution over action suggestions. We propose two methods that use suggested
actions and demonstrate the approach through simulated experiments. The proposed methodology results in increased performance while also being robust to
suboptimal suggestions.1

1

Introduction

Autonomous systems and humans have different strengths. Moravec [1] claimed in 1988 that “It
is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult level performance on intelligence tests or
playing checkers, and difficult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-year-old when it comes
to perception and mobility.” Thirty years later, computers have achieved superhuman level performance on many games like Go and StarCraft II [2], [3]. Despite major strides in perception,
algorithms still exhibit brittleness and struggle with consistency in tasks that most would consider
trivial for a young adult, like reliably generating a plausible sentence from a list of words [4]–[7].
Humans often make suboptimal decisions; however, they are exceptionally good at finding ways to
accomplish tasks, balance risk, reason through unstructured problems, and incorporate new information into decisions without prior experience in a situation. Systems integrating autonomy often
take advantage of human strengths by using a human-on-the-loop structure. This framework allows
for humans to use their experience to recognize situations where the autonomy might struggle or is
failing and to take control [8], [9]. We hypothesize that instead of requiring the human to assume
control, an agent can use occasional control inputs from the human-on-the-loop in the form of action
suggestions to improve its understanding of the environment.
1

Code is available at https://github.com/sisl/action_suggestions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

