Gold-standard solutions to the Schrödinger equation
using deep learning: How much physics do we need?
Leon Gerard†,a,* , Michael Scherbela†,* , Philipp Marquetand†,§ , and Philipp Grohs†,‡,¶
†
Research Network Data Science @ Uni Vienna, Kolingasse 14-16, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna, Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
§
Institute of Theoretical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna, Währinger Straße
17, 1090 Vienna, Austria
¶
Johann Radon Institute for Computational and Applied Mathematics, Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Altenbergerstrasse 69, 4040 Linz, Austria
a
leon.gerard@univie.ac.at
*
These authors contributed equally

‡

Abstract
Finding accurate solutions to the Schrödinger equation is the key unsolved challenge of computational chemistry. Given its importance for the development of new
chemical compounds, decades of research have been dedicated to this problem, but
due to the large dimensionality even the best available methods do not yet reach
the desired accuracy. Recently the combination of deep learning with Monte Carlo
methods has emerged as a promising way to obtain highly accurate energies and
moderate scaling of computational cost. In this paper we significantly contribute
towards this goal by introducing a novel deep-learning architecture that achieves
40-70% lower energy error at 6x lower computational cost compared to previous
approaches. Using our method we establish a new benchmark by calculating the
most accurate variational ground state energies ever published for a number of
different atoms and molecules. We systematically break down and measure our
improvements, focusing in particular on the effect of increasing physical prior
knowledge. We surprisingly find that increasing the prior knowledge given to the
architecture can actually decrease accuracy.

1

Introduction

The challenge of the Schrödinger Equation Accurately predicting properties of molecules and
materials is of utmost importance for many applications, including the development of new materials
or pharmaceuticals. In principle, any property of any molecule can be calculated from its wavefunction, which is obtained by solving the Schrödinger equation. In practice, computing accurate
wavefunctions and corresponding energies is computationally extremely difficult for two reasons:
First, the wavefunction is a high-dimensional function, depending on all coordinates of all electrons,
subjecting most methods to the curse of dimensionality. Second, the required level of accuracy is
extremely high. While total energies of small molecules are typically hundreds of Hartrees, the
chemically relevant energy differences are on the order of 1 milli-Hartree as depicted in Fig. 1.
Decades of research have produced a plethora of methods, which all require a trade-off between
accuracy and computational cost: On one end of the spectrum are approximate methods such as
Hartree-Fock (HF) or Density Functional Theory (DFT), which was awarded the Nobel prize in
1998. These methods can treat thousands of particles but can often only crudely approximate chemical properties. On the other end of the spectrum are "gold-standard" methods such as FCI (Full
Configuration Interaction) or CCSD(T) (Coupled Clusters Singles Doubles (Perturbative Triples))
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

