Learning to Mitigate AI Collusion on Economic
Platforms
Gianluca Brero⇤
Data Science Initiative
Brown University
gianluca_brero@brown.edu

Eric Mibuari⇤
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
mibuari@g.harvard.edu

Nicolas Lepore
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
nlepore33@gmail.com

David C. Parkes
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
parkes@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
Algorithmic pricing on online e-commerce platforms raises the concern of tacit
collusion, where reinforcement learning algorithms learn to set collusive prices
in a decentralized manner and through nothing more than profit feedback. This
raises the question as to whether collusive pricing can be prevented through the
design of suitable "buy boxes," i.e., through the design of the rules that govern
the elements of e-commerce sites that promote particular products and prices to
consumers. In this paper, we demonstrate that reinforcement learning (RL) can also
be used by platforms to learn buy box rules that are effective in preventing collusion
by RL sellers. For this, we adopt the methodology of Stackelberg POMDPs, and
demonstrate success in learning robust rules that continue to provide high consumer
welfare together with sellers employing different behavior models or having out-ofdistribution costs for goods.

1

Introduction

The last decade has witnessed a dramatic shift of trading from retailers to online e-commerce platforms
such as Amazon and Alibaba. In these platforms, sellers are increasingly using algorithms to set prices.
Algorithmic pricing can be beneficial for market efficiency, enabling sellers to quickly react to market
changes and also in enabling price competition. At the same time, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) U.S. Federal Trade Commission (2018) and European Commission (The Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, 2017) have raised concerns that algorithmic pricing may
facilitate collusive behaviors. Calvano et al. (2020a) support these concerns through a study of pricing
agents in a simulated platform economy, and show that commonly used reinforcement-learning
(RL) algorithms learn to initiate and sustain collusive behaviors.1 Assad et al. (2020) also provide
empirical support for algorithmic collusion in a study of Germany’s retail gas stations, showing an
association between algorithmic pricing and an increase in price markups. As highlighted by Calvano
et al. (2020b), these kinds of collusive behaviors are unlikely to be a violation of antitrust law, as they
are learned responses to profit signals and not the result of explicit agreements.
One can try to prevent algorithmic collusion by introducing suitable rules by which platforms can
choose which sellers to promote to buyers, thus promoting competition. Could Amazon’s "buy box
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.
More precisely, Calvano et al. (2020a) showed that RL algorithms learn to quote supra-competitive prices
and punish deviations from collusive agreements via lower prices.
1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

