LDSA: Learning Dynamic Subtask Assignment in
Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Mingyu Yang1 , Jian Zhao1 , Xunhan Hu1 , Wengang Zhou1,3 † , Jiangcheng Zhu2 , Houqiang Li1,3 †
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Huawei Cloud
3
Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
{ymy,zj140,cathyhxh}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
zhujiangcheng@huawei.com, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has made prominent
progress in recent years. For training efficiency and scalability, most of the MARL
algorithms make all agents share the same policy or value network. However, in
many complex multi-agent tasks, different agents are expected to possess specific
abilities to handle different subtasks. In those scenarios, sharing parameters indiscriminately may lead to similar behavior across all agents, which will limit the
exploration efficiency and degrade the final performance. To balance the training
complexity and the diversity of agent behavior, we propose a novel framework to
learn dynamic subtask assignment (LDSA) in cooperative MARL. Specifically,
we first introduce a subtask encoder to construct a vector representation for each
subtask according to its identity. To reasonably assign agents to different subtasks,
we propose an ability-based subtask selection strategy, which can dynamically
group agents with similar abilities into the same subtask. In this way, agents dealing
with the same subtask share their learning of specific abilities and different subtasks
correspond to different specific abilities. We further introduce two regularizers to
increase the representation difference between subtasks and stabilize the training
by discouraging agents from frequently changing subtasks, respectively. Empirical results show that LDSA learns reasonable and effective subtask assignment
for better collaboration and significantly improves the learning performance on
the challenging StarCraft II micromanagement benchmark and Google Research
Football.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has recently received much attention due
to its broad prospects on many real-world challenging problems, such as traffic light control [1],
autonomous cars [2] and robot swarm control [3]. Compared to single-agent scenarios, multi-agent
tasks pose more challenges. On the one hand, the observation transition function of each agent is
related to the policies of other agents, which are constantly updated during training. Hence, from
the perspective of any individual agent, the environment is extremely non-stationary, which will be
exacerbated with more agents. On the other hand, the joint action-observation space of the multi-agent
task grows exponentially with the number of agents. These two issues prevent MARL algorithms
from scaling to more agents.
To cope with a large number of agents, most of the recent MARL works, including value-based [4–9]
and policy gradient [10–15], utilize a technique of policy decentralization with shared parameters [16],
†

Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

