Provably tuning the ElasticNet across instances
Maria-Florina Balcan

Mikhail Khodak

Dravyansh Sharma

Ameet Talwalkar

Carnegie Mellon University

⇤

Abstract
An important unresolved challenge in the theory of regularization is to set the
regularization coefficients of popular techniques like the ElasticNet with general
provable guarantees. We consider the problem of tuning the regularization parameters of Ridge regression, LASSO, and the ElasticNet across multiple problem
instances, a setting that encompasses both cross-validation and multi-task hyperparameter optimization. We obtain a novel structural result for the ElasticNet which
characterizes the loss as a function of the tuning parameters as a piecewise-rational
function with algebraic boundaries. We use this to bound the structural complexity
of the regularized loss functions and show generalization guarantees for tuning the
ElasticNet regression coefficients in the statistical setting. We also consider the
more challenging online learning setting, where we show vanishing average expected regret relative to the optimal parameter pair. We further extend our results to
tuning classification algorithms obtained by thresholding regression fits regularized
by Ridge, LASSO, or ElasticNet. Our results are the first general learning-theoretic
guarantees for this important class of problems that avoid strong assumptions on
the data distribution. Furthermore, our guarantees hold for both validation and
popular information criterion objectives.

1

Introduction

Ridge regression [30, 43], LASSO [41], and their generalization the ElasticNet [28] are among the
most popular algorithms in machine learning and statistics, with applications to linear classification,
regression, data analysis, and feature selection [15, 46, 28, 20, 24]. Given a supervised dataset
(X, y) 2 Rm⇥p ⇥ Rm with m datapoints and p features, these algorithms compute the linear predictor
ˆ(X,y) = arg min ky
1, 2

2Rp

X k22 +

1k

k1 +

2k

k22

(1)

Here 1 , 2 0 are regularization coefficients constraining the `1 and `2 norms, respectively, of the
model . For general 1 and 2 the above algorithm is the ElasticNet, while setting 1 = 0 recovers
Ridge and setting 2 = 0 recovers LASSO.
These coefficients play a crucial role across fields: in machine learning controlling the norm of
implies provable generalization guarantees and prevent over-fitting in practice [34], in data analysis
their combined use yields parsimonious and interpretable models [28], and in Bayesian statistics
they correspond to imposing specific priors on [35, 33]. In practice, 2 regularizes by uniformly
shrinking all coefficients, while 1 encourages the model vector to be sparse. This means that
while they do yield learning-theoretic and statistical benefits, setting them to be too high will cause
models to under-fit the data. The question of how to set the regularization coefficients becomes
even more unclear in the case of the ElasticNet, as one must juggle trade-offs between sparsity,
feature correlation, and bias when setting both 1 and 2 simultaneously. As a result, there has been
intense empirical and theoretical effort devoted to automatically tuning these parameters. Yet the
⇤
Correspondence: dravyans@cs.cmu.edu. Author emails: {ninamf,dravyans}@cs.cmu.edu,
{khodak,talwalkar}@cmu.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

