Split-kl and PAC-Bayes-split-kl Inequalities for
Ternary Random Variables

Yi-Shan Wu
University of Copenhagen
yswu@di.ku.dk

Yevgeny Seldin
University of Copenhagen
seldin@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We present a new concentration of measure inequality for sums of independent
bounded random variables, which we name a split-kl inequality. The inequality is
particularly well-suited for ternary random variables, which naturally show up in a
variety of problems, including analysis of excess losses in classification, analysis
of weighted majority votes, and learning with abstention. We demonstrate that
for ternary random variables the inequality is simultaneously competitive with the
kl inequality, the Empirical Bernstein inequality, and the Unexpected Bernstein
inequality, and in certain regimes outperforms all of them. It resolves an open
question by Tolstikhin and Seldin [2013] and Mhammedi et al. [2019] on how
to match simultaneously the combinatorial power of the kl inequality when the
distribution happens to be close to binary and the power of Bersntein inequalities
to exploit low variance when the probability mass is concentrated on the middle
value. We also derive a PAC-Bayes-split-kl inequality and compare it with the PACBayes-kl, PAC-Bayes-Empirical-Bennett, and PAC-Bayes-Unexpected-Bernstein
inequalities in an analysis of excess losses and in an analysis of a weighted majority
vote for several UCI datasets. Last, but not least, our study provides the first direct
comparison of the Empirical Bernstein and Unexpected Bernstein inequalities and
their PAC-Bayes extensions.

1

Introduction

Concentration of measure inequalities for sums of independent random variables are the most
fundamental analysis tools in statistics and many other domains [Boucheron et al., 2013]. Their
history stretches almost a century back, and inequalities such as Hoeffding’s [Hoeffding, 1963] and
Bernstein’s [Bernstein, 1946] are the main work horses of learning theory.
For binary random variables, one of the tightest concentration of measure inequalities is the kl
inequality [Maurer, 2004, Langford, 2005, Foong et al., 2021, 2022], which is based on combinatorial
properties of a sum of n independent random variables.1 However, while being extremely tight for
binary random variables and applicable to any bounded random variables, the kl inequality is not
necessarily a good choice for sums of bounded random variables that can take more than two values.
In the latter case, the Empirical Bernstein [Mnih et al., 2008, Audibert et al., 2009, Maurer and Pontil,
2009] and the Unexpected Bernstein [Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2007, Mhammedi et al., 2019] inequalities
can be significantly tighter due to their ability to exploit low variance, as shown by Tolstikhin and
Seldin [2013]. However, the Empirical and Unexpected Bernstein inequalities are loose for binary
random variables [Tolstikhin and Seldin, 2013].
1

The Binomial tail bound is slightly tighter, but it does not extend to the PAC-Bayes setting [Langford, 2005].
Our split-kl approach can be directly applied to obtain a “split-Binomial-tail” inequality.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

