Wasserstein Logistic Regression with Mixed Features

Aras Selvi Mohammad Reza Belbasi Martin B. Haugh Wolfram Wiesemann
Imperial College Business School, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
{a.selvi19, r.belbasi21, m.haugh, ww}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent work has leveraged the popular distributionally robust optimization
paradigm to combat overfitting in classical logistic regression. While the resulting
classification scheme displays a promising performance in numerical experiments,
it is inherently limited to numerical features. In this paper, we show that distributionally robust logistic regression with mixed (i.e., numerical and categorical)
features, despite amounting to an optimization problem of exponential size, admits a polynomial-time solution scheme. We subsequently develop a practically
efficient column-and-constraint approach that solves the problem as a sequence of
polynomial-time solvable exponential conic programs. Our model retains many
of the desirable theoretical features of previous works, but—in contrast to the
literature—it does not admit an equivalent representation as a regularized logistic
regression, that is, it represents a genuinely novel variant of logistic regression.
We show that our method outperforms both the unregularized and the regularized
logistic regression on categorical as well as mixed-feature benchmark instances.

1

Introduction

i
i
Consider a data set (xi , y i )N
i=1 with feature vectors x and associated binary labels y ∈ {−1, 1}.
Classical logistic regression assumes that the labels depend probabilistically on the features via

−1
Prob(y | x) = 1 + exp(−y · [β0 + β ⊤ x])
,

where the parameters (β0 , β) ∈ R1+n are estimated from the empirical risk minimization problem
N

minimize
(β0 ,β)

1 X
lβ (xi , y i )
N i=1

subject to (β0 , β) ∈ Rn+1

with the log-loss function lβ (x, y) := log 1 + exp −y · [β0 + β ⊤ x] . Its compelling performance
across many domains, the availability of mature and computationally efficient algorithms as well as
its interpretability have all contributed to the widespread adoption of logistic regression [6, 18, 27].
Similar to other machine learning models, logistic regression is prone to overfitting, especially when
the number of training samples is small relative to the number of considered features. Moreover,
logistic regression can be sensitive to erroneous feature and label values as well as distribution shifts
under which the training and test sets stem from different distributions. In recent years, distributionally
robust (DR) optimization [3, 4] has been proposed to simultaneously address these challenges. To
this end, the DR optimization paradigm models a machine learning task as a zero-sum game between
the decision maker, who seeks to obtain the most accurate model (e.g., the parameter vector β
in a logistic regression), and a fictitious adversary who observes the decision maker’s model and
subsequently selects the worst data-generating distribution in the vicinity of the empirical distribution
formed from the available training data. In this context, the similarity of distributions is commonly
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

