A Simple and Optimal Policy Design for Online
Learning with Safety against Heavy-tailed Risk

David Simchi-Levi
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
dslevi@mit.edu

Zeyu Zheng
Industrial Engineering & Operations Research
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
zyzheng@berkeley.edu

Feng Zhu
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
fengzhu@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the classical multi-armed bandit problem and design simple-toimplement new policies that simultaneously enjoy two properties: worst-case
optimality for the expected regret, and safety against heavy-tailed risk for the regret
distribution. Recently, [10] showed that information-theoretic optimized bandit
policies as well as standard UCB policies suffer from some serious heavy-tailed
risk; that is, the probability of incurring a linear regret slowly decays at a polynomial rate of 1/T , as T (the time horizon) increases. Inspired by their result, we
further show that any policy that incurs an instance-dependent O(ln T ) regret must
incur a linear regret with probability Ω(poly(1/T )) and that the heavy-tailed risk
actually exists for all “instance-dependent consistent" policies. Next, for the twoarmed bandit setting, we provide a simple policy
√ design that (i) has the worst-case
optimality for the expected regret at order Õ( T ) and (ii) has the worst-case
√ tail
probability of incurring a linear regret decay at an exponential rate exp(−Ω( T )).
We further prove that this exponential decaying rate of the tail probability is optimal
across all policies that have worst-case optimality for the expected regret. Finally,
we generalize the policy design and analysis to the general setting with an arbitrary
K number of arms. We provide detailed characterization of the tail probability
bound for any regret threshold under our policy design. Numerical experiments
are conducted to illustrate the theoretical findings. Our results reveal insights on
the incompatibility between consistency and light-tailed risk, whereas indicate that
worst-case optimality on expected regret and light-tailed risk are compatible.

1

Introduction

The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a widely studied problem in the domain of
sequential decision-making under uncertainty, with many applications such as online advertising,
recommendation systems, clinical trials, financial portfolio design, etc. It also has valuable theoretical
insights exhibiting the exploration-exploitation trade-off For policy design and analysis, much of
the MAB literature uses the metric of maximizing the expected cumulative reward, or equivalently
minimizing the expected regret (where regret is defined as the difference between the cumulative
reward obtained by always pulling the best arm and by executing a policy that does not a priori
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

