Agreement-on-the-Line: Predicting the Performance
of Neural Networks under Distribution Shift
Christina Baek1 Yiding Jiang1 Aditi Raghunathan1 Zico Kolter1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Bosch Center for AI
{kbaek, yidingji, raditi, zkolter}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recently, Miller et al. [59] showed that a model’s in-distribution (ID) accuracy has
a strong linear correlation with its out-of-distribution (OOD) accuracy on several
OOD benchmarks — a phenomenon they dubbed “accuracy-on-the-line”. While
a useful tool for model selection (i.e., the models with better ID accuracy are
likely to have better OOD accuracy), this fact does not help estimate the actual
OOD performance of models without access to a labeled OOD validation set.
In this paper, we show a similar but surprising phenomenon also holds for the
agreement between pairs of neural network classifiers: whenever accuracy-onthe-line holds, we observe that the OOD agreement between the predictions of
any two pairs of neural networks (with potentially different architectures) also
observes a strong linear correlation with their ID agreement. Furthermore, we
observe that the slope and bias of OOD vs. ID agreement closely matches that of
OOD vs. ID accuracy. This phenomenon, which we call agreement-on-the-line,
has important practical applications: without any labeled data, we can predict the
OOD accuracy of classifiers, since OOD agreement can be estimated with just
unlabeled data. Our prediction algorithm outperforms previous methods both in
shifts where agreement-on-the-line holds and, surprisingly, when accuracy is not
on the line. This phenomenon also provides new insights into deep neural networks:
unlike accuracy-on-the-line, agreement-on-the-line appears to only hold for neural
network classifiers.

1

Introduction

Machine learning operates well when models observe and make decisions on data coming from the
same distribution as the training data. Yet in the real world, this assumption rarely holds. Environments are never fully controlled. Robots interact with their surroundings, effectively changing what
they see in the future. Self-driving cars face constant distribution shift when driving to new cities
under changing weather conditions. Models trained on clinical data from one hospital face challenges
when deployed for a different hospital with different subpopulations. Under these premises, practitioners constantly face the problem of estimating a model’s performance on new data distributions
(out-of-distribution, or OOD) that are related to but different from the data distribution that the model
was trained on (in-distribution, or ID). Depending on the distribution shift, models may sometimes
break catastrophically under new conditions, or may only suffer a small degradation in performance.
Differentiating between such cases is crucial in practice.
Assessing OOD performance is difficult because in reality, labeled OOD data is often very costly
to obtain. On the other hand, unlabeled OOD data is much easier to obtain. A natural question is
whether we can leverage unlabeled OOD data for estimating the OOD performance. This paradigm
of using unlabeled data to predict the OOD generalization performance has received much attention
recently [29, 9, 87, 22, 23, 10, 31]. Although many different metrics have been proposed, their
success varies widely depending on the shift and the ID performance of the model. While it is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

