Few-Shot Fast-Adaptive Anomaly Detection
Ze Wang ⇤ † , Yipin Zhou‡ , Rui Wang‡ , Tsung-Yu Lin‡ , Ashish Shah‡ , and Ser-Nam Lim‡
†
Purdue University ‡ Meta AI

Abstract
The ability to detect anomaly has long been recognized as an inherent human
ability, yet to date, practical AI solutions to mimic such capability have been
lacking. This lack of progress can be attributed to several factors. To begin with,
the distribution of “abnormalities” is intractable. Anything outside of a given
normal population is by definition an anomaly. This explains why a large volume
of work in this area has been dedicated to modeling the normal distribution of
a given task followed by detecting deviations from it. This direction is however
unsatisfying as it would require modeling the normal distribution of every task that
comes along, which includes tedious data collection. In this paper, we report our
work aiming to handle these issues. To deal with the intractability of abnormal
distribution, we leverage Energy Based Model (EBM). EBMs learn to associate
low energies to correct values and higher energies to incorrect values. At its core,
the EBM employs Langevin Dynamics (LD) in generating these incorrect samples
based on an iterative optimization procedure, alleviating the intractable problem
of modeling the world of anomalies. Then, in order to avoid training an anomaly
detector for every task, we utilize an adaptive sparse coding layer. Our intention is
to design a plug and play feature that can be used to quickly update what is normal
during inference time. Lastly, to avoid tedious data collection, this mentioned
update of the sparse coding layer needs to be achievable with just a few shots. Here,
we employ a meta learning scheme that simulates such a few shot setting during
training. We support our findings with strong empirical evidence.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection is an important area of study in the field of artificial intelligence. It has found utility
in computer vision applications such as industrial inspection [6] and video surveillance [28, 61, 39],
in the context of abuse prevention such as misinformation, fraud and network intrusion detection
[60, 8, 35], and others such as system health monitoring and fault detection [4, 42]. In this paper, we
propose an approach for detecting anomaly in images, where we have carefully designed steps to
handle some of the bigger issues that have prevented the deployment of image anomaly detection in
the real-world.
Image anomaly detection can generally be defined as the identification of abnormalities in a given
image. An exact definition of abnormality in this case is elusive because abnormality can be derived
from any unknown distribution outside of a normal population. Many studies have hence focused on
modeling the normal population instead of learning irregularities, where the goal is to capture the
shared concept among all of the normal data as one or several reference models. This process usually
requires investing significant efforts in curating a large set of normal samples for each task, after
which anomaly is detected as deviations from the reference model(s) [1, 58]. Recent work from [50]
provides algorithms that utilize only a few normal samples to train models from scratch. However,
the models still have to be provisioned for each new task, which requires considerable human efforts
⇤

Work done as an intern at Meta AI. Contact: zewang@purdue.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

