A Boosting Approach to Reinforcement Learning
Nataly Brukhim
Princeton University
nbrukhim@cs.princeton.edu

Elad Hazan
Princeton University
Google AI Princeton
ehazan@cs.princeton.edu

Karan Singh
Carnegie Mellon University
karansingh@cmu.edu

Abstract
Reducing reinforcement learning to supervised learning is a well-studied and
effective approach that leverages the benefits of compact function approximation
to deal with large-scale Markov decision processes. Independently, the boosting
methodology (e.g. AdaBoost) has proven to be indispensable in designing efficient
and accurate classification algorithms by combining inaccurate rules-of-thumb.
In this paper, we take a further step: we reduce reinforcement learning to a sequence
of weak learning problems. Since weak learners perform only marginally better
than random guesses, such subroutines constitute a weaker assumption than the
availability of an accurate supervised learning oracle. We prove that the sample
complexity and running time bounds of the proposed method do not explicitly
depend on the number of states.
While existing results on boosting operate on convex losses, the value function
over policies is non-convex. We show how to use a non-convex variant of the
Frank-Wolfe method for boosting, that additionally improves upon the known
sample complexity and running time even for reductions to supervised learning.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning, Markov decision processes (MDP) model the mechanism of learning from
rewards, as opposed to examples. Although the case of tabular MDPs is well understood, the main
challenge in applying RL in the real-world is the size of the state space in practical domains.
This challenge of finding efficient and provable algorithms for MDPs with large state space is the
focus of our study. Various techniques have been suggested and applied to cope with very large
MDPs. One class of approaches attempts to approximate either the value or the transition function of
the underlying MDP by using a parametric function class. Such approaches invariably make strong
realizability assumptions to produce global optimality guarantees. Another class of approaches,
so-called direct methods, produces a near-optimal policy that maximizes the expected return from a
given policy class. To deal with the challenge of large (possibly innumerable) policy classes, a popular
strategy [24] is to the frame policy search as a sequence of supervised learning problems. Such
approaches yield global optimality guarantees under state coverage assumptions without reliance on
realizability, and have inspired practical adaptations for sampling-based policy search.
In this paper, we study another methodology to derive provable algorithms for reinforcement learning:
ensemble methods for aggregating weak or approximate algorithms into substantially more accurate
solutions. Our proposal extends the methodology of boosting, typically used to solve supervised
learning instances [32], to reinforcement learning. A typical boosting algorithm (e.g. AdaBoost)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

