Unsupervised Object Detection Pretraining with Joint
Object Priors Generation and Detector Learning

Yizhou Wang1,3∗ Meilin Chen1,3∗ Shixiang Tang2 † Feng Zhu3 Haiyang Yang5
Lei Bai4 Rui Zhao3,6 Yunfeng Yan1 Donglian Qi1 Wanli Ouyang4,2
1
Zhejiang University 2 The University of Sydney 3 SenseTime Research
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 Nanjing University
6
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{yizhouwang, merlinis, yvonnech, qidl}@zju.edu.cn stan3906@uni.sydney.edu.au
{zhufeng, zhaorui}@sensetime.com
baisanshi@gmail.com
hyyang@smail.nju.edu.cn wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Unsupervised pretraining methods for object detection aim to learn object discrimination and localization ability from large amounts of images. Typically, recent
works design pretext tasks that supervise the detector to predict the defined object
priors. They normally leverage heuristic methods to produce object priors, e.g.,
selective search, which separates the prior generation and detector learning and
leads to sub-optimal solutions. In this work, we propose a novel object detection
pretraining framework that could generate object priors and learn detectors jointly
by generating accurate object priors from the model itself. Specifically, region
priors are extracted by attention maps from the encoder, which highlights foregrounds. Instance priors are the selected high-quality output bounding boxes of
the detection decoder. By assuming objects as instances in the foreground, we can
generate object priors with both region and instance priors. Moreover, our object
priors are jointly refined along with the detector optimization. With better object
priors as supervision, the model could achieve better detection capability, which in
turn promotes the object priors generation. Our method improves the competitive
approaches by +1.3 AP, +1.7 AP in 1% and 10% COCO low-data regimes object
detection.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision, whose goal is to predict a set of bounding
boxes and category labels for all objects of interest in the images. The success of modern detectors [4,
35, 22, 14, 27, 29, 31, 32, 41, 42] relies on the large-scale datasets with precious annotations which are
very costly and even infeasible for enormous images available in the Internet. Therefore, unsupervised
pretraining methods [12, 3] for object detection are proposed to ease the burden of these human
annotations, which enable the detectors to be fast deployed in the real world by finetuning the
pretrained model with only a few annotated images.
While various unsupervised pretraining methods, e.g., SwAW [5], BYOL [18], DetCo [51], have
been shown to learn good backbones for object detection [28, 52, 46, 37], only a few methods
are able to pretrain the detection head, which is also a key component of a complete detection
architecture [24, 20, 25]. To enable the localization of the pretrained detection head, a few recent
∗
†

Equal contribution. The work was done during an internship at SenseTime.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

