Positive-Unlabeled Learning using Random Forests via
Recursive Greedy Risk Minimization

Jonathan Wilton1 , Abigail M. Y. Koay2 , Ryan K. L. Ko2 , Miao Xu2,3 , Nan Ye1
1
School of Mathematics and Physics, The University of Queensland
2
School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland
3
RIKEN, Japan 103-0027

Abstract
The need to learn from positive and unlabeled data, or PU learning, arises in
many applications and has attracted increasing interest. While random forests
are known to perform well on many tasks with positive and negative data, recent
PU algorithms are generally based on deep neural networks, and the potential of
tree-based PU learning is under-explored. In this paper, we propose new random
forest algorithms for PU-learning. Key to our approach is a new interpretation
of decision tree algorithms for positive and negative data as recursive greedy
risk minimization algorithms. We extend this perspective to the PU setting to
develop new decision tree learning algorithms that directly minimizes PU-data
based estimators for the expected risk. This allows us to develop an efficient PU
random forest algorithm, PU extra trees. Our approach features three desirable
properties: it is robust to the choice of the loss function in the sense that various
loss functions lead to the same decision trees; it requires little hyperparameter
tuning as compared to neural network based PU learning; it supports a feature
importance that directly measures a feature’s contribution to risk minimization.
Our algorithms demonstrate strong performance on several datasets. Our code is
available at https://github.com/puetpaper/PUExtraTrees.

1

Introduction

Positive and unlabeled learning (PU learning) has attracted increasing interest recently, due to its
broad applications, including disease gene identification [24], landslide susceptibility modeling [29],
inference of transcriptional regulatory network [23], cybersecurity [30] and many others [2].
Existing algorithms generally reduce PU learning to solving one or more supervised learning problems.
A naive approach is to simply learn a classifier by treating all unlabeled examples as negative, but
unlabeled examples can be either positive or negative. Various approaches have been developed to
better handle the uncertainty on the labels of the unlabeled examples. A common approach follows an
iterative two-step learning process: the first step identifies reliable negative examples, then the second
step learns a model using the positive examples, the reliable negative examples and possibly unlabeled
examples [22, 15]. Another common approach transforms the PU dataset into a weighted fully labeled
dataset [20, 12, 11, 16]. The transformed dataset is often constructed so that the empirical risk on the
transformed dataset provides a good estimate of the true risk. Depending on the assumptions on how
PU data is generated, different transformations have been developed.
While random forests are known to perform well for many supervised learning problems and in
principle tree-based learning methods can be applied in the above approaches, little work has been
done to explore the potential of tree-based methods for PU learning. On the other hand, current
state-of-the-art PU learning methods are often based on deep neural networks [16, 6]. This is partly
due to the recent advances of deep learning, which allows training of powerful neural network models
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

