A Unified Evaluation of Textual Backdoor Learning:
Frameworks and Benchmarks
Ganqu Cui1∗, Lifan Yuan2∗, Bingxiang He1 , Yangyi Chen3 , Zhiyuan Liu1,4†, Maosong Sun1,4†
1
NLP Group, DCST, IAI, BNRIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4 IICTUS, Shanghai
cgq22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn lievanyuan173@gmail.com

Abstract
Textual backdoor attacks are a kind of practical threat to NLP systems. By
injecting a backdoor in the training phase, the adversary could control model
predictions via predefined triggers. As various attack and defense models have
been proposed, it is of great significance to perform rigorous evaluations. However,
we highlight two issues in previous backdoor learning evaluations: (1) The
differences between real-world scenarios (e.g. releasing poisoned datasets or
models) are neglected, and we argue that each scenario has its own constraints and
concerns, thus requires specific evaluation protocols; (2) The evaluation metrics
only consider whether the attacks could flip the models’ predictions on poisoned
samples and retain performances on benign samples, but ignore that poisoned
samples should also be stealthy and semantic-preserving. To address these issues,
we categorize existing works into three practical scenarios in which attackers
release datasets, pre-trained models, and fine-tuned models respectively, then
discuss their unique evaluation methodologies. On metrics, to completely evaluate
poisoned samples, we use grammar error increase and perplexity difference
for stealthiness, along with text similarity for validity. After formalizing the
frameworks, we develop an open-source toolkit OpenBackdoor3 to foster the
implementations and evaluations of textual backdoor learning. With this toolkit,
we perform extensive experiments to benchmark attack and defense models
under the suggested paradigm. To facilitate the underexplored defenses against
poisoned datasets, we further propose CUBE, a simple yet strong clustering-based
defense baseline. We hope that our frameworks and benchmarks could serve as
the cornerstones for future model development and evaluations.

1

Introduction

Backdoor attacks [17, 30], also known as trojan
attacks, are a kind of immense threat to deep
neural networks (DNNs). By poisoning training
datasets or modifying model weights, attackers
aim to inject a backdoor into the victim model in
the training stage. With the backdoor, the victim
model functions normally given benign inputs
Figure 1: An illustration of backdoor attacks. Here
and produces certain outputs specified by the
“cf” is the trigger and “Negative” is the target label.
attacker when predefined triggers are activated.
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding Author.
3
https://github.com/thunlp/OpenBackdoor

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

