GAR: Generalized Autoregression
for Multi-Fidelity Fusion
Yuxin Wang ⇤
School of Mathematical Science
Beihang University
Beijing, China, 100191.
WYXtt_2011@163.com

Zheng Xing ⇤
Graphics&Computing Department
Rockchip Electronics Co., Ltd
Fuzhou, China, 350003
zheng.xing@rock-chips.com

Wei W. Xing †
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK ‡
School of Integrated Circuit Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China, 100191.
wayne.xingle@gmail.com

Abstract
In many scientific research and engineering applications where repeated simulations of complex systems are conducted, a surrogate is commonly adopted to
quickly estimate the whole system. To reduce the expensive cost of generating
training examples, it has become a promising approach to combine the results of
low-fidelity (fast but inaccurate) and high-fidelity (slow but accurate) simulations.
Despite the fast developments of multi-fidelity fusion techniques, most existing
methods require particular data structures and do not scale well to high-dimensional
output. To resolve these issues, we generalize the classic autoregression (AR),
which is wildly used due to its simplicity, robustness, accuracy, and tractability,
and propose generalized autoregression (GAR) using tensor formulation and latent
features. GAR can deal with arbitrary dimensional outputs and arbitrary multifidelity data structure to satisfy the demand of multi-fidelity fusion for complex
problems; it admits a fully tractable likelihood and posterior requiring no approximate inference and scales well to high-dimensional problems. Furthermore, we
prove the autokrigeability theorem based on GAR in the multi-fidelity case and
develop CIGAR, a simplified GAR with the exact predictive mean accuracy with
computation reduction by a factor of d3 , where d is the dimensionality of the
output. The empirical assessment includes many canonical PDEs and real scientific
examples and demonstrates that the proposed method consistently outperforms the
SOTA methods with a large margin (up to 6x improvement in RMSE) with only a
couple high-fidelity training samples.

1

Introduction

The design, optimization, and control of many systems in science and engineering can rely heavily
on the numerical analysis of differential equations, which is generally computationally intense. In
this case, a data-driven surrogate model is used to approximate the system based on the input-output
data of the numerical solver and to help improve convergence efficiency where repeated simulations
are required, e.g., in Bayesian optimization (BO) [1] and uncertainty analysis (UQ) [2].
With the surrogate model in place, the remaining challenge is that executing high-fidelity numerical
simulations to generate training data can still be very expensive. To further reduce the computational
⇤

The authors contribute equally to this paper.

†

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

‡

Primary

