Fuzzy Learning Machine
Junbiao Cui1
Jiye Liang1∗
945546899@qq.com
ljy@sxu.edu.cn
1
Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of
Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University,
Taiyuan 030006, Shanxi, China.

Abstract
Classification is one of the most important problems in machine learning and the
nature of it is concept cognition. So far, dozens of different classifiers have been
designed. Although their working mechanisms vary widely, few of them fully
consider concept cognition. In this paper, a new learning machine, fuzzy learning
machine (FLM), is proposed from the perspective of concept cognition. Inspired
by cognitive science, its working mechanism is of strong interpretability. At the
same time, FLM roots in set theory and fuzzy set theory, so FLM has a solid
mathematical foundation. The systematic experimental results on a large number of
data sets show that FLM can achieve excellent performance, even with the simple
implementation.

1

Introduction

Given an input space X , an output space (a finite set) Y, and an unknown function ϕ : X → Y,
the goal of classification is finding the ϕ or an approximation to it. Classification is one of the
most important problems in machine learning, dating back to the origins of machine learning. In
classification, each member of the output space Y corresponds to a concept. In essence, the process
of classification is the process of concept cognition. Concept contains our knowledge about the
world, and we use concept to understand and organize the world. Without it, there will be no human
intelligence at all. That is why classification plays an important role in machine learning even in
artificial intelligence.
Over the past decades, a large number of classifiers have been designed and achieved success on
different tasks. The literature [1] systematically summarizes 179 classifiers from 17 different families,
which contains almost all existing classifiers. Usually, generalization performance is regarded as an
important dimension for evaluating classifiers. With the increasing depth and breadth of machine
learning applications, classifiers are expected to possess more and more good properties, such as
interpretability [2, 3, 4], robustness [5, 6, 7], and so on.
The existing classifiers follow different design principles (see Appendix A.2.1 for detailed analysis),
but they are designed without full consideration for the nature of classification and how humans do
it. For a specific scenario, the existing classifiers often perform well on one evaluation dimension
but poorly on others. For example, deep neural network has exceed the human level in very specific
settings [8]. Unfortunately, its working mechanism is difficult to be understood due to the complexity
of the network structure [9, 10], and it is also very vulnerable to be attacked [11, 12]. Instead, human
can perform well on a variety of tasks and on different evaluation dimensions.
To implement a classifier that is easy to understand and interpretable, one effective approach is to
draw on relevant research in cognitive science. As mentioned above, classifying is essentially the
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

