MACD: Multilingual Abusive Comment Detection at
Scale for Indic Languages
Vikram Gupta1 , Sumegh Roychowdhury2∗, Mithun Das2 , Somnath Banerjee2 , Punyajoy Saha2 , Binny
Mathew2 , Hastagiri Vanchinathan1 , Animesh Mukherjee2
1

ShareChat, India, 2 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India
{vikramgupta,hasta}@sharechat.co
{sumegh01,mithundas,punyajoys,binnymathew}@iitkgp.ac.in
{som.iitkgpcse@kgpian.iitkgp.ac.in},{animesh@cse.iitkgp.ac.in}

Abstract
Social media platforms were conceived to act as online ‘town squares’ where people
could get together, share information and communicate with each other peacefully.
However, harmful content borne out of bad actors are constantly plaguing these
platforms slowly converting them into ‘mosh pits’ where the bad actors take the
liberty to extensively abuse various marginalised groups. Accurate and timely
detection of abusive content on social media platforms is therefore very important
for facilitating safe interactions between users. However, due to the small scale
and sparse linguistic coverage of Indic abusive speech datasets, development of
such algorithms for Indic social media users (one-sixth of global population) is
severely impeded. To facilitate and encourage research in this important direction,
we contribute for the first time MACD - a large-scale (150K), human-annotated,
multilingual (5 languages), balanced (49% abusive content) and diverse (70K
users) abuse detection dataset of user comments, sourced from a popular social
media platform - ShareChat2 . We also release AbuseXLMR, an abusive content
detection model pretrained on large number of social media comments in 15+ Indic
languages which outperforms XLM-R and MuRIL on multiple Indic datasets. Along
with the annotations, we also release the mapping between comment, post and user
id’s to facilitate modelling the relationship between them. We share competitive
monolingual, cross-lingual and few-shot baselines so that MACD can be used as a
dataset benchmark for future research. Dataset, code and AbuseXLMR are available
at: https://github.com/ShareChatAI/MACD

1

Introduction

Adoption of social media platforms has increased dramatically in recent times. Unfortunately, this
rapid adoption is often accompanied with an increase in the frequency of abusive interactions like
cyber-bullying, abusive language, hate speeches etc. [67] towards individuals and groups which
can trigger violent real-world situations [13], and result in devaluation and exclusion of minority
members [36, 51]. Repeated exposure to these types of harmful content could lead to psychological
trauma, radicalization and even self-harm [69]. In addition, several incidents in India, such as
smearing campaigns against famous political leaders, celebrities, and social media personalities,
∗
2

Work done during internship at ShareChat, India.
https://sharechat.com/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

