Scale-invariant Learning by Physics Inversion

Philipp Holl ∗
Technical University of Munich

Vladlen Koltun
Apple

Nils Thuerey
Technical University of Munich

Abstract
Solving inverse problems, such as parameter estimation and optimal control, is
a vital part of science. Many experiments repeatedly collect data and rely on
machine learning algorithms to quickly infer solutions to the associated inverse
problems. We find that state-of-the-art training techniques are not well-suited to
many problems that involve physical processes. The highly nonlinear behavior,
common in physical processes, results in strongly varying gradients that lead
first-order optimizers like SGD or Adam to compute suboptimal optimization
directions. We propose a novel hybrid training approach that combines higherorder optimization methods with machine learning techniques. We take updates
from a scale-invariant inverse problem solver and embed them into the gradientdescent-based learning pipeline, replacing the regular gradient of the physical
process. We demonstrate the capabilities of our method on a variety of canonical
physical systems, showing that it yields significant improvements on a wide range
of optimization and learning problems.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems that involve physical systems play a central role in computational science. This
class of problems includes parameter estimation [54] and optimal control [57]. Among others, solving
inverse problems is integral in detecting gravitational waves [22], controlling plasma flows [38],
searching for neutrinoless double-beta decay [3, 1], and testing general relativity [19, 35].
Decades of research in optimization have produced a wide range of iterative methods for solving
inverse problems [47]. Higher-order methods such as limited-memory BFGS [36] have been especially successful. Such methods compute or approximate the Hessian of the optimization function
in addition to the gradient, allowing them to locally invert the function and find stable optimization
directions. Gradient descent, in contrast, only requires the first derivative but converges more slowly,
especially in ill-conditioned settings [49].
Despite the success of iterative solvers, many of today’s experiments rely on machine learning
methods, and especially deep neural networks, to find unknown parameters given the observations [11,
15, 22, 3]. While learning methods typically cannot recover a solution up to machine precision, they
have a number of advantages over iterative solvers. First, their computational cost for inferring a
solution is usually much lower than with iterative methods. This is especially important in timecritical applications, such as the search for rare events in data sets comprising of billions of individual
recordings for collider physics. Second, learning-based methods do not require an initial guess to
solve a problem. With iterative solvers, a poor initial guess can prevent convergence to a global
optimum or lead to divergence (see Appendix C.1). Third, learning-based solutions can be less
prone to finding local optima than iterative methods because the parameters are shared across a large
collection of problems [30]. Combined with the stochastic nature of the training process, this allows
gradients from other problems to push a prediction out of the basin of attraction of a local optimum.
∗

Corresponding author, philipp.holl@tum.de

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

