CATER: Intellectual Property Protection on Text
Generation APIs via Conditional Watermarks
Xuanli He∗
University College London
zodiac.he@gmail.com
Lingjuan Lyu‡
Sony AI
Lingjuan.Lv@sony.com

Qiongkai Xu ∗
University of Melbourne
qiongkai.xu@unimelb.edu.au

Fangzhao Wu
Microsoft Research Asia
fangzwu@microsoft.com

Yi Zeng†
Virginia Tech
yizeng@vt.edu

Jiwei Li
Shannon.AI, Zhejiang University
jiwei_li@shannonai.com

Ruoxi Jia
Virginia Tech
ruoxijia@vt.edu

Abstract
Previous works have validated that text generation APIs can be stolen through
imitation attacks, causing IP violations. In order to protect the IP of text generation APIs, recent work has introduced a watermarking algorithm and utilized the
null-hypothesis test as a post-hoc ownership verification on the imitation models. However, we find that it is possible to detect those watermarks via sufficient
statistics of the frequencies of candidate watermarking words. To address this drawback, in this paper, we propose a novel Conditional wATERmarking framework
(CATER) for protecting the IP of text generation APIs. An optimization method
is proposed to decide the watermarking rules that can minimize the distortion
of overall word distributions while maximizing the change of conditional word
selections. Theoretically, we prove that it is infeasible for even the savviest attacker
(they know how CATER works) to reveal the used watermarks from a large pool
of potential word pairs based on statistical inspection. Empirically, we observe
that high-order conditions lead to an exponential growth of suspicious (unused)
watermarks, making our crafted watermarks more stealthy. In addition, CATER can
effectively identify IP infringement under architectural mismatch and cross-domain
imitation attacks, with negligible impairments on the generation quality of victim
APIs. We envision our work as a milestone for stealthily protecting the IP of text
generation APIs.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, many technology corporations, such as Google, Amazon, Microsoft, have invested a
plethora of workforce and computation to data collection and model training, in order to deploy
well-trained commercial models as pay-as-you-use services on their cloud platforms. Therefore, these
corporations own the intellectual property (IP) of their trained models. Unfortunately, previous works
have validated that the functionality of a victim API can be stolen through imitation attacks, which
∗

Equal contribution. Most of the work was finished when X.H was at Monash Unversity.
Work done during internship at Sony AI.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

