Near Instance-Optimal PAC Reinforcement Learning
for Deterministic MDPs
Andrea Tirinzoni∗
Meta AI
Paris, France
tirinzoni@fb.com

Aymen Al-Marjani
UMPA, ENS Lyon
Lyon, France
aymen.al_marjani@ens-lyon.fr

Emilie Kaufmann
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL
Lille, France
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr

Abstract
In probably approximately correct (PAC) reinforcement learning (RL), an agent
is required to identify an ε-optimal policy with probability 1 − δ. While minimax
optimal algorithms exist for this problem, its instance-dependent complexity remains elusive in episodic Markov decision processes (MDPs). In this paper, we
propose the first nearly matching (up to a horizon squared factor and logarithmic
terms) upper and lower bounds on the sample complexity of PAC RL in deterministic episodic MDPs with finite state and action spaces. In particular, our bounds
feature a new notion of sub-optimality gap for state-action pairs that we call the
deterministic return gap. While our instance-dependent lower bound is written
as a linear program, our algorithms are very simple and do not require solving
such an optimization problem during learning. Their design and analyses employ
novel ideas, including graph-theoretical concepts (minimum flows) and a new
maximum-coverage exploration strategy.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning [RL, 40], an agent interacts with an environment modeled as a Markov
decision process (MDP) by sequentially selecting actions and receiving feedback in the form of
reward signals. Depending on the application, the agent may seek to maximize the cumulative
rewards received during learning (which is typically phrased as a regret minimization problem)
or to minimize the number of learning interactions (i.e., the sample complexity) for identifying a
near-optimal policy. The latter pure exploration problem was introduced in [21] under the name of
Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) RL: given two parameters ε, δ > 0, the agent must return
a policy that is ε-optimal with probability at least 1 − δ. Our work focuses on this problem in the
context of episodic (a.k.a. finite-horizon) tabular MDPs.
The PAC RL problem has been mostly studied under the lens of minimax (or worst-case) optimality. In the episodic setting, the algorithm proposed in [12] has sample complexity bounded by
O(SAH 2 log(1/δ)/ε2 ) for an MDP with S states, A actions, horizon H, and time-homogeneous
transitions and rewards (i.e., not depending on the stage). This is minimax optimal for such a context
[11]. Similarly, in [35] the authors designed a strategy with O(SAH 3 log(1/δ)/ε2 ) complexity in
time-inhomogeneous MDPs, which was later shown to be minimax optimal [17].
∗

Work done while at Inria Lille.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

