Personalized Online Federated Learning
with Multiple Kernels

Yanning Shen ∗
University of California Irvine
yannings@uci.edu

Pouya M. Ghari
University of California Irvine
pmollaeb@uci.edu

Abstract
Multi-kernel learning (MKL) exhibits well-documented performance in online
non-linear function approximation. Federated learning enables a group of learners
(called clients) to train an MKL model on the data distributed among clients to
perform online non-linear function approximation. There are some challenges in
online federated MKL that need to be addressed: i) Communication efficiency
especially when a large number of kernels are considered ii) Heterogeneous data
distribution among clients. The present paper develops an algorithmic framework to
enable clients to communicate with the server to send their updates with affordable
communication cost while clients employ a large dictionary of kernels. Utilizing
random feature (RF) approximation, the present paper proposes scalable online
federated MKL algorithm. We prove that using the proposed online federated MKL
algorithm, each client enjoys sub-linear regret with respect to the RF approximation
of its best kernel in hindsight, which indicates that the proposed algorithm can
effectively deal with heterogeneity of the data distributed among clients. Experimental results on real datasets showcase the advantages of the proposed algorithm
compared with other online federated kernel learning ones.

1

Introduction

Kernel learning exhibits well-documented performance in function approximation tasks, while
providing theoretical guarantees associated with different performance metrics, see e.g. [48, 21, 38].
In some cases, a group of learners aims at collaborating to perform function approximation without
revealing their data. To this end, federated learning has been emerged as a crucial learning paradigm
by enabling a group of learners called clients to collaborate with each other by communicating with a
central server to train a centralized model [33, 27, 12, 23]. Through this process, clients send model
parameters and updates to the server without revealing their data. Upon receiving updates from
clients, the server updates the model. Therefore, federated learning enables clients to perform kernel
learning for function approximation. In this context, a server and clients collaborate with each other
to learn the optimal kernel. Furthermore, in some practical cases, clients may need to perform the
function approximation in an online fashion while they are collaborating with the server to learn the
kernel. For example, consider the case where clients may not have enough memory to store data in
batch. In addition, data samples may arrive in a sequential manner such that clients are not able to
perform the function approximation in batch form. There are major challenges in performing online
kernel learning in federated fashion that need to be addressed:
Communication Efficiency: Communication efficiency arises as a bottleneck in federated learning
(see e.g. [25, 37, 19, 16]). Specifically, limited clients-to-server communication bandwidth restricts
the number of parameters that can be sent from clients to the server.
Heterogeneous Data: The distribution of data observed by a client might be different from others
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

