Rényi Differential Privacy of Propose-Test-Release
and Applications to Private and Robust Machine
Learning
Jiachen T. Wang
Princeton University
tianhaowang@princeton.edu
Shouda Wang
Princeton University
sw1041@princeton.edu

Ruoxi Jia
Virginia Tech
ruoxijia@vt.edu

Saeed Mahloujifar
Princeton University
sfar@princeton.edu
Prateek Mittal
Princeton University
pmittal@princeton.edu

Abstract
Propose-Test-Release (PTR) is a differential privacy framework that works with
local sensitivity of functions, instead of their global sensitivity. This framework
is typically used for releasing robust statistics such as median or trimmed mean
in a differentially private manner. While PTR is a common framework introduced
over a decade ago, using it in applications such as robust SGD where we need
many adaptive robust queries is challenging. This is mainly due to the lack of
Rényi Differential Privacy (RDP) analysis, an essential ingredient underlying the
moments accountant approach for differentially private deep learning. In this work,
we generalize the standard PTR and derive the first RDP bound for it when the target
function has bounded global sensitivity. We show that our RDP bound for PTR
yields tighter DP guarantees than the directly analyzed (", )-DP. We also derive
the algorithm-specific privacy amplification bound of PTR under subsampling.
We show that our bound is much tighter than the general upper bound and close
to the lower bound. Our RDP bounds enable tighter privacy loss calculation for
the composition of many adaptive runs of PTR. As an application of our analysis,
we show that PTR and our theoretical results can be used to design differentially
private variants for byzantine robust training algorithms that use robust statistics
for gradients aggregation. We conduct experiments on the settings of label, feature,
and gradient corruption across different datasets and architectures. We show that
PTR-based private and robust training algorithm significantly improves the utility
compared with the baseline.

1

Introduction

Privacy is a major concern for deploying machine learning (ML). In response, differential privacy
(DP) [DMNS06] has become the de-facto measure of privacy. For a differentially private mechanism,
the probability distribution of the mechanism’s outputs on a dataset should be close to the distribution
of its outputs on the same dataset with any single individual’s data replaced. A general recipe for
releasing the value of a function f on dataset S in a differentially private way is adding random noise
to f (S) (output perturbation), where noise magnitude should scale with f ’s global sensitivity.
However, it might be over-conservative to add noise scaled with global sensitivity. There is a line of
research on whether we can do better (e.g., [NRS07, DL09, TS13, KNRS13]). Propose-Test-Release
(PTR) [DL09] is a framework that improves the general recipe with the notion of local sensitivity.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

