Bayesian Persuasion for Algorithmic Recourse
Keegan Harris
Carnegie Mellon University
keeganh@cmu.edu

Valerie Chen
Carnegie Mellon University
valeriechen@cmu.edu

Joon Sik Kim
Carnegie Mellon University
joonkim@cmu.edu

Ameet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Hoda Heidari
Carnegie Mellon University
hheidari@cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
When subjected to automated decision-making, decision subjects may strategically
modify their observable features in ways they believe will maximize their chances
of receiving a favorable decision. In many practical situations, the underlying
assessment rule is deliberately kept secret to avoid gaming and maintain competitive
advantage. The resulting opacity forces the decision subjects to rely on incomplete
information when making strategic feature modifications. We capture such settings
as a game of Bayesian persuasion, in which the decision maker offers a form of
recourse to the decision subject by providing them with an action recommendation
(or signal) to incentivize them to modify their features in desirable ways. We
show that when using persuasion, the decision maker and decision subject are
never worse off in expectation, while the decision maker can be significantly
better off. While the decision maker’s problem of finding the optimal Bayesian
incentive-compatible (BIC) signaling policy takes the form of optimization over
infinitely-many variables, we show that this optimization can be cast as a linear
program over finitely-many regions of the space of possible assessment rules. While
this reformulation simplifies the problem dramatically, solving the linear program
requires reasoning about exponentially-many variables, even in relatively simple
cases. Motivated by this observation, we provide a polynomial-time approximation
scheme that recovers a near-optimal signaling policy. Finally, our numerical
simulations on semi-synthetic data empirically demonstrate the benefits of using
persuasion in the algorithmic recourse setting.

1

Introduction

High-stakes decision-making systems increasingly utilize data-driven algorithms to assess individuals
in such domains as education [31], employment [5, 36], and lending [24]. Individuals subjected to
these assessments (henceforth, decision subjects) may strategically modify their observable features
in ways they believe maximize their chances of receiving favorable decisions [21, 9]. The decision
subject often has a set of actions/interventions available to them. Each of these actions leads to
some measurable effect on their observable features, and subsequently, the decision they receive.
From the decision maker’s perspective, some of these actions may be more desirable than others.
Consider credit scoring as an example.1 Credit scores predict how likely an individual applicant
1
Other examples of strategic settings which arise as a result of decision-making include college admissions,
in which a college/university decides whether or not to admit a prospective student, hiring, in which a company
decides whether or not to hire a job applicant, and lending, in which a banking institution decides to accept
or reject someone applying for a loan. Oftentimes, the decision maker is aided by automated decision-making
tools in these situations (e.g., [31, 38, 24]).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

