Memorization Without Overfitting: Analyzing the
Training Dynamics of Large Language Models
Kushal Tirumala⇤

Aram H. Markosyan⇤

Luke Zettlemoyer

Armen Aghajanyan

Meta AI Research
{ktirumala,amarkos,lsz,armenag}@fb.com

Abstract
Despite their wide adoption, the underlying training and memorization dynamics
of very large language models is not well understood. We empirically study exact
memorization in causal and masked language modeling, across model sizes and
throughout the training process. We measure the effects of dataset size, learning
rate, and model size on memorization, finding that larger language models memorize training data faster across all settings. Surprisingly, we show that larger models
can memorize a larger portion of the data before over-fitting and tend to forget
less throughout the training process. We also analyze the memorization dynamics
of different parts of speech and find that models memorize nouns and numbers
first; we hypothesize and provide empirical evidence that nouns and numbers act
as a unique identifier for memorizing individual training examples. Together, these
findings present another piece of the broader puzzle of trying to understand what
actually improves as models get bigger.

1

Introduction

The rate and extent to which a model memorizes its training data are key statistics that provide
evidence about how it is likely to generalize to new test instances. Classical frameworks, such as
bias-variance tradeoff [31], argued for fitting a training set without full memorization. However,
recent work has established a more symbiotic relationship between memorization and generalization
in deep learning [13, 26, 28]. This paper empirically studies memorization in causal and masked
language modeling, across model sizes and throughout the training process.
Much of the recent performance gains for language models have come from scale, with the most
recent models reaching up to 1011 parameters [22, 73, 83]. Larger models are also known to memorize
more training data [16], which is a crucial component of their improved generalization. However,
perhaps surprisingly, relatively little work has been done in understanding the impact of scale on
the dynamics of language model memorization over training. Existing work focuses on analyzing
memorization post-training [16, 47, 88, 95]. In this work, we study the memorization and forgetting
dynamics in language models, with a focus on better measuring how they change as we scale up
model size. Our primary contributions include:
1. We measure the dependence of memorization dynamics over training on model size (and
other factors such as dataset size, overfitting, and learning rate). We find that larger language
models memorize training data faster (§ 4).
2. We design controlled experiments that allow us to characterize the forgetting curves in
language models (i.e., how language models naturally forget memories throughout training).
⇤

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

