SAVi++: Towards End-to-End Object-Centric
Learning from Real-World Videos

Gamaleldin F. Elsayed ∗† , Aravindh Mahendran∗ , Sjoerd van Steenkiste∗ ,
Klaus Greff, Michael C. Mozer & Thomas Kipf∗
Google Research

Abstract
The visual world can be parsimoniously characterized in terms of distinct entities
with sparse interactions. Discovering this compositional structure in dynamic
visual scenes has proven challenging for end-to-end computer vision approaches
unless explicit instance-level supervision is provided. Slot-based models leveraging
motion cues have recently shown great promise in learning to represent, segment,
and track objects without direct supervision, but they still fail to scale to complex
real-world multi-object videos. In an effort to bridge this gap, we take inspiration
from human development and hypothesize that information about scene geometry
in the form of depth signals can facilitate object-centric learning. We introduce
SAVi++, an object-centric video model which is trained to predict depth signals
from a slot-based video representation. By further leveraging best practices for
model scaling, we are able to train SAVi++ to segment complex dynamic scenes
recorded with moving cameras, containing both static and moving objects of
diverse appearance on naturalistic backgrounds, without the need for segmentation
supervision. Finally, we demonstrate that by using sparse depth signals obtained
from LiDAR, SAVi++ is able to learn emergent object segmentation and tracking
from videos in the real-world Waymo Open dataset.
Project page: https://slot-attention-video.github.io/savi++/

Emergent segmentation

1

Introduction
time

The natural world consists of distinct
Optional conditioning signal
entities—people, dogs, cars, trees, etc.—
Init.
and its complexity emerges from the
combined, mostly independent, actions
of the entities. This compositional structure must be appreciated to predict fu- e.g. 1st-frame bounding boxes
ture states of the world and to effect parSAVi++
ticular outcomes. People have an intrinsic understanding of objects: objects
have spatiotemporal coherence, they inFigure 1: Emergent segmentation and tracking in SAVi++.
teract when in close proximity, and they
∗

Equal technical contribution.  Alphabetical order. † Correspondence to: gamaleldin@google.com
Author contributions: GFE, TK initiated and led the project. GFE, AM, SVS, TK developed the main model.
GFE, AM, TK developed real-world driving data and model infrastructure. AM implemented data augmentation.
GFE led ablation study. SVS led target signals analyses and metric design. GFE, AM, SVS, TK ran experiments.
AM, SVS, KG, TK worked on baselines. KG, MCM provided advice at all stages and helped with project
scoping. TK developed visualizations. GFE, MCM, TK worked on figure design. All authors wrote the paper.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

