Scaling Multimodal Pre-Training via Cross-Modality
Gradient Harmonization
Junru Wu∗
Texas A&M University
sandboxmaster@tamu.edu
Hassan Akbari
Google Research
hassanak@google.com

Yi Liang
Google Research
yiliang@google.com

Feng Han
Google Research
bladehan@google.com

Zhangyang Wang
University of Texas at Austin
atlaswang@utexas.edu

Cong Yu∗
Celonis Inc. / CeloAI
cong.yu@celonis.com

Abstract
Self-supervised pre-training recently demonstrates success on large-scale multimodal data, and state-of-the-art contrastive learning methods often enforce the feature consistency from cross-modality inputs, such as video/audio or video/text pairs.
Despite its convenience to formulate and leverage in practice, such cross-modality
alignment (CMA) is only a weak and noisy supervision, since two modalities can be
semantically misaligned even they are temporally aligned. For example, even in the
(often adopted) instructional videos, a speaker can sometimes refer to something
that is not visually present in the current frame; and the semantic misalignment
would only be more unpredictable for the raw videos collected from unconstrained
internet sources. We conjecture that might cause conflicts and biases among modalities, and may hence prohibit CMA from scaling up to training with larger and
more heterogeneous data. This paper first verifies our conjecture by observing that,
even in the latest VATT pre-training using only narrated videos, there exist strong
gradient conflicts between different CMA losses within the same sample triplet
(video, audio, text), indicating them as the noisy source of supervision. We then
propose to harmonize such gradients during pre-training, via two techniques: (i)
cross-modality gradient realignment: modifying different CMA loss gradients for
one sample triplet, so that their gradient directions are in more agreement; and (ii)
gradient-based curriculum learning: leveraging the gradient conflict information
on an indicator of sample noisiness, to develop a curriculum learning strategy
to prioritize training with less noisy sample triplets. Applying those gradient
harmonization techniques to pre-training VATT on the HowTo100M dataset, we
consistently improve its performance on different downstream tasks. Moreover, we
are able to scale VATT pre-training to more complicated non-narrative Youtube8M
dataset to further improve the state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised pre-training scales up deep learning to leverage massive unlabeled data. Beyond
the maturity of pre-training over single-modality data such as language [2] or images [3], the recent
success on multimodal pre-training [4, 5] demonstrates the versatility to synergize the rich multimodal
information and to benefit a variety of downstream tasks. Many methods of this category [6–8, 4],
especially the latest contrastive pre-training methods [5, 9–11], consider the most organic supervision
as the cross-modality alignment (CMA), e.g., in the same video sequence, the video frames, audio
∗

Work done at Google Research

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

