Redundant representations help generalization in wide
neural networks
Diego Doimo∗
International School for Advanced Studies

Aldo Glielmo
International School for Advanced Studies
Bank of Italy†

Sebastian Goldt
International School for Advanced Studies

Alessandro Laio
International School for Advanced Studies

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) defy the classical bias-variance trade-off: adding
parameters to a DNN that interpolates its training data will typically improve
its generalization performance. Explaining the mechanism behind this “benign
overfitting” in deep networks remains an outstanding challenge. Here, we study
the last hidden layer representations of various state-of-the-art convolutional neural
networks and find that if the last hidden representation is wide enough, its neurons
tend to split into groups that carry identical information and differ from each other
only by statistically independent noise. The number of such groups increases
linearly with the width of the layer, but only if the width is above a critical value.
We show that redundant neurons appear only when the training is regularized and
the training error is zero.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNN) have enough parameters to achieve zero training error, even with
random labels [1, 2]. In defiance of the classical bias-variance trade-off, the performance of these
interpolating classifiers improves as the number of parameters increases well beyond the number
of training samples [3–6]. Despite recent progress in describing the implicit bias of stochastic
gradient descent towards “good” minima [7–12], and the detailed analysis of solvable models of
learning [13–21], the mechanisms underlying this “benign overfitting” [22] in deep neural networks
remain unclear, especially since their loss landscape contains “bad” local minima and SGD can reach
them [23].
In this paper, we describe a phenomenon in wide DNNs that could be a possible mechanism for
benign overfitting when the networks are trained with regularization. We illustrate this mechanism
in Fig. 1 for a family of increasingly wide DenseNet40s [24] trained on CIFAR10 [25] following
common practice, in particular using weight decay (see Sec. 2.1). For simplicity, we refer to the
width W of the last hidden representation as the width of the network. The blue line in Fig. 1-b
shows that the average classification error (error) approaches the performance of a large ensemble
of networks (error∞ ) [21] as we increase the network width W . In agreement with [26], we find
that the performance of these DenseNets improves continuously with width. For widths greater than
350, the networks are wide enough to reach zero training error (see Appendix, Sec. B, Fig S2-c) and,
∗

ddoimo@sissa.it
The views and opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
official policy or position of Bank of Italy.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

