DTG-SSOD: Dense Teacher Guidance for
Semi-Supervised Object Detection

Gang Li1,2 , Xiang Li3∗, Yujie Wang2 , Yichao Wu2 , Ding Liang2 , Shanshan Zhang1∗
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 SenseTime Research 3 Nankai University
{gang.li, shanshan.zhang}@njust.edu.cn, xiang.li.implus@nankai.edu.cn
{wangyujie, wuyichao, liangding}@sensetime.com

Abstract
The Mean-Teacher (MT) scheme is widely adopted in semi-supervised object
detection (SSOD). In MT, the sparse pseudo labels, offered by the final predictions
of the teacher (e.g., after Non Maximum Suppression (NMS) post-processing), are
adopted for the dense supervision for the student via hand-crafted label assignment.
However, the “sparse-to-dense” paradigm complicates the pipeline of SSOD, and
simultaneously neglects the powerful direct, dense teacher supervision. In this
paper, we attempt to directly leverage the dense guidance of teacher to supervise
student training, i.e., the “dense-to-dense” paradigm. Specifically, we propose
the Inverse NMS Clustering (INC) and Rank Matching (RM) to instantiate the
dense supervision, without the widely used, conventional sparse pseudo labels.
INC leads the student to group candidate boxes into clusters in NMS as the teacher
does, which is implemented by learning grouping information revealed in NMS
procedure of the teacher. After obtaining the same grouping scheme as the teacher
via INC, the student further imitates the rank distribution of the teacher over
clustered candidates through Rank Matching. With the proposed INC and RM, we
integrate Dense Teacher Guidance into Semi-Supervised Object Detection (termed
“DTG-SSOD”), successfully abandoning sparse pseudo labels and enabling more
informative learning on unlabeled data. On COCO benchmark, our DTG-SSOD
achieves state-of-the-art performance under various labeling ratios. For example,
under 10% labeling ratio, DTG-SSOD improves the supervised baseline from 26.9
to 35.9 mAP, outperforming the previous best method Soft Teacher by 1.9 points.
Code will be released at: https://github.com/ligang-cs/DTG-SSOD.

1

Introduction

Thanks to plenty of annotated data, deep learning based computer vision has achieved great success
in the past few years [1–4]. However, labeling accurate annotations is usually labour-consuming
and expensive, especially for dense prediction tasks [5–8], such as object detection, where multiple
bounding boxes with their corresponding category labels need to be annotated extensively for each
image. Some works attempt to leverage easily accessible unlabeled data to promote object detection
in a semi-supervised manner [9–12]. The model is first initialized by learning on the labeled data.
Then it is adopted for generating pseudo labels (i.e., pseudo bounding boxes and category labels) on
the unlabeled data for training.
Recently, advanced Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SSOD) methods follow the Mean-Teacher
paradigm [14], where a stronger teacher model is built from the student model via Exponential Moving
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

