Efficient identification of informative features in
simulation-based inference
Jonas Beck
University of Tübingen
jonas.beck@uni-tuebingen.de

Michael Deistler
University of Tübingen
michael.deistler@uni-tuebingen.de

Yves Bernaerts
University of Tübingen
yves.bernaerts@uni-tuebingen.de

Jakob H. Macke
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
jakob.macke@uni-tuebingen.de

Philipp Berens
University of Tübingen
philipp.berens@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Simulation-based Bayesian inference (SBI) can be used to estimate the parameters
of complex mechanistic models given observed model outputs without requiring
access to explicit likelihood evaluations. A prime example for the application of
SBI in neuroscience involves estimating the parameters governing the response
dynamics of Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) models from electrophysiological measurements, by inferring a posterior over the parameters that is consistent with a set of
observations. To this end, many SBI methods employ a set of summary statistics or
scientifically interpretable features to estimate a surrogate likelihood or posterior.
However, currently, there is no way to identify how much each summary statistic
or feature contributes to reducing posterior uncertainty. To address this challenge,
one could simply compare the posteriors with and without a given feature included
in the inference process. However, for large or nested feature sets, this would
necessitate repeatedly estimating the posterior, which is computationally expensive
or even prohibitive. Here, we provide a more efficient approach based on the SBI
method neural likelihood estimation (NLE): We show that one can marginalize
the trained surrogate likelihood post-hoc before inferring the posterior to assess
the contribution of a feature. We demonstrate the usefulness of our method by
identifying the most important features for inferring parameters of an example HH
neuron model. Beyond neuroscience, our method is generally applicable to SBI
workflows that rely on data features for inference used in other scientific fields.

1

Introduction

Mechanistic models are an elegant way to encode scientific knowledge about the world in the form of
numerical simulations. They include models such as Kepler’s laws of planetary motion [1], the SEIR
model [2] for describing the spread of infectious diseases or the Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) model for the
dynamics of action potentials in neurons [3]. Efficiently constraining the parameters of such models by
measurements is a key problem in many disciplines [4–7]. Since these models give rise to intractable
likelihood functions, however, classical likelihood-based Bayesian methods such as variational
inference [8] or Markov Chain Monte Carlo [9] cannot be used directly. There are algorithms,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

