Top Two Algorithms Revisited

Marc Jourdan1
marc.jourdan@inria.fr

Rémy Degenne1
remy.degenne@inria.fr

Dorian Baudry1
dorian.baudry@inria.fr

Rianne de Heide2
r.de.heide@vu.nl

Emilie Kaufmann1
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr
1

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9198-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
2
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

Abstract
Top Two algorithms arose as an adaptation of Thompson sampling to best arm
identification in multi-armed bandit models [38], for parametric families of arms.
They select the next arm to sample from by randomizing among two candidate arms,
a leader and a challenger. Despite their good empirical performance, theoretical
guarantees for fixed-confidence best arm identification have only been obtained
when the arms are Gaussian with known variances. In this paper, we provide
a general analysis of Top Two methods, which identifies desirable properties of
the leader, the challenger, and the (possibly non-parametric) distributions of the
arms. As a result, we obtain theoretically supported Top Two algorithms for best
arm identification with bounded distributions. Our proof method demonstrates in
particular that the sampling step used to select the leader inherited from Thompson
sampling can be replaced by other choices, like selecting the empirical best arm.

1

Introduction

Finding the distribution that has the largest mean by sequentially collecting samples from a pool of
candidate distributions (“arms”) has been extensively studied in the multi-armed bandit [6, 24] and
ranking and selection [21] literature. While existing approaches often rely on parametric assumptions
for the distributions, we are interested in (near) optimal and computationally efficient strategies when
the distributions belong to an arbitrary class F of distributions.
For applications to online marketing such as A/B testing [30, 37] assuming Bernoulli or Gaussian
arms is fine, but more sophisticated distributions arise in other fields such as agriculture. In Section 5
we consider a crop-management problem: a group of farmers wants to identify the best planting
date for a rainfed crop. The reward (crop yield) can be modeled as a complex distribution with
multiple modes, but upper bounded by a known yield potential. Therefore, sequentially identifying
the best planting date calls for efficient best arm identification algorithms for the class of bounded
distributions with a known range.
To tackle this problem, we build on Top Two algorithms [38, 35, 39], originally proposed for specific
parametric families. We propose a generic analysis of this type of algorithms, which puts forward
new possibilities for the choice of leader and challenger used by the algorithm. In particular, this
work leads to the first asymptotically β-optimal strategies for bounded distributions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

