Estimating the Arc Length of the Optimal ROC Curve
and Lower Bounding the Maximal AUC

Song Liu∗
School of Mathematics
University of Bristol
Bristol, BS8 1UG, UK
song.liu@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we show the arc length of the optimal ROC curve is an f -divergence.
By leveraging this result, we express the arc length using a variational objective and
estimate it accurately using positive and negative samples. We show this estimator
has a non-parametric convergence rate Op (n−β/4 ) (β ∈ (0, 1] depends on the
smoothness). Using the same technique, we show the surface area between the
optimal ROC curve and the diagonal can be expressed via a similar variational objective. These new insights lead to a novel classification procedure that maximizes
an approximate lower bound of the maximal AUC. Experiments on CIFAR-10
datasets show the proposed two-step procedure achieves good AUC performance
in imbalanced binary classification tasks.

1

Introduction

The study of Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves has a long history in medicine [26],
psychology [15] and radiology [16, 13]. In machine learning, ROC curves have been primarily used
to analyze the performance of different classification algorithms [8, 9]. Indeed, the Area Under the
Curve (AUC) encodes a classifier’s ranking accuracy, making it a preferable performance metric for
imbalanced class classification [8, 3]. In recent years, ROC curves have also been used in comparing
two distributions and achieved promising results. Examples include analyzing the mode collapsing
issue of Generative Adversarial nets (GAN) [25], and diagnosing the performance of an amortized
Markov Chain Monte Carlo [18].
In applications that require computing statistical discrepancy between distributions (e.g. GAN [14]
or Variational Inference (VI) [1]), f -divergences are widely used discrepancy measures. The family
of f -divergences includes Kullback-Leibler divergence [23] and Total Variation distance. It has
been shown that f -divergences, generally, can be expressed via variational objectives and efficiently
approximated from empirical samples [29, 30].
Since the ROC curves are used as performance metrics in many two sample applications, are they in
any way related to f -divergences? For example, can AUC be an f -divergence between positive and
negative data distributions given some classification score function? An earlier investigation proves
that the answer is no when the score function is the likelihood ratio [31]. Nonetheless, this result
inspired us to look for f -divergence from other geometries of the ROC curve.
In this paper, we show that, when using the likelihood ratio score, a novel f -divergence arises from
the arc length of the corresponding ROC curve. By leveraging this result, we can express the arc
length using a variational objective and approximate it using only samples from two distributions.
∗

Webpage: https://allmodelsarewrong.net

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

