Cross Aggregation Transformer for
Image Restoration

Zheng Chen1 , Yulun Zhang2 , Jinjin Gu3,4 , Yongbing Zhang5 , Linghe Kong1∗, Xin Yuan6
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 ETH Zürich, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory,
4
The University of Sydney, 5 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), 6 Westlake University

Abstract
Recently, Transformer architecture has been introduced into image restoration to
replace convolution neural network (CNN) with surprising results. Considering
the high computational complexity of Transformer with global attention, some
methods use the local square window to limit the scope of self-attention. However,
these methods lack direct interaction among different windows, which limits the
establishment of long-range dependencies. To address the above issue, we propose
a new image restoration model, Cross Aggregation Transformer (CAT). The core
of our CAT is the Rectangle-Window Self-Attention (Rwin-SA), which utilizes
horizontal and vertical rectangle window attention in different heads parallelly
to expand the attention area and aggregate the features cross different windows.
We also introduce the Axial-Shift operation for different window interactions.
Furthermore, we propose the Locality Complementary Module to complement
the self-attention mechanism, which incorporates the inductive bias of CNN (e.g.,
translation invariance and locality) into Transformer, enabling global-local coupling.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our CAT outperforms recent state-of-theart methods on several image restoration applications. The code and models are
available at https://github.com/zhengchen1999/CAT.

1

Introduction

Image restoration is a long-term low-level vision problem, aimed at recovering high-quality (HQ)
images from low-quality (LQ) counterparts. Depending on the type of degradation, there are many
sub-problems, such as super-resolution (SR), image denoising, and JPEG compression artifact
reduction. In recent decades, many researchers have proposed various theories and methods to solve
this problem, e.g., inverse filtering and wiener filtering. Meanwhile, with the increase of computing
resources, neural networks have become the mainstream of image restoration, especially convolutional
neural network (CNN) [10, 11, 50], which achieve impressive performance over traditional methods.
Recently, some researchers have been using Transformer proposed in natural language processing
(NLP) to replace CNN and achieving excellent performance in multiple vision tasks, such as image
classification [13], semantic segmentation [12], and object detection [41]. The core component
of Transformer is the multi-head self-attention (MHSA), which can effectively model long-range
dependencies, while CNN is more inclined to extract local features. Although Transformer can
effectively handle dependencies between tokens, its complexity is quadratic with the image resolution
(H×W ), i.e., O((HW )2 ), which limits its application to high-resolution image tasks (including
image restoration). To apply Transformer in image restoration, some methods [5, 21, 44] propose to
divide the image into smaller independent patches (e.g., 8×8) and perform attention separately or
apply self-attention (SA) in the feature dimension instead of the spatial dimension, thus achieving
linear complexity. However, the square window lacks inter-window interaction, leading to the slow
∗

Corresponding author: Linghe Kong, linghe.kong@sjtu.edu.cn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

