LIPS - Learning Industrial Physical Simulation
benchmark suite

M. Leyli-Abadi, D. Danan, M. Yagoubi, S. Attoui
IRT SystemX, Palaiseau, France

A. Marot, J. Picault, B. Donnot
RTE France, Paris, France

P. Dimitrov, C. Etienam, A. Farjallah
Nvidia

Abstract
Physical simulations are at the core of many critical industrial systems. However, today’s physical simulators have some limitations such as computation
time, dealing with missing or uncertain data, or even non-convergence for some
feasible cases. Recently, the use of data-driven approaches to learn complex
physical simulations has been considered as a promising approach to address
those issues. However, this comes often at the cost of some accuracy which
may hinder the industrial use. To drive this new research topic towards a better
real-world applicability, we propose a new benchmark suite "Learning Industrial
Physical Simulations"(LIPS) to meet the need of developing efficient, industrial application-oriented, augmented simulators. To define how to assess such
benchmark performance, we propose a set of four generic categories of criteria.
The proposed benchmark suite is a modular and configurable framework that
can deal with different physical problems. To demonstrate this ability, we propose in this paper to investigate two distinct use-cases with different physical
simulations, namely: the power grid and the pneumatic. For each use case,
several benchmarks are described and assessed with existing models. None
of the models perform well under all expected criteria, inviting the community to develop new industry-applicable solutions and possibly showcase their
performance publicly upon online LIPS instance on Codabench.

1 Introduction
Physical simulations constitute today a key enabler for real-world complex industrial systems
(power grid management, rail infrastructure, aeronautics, pneumatic, gas production plants,
thermal comfort, etc.), and are used at several critical stages of the system life-cycle (system design,
solutions exploration, system V&V, etc.) to enhance decision making. Typically, the main drawback
of using numerical simulations is their high computational cost to reach satisfactory solutions.
It can become prohibitive for complex systems requiring large number of simulations. To tackle
this issue, several techniques have been explored in the literature to design simplified physical
models [1, 2, 3, 4], dimension reduction, or considering simplified assumptions to linearize the
problem. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in using machine learning techniques
to solve physical problems [5] for which conventional modeling approaches are very expensive to
compute. The main goal is to accelerate the computation time while maintaining an acceptable
accuracy of simulation predictions under some specified tasks. Going even further to reach the
best trade-off, Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have recently led to promising results in various
domains (see e.g.,[6, 7, 8, 9, 10]), allowing an important speed-up of simulations by substituting
some computational bricks with data-driven numerical models.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

