Finite-Time Regret of Thompson Sampling
Algorithms for Exponential Family Multi-Armed
Bandits
Tianyuan Jin
National University of Singapore
tianyuan@u.nus.edu

Pan Xu
Duke University
pan.xu@duke.edu

Xiaokui Xiao
National University of Singapore
xkxiao@nus.edu.sg

Anima Anandkumar
California Institute of Technology
anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study the regret of Thompson sampling (TS) algorithms for exponential family
bandits, where the reward distribution is from a one-dimensional exponential family, which covers many common reward distributions including Bernoulli, Gaussian,
Gamma, Exponential, etc. We propose a Thompson sampling algorithm, termed
ExpTS, which uses a novel sampling distribution to avoid the under-estimation
of the optimal arm. We provide a tight regret analysis for ExpTS, which simultaneously yields both the finite-time regret bound as well as the asymptotic regret
bound. In particular, for a K-armed bandit with exponential family rewards, ExpTS over a horizon T is sub-UCB (a strong criterion for the
√ finite-time regret that
is problem-dependent), minimax optimal up to a factor log K, and asymptotically optimal, for exponential family rewards. Moreover, we propose ExpTS+ , by
adding a greedy exploitation step in addition to the sampling distribution used in
ExpTS, to avoid the over-estimation of sub-optimal arms. ExpTS+ is an anytime
bandit algorithm and achieves the minimax optimality and asymptotic optimality
simultaneously for exponential family reward distributions. Our proof techniques
are general and conceptually simple and can be easily applied to analyze standard
Thompson sampling with specific reward distributions.

1

Introduction

The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem is centered around a fundamental model for balancing
the exploration versus exploitation trade-off in many online decision problems. In this problem,
the agent is given an environment with a set of K arms [K] = {1, 2, · · · , K}. At each time step
t, the agent pulls an arm At ∈ [K] based on observations of previous t − 1 time steps, and then a
reward rt is revealed at the end of the step. In real-world applications, reward distributions often
have different forms such as Bernoulli, Gaussian, etc. As suggested by Auer et al. [8, 9], Agrawal
and Goyal [5], Lattimore [29], Garivier et al. [16], a good bandit strategy should be general enough
to cover a sufficiently rich family of reward distributions. In this paper, we assume the reward rt is
independently generated from some canonical one-parameter exponential family of distributions with
a mean value µAt . It is a rich family that covers many common distributions including Bernoulli,
Gaussian, Gamma, Exponential, and others.
The goal of a bandit strategy is usually to maximize the cumulative reward over T time steps, which
is equivalent to minimizing the regret, defined as the expected cumulative difference between playing
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

