Monte Carlo Tree Search based Variable Selection
for High Dimensional Bayesian Optimization

Lei Song∗, Ke Xue∗, Xiaobin Huang, Chao Qian†
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{songl, xuek, huangxb, qianc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a class of popular methods for expensive black-box
optimization, and has been widely applied to many scenarios. However, BO suffers
from the curse of dimensionality, and scaling it to high-dimensional problems is still
a challenge. In this paper, we propose a variable selection method MCTS-VS based
on Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS), to iteratively select and optimize a subset of
variables. That is, MCTS-VS constructs a low-dimensional subspace via MCTS and
optimizes in the subspace with any BO algorithm. We give a theoretical analysis of
the general variable selection method to reveal how it can work. Experiments on
high-dimensional synthetic functions and real-world problems (i.e., NAS-bench
problems and MuJoCo locomotion tasks) show that MCTS-VS equipped with a
proper BO optimizer can achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

In many real-world tasks such as neural architecture search (NAS) [41] and policy search in reinforcement learning (RL) [6], one often needs to solve the expensive black-box optimization problems.
Bayesian optimization (BO) [2, 11, 23, 32] is a sample-efficient algorithm for solving such problems.
It iteratively fits a surrogate model, typically Gaussian process (GP), and maximizes an acquisition
function to obtain the next point to evaluate. While BO has been employed in a wide variety of
settings, successful applications are often limited to low-dimensional problems.
Recently, scaling BO to high-dimensional problems has received a lot of interest. Decompositionbased methods [13, 15, 17, 26, 31] assume that the high-dimensional function to be optimized has
a certain structure, typically the additive structure. By decomposing the original high-dimensional
function into the sum of several low-dimensional functions, they optimize each low-dimensional
function to obtain the point in the high-dimensional space. However, it is not easy to decide whether
a decomposition exists as well as to learn the decomposition.
Other methods often assume that the original high-dimensional function with dimension D has
a low-dimensional subspace with dimension d ≪ D, and then perform the optimization in the
low-dimensional subspace and project the low-dimensional point back for evaluation. For example,
embedding-based methods [20, 27, 42] use a random matrix to embed the original space into the lowdimensional subspace. Another way is to select a subset of variables directly, which can even avoid
the time-consuming matrix operations of embedding-based methods. For example, Dropout [21]
selects d variables randomly in each iteration. Note that for both embedding and variable selection
methods, the parameter d can have a large influence on the performance, which is, however, difficult
to set in real-world problems.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

