BOME! Bilevel Optimization Made Easy:
A Simple First-Order Approach

1

Bo Liu1⇤ Mao Ye1⇤ Stephen Wright2 Peter Stone1,3 Qiang Liu1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison 3 Sony AI
1
{bliu,my21,pstone,lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu, 2 swright@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Bilevel optimization (BO) is useful for solving a variety of important machine
learning problems including but not limited to hyperparameter optimization, metalearning, continual learning, and reinforcement learning. Conventional BO methods
need to differentiate through the low-level optimization process with implicit differentiation, which requires expensive calculations related to the Hessian matrix.
There has been a recent quest for first-order methods for BO, but the methods proposed to date tend to be complicated and impractical for large-scale deep learning
applications. In this work, we propose a simple first-order BO algorithm that depends only on first-order gradient information, requires no implicit differentiation,
and is practical and efficient for large-scale non-convex functions in deep learning.
We provide a non-asymptotic convergence analysis of the proposed method to
stationary points for non-convex objectives and present empirical results that show
its superior practical performance.

1

Introduction

We consider the bilevel optimization (BO) problem:
min f v, ✓
v,✓

s.t.

✓ 2 arg min g v, ✓0 ,
✓0

(1)

where the goal is to minimize an outer objective f whose variables include the solution of another
minimization problem w.r.t an inner objective g. The ✓ and v are the inner and outer variables,
respectively. We assume that v 2 Rm , ✓ 2 Rn and that g(v, ·) attains a minimum for each v.

BO is useful in a variety of machine learning tasks. A canonical example is hyperparameter optimization, in which case f (resp. g) is the validation (resp. training) loss associated with a model
parameter ✓ and a hyperparameter v, and we want to find the optimal hyperparameter v to minimize
the validation loss f when ✓ is determined by minimizing the training loss; see e.g., Pedregosa
[42], Franceschi et al. [12]. Other applications include meta learning [12], continual learning [43],
reinforcement learning [52], and adversarial learning [23]. See Liu et al. [32] for a recent survey.

BO is notoriously challenging due to its nested nature. Despite the large literature, most existing
methods for BO are slow and unsatisfactory in various ways. For example, a major class of BO
methods is based on direct gradient descent on the outer variable v while viewing the optimal inner
variable ✓⇤ (v) = arg min✓ g(v, ✓) as a (uniquely defined) function of v. The key difficulty is to
calculate the derivative rv ✓⇤ (v) which may require expensive manipulation of the Hessian matrix of
g via the implicit differentiation theorem. Another approach is to replace the low level optimization
with the stationary condition r✓ g(v, ✓) = 0. This still requires Hessian information, and more
importantly, is unsuitable for nonconvex g since it allows ✓ to be any stationary point of g(v, ·),
⇤
Equal contribution. MY mainly contributes on developing theory and BL mainly contributes on conducting
experiment. Both authors contribute equally on paper writing.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

