Posterior and Computational Uncertainty
in Gaussian Processes
Jonathan Wenger1,2
Marvin Pförtner1

Geoff Pleiss2

Philipp Hennig1,3

John P. Cunningham2

University of Tübingen
Columbia University
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
1

2

Abstract
Gaussian processes scale prohibitively with the size of the dataset. In response,
many approximation methods have been developed, which inevitably introduce
approximation error. This additional source of uncertainty, due to limited computation, is entirely ignored when using the approximate posterior. Therefore in
practice, GP models are often as much about the approximation method as they are
about the data. Here, we develop a new class of methods that provides consistent
estimation of the combined uncertainty arising from both the finite number of data
observed and the finite amount of computation expended. The most common GP
approximations map to an instance in this class, such as methods based on the
Cholesky factorization, conjugate gradients, and inducing points. For any method
in this class, we prove (i) convergence of its posterior mean in the associated RKHS,
(ii) decomposability of its combined posterior covariance into mathematical and
computational covariances, and (iii) that the combined variance is a tight worst-case
bound for the squared error between the method’s posterior mean and the latent
function. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the consequences of ignoring computational uncertainty and show how implicitly modeling it improves generalization
performance on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are an expressive probabilistic model class, but their prohibitive scaling
necessitates approximation [1]. A range of approximations based on kernel [2–10] or precision matrix
[11–14] estimates, inducing point methods [15–22], and iterative solvers [23–29] have been proposed.
These methods all use an affordable amount of computation to obtain an approximation of the
mathematical posterior, which exists theoretically but cannot be accessed given limited computational
resources. The approximate posterior is then used as a direct replacement of the mathematical
posterior in downstream applications. Doing so, however, completely ignores the fact that we only
expended a limited amount of compute. By analogy to the typical GP operation, where limited data
induces modeling error captured by mathematical uncertainty, our work is motivated by the fact that
limited computation induces approximation error that must be captured by computational uncertainty.
Here, we introduce IterGP, a class of methods which return a combined uncertainty that is the sum of
mathematical and computational uncertainty. Figure 1 illustrates the difference between ignoring
computational uncertainty and explicitly modeling it. We perform GP regression using a Matérn( 32 )
kernel on a toy dataset and compare SVGP ( ) [22] to its analog in our framework, IterGP-PI ( +
), for a fixed set of inducing points. The computational shortcuts of inducing point methods can lead
to unavoidable biases in their posterior mean and covariance [30, 31]. As Figure 1 illustrates, SVGP
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

