What You See is What You Get:
Principled Deep Learning via Distributional
Generalization
Bogdan Kulynych1? Yao-Yuan Yang2? Yaodong Yu3 Jarosław Błasiok4 Preetum Nakkiran2
1
EPFL 2 UC San Diego 3 UC Berkeley 4 Columbia University
?

denotes equal contribution.

Abstract
Having similar behavior at training time and test time—what we call a “What You
See Is What You Get” (WYSIWYG) property—is desirable in machine learning.
Models trained with standard stochastic gradient descent (SGD), however, do not
necessarily have this property, as their complex behaviors such as robustness or
subgroup performance can differ drastically between training and test time. In
contrast, we show that Differentially-Private (DP) training provably ensures the
high-level WYSIWYG property, which we quantify using a notion of distributional
generalization. Applying this connection, we introduce new conceptual tools for
designing deep-learning methods by reducing generalization concerns to optimization ones: to mitigate unwanted behavior at test time, it is provably sufficient to
mitigate this behavior on the training data. By applying this novel design principle,
which bypasses “pathologies” of SGD, we construct simple algorithms that are
competitive with SOTA in several distributional-robustness applications, significantly improve the privacy vs. disparate impact trade-off of DP-SGD, and mitigate
robust overfitting in adversarial training. Finally, we also improve on theoretical
bounds relating DP, stability, and distributional generalization.

1

Introduction

Much of machine learning (ML), both in theory and in practice, operates under two assumptions.
First, we have independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples. Second, we care only about a
single averaged scalar metric (error, loss, risk). Under these assumptions, we have mature methods
and theory: Modern learning methods excel when trained on i.i.d. data to directly optimize a scalar
loss, and there are many theoretical tools for reasoning about generalization, which explain when
does optimization of a scalar on the training data translates to similar values of this scalar at test time.
The focus on scalar metrics such as average error, however, misses many theoretically, practically,
and socially relevant aspects of model performance. For example, models with small average error
often have high error on salient minority subgroups [Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018, Koenecke et al.,
2020]. In general, ML models are applied to the heterogeneous and long-tailed data distributions of
the real world [Van Horn and Perona, 2017]. Attempting to summarize their complex behavior with
only a single scalar misses many rich and important aspects of learning.
These issues are compounded for modern overparameterized networks, as their nuanced test-time
behavior is not reflected at training time. For example, consider the setting of importance sampling:
suppose we know that a certain subgroup of inputs is underrepresented in the training data compared
to the test distribution (breaking the i.i.d. assumption). For underparameterized models, we can
upsample this underrepresented group to account for the distribution shift [see, e.g., Gretton et al.,
2009]. This approach, however, is known to empirically fail for overparameterized models [Byrd and
Lipton, 2019]. Because “what you see” (on the training data) is not “what you get” (at test time),
we cannot make principled train-time interventions to affect test-time behaviors. This issue extends
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

