Generative Time Series Forecasting with Diffusion,
Denoise, and Disentanglement

Yan Li§ † ∗ , Xinjiang Lu† , Yaqing Wang† , Dejing Dou†
†
Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research
§
Zhejiang University, China
ly21121@zju.edu.cn, {luxinjiang,wangyaqing01,doudejing}@baidu.com

Abstract
Time series forecasting has been a widely explored task of great importance in
many applications. However, it is common that real-world time series data are
recorded in a short time period, which results in a big gap between the deep model
and the limited and noisy time series. In this work, we propose to address the time
series forecasting problem with generative modeling and propose a bidirectional
variational auto-encoder (BVAE) equipped with diffusion, denoise, and disentanglement, namely D3 VAE. Specifically, a coupled diffusion probabilistic model is
proposed to augment the time series data without increasing the aleatoric uncertainty and implement a more tractable inference process with BVAE. To ensure
the generated series move toward the true target, we further propose to adapt and
integrate the multiscale denoising score matching into the diffusion process for
time series forecasting. In addition, to enhance the interpretability and stability of
the prediction, we treat the latent variable in a multivariate manner and disentangle
them on top of minimizing total correlation. Extensive experiments on synthetic
and real-world data show that D3 VAE outperforms competitive algorithms with
remarkable margins. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/
PaddlePaddle/PaddleSpatial/tree/main/research/D3VAE.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting is of great importance for risk-averse and decision-making. Traditional RNNbased methods capture temporal dependencies of the time series to predict the future. Long short-term
memories (LSTMs) and gated recurrent units (GRUs) [55, 16, 15, 40] introduce the gate functions into
the cell structure to handle long-term dependencies effectively. The models based on convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) capture complex inner patterns of the time series through convolutional
operations [28, 4, 3]. Recently, the Transformer-based models have shown great performance in time
series forecasting [54, 56, 25, 29] with the help of multi-head self-attention. However, one big issue
of neural networks in time series forecasting is the uncertainty [14, 1] resulting from the properties of
the deep structure. The models based on vector autoregression (VAR) [5, 10, 23] try to model the
distribution of time series from hidden states, which could provide more reliability to the prediction,
while the performance is not satisfactory [27].
Interpretable representation learning is another merit of time series forecasting. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) have shown not only the superiority in modeling latent distributions of the data and
reducing the gradient noise [36, 24, 30, 45] but also the interpretability of time series forecasting [11,
12]. However, the interpretability of VAEs might be inferior due to the entangled latent variables.
∗
This work was done when the first author was an intern at Baidu Research under the supervision of the
second author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

