RAMBO-RL: Robust Adversarial Model-Based
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, Nick Hawes
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford
{mrigter, bruno, nickh}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to find performant policies from logged
data without further environment interaction. Model-based algorithms, which
learn a model of the environment from the dataset and perform conservative policy
optimisation within that model, have emerged as a promising approach to this
problem. In this work, we present Robust Adversarial Model-Based Offline RL
(RAMBO), a novel approach to model-based offline RL. We formulate the problem
as a two-player zero sum game against an adversarial environment model. The
model is trained to minimise the value function while still accurately predicting
the transitions in the dataset, forcing the policy to act conservatively in areas
not covered by the dataset. To approximately solve the two-player game, we
alternate between optimising the policy and adversarially optimising the model.
The problem formulation that we address is theoretically grounded, resulting in a
probably approximately correct (PAC) performance guarantee and a pessimistic
value function which lower bounds the value function in the true environment. We
evaluate our approach on widely studied offline RL benchmarks, and demonstrate
that it outperforms existing state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [61] has achieved state-of-the-art performance on many sequential
decision-making problems [40, 45, 59]. However, the need for extensive exploration prohibits the
application of RL to many real world domains where such exploration is costly or dangerous. Offline
RL [33, 35] overcomes this limitation by learning policies from static, pre-recorded datasets.
Online RL algorithms perform poorly in the offline setting due to the distributional shift between the
state-action pairs in the dataset and those taken by the learnt policy. Thus, an important aspect of
offline RL is to introduce conservatism to prevent the learnt policy from executing state-action pairs
which are out of distribution. Model-free offline RL algorithms [15, 23, 27, 29, 31, 72] train a policy
from only the data present in the fixed dataset, and incorporate conservatism either into the value
function or by directly constraining the policy.
On the other hand, model-based offline RL algorithms [76, 75, 25, 63, 39] use the dataset to learn
a model of the environment, and train a policy using additional synthetic data generated from that
model. By training on additional synthetic data, model-based algorithms can potentially generalise
better to states not present in the dataset, or to solving new tasks. Previous approaches to model-based
offline RL incorporate conservatism by estimating the uncertainty in the model and applying reward
penalties for state-action pairs that have high uncertainty [76, 25]. However, uncertainty estimation
can be unreliable for neural network models [75, 37]. Like recent work [75], we propose an approach
for offline model-based RL which does not require uncertainty estimation.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

