Value Function Decomposition for Iterative Design of
Reinforcement Learning Agents
James MacGlashan†
james.macglashan@sony.com

Evan Archer†⇤
evan.archer@sony.com

Alisa Devlic†⇤
alisa.devlic@sony.com

Takuma Seno†⇤
takuma.seno@sony.com

Craig Sherstan†⇤
craig.sherstan@sony.com

Peter R. Wurman†
peter.wurman@sony.com

Peter Stone†‡
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Designing reinforcement learning (RL) agents is typically a difficult process that
requires numerous design iterations. Learning can fail for a multitude of reasons,
and standard RL methods provide too few tools to provide insight into the exact
cause. In this paper, we show how to integrate value decomposition into a broad
class of actor-critic algorithms and use it to assist in the iterative agent-design
process. Value decomposition separates a reward function into distinct components
and learns value estimates for each. These value estimates provide insight into an
agent’s learning and decision-making process and enable new training methods to
mitigate common problems. As a demonstration, we introduce SAC-D, a variant
of soft actor-critic (SAC) adapted for value decomposition. SAC-D maintains
similar performance to SAC, while learning a larger set of value predictions. We
also introduce decomposition-based tools that exploit this information, including a
new reward influence metric, which measures each reward component’s effect on
agent decision-making. Using these tools, we provide several demonstrations of
decomposition’s use in identifying and addressing problems in the design of both
environments and agents. Value decomposition is broadly applicable and easy to
incorporate into existing algorithms and workflows, making it a powerful tool in
an RL practitioner’s toolbox.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement-learning (RL) approaches have achieved successes in a range of application areas
such as gaming ([5, 32, 36, 38]), robotics ([22]), and the natural sciences ([25, 35]). Despite these
successes, applying RL techniques to complex control problems remains a daunting undertaking,
where initial attempts often result in underwhelming performance. Unfortunately, there are many
reasons why an agent may fail to learn a good policy, making it difficult to diagnose which reason(s)
caused a particular agent to fail. For example: an agent may fail because the state features were
insufficient to make accurate predictions, different task objectives defining the reward function may
be imbalanced, the agent may fail to sufficiently explore the state-action space, values may not
accurately propagate to more distant states, the neural network may not have sufficient capacity to
†

Sony AI
Equal contribution
‡
The University of Texas at Austin

⇤

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

