Synthetic Model Combination: An Instance-wise
Approach to Unsupervised Ensemble Learning

Alex J. Chan
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
ajc340cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
Cambridge Centre for AI in Medicine
Cambridge, UK
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Consider making a prediction over new test data without any opportunity to learn
from a training set of labelled data - instead given access to a set of expert models
and their predictions alongside some limited information about the dataset used to
train them. In scenarios from finance to the medical sciences, and even consumer
practice, stakeholders have developed models on private data they either cannot,
or do not want to, share. Given the value and legislation surrounding personal
information, it is not surprising that only the models, and not the data, will be
released - the pertinent question becoming: how best to use these models? Previous
work has focused on global model selection or ensembling, with the result of a
single final model across the feature space. Machine learning models perform
notoriously poorly on data outside their training domain however, and so we argue
that when ensembling models the weightings for individual instances must reflect
their respective domains - in other words models that are more likely to have seen
information on that instance should have more attention paid to them. We introduce
a method for such an instance-wise ensembling of models, including a novel
representation learning step for handling sparse high-dimensional domains. Finally,
we demonstrate the need and generalisability of our method on classical machine
learning tasks as well as highlighting a real world use case in the pharmacological
setting of vancomycin precision dosing.

1

Introduction

Sharing data is often a very problematic affair - before we even arrive at whether a stakeholder will
want to, given the modern day value - it may not even be allowed. In particular, when the data contains
identifiable and personal information it may be inappropriate, and illegal, to do so. A common solution
is to provide some proxy of the true data in the form of a generated fully synthetic dataset (Alaa et al.,
2020) or one that has undergone some privatisation or anonymisation process (Elliot et al., 2018;
Chan et al., 2021), but this can often lead to low-quality or extremely noisy data (Alaa et al., 2021)
that is hard to gain insight on. Alternatively, groups may release models that they have trained on
their private data. If for a given task there are multiple of such models, we are left with the task of
how to best use these models in combination when they have potentially conflicting predictions. This
problem is known as unsupervised ensemble learning since we have no explicit signal on the task,
and we aim to construct a combination of the models for making future predictions (Jaffe et al., 2016).
Without having trained the models ourselves, it is a very challenging task for us to know how well
the individual models should perform, making the task of choosing the most appropriate model (or
ensemble) difficult. This is compounded by the problem that the provided models could perform
poorly for not one, but two main reasons: Firstly, the model itself may not have been flexible
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

