EcoFormer: Energy-Saving Attention
with Linear Complexity

Jing Liu∗ Zizheng Pan∗

Haoyu He

Jianfei Cai

Bohan Zhuang†

Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University, Australia

Abstract
Transformer is a transformative framework for deep learning which models sequential data and has achieved remarkable performance on a wide range of tasks,
but with high computational and energy cost. To improve its efficiency, a popular
choice is to compress the models via binarization which constrains the floatingpoint values into binary ones to save resource consumption owing to cheap bitwise
operations significantly. However, existing binarization methods only aim at minimizing the information loss for the input distribution statistically, while ignoring
the pairwise similarity modeling at the core of the attention mechanism. To this
end, we propose a new binarization paradigm customized to high-dimensional
softmax attention via kernelized hashing, called EcoFormer, to map the original
queries and keys into low-dimensional binary codes in Hamming space. The kernelized hash functions are learned to match the ground-truth similarity relations
extracted from the attention map in a self-supervised way. Based on the equivalence between the inner product of binary codes and the Hamming distance as
well as the associative property of matrix multiplication, we can approximate the
attention in linear complexity by expressing it as a dot-product of binary codes.
Moreover, the compact binary representations of queries and keys in EcoFormer
enable us to replace most of the expensive multiply-accumulate operations in attention with simple accumulations to save considerable on-chip energy footprint on
edge devices. Extensive experiments on both vision and language tasks show that
EcoFormer consistently achieves comparable performance with standard attentions
while consuming much fewer resources. For example, based on PVTv2-B0 and
ImageNet-1K, EcoFormer achieves a 73% reduction in on-chip energy footprint
with only a slight performance drop of 0.33% compared to the standard attention.
Code is available at https://github.com/ziplab/EcoFormer.

1

Introduction

Recently, Transformers [57] have shown rapid and exciting progress in natural language processing
(NLP) [15, 14] and computer vision (CV) [17, 56] due to its extraordinary representational power.
Compared with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [30], Transformer models are generally more
scalable to massive amounts of data and better at capturing long-dependency global information with
less inductive bias, thus achieving better performance in many tasks [26, 38]. However, the efficiency
bottlenecks, especially the high energy consumption, greatly hamper the massive deployment of
Transformer models to resource-constrained edge devices, such as mobile phones and unmanned
aerial vehicles, for solving a variety of real-world applications.
∗
†

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author. Email: bohan.zhuang@monash.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

