FOF: Learning Fourier Occupancy Field for
Monocular Real-time Human Reconstruction
Qiao Feng
Tianjin University
fengqiao@tju.edu.cn

Yebin Liu
Tsinghua University
liuyebin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yu-Kun Lai
Cardiff University
laiy4@cardiff.ac.uk

Kun Li∗
Tianjin University
lik@tju.edu.cn

Jingyu Yang
Tianjin University
yjy@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
The advent of deep learning has led to significant progress in monocular human
reconstruction. However, existing representations, such as parametric models,
voxel grids, meshes and implicit neural representations, have difficulties achieving
high-quality results and real-time speed at the same time. In this paper, we propose
Fourier Occupancy Field (FOF), a novel, powerful, efficient and flexible 3D geometry representation, for monocular real-time and accurate human reconstruction. A
FOF represents a 3D object with a 2D field orthogonal to the view direction where
at each 2D position the occupancy field of the object along the view direction is
compactly represented with the first few terms of Fourier series, which retains the
topology and neighborhood relation in the 2D domain. A FOF can be stored as a
multi-channel image, which is compatible with 2D convolutional neural networks
and can bridge the gap between 3D geometries and 2D images. A FOF is very
flexible and extensible, e.g., parametric models can be easily integrated into a FOF
as a prior to generate more robust results. Meshes and our FOF can be easily
inter-converted. Based on FOF, we design the first 30+FPS high-fidelity real-time
monocular human reconstruction framework. We demonstrate the potential of FOF
on both public datasets and real captured data. The code is available for research
purposes at http://cic.tju.edu.cn/faculty/likun/projects/FOF.

Figure 1: Our novel 3D geometry representation (FOF) enables monocular real-time human reconstruction with high-quality results at 30+FPS.
*

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

