Pragmatically Learning from Pedagogical
Demonstrations in Multi-Goal Environments
Hugo Caselles-Dupré, Olivier Sigaud, Mohamed Chetouani
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut des Systèmes Intelligents et de Robotique (ISIR)
Paris, France
casellesdupre.hugo@gmail.com,olivier.sigaud,mohamed.chetouani@isir.upmc.fr

Abstract
Learning from demonstration methods usually leverage close to optimal demonstrations to accelerate training. By contrast, when demonstrating a task, human teachers
deviate from optimal demonstrations and pedagogically modify their behavior by
giving demonstrations that best disambiguate the goal they want to demonstrate.
Analogously, human learners excel at pragmatically inferring the intent of the
teacher, facilitating communication between the two agents. These mechanisms are
critical in the few demonstrations regime, where inferring the goal is more difficult.
In this paper, we implement pedagogy and pragmatism mechanisms by leveraging
a Bayesian model of Goal Inference from demonstrations (BGI). We highlight the
benefits of this model in multi-goal teacher-learner setups with two artificial agents
that learn with goal-conditioned Reinforcement Learning. We show that combining
BGI-agents (a pedagogical teacher and a pragmatic learner) results in faster learning
and reduced goal ambiguity over standard learning from demonstrations, especially
in the few demonstrations regime. We provide the code for our experiments 1 , as
well as an illustrative video explaining our approach 2 .

1

Introduction

Imagine a teacher-learner setup where 3 colored blocks are lying on a table, the green and red blocks
are close to each other and the blue block is further away. Assume the teacher wants to demonstrate
how to have the blue block close to the green one (see Fig. 1). A naive teacher may move the blue
block to the green one, but this would be ambiguous: is the goal to put the blue block close to the
green one or to the red one? By contrast, a pedagogical teacher would move the green block close to
the blue one, hence away from the red one, resolving the ambiguity as illustrated in Fig. 1.
As this example shows, in real life, when a teacher shows how to do something with a demonstration,
the agent receiving the demonstration does not have access to the intended goal of the demonstration:
it must infer this goal. In many situations, a single demonstration may be correctly interpreted as
demonstration of a variety of goals – we call this goal ambiguity. In that case, the teacher may use
pedagogy to help the learner infer the intended goal, and the learner may use pragmatism in order to
increase its chance to infer the right goal. This is the situation we address in this paper.
To infer that a demonstration facilitates learning, the pedagogical teacher may ask herself what goal
she would infer if she was the learner. Using her policy and Bayesian inference, she can determine
the probability that she would infer the right goal given this demonstration, and assume the learner
would do the same. Now, the learner has to interpret the demonstration to infer the goal. Given the
same inference mechanism as the teacher, a literal learner would perform this inference using her
1
2

https://github.com/Caselles/NeurIPS22-demonstrations-pedagogy-pragmatism
https://youtu.be/V4n16IjkNyw

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

