Panchromatic and Multispectral Image Fusion via
Alternating Reverse Filtering Network

Keyu Yan1,2∗, Man Zhou1,2∗, Jie Huang2 , Feng Zhao2 , Chengjun Xie1 , Chongyi Li3 ,
Danfeng Hong4†
1
Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Panchromatic (PAN) and multi-spectral (MS) image fusion, named Pan-sharpening,
refers to super-resolve the low-resolution (LR) multi-spectral (MS) images in the
spatial domain to generate the expected high-resolution (HR) MS images, conditioning on the corresponding high-resolution PAN images. In this paper, we present
a simple yet effective alternating reverse filtering network for pan-sharpening.
Inspired by the classical reverse filtering that reverses images to the status before
filtering, we formulate pan-sharpening as an alternately iterative reverse filtering
process, which fuses LR MS and HR MS in an interpretable manner. Different from
existing model-driven methods that require well-designed priors and degradation
assumptions, the reverse filtering process avoids the dependency on pre-defined
exact priors. To guarantee the stability and convergence of the iterative process
via contraction mapping on a metric space, we develop the learnable multi-scale
Gaussian kernel module, instead of using specific filters. We demonstrate the theoretical feasibility of such formulations. Extensive experiments on diverse scenes to
thoroughly verify the performance of our method, significantly outperforming the
state of the arts.

1

Introduction

Multispectral images are widely used in various fields such as resource monitoring [1], environmental protection [2, 3] and ecological monitoring [4]. However, due to the hardware limitations of
multispectral sensors, multispectral images usually lack high spatial resolution [5, 6]. In contrast,
high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) images that contain rich spatial details of the same scene are
easy to obtain. Therefore, pan-sharpening, generating high-resolution multispectral images by fusing
panchromatic images with low-resolution multispectral images, has become an important issue in the
field of remote sensing [7, 8].
Many efforts have been made to solve the pan-sharpening problem, which can be generally divided
into two large groups: traditional pan-sharpening methods and deep learning-based methods [9,
10]. Traditional pan-sharpening methods usually require strict assumptions of multispectral image
degradation via prior knowledge. Otherwise, the inexact assumptions may cause system model error.
For example, both the assumptions established by component substitution methods [11, 12] and
multi-resolution analysis methods [13, 14] focus on the relationship between PAN and HR MS, which
is destined to make these methods prone to spectral distortion. Unlike the above-mentioned traditional
approaches, variational optimization approaches consider the relationship among HR MS, LR MS
∗

Co-first authors contributed equally, † corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

