ReCo: Retrieve and Co-segment
for Zero-shot Transfer

1

Gyungin Shin1
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
UK

2

Weidi Xie1,2
Coop. Medianet Innovation Center
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
China

3

Samuel Albanie3
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
UK

Abstract
Semantic segmentation has a broad range of applications, but its real-world impact
has been significantly limited by the prohibitive annotation costs necessary to
enable deployment. Segmentation methods that forgo supervision can side-step
these costs, but exhibit the inconvenient requirement to provide labelled examples
from the target distribution to assign concept names to predictions. An alternative
line of work in language-image pre-training has recently demonstrated the potential to produce models that can both assign names across large vocabularies of
concepts and enable zero-shot transfer for classification, but do not demonstrate
commensurate segmentation abilities.
We leverage the retrieval abilities of one such language-image pre-trained model,
CLIP, to dynamically curate training sets from unlabelled images for arbitrary
collections of concept names, and leverage the robust correspondences offered
by modern image representations to co-segment entities among the resulting collections. The synthetic segment collections are then employed to construct a
segmentation model (without requiring pixel labels) whose knowledge of concepts
is inherited from the scalable pre-training process of CLIP. We demonstrate that our
approach, termed Retrieve and Co-segment (ReCo) performs favourably to conventional unsupervised segmentation approaches while inheriting the convenience of
nameable predictions and zero-shot transfer. We also demonstrate ReCo’s ability
to generate specialist segmenters for extremely rare objects.

1

Introduction

The objective of semantic segmentation is to partition an image into coherent regions and to assign
to each region a semantic label. This task has myriad applications across domains such as medical
image analysis, autonomous driving, industrial process monitoring and wildlife tracking. However,
there are several key challenges that have hindered the deployment of existing semantic segmentation
approaches to date: (1) Cost: collecting manual pixel-level annotations is extraordinarily expensive (e.g. 90 minutes per image for high quality labels [14]), limiting the use of fully-supervised
approaches; (2) Flexibility: supervised approaches have typically been trained with limited lists
of pre-defined categories and lack the ability to recognise rare or novel categories (such as those
described by free-form text); (3) Complexity of deployment: unsupervised segmentation methods
have dramatically reduced annotation costs, but still exhibit the inconvenience of requiring labelled
examples to assign names to predictions; (4) Data access: many existing approaches (both supervised
and unsupervised) are trained on the target data distribution, requiring both that this distribution is
known at training time (limiting flexibility) and that this data is accessible, which may not be the case
for legal/ethical reasons (e.g. medical image data).
There is a rich body of semantic segmentation literature that proposes solutions to subsets of these
challenges, but to our knowledge no existing work addresses their full combination. To tackle all
four challenges, we draw inspiration from two lines of recent research. The first line of research has
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

