What Can the Neural Tangent Kernel Tell Us About
Adversarial Robustness?
Nikolaos Tsilivis
Center for Data Science
New York University
nt2231@nyu.edu

Julia Kempe
Center for Data Science and
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
kempe@nyu.edu

Abstract
The adversarial vulnerability of neural nets, and subsequent techniques to create
robust models have attracted significant attention; yet we still lack a full understanding of this phenomenon. Here, we study adversarial examples of trained neural
networks through analytical tools afforded by recent theory advances connecting
neural networks and kernel methods, namely the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK),
following a growing body of work that leverages the NTK approximation to successfully analyze important deep learning phenomena and design algorithms for
new applications. We show how NTKs allow to generate adversarial examples
in a “training-free” fashion, and demonstrate that they transfer to fool their finitewidth neural net counterparts in the “lazy” regime. We leverage this connection
to provide an alternative view on robust and non-robust features, which have been
suggested to underlie the adversarial brittleness of neural nets. Specifically, we
define and study features induced by the eigendecomposition of the kernel to better
understand the role of robust and non-robust features, the reliance on both for
standard classification and the robustness-accuracy trade-off. We find that such
features are surprisingly consistent across architectures, and that robust features
tend to correspond to the largest eigenvalues of the model, and thus are learned
early during training. Our framework allows us to identify and visualize non-robust
yet useful features. Finally, we shed light on the robustness mechanism underlying
adversarial training of neural nets used in practice: quantifying the evolution of
the associated empirical NTK, we demonstrate that its dynamics falls much earlier
into the “lazy” regime and manifests a much stronger form of the well known bias
to prioritize learning features within the top eigenspaces of the kernel, compared to
standard training.

1

Introduction

Despite the tremendous success of deep neural networks in many computer vision and language
modeling tasks, as well as in scientific discoveries, their properties and the reasons for their success
are still poorly understood. Focusing on computer vision, a particularly surprising phenomenon
evidencing that those machines drift away from how humans perform image recognition is the
presence of adversarial examples, images that are almost identical to the original ones, yet are
misclassified by otherwise accurate models.
Since their discovery (Szegedy et al., 2014), a vast amount of work has been devoted to understanding
the sources of adversarial examples and explanations include, but are not limited to, the close to linear
operating mode of neural nets (Goodfellow et al., 2015), the curse of dimensionality carried by the
input space (Goodfellow et al., 2015, Simon-Gabriel et al., 2019), insufficient model capacity (Tsipras
et al., 2019, Nakkiran, 2019) or spurious correlations found in common datasets (Ilyas et al., 2019).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

