The trade-offs of model size in large recommendation
models : 100GB to 10MB Criteo-tb DLRM model
Anshumali Shrivastava
Department of Computer Science
Rice University/ThirdAI Corp.
Houston, Tx 77005
anshumali@rice.edu

Aditya Desai
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, Tx 77005
apd10@rice.edu

Abstract
Embedding tables dominate industrial-scale recommendation model sizes, using
up to terabytes of memory. A popular and the largest publicly available machine
learning MLPerf benchmark on recommendation data is a Deep Learning Recommendation Model (DLRM) trained on a terabyte of click-through data. It contains
100GB of embedding memory (25+Billion parameters). DLRMs, due to their sheer
size and the associated volume of data, face difficulty in training, deploying for
inference, and memory bottlenecks due to large embedding tables. This paper
analyzes and extensively evaluates a generic parameter-sharing setup (PSS) for
compressing DLRM models. We show theoretical upper bounds on the learnable
memory requirements for achieving approximations to the embedding table. Our
bounds indicate exponentially fewer parameters suffice for a good approximation. To this end, we demonstrate a PSS DLRM reaching 10000× compression
on criteo-tb without losing quality. Such a compression, however, comes with a
caveat. It requires 4.5 × more iterations to achieve the same saturation quality. The
paper argues that this tradeoff needs more investigation as it might be significantly
favorable. Leveraging the small size of the compressed model, we show a 4.3×
improvement in training latency leading to similar overall training times. Thus,
in the tradeoff between the system advantage of a small DLRM model vs. slower
convergence, we show that scales are tipped towards having a smaller DLRM
model, leading to the same quality, faster inference, easier deployment, and similar
training times.

1

Introduction

Recently, recommendation systems have emerged as one of the largest workloads in machine learning
[1]. Recommendation systems form the backbone of a good user experience on online platforms such
as e-commerce and web search, where there is a flood of information. Thus, considerable effort goes
into building recommendation systems. Deep learning recommendation models give a state-of-the-art
performance. However, recommendation models suffer from a critical challenge - sparse features
with millions of categorical values[2, 3] These state-of-the-art [2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] methods learn a dense
representation of the categorical values in a parameter structure called embedding table.
Most parameters in recommendation models come from embedding tables. For example, in the
popular Criteo-tb MLPerf benchmark model, the embedding tables are around 100GB, whereas other
parameters only amount to 10MB. Industrial-scale recommendation models are one of the largest
models built, and the size of the embedding table can go as large as hundreds of terabytes. For
example, a research article from Facebook discusses training a model of size 50TB over 128 GPUs [3].
The scale of these models leads to some unfavorable effects - slower inference time, slower training
time per iteration, and significant engineering challenges in training/deployment. In light of these
issues, many works have investigated learning of compressed representation of embedding tables
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

