Predicting Cellular Responses to Novel Drug
Perturbations at a Single-Cell Resolution
Leon Hetzel⇤1, 3 , Simon Böhm⇤3 , Niki Kilbertus2, 4 ,
Stephan Günnemann2 , Mohammad Lotfollahi1, 5 , and Fabian Theis1, 3
{leon.hetzel, simon.boehm, niki.kilbertus}@helmholtz-muenchen.de
s.guennemann@tum.de, {mohammad.lotfollahi, fabian.theis}@helmholtz-muenchen.de
2

1
Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich
Department of Computer Science, Technical University of Munich
3
Helmholtz Center for Computational Health, Munich
4
Helmholtz AI, Munich
5
Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge

Abstract
Single-cell transcriptomics enabled the study of cellular heterogeneity in response
to perturbations at the resolution of individual cells. However, scaling highthroughput screens (HTSs) to measure cellular responses for many drugs remains
a challenge due to technical limitations and, more importantly, the cost of such
multiplexed experiments. Thus, transferring information from routinely performed
bulk RNA HTS is required to enrich single-cell data meaningfully. We introduce
chemCPA, a new encoder-decoder architecture to study the perturbational effects
of unseen drugs. We combine the model with an architecture surgery for transfer
learning and demonstrate how training on existing bulk RNA HTS datasets can
improve generalisation performance. Better generalisation reduces the need for
extensive and costly screens at single-cell resolution. We envision that our proposed method will facilitate more efficient experiment designs through its ability
to generate in-silico hypotheses, ultimately accelerating drug discovery.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in single-cell methods allowed the simultaneous analysis of millions of cells,
increasing depth and resolution to explore cellular heterogeneity (Sikkema et al., 2022; Han et al.,
2020). With single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and high-throughput screens (HTSs) one can
now study the impact of different perturbations, i.e., drug-dosage combinations, on the transcriptome
at cellular resolution (Yofe et al., 2020; Norman et al., 2019). Unlike conventional HTSs, scRNAseq HTSs can identify subtle changes in gene expression and cellular heterogeneity, constituting a
cornerstone for pharmaceutics and drug discovery (Srivatsan et al., 2020). Nevertheless, these newly
introduced sample multiplexing techniques (McGinnis et al., 2019; Stoeckius et al., 2018; Gehring
et al., 2018) require expensive library preparation and do not scale to screen thousands of distinct
molecules. Even in its most cost-effective version, nuclear hashing, the acquired datasets contain no
more than 200 different drugs (Srivatsan et al., 2020).
Consequently, computational methods are required to address the limited exploration power of
existing experimental methods and discover promising therapeutic drug candidates. Suitable methods
⇤

equal contribution
Code is available at github.com/theislab/chemCPA.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

