A Quadrature Rule combining
Control Variates and Adaptive Importance Sampling

Rémi Leluc
LTCI, Télécom Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
remi.leluc@telecom-paris.fr

François Portier
CREST
ENSAI, France
francois.portier@gmail.com

Aigerim Zhuman
LIDAM, ISBA
UCLouvain, Belgium
aigerim.zhuman@uclouvain.be

Johan Segers
LIDAM, ISBA
UCLouvain, Belgium
johan.segers@uclouvain.be

Abstract
Driven by several successful applications such as in stochastic gradient descent
or in Bayesian computation, control variates have become a major tool for Monte
Carlo integration. However, standard methods do not allow the distribution of the
particles to evolve during the algorithm, as is the case in sequential simulation
methods. Within the standard adaptive importance sampling framework, a simple
weighted least squares approach is proposed to improve the procedure with control
variates. The procedure takes the form of a quadrature rule with adapted quadrature
weights to reflect the information brought in by the control variates. The quadrature
points and weights do not depend on the integrand, a computational advantage in
case of multiple integrands. Moreover, the target density needs to be known only up
to a multiplicative constant. Our main result is a non-asymptotic bound on the probabilistic error of the procedure. The bound proves that for improving the estimate’s
accuracy, the benefits from adaptive importance sampling and control variates
can be combined. The good behavior of the method is illustrated empirically on
synthetic examples and real-world data for Bayesian linear regression.

1

Introduction

In recent years, sequential simulation has emerged as a leading approach to compute multidimensional
integrals. A key object in sequential simulation is the sequence of distributions, called the policy,
from which to generate the random variables, called particles, used to approximate the integrals of
interest. The policy is designed to evolve in the course of the algorithm to mimic the target density,
which may itself be known only up to a proportionality constant. While the design of algorithms with
adaptive policies has been of major interest recently, only a few studies have focused on using control
variates to reduce the variance. This paper provides a new method to incorporate control variates
within standard sequential algorithms. The proposed approach significantly improves the accuracy of
the initial algorithm, both theoretically and in practice.
R
The
sequential framework. Consider the problem of approximating the integral gf dλ =
R
g(x)f (x) dx, where λ is the d-dimensional Lebesgue measure, f is a probability density on Rd
Rd
and the integrand g is a real-valued function on Rd . For instance, one may think of f as the posterior
density in Bayesian inference. Let (qi )i≥0 be the policy of the algorithm, i.e., a sequence of probability densities which evolves adaptively depending on previous outcomes. The particles
R (Xi )i≥1
are generated sequentially—at iteration i, particle Xi is drawn from qi−1 . The integral gf dλ is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

