Addressing Leakage in Concept Bottleneck Models

Marton Havasi
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
mhavasi@seas.harvard.edu

Sonali Parbhoo
Department of Electrical Engineering
Imperial College London
s.parbhoo@imperial.ac.uk

Finale Doshi-Velez
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
finale@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Concept bottleneck models (CBMs) enhance the interpretability of their predictions
by first predicting high-level concepts given features, and subsequently predicting
outcomes on the basis of these concepts. Recently, it was demonstrated that training
the label predictor directly on the probabilities produced by the concept predictor
as opposed to the ground-truth concepts, improves label predictions. However, this
results in corruptions in the concept predictions that impact the concept accuracy as
well as our ability to intervene on the concepts – a key proposed benefit of CBMs.
In this work, we investigate and address two issues with CBMs that cause this
disparity in performance: having an insufficient concept set and using inexpressive
concept predictor. With our modifications, CBMs become competitive in terms of
predictive performance, with models that otherwise leak unintended information in
the concept probabilities, while having dramatically increased concept accuracy
and intervention accuracy.

1

Introduction

Building interpretable machine learning models is important in several high-stake domains where
humans must typically interact with the models to make meaningful decisions. Among such models,
Concept bottleneck models (CBMs) (Chen et al., 2020; Koh et al., 2020; Yeh et al., 2020; Lage
& Doshi-Velez, 2020; Wang et al., 2017) propose explicitly aligning the intermediate layers of a
neural network with some pre-defined expert concepts by first training a predictor of concepts, and
subsequently using this to predict the label (Figure 1 left). CBMs are examples of interpretable
models that are well-suited for human-AI joint decision making. A human supervisor can interpret
and understand the label predictions by inspecting the concept predictions. Moreover, when the
supervisor notices a misprediction among the concepts, they may intervene by correcting the concept
prediction and, in turn, the model is able to update its final prediction accounting for the revised
concept.
Typically when training a CBM, the concept predictor and the label predictor are trained independently
on ground-truth concepts. Unfortunately, these models can underperform in predictive performance
compared to a black-box predictor. Instead, the most predictive CBMs use soft concepts, meaning
that the inputs to the label predictor are the concept probabilities (the numerical values between 0 and
1) as predicted by the concept predictor (Koh et al., 2020). Soft concepts rely on this information-rich
representation, which is in contrast with hard concepts, where label predictor only accepts binary
concepts.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

