Reconstructing Training Data from Trained
Neural Networks
Niv Haim∗
Weizmann Institute of Science
niv.haim@weizmann.ac.il

Gal Vardi∗†
TTI-Chicago and Hebrew University
galvardi@ttic.edu

Gilad Yehudai∗
Weizmann Institute of Science
gilad.yehudai@weizmann.ac.il

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Michal Irani
Weizmann Institute of Science
michal.irani@weizmann.ac.il
Project page: https://giladude1.github.io/reconstruction

Abstract
Understanding to what extent neural networks memorize training data is an intriguing question with practical and theoretical implications. In this paper we show that
in some cases a significant fraction of the training data can in fact be reconstructed
from the parameters of a trained neural network classifier. We propose a novel
reconstruction scheme that stems from recent theoretical results about the implicit
bias in training neural networks with gradient-based methods. To the best of our
knowledge, our results are the first to show that reconstructing a large portion of
the actual training samples from a trained neural network classifier is generally
possible. This has negative implications on privacy, as it can be used as an attack
for revealing sensitive training data. We demonstrate our method for binary MLP
classifiers on a few standard computer vision datasets.

1

Introduction

It is commonly believed that neural networks memorize the training data, even when they are able
to generalize well to unseen test data (e.g., [Zhang et al., 2021, Feldman, 2020]). Exploring this
memorization phenomenon is of great importance both practically and theoretically. Indeed, it has
implications on our understanding of generalization in deep learning, on the hidden representations
learnt by neural networks, and on the extent to which they are vulnerable to privacy attacks.
A fundamental question for understanding memorization is:
Are the specific training samples encoded in the parameters of a trained classifier?
Can they be recovered from the network parameters?
In this work, we study this question, and devise a novel scheme which allows us to reconstruct a
significant portion of the training data from the parameters of a trained neural network alone, without
having any additional information on the data. Thus, we provide a proof-of-concept that the learning
∗
†

Equal contribution, alphabetically ordered
Work done while the author was at the Weizmann Institute of Science

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

