Beyond Time-Average Convergence:
Near-Optimal Uncoupled Online Learning via
Clairvoyant Multiplicative Weights Update

Georgios Piliouras
SUTD
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Ryann Sim
SUTD
ryann_sim@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Stratis Skoulakis
EPFL
efstratios.skoulakis@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this paper we provide a novel and simple algorithm, Clairvoyant Multiplicative
Weights Updates (CMWU), for convergence to Coarse Correlated Equilibria (CCE)
in general games. CMWU effectively corresponds to the standard MWU algorithm
but where all agents, when updating their mixed strategies, use the payoff profiles
based on tomorrow’s behavior, i.e. the agents are clairvoyant. CMWU achieves
constant regret of ln(m)/η in all normal-form games with m actions and fixed
step-sizes η. Although CMWU encodes in its definition a fixed point computation,
which in principle could result in dynamics that are neither computationally efficient
nor uncoupled, we show that both of these issues can be largely circumvented.
1
Specifically, as long as the step-size η is upper bounded by (n−1)V
, where n is the
number of agents and [0, V ] is the payoff range, then the CMWU updates can be
computed linearly fast via a contraction map. This implementation results in an
uncoupled online learning dynamic that admits a O(log T )-sparse sub-sequence
where each agent experiences at most O(nV log m) regret. This implies that
the CMWU dynamics converge with rate O(nV log m log T /T ) to a CCE and
improves on the current state-of-the-art convergence rate of uncoupled online
learning dynamics [13, 1].

1

Introduction

The connection between online learning and game theory has been extensively studied for decades.
The emergence of online learning algorithms guaranteeing comparable payoffs with the highestrewarding strategy has provided a landmark method of understanding how selfish agents can act in
an adversarial environment, while the notion of Coarse Correlated Equilibrium (CCE) has provided
a game-theoretic characterization of the limiting behavior of such online learning dynamics [4, 20,
35, 21].
An important aspect of online learning dynamics is that agents can collectively learn a CCE without
having explicit knowledge of the full game description. By definition, online learning algorithms
take as input the sequence of vectors corresponding to the payoff of each possible action, making no
assumption about how these payoff vectors are derived [22]. This idea of information exchange can
be concisely described with the following distributed protocol, known in the literature as uncoupled
online learning dynamics [11]:
1. No agent is aware of their payoff matrix or the payoff matrix of any other agent.
2. At each round t, each agent i announces their mixed strategy xti .
3. Based on the announced strategy vector xt := (xt1 , . . . , xtn ), each agent i learns only their
payoff vector ui (xt−i ).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

