Stimulative Training of Residual Networks: A Social
Psychology Perspective of Loafing

Peng Ye1† , Shengji Tang1† , Baopu Li2 , Tao Chen1∗, Wanli Ouyang3
School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University, 2 Oracle Health and AI, USA,
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Group, Australia, and Shanghai AI Lab

1

yepeng20@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Residual networks have shown great success and become indispensable in today’s
deep models. In this work, we aim to re-investigate the training process of residual
networks from a novel social psychology perspective of loafing, and further propose a new training strategy to strengthen the performance of residual networks.
As residual networks can be viewed as ensembles of relatively shallow networks
(i.e., unraveled view) in prior works, we also start from such view and consider
that the final performance of a residual network is co-determined by a group of
sub-networks. Inspired by the social loafing problem of social psychology, we
find that residual networks invariably suffer from similar problem, where subnetworks in a residual network are prone to exert less effort when working as part
of the group compared to working alone. We define this previously overlooked
problem as network loafing. As social loafing will ultimately cause the low individual productivity and the reduced overall performance, network loafing will
also hinder the performance of a given residual network and its sub-networks.
Referring to the solutions of social psychology, we propose stimulative training,
which randomly samples a residual sub-network and calculates the KL-divergence
loss between the sampled sub-network and the given residual network, to act as
extra supervision for sub-networks and make the overall goal consistent. Comprehensive empirical results and theoretical analyses verify that stimulative training
can well handle the loafing problem, and improve the performance of a residual
network by improving the performance of its sub-networks. The code is available
at https://github.com/Sunshine-Ye/NIPS22-ST.

1

Introduction

Since ResNet [1] wins the first place at the ILSVRC-2015 competition, simple-but-effective residual
connections are applied in various deep networks, such as CNN, MLP, and transformer. To explore
the secrets behind the success of residual networks, numerous studies have been proposed. He et.
al [1] exploit the residual structure to avoid the performance degradation of deep networks. Further,
He et. al [2] consider that such a structure can transfer any low level features to high level layers in
forward propagation and directly transmit the gradients from deep to shallow layers in backward
propagation. Balduzzi et. al [3] find that residual networks can alleviate the shattered gradients
problem that gradients resemble white noise. In addition, Veit et. al [4] experimentally verify that
residual networks can be seen as a collection of numerous networks of different lengths, namely
unraveled view. Following this view, Sun et. al [5] further attribute the success of residual networks
to shallow sub-networks, which may correspond to the low-degree term when regarding the neural
network as a polynomial function. Since the unraveled view is supported both experimentally and
∗

Corresponding Author (eetchen@fudan.edu.cn).

†

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

