Handcrafted Backdoors in Deep Neural Networks
Sanghyun Hong, † Nicholas Carlini, † Alexey Kurakin
Oregon State University
†
Google Brain
sanghyun.hong@oregonstate.edu, {ncarlini, kurakin}@google.com

Abstract
When machine learning training is outsourced to third parties, backdoor attacks
become practical as the third party who trains the model may act maliciously to
inject hidden behaviors into the otherwise accurate model. Until now, the mechanism to inject backdoors has been limited to poisoning. We argue that a supplychain attacker has more attack techniques available by introducing a handcrafted
attack that directly manipulates a model’s weights. This direct modification gives
our attacker more degrees of freedom compared to poisoning, and we show it can
be used to evade many backdoor detection or removal defenses effectively. Across
four datasets and four network architectures our backdoor attacks maintain an attack success rate above 96%. Our results suggest that further research is needed
for understanding the complete space of supply-chain backdoor attacks.

1

Introduction

Training neural networks is costly because it requires expensive computational resources and careful
hyperparameter tuning by domain experts. These costs make it attractive to either outsource neural
network training to third-party services (such as Google AutoML, Amazon SageMaker, or Microsoft
Azure ML) if custom models are required, or to download models from “model zoos” that have been
pre-trained (by third parties) on popular datasets [2]. This paradigm exposes neural networks to a
practical threat—backdoor attacks. In such an attack, the third-party model trainer acts maliciously
and trains a network that correctly solves the desired task on expected data yet exhibits malicious
behaviors when presented with a certain trigger. The trigger could allow, for example, a face recognition model to misclassify any person as the desired target when wearing specific glasses [8].
Existing backdoor attacks work by performing poisoning. These typically work in one of two ways:
In data poisoning [17, 8, 29, 53, 42], the adversary augments the original dataset with poisoning
samples that contains a trigger and are labeled as a target in order to induce the model trained on this
dataset to behave incorrectly. In code poisoning [4, 16, 45, 36], the attacker manipulates the training
algorithm so that running it on a standard benign dataset will cause the model to be backdoored.
Contributions. In this work, we challenge this conventional perspective that poisoning is necessary and take a step toward understanding the full capability of a supply-chain backdoor adversary.
Specifically, we show that the attack objective of injecting a backdoor is orthogonal to the methodology of poisoning. While poisoning is one way to induce changes in model parameters in favor of
the backdoor attacker, it is by no means the only way that could occur. To this end, we show that
the existing literature underestimates the power of backdoor attacks by presenting a new threat—
handcrafted backdoors—to the neural network supply-chain.
Our handcrafted backdoor attacks directly modify a pre-trained model’s parameters to introduce
malicious functionality. Because our attack does not require training, knowledge of or access to the
training data is unnecessary. More importantly, handcrafted attacks have more degrees of freedom in
optimizing a model’s behaviors for malicious purposes. Our handcrafted attack works by injecting
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

