Watermarking for Out-of-distribution Detection

Qizhou Wang1∗ Feng Liu2∗ Yonggang Zhang1 Jing Zhang3
Chen Gong4,5 Tongliang Liu6† Bo Han1†
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne
3
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney
4
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of MoE
5
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
6
TML Lab, The University of Sydney
{csqzwang, csygzhang, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
fengliu.ml@gmail.com chen.gong@njust.edu.cn
{jing.zhang1, tongliang.liu}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to identify OOD data based on representations extracted from well-trained deep models. However, existing methods largely
ignore the reprogramming property of deep models and thus may not fully unleash
their intrinsic strength: without modifying parameters of a well-trained deep model,
we can reprogram this model for a new purpose via data-level manipulation (e.g.,
adding a specific feature perturbation to the data). This property motivates us to
reprogram a classification model to excel at OOD detection (a new task), and thus
we propose a general methodology named watermarking in this paper. Specifically,
we learn a unified pattern that is superimposed onto features of original data, and
the model’s detection capability is largely boosted after watermarking. Extensive
experiments verify the effectiveness of watermarking, demonstrating the significance of the reprogramming property of deep models in OOD detection. The code
is publicly available at: github.com/qizhouwang/watermarking.

1

Introduction

Deep learning systems in an open world often encounter out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs whose
label spaces are disjoint with that of training data, known as in-distribution (ID) data. For safetycritical applications, deep models should make reliable predictions for ID data, meanwhile detecting
OOD data and avoiding making predictions for the detected ones. This leads to the OOD detection
task [28, 38, 41, 50], which has attracted intensive attention in the real world.
Identifying OOD data remains non-trivial since deep models can be overconfident with them [40].
As a promising technique, the classification-based OOD detection [58] relies on various scoring
functions derived by classification models well trained with ID data (i.e., well-trained models), taking
those inputs with small scores as OOD cases. In general, the scoring functions can be defined by
logit outputs [17, 33], gradients [21], and embedding features [28, 44]. Without interfering with the
well-trained models or requiring extra computation, they exploit the inherent capability of models
learned from only ID data. In general, these advantages can be critical in reality, where the cost of
re-training is prohibitively high and the acquisition of true OOD data is very difficult [58].
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Correspondence to Bo Han (bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk) and Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

