Graph Few-shot Learning with
Task-specific Structures

Song Wang
University of Virginia
sw3wv@virginia.edu

Chen Chen
University of Virginia
zrh6du@virginia.edu

Jundong Li
University of Virginia
jundong@virginia.edu

Abstract
Graph few-shot learning is of great importance among various graph learning
tasks. Under the few-shot scenario, models are often required to conduct classification given limited labeled samples. Existing graph few-shot learning methods
typically leverage Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and perform classification
across a series of meta-tasks. Nevertheless, these methods generally rely on the
original graph (i.e., the graph that the meta-task is sampled from) to learn node
representations. Consequently, the graph structure used in each meta-task is identical. Since the class sets are different across meta-tasks, node representations
should be learned in a task-specific manner to promote classification performance.
Therefore, to adaptively learn node representations across meta-tasks, we propose a
novel framework that learns a task-specific structure for each meta-task. To handle
the variety of nodes across meta-tasks, we extract relevant nodes and learn taskspecific structures based on node influence and mutual information. In this way,
we can learn node representations with the task-specific structure tailored for each
meta-task. We further conduct extensive experiments on five node classification
datasets under both single- and multiple-graph settings to validate the superiority of our framework over the state-of-the-art baselines. Our code is provided at
https://github.com/SongW-SW/GLITTER.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, graph-structured data is widely used in various real-world applications, such as molecular property prediction [18], knowledge graph completion [47], and recommender systems [45].
More recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [43, 44, 32, 15] have been proposed to learn node
representations via information aggregation based on the given graph structure. Generally, these
methods adopt a semi-supervised learning strategy to train models on a graph with abundant labeled samples [19]. However, in practice, it is often difficult to obtain sufficient labeled samples
due to the laborious labeling process [10]. Hence, there is a surge of research interests aiming at
performing graph learning with limited labeled samples as references, known as graph few-shot
learning [48, 21, 9].
Among various types of graph few-shot learning tasks, few-shot node classification is essential in
real-world scenarios, including protein classification [3] and document categorization [30]. To deal
with the label deficiency issue in node classification, many recent works [6, 10, 18, 21] incorporate
existing few-shot learning frameworks from other domains [33, 27] into GNNs. Specifically, few-shot
classification during evaluation is conducted on a specific number of meta-test tasks. Each meta-test
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

