Mingling Foresight with Imagination: Model-Based
Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Zhiwei Xu, Dapeng Li, Bin Zhang, Yuan Zhan, Yunpeng Bai, Guoliang Fan
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xuzhiwei2019, lidapeng2020, zhangbin2020, zhanyuan2020, baiyuanpeng2020,
guoliang.fan}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, model-based agents have achieved better performance than model-free
ones using the same computational budget and training time in single-agent environments. However, due to the complexity of multi-agent systems, it is tough to
learn the model of the environment. The significant compounding error may hinder
the learning process when model-based methods are applied to multi-agent tasks.
This paper proposes an implicit model-based multi-agent reinforcement learning
method based on value decomposition methods. Under this method, agents can
interact with the learned virtual environment and evaluate the current state value
according to imagined future states in the latent space, making agents have the
foresight. Our approach can be applied to any multi-agent value decomposition
method. The experimental results show that our method improves the sample
efficiency in different partially observable Markov decision process domains.

1

Introduction

In recent years, reinforcement learning has made remarkable achievements in game AI [47, 12],
robots [33], and autonomous driving [24]. It is primarily due to the progress of model-free reinforcement learning (MFRL) research. Unlike model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL), MFRL does
not require dynamics of the environment and learns from the data generated by directly interacting
with the environment. Therefore, although most environment models are unavailable in the real world,
MFRL can master complex tasks through large-capacity value function approximators. However,
MFRL requires large amounts of training data that can be costly and risky in reality, which means
that the sample efficiency is the main bottleneck of the current MFRL algorithms. So in the problem
that the dynamics model is known, we should prioritize using MBRL, which can even obtain an
analytical solution to optimal control problems.
Multi-agent systems are more complex than single-agent tasks. The strategy of each agent changes
during the learning process in multi-agent systems, which makes the environment unstable from the
perspective of each agent. One method [44, 10, 38, 19, 22] is for agents to use channels to transmit
information to each other, in this way to reach a consensus between agents. In addition, many current
studies on multi-agent reinforcement learning have focused on the paradigm of centralized training
with decentralized execution (CTDE) [29]. The agent only obtains global information during training
can significantly alleviate the instability problem. The first branch [29, 11, 16] that emerged is
using the Actor-Critic structure’s advantages to build the centralized critic and decentralized actor
framework. The value decomposition method [45, 39, 43, 30, 50, 49, 53] is also the most popular
CTDE approach lately, and it has obtained excellent performance in the decentralized partially
observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) domains [32]. Nevertheless, most of the above
methods are model-free and require access to an impractically large number of trajectories.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

