Exploration-Guided Reward Shaping
for Reinforcement Learning under Sparse Rewards

Rati Devidze1

Parameswaran Kamalaruban2

Adish Singla1

rdevidze@mpi-sws.org

kparameswaran@turing.ac.uk

adishs@mpi-sws.org

1

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS), Saarbrucken, Germany
2
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK

Abstract
We study the problem of reward shaping to accelerate the training process of
a reinforcement learning agent. Existing works have considered a number of
different reward shaping formulations; however, they either require external domain
knowledge or fail in environments with extremely sparse rewards. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework, Exploration-Guided Reward Shaping (E XPLO RS),
that operates in a fully self-supervised manner and can accelerate an agent’s
learning even in sparse-reward environments. The key idea of E XPLO RS is to
learn an intrinsic reward function in combination with exploration-based bonuses
to maximize the agent’s utility w.r.t. extrinsic rewards. We theoretically showcase
the usefulness of our reward shaping framework in a special family of MDPs.
Experimental results on several environments with sparse/noisy reward signals
demonstrate the effectiveness of E XPLO RS.

1

Introduction

Training reinforcement learning (RL) agents in environments with extremely sparse or distracting
rewards is challenging. Existing works have studied several approaches to design informative rewards
that speed up the agent’s convergence [1–7]. One well-studied line of work is potential-based
reward shaping, where a potential function is specified by an expert or obtained via transfer learning
techniques (see [3, 8–17]). Another popular approach is to learn rewards via Inverse-RL using
expert demonstrations [18]. Alternatively, one could also consider a manual specification of rewards,
e.g., using distance-based metrics [19]. However, these reward design techniques typically rely on
high-quality domain knowledge and may fail in practice. In fact, the RL agents can easily exploit
poorly designed rewards and get stuck in local optima. This naturally leads to the fundamental
question of how to do online reward shaping without relying on expert domain knowledge. More
concretely, can we design informative rewards that will accelerate the agent’s training process by
leveraging experience gained online during the agent’s training lifetime itself? [20–24]
To tackle this question, recent works [24–26] have explored fully self-supervised learning of parametric intrinsic rewards that can improve the performance of RL agents. In particular, these methods
alternate between intrinsic reward parameter learning and the agent’s policy optimization w.r.t. the
learned reward. For instance, Learning Intrinsic Rewards for Policy Gradient (LIRPG) technique
[25] updates the intrinsic reward parameters to maximize the extrinsic rewards received by the policy
from the environment. Self-supervised Online Reward Shaping (SORS) technique [26] infers an
intrinsic reward using a classification-based reward inference algorithm, TREX [27]. However, these
fully self-supervised reward shaping techniques might fail to produce meaningful agent behavior
in environments with extremely sparse rewards (called hard-exploration domains) as they lack an
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

