Learning versus Refutation in Noninteractive Local
Differential Privacy
Alexander Edmonds
University of Toronto
alex.edmonds@utoronto.ca

Aleksandar Nikolov
University of Toronto
anikolov@cs.toronto.edu

Toniann Pitassi
Columbia University & University of Toronto
toni@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We study two basic statistical tasks in non-interactive local differential privacy
(LDP): learning and refutation: learning requires finding a concept that best fits
an unknown target function (from labelled samples drawn from a distribution),
whereas refutation requires distinguishing between data distributions that are wellcorrelated with some concept in the class, versus distributions where the labels are
random. Our main result is a complete characterization of the sample complexity
of agnostic PAC learning for non-interactive LDP protocols. We show that the
optimal sample complexity for any concept class is captured by the approximate
2 norm of a natural matrix associated with the class. Combined with previous
work, this gives an equivalence between agnostic learning and refutation in the
agnostic setting.

1

Introduction

We study two related basic statistical tasks, learning and refutation, in the setting of distributed data,
and under strong privacy constraints. For both tasks, we have an unknown distribution on labeled
data points in the universe U ⇥ {±1}, and we receive samples from . We are also given a concept
class C ✓ {±1}U , which, hopefully, is capable of capturing the labels given by . We define our two
tasks as follows.
• Learning requires finding a concept that best fits . I.e., using the usual binary loss function
L (h) = E [I[h(a) 6= y]], the goal of agnostic learning with accuracy ↵ is to produce
(a,b)⇠

some h which, with probability 1
, satisfies L (h)  minc2C L (c) + ↵.
If an algorithm solves this problem for any distribution , then we say it (↵, )-learns C
agnostically.
• Refutation requires distinguishing between data distributions that are well correlated with
some concept c 2 C, vs. data distributions where the labels are random. I.e., the goal of
agnostic refutation with accuracy ↵ is to distinguish, with probability 1
, between the
following two cases: (i) minc2C L (c)  12 ↵ versus (ii) for all h 2 {±1}U , L (h) = 12 .
If an algorithm solves this problem for any distribution , then we say it (↵, )-refutes C
agnostically.
The definition of agnostic learning above is classical. Refutation is a more recent notion, and was
studied by Kothari and Livni [2018] (and in a realizable setting by Vadhan [2017]), where it was
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

