Regret Bounds for Information-Directed
Reinforcement Learning

Botao Hao
Deepmind
haobotao000@gmail.com

Tor Lattimore
Deepmind
lattimore@google.com

Abstract
Information-directed sampling (IDS) has revealed its potential as a data-efficient
algorithm [Lu et al., 2021] for reinforcement learning (RL). However, theoretical
understanding of IDS for Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) is still limited.
We develop novel information-theoretic tools to bound the information ratio and
cumulative information gain about the learning target. Our theoretical results shed
light on the importance of choosing the learning target such that the practitioners
can balance the computation and regret bounds. As a consequence, we derive priorfree Bayesian regret bounds for vanilla-IDS which learns the whole environment
under tabular finite-horizon MDPs. In addition, we propose a computationallyefficient regularized-IDS that maximizes an additive form rather than the ratio
form and show that it enjoys the same regret bound as vanilla-IDS. With the aid
of rate-distortion theory, we improve the regret bound by learning a surrogate, less
informative environment. Furthermore, we extend our analysis to linear MDPs and
prove similar regret bounds for Thompson sampling as a by-product.

1

Introduction

Information-directed sampling (IDS) is a design principle proposed by [Russo and Van Roy, 2014,
2018] that optimizes the trade-off between information and regret. Comparing with other design
principles such as UCB and Thompson sampling (TS), IDS can automatically adapt to different
information-regret structures. As a result, IDS demonstrates impressive empirical performance [Russo
and Van Roy, 2018] and outperforms UCB and TS in terms of asymptotic optimality [Kirschner et al.,
2021] and minimax optimality in heteroscedastic bandits [Kirschner and Krause, 2018] and sparse
linear bandits [Hao et al., 2021].
In the context of full RL, mutiple works have examined the empirical performance of IDS [Nikolov
et al., 2018, Lu et al., 2021]. However, formal regret guarantee for IDS is still lacking. IDS minimizes
a notion of information ratio that is the ratio of per-episode regret and information gain about the
learning target. While different choices of the learning target could lead to different regret bounds
and computational methods, the most natural choice is the whole environment and we name the
corresponding IDS as vanilla-IDS.
√
e S 3 A2 H 4 L) Bayesian regret bound for vanilla-IDS,
In this work, we prove the first prior-free O(
where S is the size of state space, A is the size of action space, H is the length of episodes and L is
the number of episodes. Computationally, vanilla-IDS needs to optimize over the full policy space,
which is not efficient in general. To facilitate the computation, we consider its regularized form,
named regularized-IDS, that can be solved by any dynamic programming solver. By carefully
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

