Defending Against Adversarial Attacks via Neural
Dynamic System

Xiyuan Li
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
Lee_xiyuan@outlook.com

Xin Zou
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
zouxin2021@gmail.com

Weiwei Liu∗
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
liuweiwei863@gmail.com

Abstract
Although deep neural networks (DNN) have achieved great success, their applications in safety-critical areas are hindered due to their vulnerability to adversarial
attacks. Some recent works have accordingly proposed to enhance the robustness of DNN from a dynamic system perspective. Following this line of inquiry,
and inspired by the asymptotic stability of the general nonautonomous dynamical system, we propose to make each clean instance be the asymptotically stable
equilibrium points of a slowly time-varying system in order to defend against
adversarial attacks. We present a theoretical guarantee that if a clean instance is
an asymptotically stable equilibrium point and the adversarial instance is in the
neighborhood of this point, the asymptotic stability will reduce the adversarial
noise to bring the adversarial instance close to the clean instance. Motivated by
our theoretical results, we go on to propose a nonautonomous neural ordinary
differential equation (ASODE) and place constraints on its corresponding linear
time-variant system to make all clean instances act as its asymptotically stable
equilibrium points. Our analysis suggests that the constraints can be converted
to regularizers in implementation. The experimental results show that ASODE
improves robustness against adversarial attacks and outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in a range of tasks, including image
recognition [1, 2], scene segmentation [3, 4, 5] and action recognition [6, 7]. However, their
performance can be significantly affected by human-imperceptible perturbations that can drastically
change the network’s output [8, 9]. This phenomenon seriously restricts the application of DNN in
safety-critical fields such as automatic driving.
Recently, some methods have been proposed to defend against adversarial attacks from the perspective
of dynamic systems. The paper [10] proposes a time-invariant steady neural ODE (TisODE) to limit
the evolution of the curves by forcing the integrand to be close to zero. However, this approach does
not guarantee that small perturbations of the initial point will lead to small perturbations in the output
at time T . To reduce perturbations on the initial point, SODEF [11] causes the extracted features to
be located within a neighborhood of the Lyapunov-stable equilibrium points of the autonomous ODE.
However, there are still some drawbacks of SODEF: 1. In the papers [1, 12, 13], the general dynamical
system explicitly depends on the argument t and is referred to as a nonautonomous dynamical system.
However, SODEF only considers the autonomous case, which is simply a special class of ODE.
2. As shown in Figure 1 (a), Lyapunov stability only controls the perturbations of the input rather
than eliminating the effects of perturbations; simply maintaining the perturbations may still lead
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

