Moment Distributionally Robust Tree Structured
Prediction
Yeshu Li

Danyal Saeed
Xinhua Zhang
Brian D. Ziebart
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
{yli299, dsaeed3, zhangx, bziebart}@uic.edu
Kevin Gimpel
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
kgimpel@ttic.edu

Abstract
Structured prediction of tree-shaped objects is heavily studied under the name of
syntactic dependency parsing. Current practice based on maximum likelihood or
margin is either agnostic to or inconsistent with the evaluation loss. Risk minimization alleviates the discrepancy between training and test objectives but typically
induces a non-convex problem. These approaches adopt explicit regularization
to combat overfitting without probabilistic interpretation. We propose a momentbased distributionally robust optimization approach for tree structured prediction,
where the worst-case expected loss over a set of distributions within bounded
moment divergence from the empirical distribution is minimized. We develop
efficient algorithms for arborescences and other variants of trees. We derive Fisher
consistency, convergence rates and generalization bounds for our proposed method.
We evaluate its empirical effectiveness on dependency parsing benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction is an important learning setting for joint prediction of interdependent variables.
The output space typically consists of an exponential number of structured objects whose inherent
relations can be exploited to develop efficient learning algorithms and capture key properties of data
[Ciliberto et al., 2019]. Trees are widely used structures that offer expressiveness and simplicity.
We distinguish between two different tree structured prediction tasks in the literature. The first
task is a structure learning problem in graphical models [Bradley and Guestrin, 2010], aimed at
constructing trees underlying a predictive model from training data. The optimal tree is found easily
with greedy algorithms for generative models [Chow and Liu, 1968], while it is NP-hard for the
discriminative max-margin setting [Meshi et al., 2013]. The second task requires prediction itself to
be a tree-shaped object (e.g., an incidence vector). Dependency parsing is a crucial application of this
problem that has inspired a flurry of work in natural language processing. The first-order spanning
tree prediction assuming factorization over arcs can be done in O(n2 ) [Stanojević and Cohen, 2021],
whereas exact inference is NP-hard for certain (non-projective) higher-order trees (e.g., considering
siblings) [McDonald and Satta, 2007]. We study the latter in this work.
A common evaluation criterion in dependency parsing is the attachment score, namely, the score we
would like to maximize on test data. It is cost-sensitive to allow partially correct prediction. Ideally,
the training objective should be aligned with the test objective. An early attempt to directly mimic
test conditions leads to a non-convex piece-wise constant objective [Och, 2003]. Risk minimization
in appropriate parametric form has a non-convex smooth objective, solvable with gradient descent,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

