CUP: Critic-Guided Policy Reuse

Jin Zhang1 , Siyuan Li2 , Chongjie Zhang1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
jin-zhan20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
lisiyuan199511@gmail.com
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The ability to reuse previous policies is an important aspect of human intelligence. To achieve efficient policy reuse, a Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)
agent needs to decide when to reuse and which source policies to reuse. Previous
methods solve this problem by introducing extra components to the underlying
algorithm, such as hierarchical high-level policies over source policies, or estimations of source policies’ value functions on the target task. However, training these
components induces either optimization non-stationarity or heavy sampling cost,
significantly impairing the effectiveness of transfer. To tackle this problem, we
propose a novel policy reuse algorithm called Critic-gUided Policy reuse (CUP),
which avoids training any extra components and efficiently reuses source policies.
CUP utilizes the critic, a common component in actor-critic methods, to evaluate
and choose source policies. At each state, CUP chooses the source policy that
has the largest one-step improvement over the current target policy, and forms a
guidance policy. The guidance policy is theoretically guaranteed to be a monotonic
improvement over the current target policy. Then the target policy is regularized to
imitate the guidance policy to perform efficient policy search. Empirical results
demonstrate that CUP achieves efficient transfer and significantly outperforms
baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

Human intelligence can solve new tasks quickly by reusing previous policies (Guberman & Greenfield,
1991). Despite remarkable success, current Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) agents lack this
knowledge transfer ability (Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Ceron & Castro, 2021), leading to
enormous computation and sampling cost. As a consequence, a large number of works have been
studying the problem of policy reuse in DRL, i.e., how to efficiently reuse source policies to speed up
target policy learning (Fernández & Veloso, 2006; Barreto et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2020b).
A fundamental challenge towards policy reuse is: how does an agent with access to multiple source
policies decide when and where to use them (Fernández & Veloso, 2006; Kurenkov et al., 2020;
Cheng et al., 2020)? Previous methods solve this problem by introducing additional components to
the underlying DRL algorithm, such as hierarchical high-level policies over source policies (Li et al.,
2018, 2019; Yang et al., 2020b), or estimations of source policies’ value functions on the target task
(Barreto et al., 2017, 2018; Cheng et al., 2020). However, training these components significantly
impairs the effectiveness of transfer, as hierarchical structures induce optimization non-stationarity
(Pateria et al., 2021), and estimating the value functions for every source policy is computationally
expensive and with high sampling cost. Thus, the objective of this study is to address the question:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

