The Impact of Task Underspecification in
Evaluating Deep Reinforcement Learning
Vindula Jayawardana
MIT
vindula@mit.edu

Catherine Tang
MIT
cattang@mit.edu

Dajiang Suo
MIT
djsuo@mit.edu

Sirui Li
MIT
siruil@mit.edu

Cathy Wu
MIT
cathywu@mit.edu

Abstract
Evaluations of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) methods are an integral part
of scientific progress of the field. Beyond designing DRL methods for general intelligence, designing task-specific methods is becoming increasingly prominent for
real-world applications. In these settings, the standard evaluation practice involves
using a few instances of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) to represent the task.
However, many tasks induce a large family of MDPs owing to variations in the
underlying environment, particularly in real-world contexts. For example, in traffic
signal control, variations may stem from intersection geometries and traffic flow
levels. The select MDP instances may thus inadvertently cause overfitting, lacking
the statistical power to draw conclusions about the method’s true performance
across the family. In this article, we augment DRL evaluations to consider parameterized families of MDPs. We show that in comparison to evaluating DRL methods
on select MDP instances, evaluating the MDP family often yields a substantially
different relative ranking of methods, casting doubt on what methods should be
considered state-of-the-art. We validate this phenomenon in standard control benchmarks and the real-world application of traffic signal control. At the same time, we
show that accurately evaluating on an MDP family is nontrivial. Overall, this work
identifies new challenges for empirical rigor in reinforcement learning, especially
as the outcomes of DRL trickle into downstream decision-making.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning research has progressed rapidly in recent years, achieving super-human
level performance in many applications. At the core of DRL research lies the need to engage in
rigorous experimental design for conducting evaluations. The lack of rigorous experimental design
could lead to profound implications. Researchers may inadvertently mislead themselves and draw
incorrect conclusions about DRL including what factors contribute to the success of a method [17, 22],
what factors make the results of a method reproducible [21], or whether a method successfully solves
one task [45] or multiple tasks [1, 26]. As evidenced by these findings, strong empirical rigor is
crucial for research progress as it allows the research community to confidently assess the current
state of the field.
The real world induces many complexities for control tasks, and one major complexity is the existence
of multiple instances of the same task. Consider the case of a traffic signal control task where the
goal is to design a signal control strategy for an intersection. To reliably claim a DRL method solves
the traffic signal control problem, one needs to show that the proposed method sufficiently works
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

