Model-Based Opponent Modeling

Xiaopeng Yu

Jiechuan Jiang

Wanpeng Zhang

Haobin Jiang

Zongqing Lu†

School of Computer Science, Peking University

Abstract
When one agent interacts with a multi-agent environment, it is challenging to
deal with various opponents unseen before. Modeling the behaviors, goals, or
beliefs of opponents could help the agent adjust its policy to adapt to different
opponents. In addition, it is also important to consider opponents who are learning
simultaneously or capable of reasoning. However, existing work usually tackles
only one of the aforementioned types of opponents. In this paper, we propose
model-based opponent modeling (MBOM), which employs the environment model
to adapt to all kinds of opponents. MBOM simulates the recursive reasoning
process in the environment model and imagines a set of improving opponent
policies. To effectively and accurately represent the opponent policy, MBOM
further mixes the imagined opponent policies according to the similarity with the
real behaviors of opponents. Empirically, we show that MBOM achieves more
effective adaptation than existing methods in a variety of tasks, respectively with
different types of opponents, i.e., fixed policy, naïve learner, and reasoning learner.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made great progress in multi-agent competitive games, e.g., AlphaGo [33], OpenAI Five [26], and AlphaStar [39]. In multi-agent environments, an agent usually
has to compete against or cooperate with diverse other agents (collectively termed as opponents
whether collaborators or competitors) unseen before. Since the opponent policy influences the transition dynamics experienced by the agent, interacting with diverse opponents makes the environment
nonstationary from the agent’s perspective. Due to the complexity and diversity in opponent policies,
it is very challenging for the agent to retain overall supremacy.
Explicitly modeling the behaviors, goals, or beliefs of opponents [2], rather than treating them as
a part of the environment, could help the agent adjust its policy to adapt to different opponents.
Many studies rely on predicting the actions [11, 13, 10, 27] and goals [29, 30] of opponents during
training. When facing diverse or unseen opponents, the agent policy conditions on such predictions
or representations generated by corresponding modules. However, opponents may also have the
same reasoning ability, e.g., an opponent who makes predictions about the agent’s goal. In this
scenario, higher-level reasoning and some other modeling techniques are required to handle such
sophisticated opponents [40, 43, 45]. In addition, the opponents may learn simultaneously, the
modeling becomes unstable, and the fitted models with historical experiences lag behind. To enable
the agent to continuously adapt to learning opponents, LOLA [8] takes into account the gradients
of the opponent’s learning for policy updates, Meta-PG [1] formulates continuous adaptation as a
meta-learning problem, and Meta-MAPG [16] combines meta-learning with LOLA. However, LOLA
requires knowing the learning algorithm of opponents, while Meta-PG and Meta-MAPG require all
opponents use the same learning algorithm.
†

Correspondence to B zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

