Language Conditioned Spatial Relation Reasoning
for 3D Object Grounding
Shizhe Chen1 , Pierre-Louis Guhur1 , Makarand Tapaswi2 , Cordelia Schmid1 , Ivan Laptev1
1

Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, 2 IIIT Hyderabad
https://cshizhe.github.io/projects/vil3dref.html

Abstract
Localizing objects in 3D scenes based on natural language requires understanding
and reasoning about spatial relations. In particular, it is often crucial to distinguish
similar objects referred by the text, such as "the left most chair" and "a chair next to
the window". In this work we propose a language-conditioned transformer model
for grounding 3D objects and their spatial relations. To this end, we design a spatial
self-attention layer that accounts for relative distances and orientations between
objects in input 3D point clouds. Training such a layer with visual and language
inputs enables to disambiguate spatial relations and to localize objects referred by
the text. To facilitate the cross-modal learning of relations, we further propose a
teacher-student approach where the teacher model is first trained using ground-truth
object labels, and then helps to train a student model using point cloud inputs. We
perform ablation studies showing advantages of our approach. We also demonstrate
our model to significantly outperform the state of the art on the challenging Nr3D,
Sr3D and ScanRefer 3D object grounding datasets.

1

Introduction

To carry out human instructions in the real world, robots should understand natural language and be
able to ground mentioned objects in 3D environments. Following this objective, recent research is
shifting from object grounding in 2D images [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] to the 3D object grounding task [7, 8],
where objects referred by a sentence should be localized in a 3D point cloud.
Language expressions often refer to objects by their relative spatial locations in 3D scenes. Figure 1
illustrates example scenes and corresponding sentences where object grounding requires disambiguation between objects of the same class. For instance, “the backpack closest to the piano” requires
to compare relative distances among objects, while “choose the door on the left when facing them”
requires to infer the correct viewpoint and understand relative directions. Such complexity and
diversity of the spatial language makes 3D object grounding highly challenging.
Given the critical role of the spatial language, many existing methods attempt to model spatial
relations for 3D object grounding. Early work [9, 10, 11, 12] explicitly build 3D visual graphs based
on distances between objects and apply graph neural networks to learn relationships. However, since
only nearest neighbors are considered in the graph, it remains difficult to infer relationships between
distant objects such as “farthest”. More recently, transformer architectures [9, 13, 14, 15, 16] have
been used, as they have the potential to learn relations between pairs of objects with a multi-head selfattention mechanism [17]. Enabling transformers to better understand 3D spatial relations expressed
by natural language, however, remains an open research problem.
In addition, 3D object grounding suffers more from the scarcity of training data compared to its
2D counterpart. The success of 2D object grounding models [18, 19] can be largely attributed to
large-scale datasets with image-text pairs [1, 2, 20, 21], whereas the limited amount of 3D scene36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

