Fine-tuning Language Models over Slow Networks
using Activation Quantization with Guarantees

Jue Wang1,3∗, Binhang Yuan1∗, Luka Rimanic1†∗, Yongjun He1 , Tri Dao2 ,
Beidi Chen34 , Christopher Ré2 , Ce Zhang1
1
ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 Stanford University, USA 3 Zhejiang University, China
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 Meta AI
{juewang, binhang.yuan, luka.rimanic, yongjun.he, ce.zhang}@inf.ethz.ch
{beidic, trid, chrismre}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Communication compression is a crucial technique for modern distributed learning systems to alleviate their communication bottlenecks over slower networks.
Despite recent intensive studies of gradient compression for data parallel-style
training, compressing the activations for models trained with pipeline parallelism
is still an open problem. In this paper, we propose AQ-SGD, a novel activation
compression algorithm for communication-efficient pipeline parallelism training
over slow networks. Different from previous efforts in activation compression,
instead of compressing activation values directly, AQ-SGD compresses the changes
of the activations. This allows us to show,
√to the best of our knowledge for the
first time, that one can still achieve O(1/ T ) convergence rate for non-convex
objectives under activation compression, without making assumptions on gradient
unbiasedness that do not hold for deep learning models with non-linear activation
functions. We then show that AQ-SGD can be optimized and implemented efficiently, without additional end-to-end runtime overhead. We evaluated AQ-SGD to
fine-tune language models with up to 1.5 billion parameters, compressing activation
to 2-4 bits. AQ-SGD provides up to 4.3× end-to-end speed-up in slower networks,
without sacrificing model quality. Moreover, we also show that AQ-SGD can be combined with state-of-the-art gradient compression algorithms to enable “end-to-end
communication compression”: All communications between machines, including
model gradients, forward activations, and backward gradients are compressed into
lower precision. This provides up to 4.9× end-to-end speed-up, without sacrificing
model quality.

1

Introduction

Decentralized or open collaborative training has recently attracted intensive interests [1, 2, 3, 4].
Despite their great potential in leveraging geo-distributed powerful GPUs, the computation efficiency
is severely hindered by low network bandwidth — typically in the range of 10-400Mbps [2, 3, 4].
Recently, efforts in improving communication efficiency have significantly decreased the dependency
on fast data center networks — the gradient can be compressed to lower precision or sparsified [5, 6,
7, 8], which speeds up training over low bandwidth networks, whereas the communication topology
can be decentralized [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], which speeds up training over high latency networks.
Indeed, today’s state-of-the-art training systems, such as Pytorch [15, 16], Horovod [17], Bagua [18],
and BytePS [19], already support many of these communication-efficient training paradigms.
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Now at Google.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

