Adversarial Auto-Augment with Label Preservation:
A Representation Learning Principle Guided Approach

Kaiwen Yang1,4 Yanchao Sun2 Jiahao Su2 Fengxiang He4
Xinmei Tian1,3 Furong Huang2 Tianyi Zhou2 Dacheng Tao4,5
University of Science and Technology of China1 ; University of Maryland, College Park2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center3
JD Explore Academy4 ; The University of Sydney5
kwyang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn,
{ycs, jiahaosu, furongh}@umd.edu
{fengxiang.f.he, tianyi.david.zhou, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com

Abstract
Data augmentation is a critical contributing factor to the success of deep learning
but heavily relies on prior domain knowledge which is not always available. Recent
works on automatic data augmentation learn a policy to form a sequence of augmentation operations, which are still pre-defined and restricted to limited options.
In this paper, we show that a prior-free autonomous data augmentation’s objective
can be derived from a representation learning principle that aims to preserve the
minimum sufficient information of the labels. Given an example, the objective
aims at creating a distant “hard positive example” as the augmentation, while still
preserving the original label. We then propose a practical surrogate to the objective
that can be optimized efficiently and integrated seamlessly into existing methods
for a broad class of machine learning tasks, e.g., supervised, semi-supervised, and
noisy-label learning. Unlike previous works, our method does not require training
an extra generative model but instead leverages the intermediate layer representations of the end-task model for generating data augmentations. In experiments,
we show that our method consistently brings non-trivial improvements to the three
aforementioned learning tasks from both efficiency and final performance, either
or not combined with strong pre-defined augmentations, e.g., on medical images
when domain knowledge is unavailable and the existing augmentation techniques
perform poorly. Code is available at: https://github.com/kai-wen-yang/LPA3.

1

Introduction

Data augmentation has emerged as an effective data pre-processing or data transformation step to
mitigate overfitting [31], to encourage local smoothness [57], and to improve generalization [6] in
machine learning pipelines such as deep neural networks. Notably, effective data augmentation,
which incorporates class-related data invariance and enriches the in-class sample, is one of the key
contributing factors for representation learning with weak or self supervision [9, 23].
Given a task, we aim to generate “good” augmentations efficiently. As part of the machine learning
model pipeline, an autonomous domain-agnostic but task-informed data augmentation mechanism is
desirable. However, a number of challenges exist. (1) Existing augmentation operators are usually
hand-crafted based on domain expert knowledge, which is not always available in some domain [49].
For example, widely used augmentations for natural images are not effective on medical images.
Moreover, the performance of those machine learning pipelines drastically varies with different
choices of data augmentations. (2) Existing few autonomous augmentation approaches developed
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

