Near-Optimal Private and Scalable k-Clustering

Vincent Cohen-Addad1∗ Alessandro Epasto1 Vahab Mirrokni1
Shyam Narayanan2† Peilin Zhong1
1
Google Research 2 MIT
{cohenaddad,aepasto,mirrokni,peilinz}@google.com
shyamsn@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the differentially private (DP) k-means and k-median clustering problems
of n points in d-dimensional Euclidean space in the massively parallel computation
(MPC) model. We provide two near-optimal algorithms where the near-optimality
is in three aspects: they both achieve (1). O(1) parallel computation rounds, (2).
near-linear in n and polynomial in k total computational work (i.e., near-linear running time when n is a sufficient polynomial in k), (3). O(1) relative approximation
and poly(k, d) additive error. Note that Ω(1) relative approximation is provably necessary even for any polynomial-time non-private algorithm, and Ω(k) additive error
is a provable lower bound for any polynomial-time DP k-means/median algorithm.
Our two algorithms provide a tradeoff between the relative approximation and√the
additive error: the first has O(1) relative approximation and ∼ (k 2.5 + k 1.01 d)
additive error, and the second one achieves (1 + γ) relative approximation to the
optimal non-private algorithm for an arbitrary small constant γ > 0 and with
poly(k, d) additive error for a larger polynomial dependence on k and d.
To achieve our result, we develop a general framework which partitions the data
and reduces the DP clustering problem for the entire dataset to the DP clustering
problem for each part. To control the blow-up of the additive error introduced by
each part, we develop a novel charging argument which might be of independent
interest.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, the leakage of private information by machine learning and data mining
algorithms has had dramatic consequences, from losses of billions of dollars [60] to even costing
human lives [8]. Thus, protecting data privacy has become a top priority constraint in many modern
machine learning and data mining problems.
This high demand has stimulated an important research effort to design algorithmic techniques
enabling privacy-preserving algorithms. In recent years, the elegant notion of differential privacy
(DP) [34] has become the gold standard for privacy-preserving algorithms [38, 67, 33, 1]. Informally,
differential privacy requires the output (distribution) of the algorithm to remain almost the same under
a small adversarial perturbation of the input.
k-Means and k-median clustering are fundamental and widely-studied problems in unsupervised
learning. They are used to analyze and extract information from massive datasets in machine learning
and data mining tasks. In particular, given a set of n points XP⊆ Rd within a ball of radius Λ, the
goal is to find a set C of k centers such that the clustering cost x∈X minc∈C dp (x, c) is minimized,
∗
†

Authors listed in alphabetical order.
Work done as a student researcher at Google.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

