Graph Reordering for Cache-Efficient Near Neighbor
Search
Benjamin Coleman∗
ECE Department
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
benjamin.ray.coleman@gmail.com
Alex Smola
Amazon Web Services
alex@smola.org

Santiago Segarra
ECE Department
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
segarra@rice.edu
Anshumali Shrivastava
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
Graph search is one of the most successful algorithmic trends in near neighbor
search. Several of the most popular and empirically successful algorithms are, at
their core, a greedy walk along a pruned near neighbor graph. However, graph
traversal applications often suffer from poor memory access patterns, and near
neighbor search is no exception to this rule. Our measurements show that popular
search indices such as the hierarchical navigable small-world graph (HNSW)
can have poor cache miss performance. To address this issue, we formulate the
graph traversal problem as a cache hit maximization task and propose multiple
graph reordering as a solution. Graph reordering is a memory layout optimization
that groups commonly-accessed nodes together in memory. We mathematically
formalize the connection between the graph layout and the cache complexity of
search. We present exhaustive experiments applying several reordering algorithms
to a leading graph-based near neighbor method based on the HNSW index. We
find that reordering improves the query time by up to 40%, we present analysis
and improvements for existing graph layout methods, and we demonstrate that the
time needed to reorder the graph is negligible compared to the time required to
construct the index.

1

Introduction

Near neighbor search is a fundamental building block within many applications in machine learning
systems. Informally, the task can be understood as follows. Given a dataset D = {x1 , x2 , ...xN }, we
wish to build a data structure that can be queried with any point q to obtain the k points xi ∈ D that
have the smallest distance to the query. This structure is called a near neighbor index. Near neighbor
indices are of tremendous practical importance, as they form the backbone of production models in
recommendation systems, natural language processing Mikolov et al. (2013), genomics Ondov et al.
(2016), computer vision Lowe (1999) and other applications in machine learning Shakhnarovich et al.
(2008).
Applications. The accuracy and speed of several machine learning algorithms critically depend on
the recall and latency of near neighbor search. The problem is the focus of intense research activity
∗

Work was completed while the author was with Amazon Web Services.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

