Few-Shot Audio-Visual Learning of
Environment Acoustics
Sagnik Majumder1

Changan Chen1,2∗ Ziad Al-Halah1∗
1
UT Austin 2 Facebook AI Research

Kristen Grauman1,2

Abstract
Room impulse response (RIR) functions capture how the surrounding physical
environment transforms the sounds heard by a listener, with implications for various
applications in AR, VR, and robotics. Whereas traditional methods to estimate RIRs
assume dense geometry and/or sound measurements throughout the environment,
we explore how to infer RIRs based on a sparse set of images and echoes observed
in the space. Towards that goal, we introduce a transformer-based method that
uses self-attention to build a rich acoustic context, then predicts RIRs of arbitrary
query source-receiver locations through cross-attention. Additionally, we design a
novel training objective that improves the match in the acoustic signature between
the RIR predictions and the targets. In experiments using a state-of-the-art audiovisual simulator for 3D environments, we demonstrate that our method successfully
generates arbitrary RIRs, outperforming state-of-the-art methods and—in a major
departure from traditional methods—generalizing to novel environments in a fewshot manner. Project: http://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/fs_rir.

1

Introduction

Sound is central to our perceptual experience—people talk, doorbells ring, music plays, knives chop,
dishwashers hum. A sound carries information not only about the semantics of its source, but also the
physical space around it. For instance, compare listening to your favorite song in a big auditorium
to hearing the same song in your cozy bedroom: the auditory experience changes drastically due
to differences in the environment. On its way to our ears, the sound undergoes various acoustic
phenomena: direct sound, early reflections, and late reverberations. Consequently, we hear spatial
sound shaped by the environment’s geometry, the materials of constituent surfaces and objects, and
the relative locations of the sound source and the listener. These factors together comprise the room
impulse response (RIR)—the transfer function that maps an original sound to the sound that meets
our ears or microphones [58].
Learning to model RIRs would have far-reaching implications for augmented reality (AR), virtual
reality (VR), and robotics. In AR/VR, a truly immersive experience demands that the user hear
sounds that are acoustically matched with the surrounding augmented/virtual space [60]. For example,
imagine a situation in which users of an AR/VR app, who are at different locations, are speaking to
each other through telepresence and moving about during the conversation. In mobile robotics, an
agent cognizant of environment acoustics could better solve important embodied tasks, like localizing
sounds, navigating to a target sound, or separating out a target sound(s) of interest. In any such
application, one must be able to anticipate the environment effects for arbitrarily positioned sources
observed from arbitrary receiver poses.
Traditional approaches to model room acoustics require extensive access to the physical environment.
They either assume a full 3D mesh of the space is available in order to simulate sound propagation
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

