Sustainable Online Reinforcement Learning for
Auto-bidding
Zhiyu Mou1,2⇤ ,

Yusen Huo1 , Rongquan Bai1 , Mingzhou Xie1 , Chuan Yu1 ,
Jian Xu1 , Bo Zheng1†
1
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
mouzy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{huoyusen.huoyusen, rongquan.br, mingzhou.xmz,
yuchuan.yc, xiyu.xj, bozheng}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Recently, auto-bidding technique has become an essential tool to increase the
revenue of advertisers. Facing the complex and ever-changing bidding environments in the real-world advertising system (RAS), state-of-the-art auto-bidding
policies usually leverage reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to generate realtime bids on behalf of the advertisers. Due to safety concerns, it was believed that
the RL training process can only be carried out in an offline virtual advertising
system (VAS) that is built based on the historical data generated in the RAS. In
this paper, we argue that there exists significant gaps between the VAS and RAS,
making the RL training process suffer from the problem of inconsistency between
online and offline (IBOO). Firstly, we formally define the IBOO and systematically
analyze its causes and influences. Then, to avoid the IBOO, we propose a sustainable online RL (SORL) framework that trains the auto-bidding policy by directly
interacting with the RAS, instead of learning in the VAS. Specifically, based on
our proof of the Lipschitz smooth property of the Q function, we design a safe and
efficient online exploration (SER) policy for continuously collecting data from the
RAS. Meanwhile, we derive the theoretical lower bound on the safety degree of
the SER policy. We also develop a variance-suppressed conservative Q-learning
(V-CQL) method to effectively and stably learn the auto-bidding policy with the
collected data. Finally, extensive simulated and real-world experiments validate
the superiority of our approach over the state-of-the-art auto-bidding algorithm.

1

Introduction

In the era of Internet, online advertising business has become one of the main profit models for
many companies, such as Google [6] and Alibaba [3], which, at the same time, benefits millions of
advertisers who are willing to bid for impression opportunities. Contemporary online advertising
systems, as auctioneers, usually have large amount of candidate advertisers contesting for numerous
impression opportunities at every moment. Making auction decisions based on accurate evaluation
of each impression opportunity for all advertisers within several milli-seconds is computationally
infeasible. Therefore, a real-world advertising system (RAS) adopts a cascade architecture [7, 10].
In this architecture, the auction of each impression opportunity is completed through several stages.
Without loss of generality, we here simply view the RAS as a system with two stages: stage 1
and stage 2. The auction process of each impression opportunity is as follows: in stage 1, rough
⇤
†

Work was done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

