Debiasing Graph Neural Networks via Learning
Disentangled Causal Substructure
1,2∗

1

1

1†

2,3,4 †

Shaohua Fan , Xiao Wang , Yanhu Mo , Chuan Shi , Jian Tang
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Mila - Québec AI Institute, Canada
3
HEC Montréal, Canada
4
CIFAR AI Research Chair
{fanshaohua, xiaowang, moyanhu, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, jian.tang@hec.ca

Abstract
Most Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) predict the labels of unseen graphs by learning the correlation between the input graphs and labels. However, by presenting
a graph classification investigation on the training graphs with severe bias, surprisingly, we discover that GNNs always tend to explore the spurious correlations
to make decision, even if the causal correlation always exists. This implies that
existing GNNs trained on such biased datasets will suffer from poor generalization
capability. By analyzing this problem in a causal view, we find that disentangling
and decorrelating the causal and bias latent variables from the biased graphs are
both crucial for debiasing. Inspired by this, we propose a general disentangled
GNN framework to learn the causal substructure and bias substructure, respectively.
Particularly, we design a parameterized edge mask generator to explicitly split the
input graph into causal and bias subgraphs. Then two GNN modules supervised
by causal/bias-aware loss functions respectively are trained to encode causal and
bias subgraphs into their corresponding representations. With the disentangled
representations, we synthesize the counterfactual unbiased training samples to
further decorrelate causal and bias variables. Moreover, to better benchmark the
severe bias problem, we construct three new graph datasets, which have controllable bias degrees and are easier to visualize and explain. Experimental results well
demonstrate that our approach achieves superior generalization performance over
existing baselines. Furthermore, owing to the learned edge mask, the proposed
3
model has appealing interpretability and transferability.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have exhibited powerful performance on graph data with various
applications [17, 35, 13, 9, 8]. One major category of applications are the graph classification task,
such as molecular graph property prediction [15, 20, 44], superpixel graph classification [14], and
social network category classification [46, 44]. It is well known that graph classification is usually
determined by a relevant substructure, but not the whole graph structure [43, 26, 45]. For example,
for MNIST superpixel graph classification task, the digit subgraphs are causal (i.e., deterministic) for
labels [36]. The mutagenic property of a molecular graph depends on the functional groups (i.e.,
∗

This work was done when the first author was a visiting student at Mila.
Corresponding authors.
3
Code and data are available at: https://github.com/googlebaba/DisC.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

