Co-Modality Graph Contrastive Learning
for Imbalanced Node Classification
Yiyue Qian1 , Chunhui Zhang2 , Yiming Zhang3 , Qianlong Wen1 ,
Yanfang Ye1∗ , Chuxu Zhang2∗
yqian5@nd.edu, chunhuizhang@brandeis.edu, yxz2092@case.edu,
qwen@nd.edu, yye7@nd.edu, chuxuzhang@brandeis.edu
1

Department of Compute Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Brandeis University, USA
3
Department of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, USA

Abstract
Graph contrastive learning (GCL), leveraging graph augmentations to convert
graphs into different views and further train graph neural networks (GNNs), has
achieved considerable success on graph benchmark datasets. Yet, there are still
some gaps in directly applying existing GCL methods to real-world data. First,
handcrafted graph augmentations require trials and errors, but still can not yield
consistent performance on multiple tasks. Second, most real-world graph data
present class-imbalanced distribution but existing GCL methods are not immune
to data imbalance. Therefore, this work proposes to explicitly tackle these challenges, via a principled framework called Co-Modality Graph Contrastive Learning
(CM-GCL) to automatically generate contrastive pairs and further learn balanced
representation over unlabeled data. Specifically, we design inter-modality GCL to
automatically generate contrastive pairs (e.g., node-text) based on rich node content. Inspired by the fact that minority samples can be “forgotten” by pruning deep
neural networks, we naturally extend network pruning to our GCL framework for
mining minority nodes. Based on this, we co-train two pruned encoders (e.g., GNN
and text encoder) in different modalities by pushing the corresponding node-text
pairs together and the irrelevant node-text pairs away. Meanwhile, we propose
intra-modality GCL by co-training non-pruned GNN and pruned GNN, to ensure
node embeddings with similar attribute features stay closed. Last, we fine-tune the
GNN encoder on downstream class-imbalanced node classification tasks. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
baseline models and learns more balanced representations on real-world graphs.
Our source code is available at https://github.com/graphprojects/CM-GCL.

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning, aiming to contrast instance pairs generated from unlabeled data to train better
representation models, has attracted considerable attention. Inspired by the consistent success of contrastive learning in computer vision and natural language processing [3, 2, 26], an increasing number
of works have started to investigate the great potential of contrastive learning on graphs [45, 52, 38].
Most existing graph contrastive learning (GCL) models leverage different graph transformation
methods to augment graph data into different views, and further train graph neural networks (GNNs)
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

