Combining Explicit and Implicit Regularization for
Efficient Learning in Deep Networks
Dan Zhao
New York University
dz1158@nyu.edu

Abstract
Works on implicit regularization have studied gradient trajectories during the
optimization process to explain why deep networks favor certain kinds of solutions
over others. In deep linear networks, it has been shown that gradient descent
implicitly regularizes toward low-rank solutions on matrix completion/factorization
tasks. Adding depth not only improves performance on these tasks but also acts
as an accelerative pre-conditioning that further enhances this bias towards lowrankedness. Inspired by this, we propose an explicit penalty to mirror this implicit
bias which only takes effect with certain adaptive gradient optimizers (e.g. Adam).
This combination can enable a degenerate single-layer network to achieve lowrank approximations with generalization error comparable to deep linear networks,
making depth no longer necessary for learning. The single-layer network also
performs competitively or out-performs various approaches for matrix completion
over a range of parameter and data regimes despite its simplicity. Together with
an optimizer’s inductive bias, our findings suggest that explicit regularization can
play a role in designing different, desirable forms of regularization and that a more
nuanced understanding of this interplay may be necessary.

1

Introduction

Much work has poured into understanding why and how highly over-parameterized, deep neural
networks with more parameters than training examples generalize so effectively despite long-held
notions to the contrary [12, 13]. This generalization puzzle has only deepened as deep learning
models often generalize well simply by optimizing its training error on an under-determined problem.
To explain this, previous works have focused on how gradient-based optimization induces an implicit
bias on optimization trajectories, particularly in deep (i.e., over-parameterized) settings, tending
towards solutions with certain properties [7, 27] like those that generalize well. In contrast, while
explicit regularization has seen wide-spread usage in various settings (e.g. weight decay, dropout [60]),
its role in explaining generalization has been less certain given its inability to prevent over-fitting on
random labels [70] or its absence in deep models that generalize well on their own.
Some works have focused on a simple test-bed to formalize and isolate the mechanisms through
which implicit regularization operates—namely, matrix completion. Given some observed subset of
an unknown, low-rank matrix W ? , the task is to recover the unseen entries. A key observation [27]
has been how gradient descent on a shallow linear neural network, with sufficiently small learning
rate and near-zero initialization, pushes towards low-rank solutions on its own. This has led to the
conjecture [27] that gradient descent induces implicit regularization that minimizes the nuclear norm.
This conjecture has been put into doubt by work [7] showing that gradient descent not only promotes
low-rank solutions in the shallow case on matrix completion tasks, but its implicit regularization
is further strengthened with increased depth—deep linear neural networks [7]) are able to produce
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

