Bringing Image Structure to Video via
Frame-Clip Consistency of Object Tokens
Elad Ben-Avraham
Tel Aviv University
eladba4@gmail.com
Amir Bar
Tel Aviv University
amirb4r@gmail.com

Roei Herzig
Tel Aviv University, IBM Research
roeiherz@gmail.com

Karttikeya Mangalam
UC Berkeley
mangalam@cs.berkeley.edu

Anna Rohrbach
UC Berkeley
anna.rohrbach@berkeley.edu

Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley
trevordarrell@berkeley.edu

Leonid Karlinsky
MIT-IBM Lab
leonidka@ibm.com

Amir Globerson
Tel Aviv University, Google Research
gamir@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Recent action recognition models have achieved impressive results by integrating
objects, their locations and interactions. However, obtaining dense structured
annotations for each frame is tedious and time-consuming, making these methods
expensive to train and less scalable. On the other hand, one does often have
access to a small set of annotated images, either within or outside the domain of
interest. Here we ask how such images can be leveraged for downstream video
understanding tasks. We propose a learning framework StructureViT (SViT for
short), which demonstrates how utilizing the structure of a small number of images
only available during training can improve a video model. SViT relies on two
key insights. First, as both images and videos contain structured information, we
enrich a transformer model with a set of object tokens that can be used across
images and videos. Second, the scene representations of individual frames in
video should “align” with those of still images. This is achieved via a FrameClip Consistency loss, which ensures the flow of structured information between
images and videos. We explore a particular instantiation of scene structure, namely
a Hand-Object Graph, consisting of hands and objects with their locations as
nodes, and physical relations of contact/no-contact as edges. SViT shows strong
performance improvements on multiple video understanding tasks and datasets,
including the first place in the Ego4D CVPR’22 Point of No Return Temporal
Localization Challenge. For code and pretrained models, visit the project page at
https://eladb3.github.io/SViT/.

1

Introduction

Semantic understanding of videos is a key challenge for machine vision and artificial intelligence. It
is intuitive that video models should benefit from incorporating scene structure, e.g., the objects that
appear in a video, their attributes, and the way they interact. Indeed, several works [5, 25, 26, 34, 35,
42, 81, 83, 89] have demonstrated that incorporating structured representations into models improves
both performance and sample efficiency. In particular, [34, 81, 89] showed how to incorporate
structured representations by utilizing static image object annotations in videos.
Recently, vision transformers (ViT) [20] have emerged as the leading model for many vision applications [4, 21, 12]. This raises the question: how can structured representations be leveraged for
video tasks in a video transformer? Past works [4, 21] have proposed video transformer models
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

