Video compression dataset and benchmark
of learning-based video-quality metrics
∗

∗

∗

Anastasia Antsiferova1,2 , Sergey Lavrushkin1,2 , Maksim Smirnov3 ,
∗
∗
∗
Alexander Gushchin3 , Dmitriy Vatolin1,2,3 , Dmitriy Kulikov2,3
ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence1
MSU Institute for Artificial Intelligence2
Lomonosov Moscow State University3
{aantsiferova, sergey.lavrushkin, maxim.smirnov.2025,
alexander.gushchin, dmitriy, dkulikov}@graphics.cs.msu.ru

Abstract
Video-quality measurement is a critical task in video processing. Nowadays,
many implementations of new encoding standards — such as AV1, VVC, and
LCEVC — use deep-learning-based decoding algorithms with perceptual metrics
that serve as optimization objectives. But investigations of the performance of
modern video- and image-quality metrics commonly employ videos compressed
using older standards, such as AVC. In this paper, we present a new benchmark for
video-quality metrics that evaluates video compression. It is based on a new dataset
consisting of about 2,500 streams encoded using different standards, including AVC,
HEVC, AV1, VP9, and VVC. Subjective scores were collected using crowdsourced
pairwise comparisons. The list of evaluated metrics includes recent ones based
on machine learning and neural networks. The results demonstrate that new noreference metrics exhibit high correlation with subjective quality and approach the
capability of top full-reference metrics.

1

Introduction

Video constitutes the largest part of the world’s Internet traffic, and its volume has increased because
of the Covid lockdowns. The network load has also increased, making efficient video compression
extremely important. Development and comparison of new video encoders greatly relies on quality
measurement, and many new compression standards implement machine-learning- and neuralnetwork-based approaches. But traditional image- and video-quality metrics, such as PSNR and
SSIM, emerged long before recent compression standards, and they did not account for neuralnetwork-related artifacts. VMAF [26], a well-known video-quality metric from Netflix, was also
trained using only H.264/AVC-compressed videos. Thus, quality measurement for new videoencoding standards is even more vital. The number of new image- and video-quality metrics has
increased, and many recent algorithms employ learning-based approaches. Industry leaders have
also created their own quality metrics: Apple’s Advanced Video Quality Tool (AVQT) [2], Tencent’s
Deep Learning-Based Video Quality Assessment (DVQA) [1], and the aforementioned VMAF. Only
a few of these metrics demonstrate high performance on independent benchmarks, however, and
some new ones, including AVQT and DVQA, still await detailed analysis. A concern associated with
∗

A. Antsiferova designed methodology and performed results analysis, led the benchmark and the paper
preparation, S. Lavrushkin performed results analysis and the paper preparation, M. Smirnov developed the
benchmark of no-reference metrics, A. Gushchin developed the benchmark of full-reference metrics, both of
them performed the dataset research, results analysis and contributed to the paper preparation, D. Vatolin and D.
Kulikov coordinated the benchmark and the dataset creation
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

