Learning Debiased Classifier with Biased Committee

Nayeong Kim

Sehyun Hwang

Sungsoo Ahn

Jaesik Park

Suha Kwak

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
{nayeong.kim, sehyun03, sungsoo.ahn, jaesik.park, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural networks are prone to be biased towards spurious correlations between
classes and latent attributes exhibited in a major portion of training data, which ruins their generalization capability. We propose a new method for training debiased
classifiers with no spurious attribute label. The key idea is to employ a committee of
classifiers as an auxiliary module that identifies bias-conflicting data, i.e., data without spurious correlation, and assigns large weights to them when training the main
classifier. The committee is learned as a bootstrapped ensemble so that a majority
of its classifiers are biased as well as being diverse, and intentionally fail to predict
classes of bias-conflicting data accordingly. The consensus within the committee
on prediction difficulty thus provides a reliable cue for identifying and weighting
bias-conflicting data. Moreover, the committee is also trained with knowledge
transferred from the main classifier so that it gradually becomes debiased along
with the main classifier and emphasizes more difficult data as training progresses.
On five real-world datasets, our method outperforms prior arts using no spurious
attribute label like ours and even surpasses those relying on bias labels occasionally.
Our code is available at https://github.com/nayeong-v-kim/LWBC.

1

Introduction

Most supervised learning algorithms for classification rely on the empirical risk minimization (ERM)
principle [40]. However, ERM has been known to cause a learned classifier to be biased toward
spurious correlations between predefined classes and latent attributes that appear in a majority of
training data [12]. In the case of hair color classification, for example, when most people with
blond-hair (i.e., target class) are female (i.e., latent attribute) in a dataset, a classifier learned
by ERM exploits female as a shortcut for the classification due to its spurious correlation with
blond-hair, and often mis-classifies non-blonde-haired women as blond-hair in consequence.
We call data with such spurious correlations and holding a majority of training data bias-guiding
samples, and the other bias-conflicting samples, respectively. The issue of model bias has often been
addressed by exploiting explicit spurious attribute labels [22, 28, 36, 2, 39, 38, 45] or knowledge
about bias types given a priori [3]. However, these methods are impractical because such supervision
and prior knowledge are costly, and the methods demand extensive post hoc analysis.
Hence, a body of research has been conducted for learning debiased classifiers with no additional label
for spurious attributes [42, 27, 29, 32, 23, 26]. A common approach in this line of work is to employ
an intentionally biased classifier as an auxiliary module [29, 32, 23, 26]. In this approach, samples
that the biased classifier has trouble handling are regarded as bias-conflicting ones and assigned large
weights when used for training the main classifier to reduce the effect of bias-guiding counterparts.
Although it has driven remarkable success, this approach has drawbacks due to the use of a single
biased classifier. First, the quality of the biased classifier could vary by hyper-parameters [29] and its
initial parameter values [11]. Further, data that the biased classifier fails to handle could include not
only bias-conflicting samples but also bias-guiding ones, which differs by the quality of the classifier.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

