Fault-Aware Neural Code Rankers
Jeevana Priya Inala
Mark Encarnación

Chenglong Wang
Shuvendu K Lahiri

Mei Yang

Andres Codas

Madanlal Musuvathi

Jianfeng Gao

Microsoft Research
{jinala,chenwang,meiyang,andres.codas,markenc,
shuvendu,madanm,jfgao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated an impressive ability to generate
code for various programming tasks. In many instances, LLMs can generate a
correct program for a task when given numerous trials. Consequently, a recent trend
is to do large scale sampling of programs using a model and then filtering/ranking
the programs based on the program execution on a small number of known unit
tests to select one candidate solution. However, these approaches assume that the
unit tests are given and assume the ability to safely execute the generated programs
(which can do arbitrary dangerous operations such as file manipulations). Both of
the above assumptions are impractical in real-world software development. In this
paper, we propose C ODE R ANKER, a neural ranker that can predict the correctness
of a sampled program without executing it. Our C ODE R ANKER is fault-aware i.e.,
it is trained to predict different kinds of execution information such as predicting
the exact compile/runtime error type (e.g., an IndexError or a TypeError). We show
that C ODE R ANKER can significantly increase the pass@1 accuracy of various
code generation models (including Codex [11], GPT-Neo, GPT-J) on APPS [25],
HumanEval [11] and MBPP [3] datasets.

1

Introduction

Large transformer-based language models (LLMs) have impressive capabilities [19, 7, 16], including
the ability to generate code [11, 3, 28, 39, 33]. The task here is to take a natural language description or
previous code context as the input and generate an entire program in a general-purpose programming
language such as Python or C++. Generating entire programs is a challenging task as it involves
understanding the task, figuring out how to accomplish it, and writing code without any syntax/runtime
errors. On harder programming problems such as coding competition problems, current models
achieve very low accuracy especially if the inference-time sampling budget is low. For example, on
the APPS dataset [25], a state-of-the-art code generation model, Codex [11], achieves 4% accuracy if
it is allowed to sample only one program per task (called pass@1), but achieves 24% accuracy if it is
allowed 100 samples per task (called pass@100—at least one correct program in 100 samples) (see
Table 7). This observation leads us to an important research problem on exploring approaches to rank
the sampled programs to bridge the gap between the pass@1 and pass@100 performances.
Upon analyzing the sampled programs obtained using an LLM, we find that several of them have
syntax errors and runtime errors, and some of them execute to produce undesirable outputs. Therefore,
prior works [11, 28] focused on ranking the programs by executing them on a small set of unit tests
(which are typically assumed to be given as part of the task description). However, there are several
caveats to this approach: First, even if a program passes the given tests, it could still fail on the
unknown unit tests. Second, there is a burden on the user to provide unit tests for every inference
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

