A Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework for
Column Generation
Cheng Chi
University of Toronto

Amine Mohamed Aboussalah
New York University

Juyoung Wang
University of Toronto

Elias B. Khalil⇤
University of Toronto

Zoha Sherkat-Masoumi
University of Toronto

Abstract
Column Generation (CG) is an iterative algorithm for solving linear programs
(LPs) with an extremely large number of variables (columns). CG is the workhorse
for tackling large-scale integer linear programs, which rely on CG to solve LP
relaxations within a branch and price algorithm. Two canonical applications are the
Cutting Stock Problem (CSP) and Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows
(VRPTW). In VRPTW, for example, each binary variable represents the decision
to include or exclude a route, of which there are exponentially many; CG incrementally grows the subset of columns being used, ultimately converging to an optimal
solution. We propose RLCG, the first Reinforcement Learning (RL) approach for
CG. Unlike typical column selection rules which myopically select a column based
on local information at each iteration, we treat CG as a sequential decision-making
problem: the column selected in a given iteration affects subsequent column selections. This perspective lends itself to a Deep Reinforcement Learning approach that
uses Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to represent the variable-constraint structure
in the LP of interest. We perform an extensive set of experiments using the publicly
available BPPLIB benchmark for CSP and Solomon benchmark for VRPTW. RLCG
converges faster and reduces the number of CG iterations by 22.4% for CSP and
40.9% for VRPTW on average compared to a commonly used greedy policy. Our
code is available at this link.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) for Mathematical Optimization (MO) is a growing field with a wide range
of recent studies that enhance optimization algorithms by embedding ML in them to replace humandesigned heuristics [Bengio et al., 2021]. Previous work has overwhelmingly focused on combinatorial or integer programming problems/algorithms for which all decision variables are explicitly
given in advance. For example, in a knapsack problem, each binary variable represents the decision
to include or exclude an item in the knapsack; even with hundreds of thousands of items, modern
integer programming solvers or heuristics can assign values to some or all variables simultaneously
without any memory issues. However, there are many optimization problems in which there are more
decision variables than one could ever explicitly deal with. In VRPTW, for example, each binary
variable represents the decision to include or exclude a route, of which there are exponentially many.
Column generation (CG) is an algorithm for solving linear programs (LPs) with a prohibitively large
number of variables (columns) [Desaulniers et al., 2006]. It leverages the insight that in an optimal
⇤

Corresponding author: khalil@mie.utoronto.ca.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

