Staircase Attention for Recurrent Processing of
Sequences
Da Ju
Meta AI
daju@fb.com

Stephen Roller
Meta AI
roller@fb.com

Sainbayar Sukhbaatar
Meta AI
sainbar@fb.com

Jason Weston
Meta AI
jase@meta.com

Abstract
Attention mechanisms have become a standard tool for sequence modeling tasks,
in particular by stacking self-attention layers over the entire input sequence as in
the Transformer architecture. In this work we introduce a novel attention procedure
called staircase attention that, unlike self-attention, operates across the sequence
(in time) recurrently processing the input by adding another step of processing. A
step in the staircase comprises of backward tokens (encoding the sequence so far
seen) and forward tokens (ingesting a new part of the sequence). Thus our model
can trade off performance and compute, by increasing the amount of recurrence
through time and depth. Staircase attention is shown to be able to solve tasks that
involve tracking that conventional Transformers cannot, due to this recurrence.
Further, it is shown to provide improved modeling power for the same size model
(number of parameters) compared to self-attentive Transformers on large language
modeling and dialogue tasks, yielding significant perplexity gains.

1

Introduction

Early breakthrough work in neural language modeling considered a fixed context size of tokens
that are embedded with a lookup table, followed by nonlinearities and a final softmax to produce
a probability distribution for the next output token in a sequence [5]. Such models were replaced,
pre-Transformer, with recurrent models such as RNNs and LSTMs [12, 16, 28] that were able to
consider arbitrary context length via the ability to store state in their memory using recurrent steps
through the data, in contrast to the fixed length constraint of earlier models. Moreover, the repeated
application of the recurrent network across the sequence also made the models considerably deeper:
a given representation is a function of a large number of nonlinearities due to previous state. This
allows such models to track state 1 , store long-term memories, and potentially solve highly nonlinear
sequential tasks. Today, with the advent of attention-based models [2] and in particular Transformers
[36], fixed length inputs that eschew recurrence are back as the norm, thanks mainly due to deep
stacks of nonlinearities on those fixed inputs that are also well suited to modern hardware, leading the
authors of Vaswani et al. [36] to claim that non-recurrent attention is “all you need.” However, some
of the advantages just mentioned of earlier models – tracking state, and solving highly nonlinear
sequential tasks – have to some degree been lost [13].
In this work, we introduce a novel recurrent model that utilizes a novel attention procedure called
staircase attention. We show that our new model, which utilize both sequence aligned recurrence (in
time) and recurrence in depth can bring advantages to modern models, in particular in terms of lower
language modeling perplexities given the same number of parameters, and for solving nonlinear
state-tracking tasks. Staircase attention, like self-attention, processes tokens in parallel for speed,
but unlike self-attention, operates across the sequence (in time) recurrently processing the input by
1

keep track of an evolving state given sequence of changes to it

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

