Towards Reliable Simulation-Based Inference
with Balanced Neural Ratio Estimation
Arnaud Delaunoy∗
University of Liège
a.delaunoy@uliege.be
François Rozet
University of Liège
francois.rozet@uliege.be

Joeri Hermans*
Unaffiliated
joeri@peinser.com

Antoine Wehenkel
University of Liège
antoine.wehenkel@uliege.be

Gilles Louppe
University of Liège
g.louppe@uliege.be

Abstract
Modern approaches for simulation-based inference rely upon deep learning surrogates to enable approximate inference with computer simulators. In practice,
the estimated posteriors’ computational faithfulness is, however, rarely guaranteed.
For example, Hermans et al. [1] show that current simulation-based inference algorithms can produce posteriors that are overconfident, hence risking false inferences.
In this work, we introduce Balanced Neural Ratio Estimation (BNRE), a variation of
the NRE algorithm [2] designed to produce posterior approximations that tend to be
more conservative, hence improving their reliability, while sharing the same Bayes
optimal solution. We achieve this by enforcing a balancing condition that increases
the quantified uncertainty in small simulation budget regimes while still converging
to the exact posterior as the budget increases. We provide theoretical arguments
showing that BNRE tends to produce posterior surrogates that are more conservative
than NRE’s. We evaluate BNRE on a wide variety of tasks and show that it produces
conservative posterior surrogates on all tested benchmarks and simulation budgets.
Finally, we emphasize that BNRE is straightforward to implement over NRE and
does not introduce any computational overhead.

1

Introduction

Many areas of science and engineering use parametric computer simulations to describe complex
stochastic generative processes. In this setting, Bayesian inference provides a principled framework
to identify parameters matching empirical observations. Computer simulations, however, define
the necessary likelihood function only implicitly, which prevents its evaluation and the use of
classical inference algorithms. To overcome this obstacle, recent simulation-based inference (SBI)
algorithms [3] build upon deep learning surrogates to approximate parts of the Bayes rule and
enable approximate inference. For example, [4, 5] build a surrogate of the likelihood function while
[6, 7, 2, 8, 9] approximate the likelihood-to-evidence ratio. The posterior can also be targeted directly
with variational inference, as proposed by [10, 11, 5]. These algorithms are either amortized or run
sequentially to drive the training towards a target observation and improve the simulation efficiency
of the procedure [10, 12, 2, 11, 4, 8, 5]. However, sequential methods have the drawback of being
computationally expensive to diagnose as the surrogates are only valid for the target observation
[1]. Truncated marginal neural ratio estimation [9] alleviates this issue by introducing a sequential
algorithm that builds a surrogate valid in a local region around the target.
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

