RKHS-SHAP: Shapley Values for Kernel Methods

Siu Lun Chau
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Robert Hu
Amazon†
London

Javier Gonzalez
Microsoft Research
Cambridge

Dino Sejdinovic
School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences†
University of Adelaide

Abstract
Feature attribution for kernel methods is often heuristic and not individualised for
each prediction. To address this, we turn to the concept of Shapley values (SV), a
coalition game theoretical framework that has previously been applied to different
machine learning model interpretation tasks, such as linear models, tree ensembles
and deep networks. By analysing SVs from a functional perspective, we propose
RKHS-SHAP, an attribution method for kernel machines that can efficiently
compute both Interventional and Observational Shapley values using kernel mean
embeddings of distributions. We show theoretically that our method is robust with
respect to local perturbations - a key yet often overlooked desideratum for consistent
model interpretation. Further, we propose Shapley regulariser, applicable to a
general empirical risk minimisation framework, allowing learning while controlling
the level of specific feature’s contributions to the model. We demonstrate that the
Shapley regulariser enables learning which is robust to covariate shift of a given
feature and fair learning which controls the SVs of sensitive features.

1

Introduction

Machine learning model interpretability is critical for researchers, data scientists, and developers to explain, debug and trust their models and understand the value of their findings.
A typical way to understand model performance
is to attribute importance scores to each input feature [5]. These scores can be computed either for
an entire dataset to explain the model’s overall behaviour (global) or compute individually for each
single prediction (local).
Understanding feature importances in reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) methods such as kernel
ridge regression and support vector machines often
require the study of kernel lengthscales across dimensions [44, Chapter 5]. The larger the value, the less
relevant the feature is to the model. Albeit straightforward, this approach comes with three shortcomings:
(1) It only provides global feature importances and Figure 1: An example of RKHS-SHAP providing local explanations to why a kernel logiscannot be individualised to each single prediction. tic model predicts this patient to be diabetic. [11].
†

Work mainly done while the authors were with the
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford

RKHS-SHAP provides a more granular level of
explanation than studying lengthscales across dimensions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

