Meta-Complementing the Semantics of Short Texts in
Neural Topic Models

Delvin Ce Zhang
School of Computing and Information Systems
Singapore Management University
Singapore 178902
cezhang.2018@smu.edu.sg
Hady W. Lauw
School of Computing and Information Systems
Singapore Management University
Singapore 178902
hadywlauw@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Topic models infer latent topic distributions based on observed word co-occurrences
in a text corpus. While typically a corpus contains documents of variable lengths,
most previous topic models treat documents of different lengths uniformly, assuming that each document is sufficiently informative. However, shorter documents
may have only a few word co-occurrences, resulting in inferior topic quality. Some
other previous works assume that all documents are short, and leverage external
auxiliary data, e.g., pretrained word embeddings and document connectivity. Orthogonal to existing works, we remedy this problem within the corpus itself by
proposing a Meta-Complement Topic Model, which improves topic quality of
short texts by transferring the semantic knowledge learned on long documents
to complement semantically limited short texts. As a self-contained module, our
framework is agnostic to auxiliary data and can be further improved by flexibly
integrating them into our framework. Specifically, when incorporating document
connectivity, we further extend our framework to complement documents with
limited edges. Experiments demonstrate the advantage of our framework.

1

Introduction

Much of the data on the Web can be represented as text documents. Topic models help to understand
the main themes within documents, i.e., each document is represented by a topic distribution, and
each topic is interpreted by its key words. The quality of topic distribution of each document depends
on sufficient word co-occurrences. However, many real-word corpora contain documents of variable
lengths. Academic papers vary from journal manuscripts to conference papers to extended abstracts.
News articles could be headlines, short or full articles, or detailed commentaries. Fig. 1(a) illustrates
an academic paper corpus where the distribution of document lengths exhibits a long-tail distribution.
Despite variable lengths (with different degrees of sufficiency of word co-occurrences), existing
works, e.g., ProdLDA [31] and GATON [37], treat documents uniformly, resulting in inferior topic
quality for short texts. Evidentially, Fig. 1(b) presents document classification accuracy on four
subsets of corpus with descending lengths. Accuracies gradually drop as the length decreases. The
inferior topic quality of short texts limits the overall performance of a topic model.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

