MultiScan: Scalable RGBD scanning for
3D environments with articulated objects

Yongsen Mao, Yiming Zhang, Hanxiao Jiang, Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva
Simon Fraser University
https://3dlg-hcvc.github.io/multiscan/

Multiple scans & multiple object states
for each scene

Object instance
annotations

Part & part articulation
annotations

Tasks
Object instance segmentation

Part instance segmentation

Part mobility estimation

Figure 1: MultiScan offers 3D reconstructions of indoor scenes with multiple scans, capturing objects
in multiple states, and with multiple levels of annotations. For each scene, we provide multiple scans
(leftmost column) with objects in varied states (second column). Each scan is densely annotated
with semantic object instances (third column) that are corresponded across scans. Each object is
annotated with parts and part articulation parameters (fourth column). Different scans capture objects
in different articulation states (e.g., the cabinet door is opened in the bottom row). The MultiScan
pipeline and dataset enable investigation of holistic 3D scene understanding with articulated objects
by supporting tasks that reason at multiple levels of a 3D scene (rightmost column).

Abstract
We introduce MultiScan, a scalable RGBD dataset construction pipeline leveraging
commodity mobile devices to scan indoor scenes with articulated objects and
web-based semantic annotation interfaces to efficiently annotate object and part
semantics and part mobility parameters. We use this pipeline to collect 273 scans
of 117 indoor scenes containing 10957 objects and 5129 parts. The resulting
MultiScan dataset provides RGBD streams with per-frame camera poses, textured
3D surface meshes, richly annotated part-level and object-level semantic labels,
and part mobility parameters. We validate our dataset on instance segmentation and
part mobility estimation tasks and benchmark methods for these tasks from prior
work. Our experiments show that part segmentation and mobility estimation in real
3D scenes remain challenging despite recent progress in 3D object segmentation.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

