NSNet: A General Neural Probabilistic Framework for
Satisfiability Problems

1

Zhaoyu Li1,2 , Xujie Si1,2,3
McGill University, Mila – Quebec AI Institute, 3 CIFAR AI Research Chair
{zli199, xsi}@cs.mcgill.ca
2

Abstract
We present the Neural Satisfiability Network (NSNet), a general neural framework that models satisfiability problems as probabilistic inference and meanwhile
exhibits proper explainability. Inspired by the Belief Propagation (BP), NSNet
uses a novel graph neural network (GNN) to parameterize BP in the latent space,
where its hidden representations maintain the same probabilistic interpretation as
BP. NSNet can be flexibly configured to solve both SAT and #SAT problems by
applying different learning objectives. For SAT, instead of directly predicting a
satisfying assignment, NSNet performs marginal inference among all satisfying
solutions, which we empirically find is more feasible for neural networks to learn.
With the estimated marginals, a satisfying assignment can be efficiently generated
by rounding and executing a stochastic local search. For #SAT, NSNet performs
approximate model counting by learning the Bethe approximation of the partition
function. Our evaluations show that NSNet achieves competitive results in terms
of inference accuracy and time efficiency on multiple SAT and #SAT datasets 1 .

1

Introduction

The Boolean Satisfiability Problem (SAT) and the Sharp Satisfiability Problem (#SAT, or model
counting) are fundamental challenges for computer science, with numerous applications including
software verification [12, 19], hardware design [28, 36], and planning [14, 15]. Although modern SAT
and #SAT solvers have achieved practical success in these domains, the performance of satisfiability
solvers heavily relies on custom search heuristics [8]. However, designing good heuristics is highly
non-trivial and time-consuming. With the superior learning ability of neural networks, recent research
on satisfiability problems has migrated from hand-engineered methods toward data-driven ones.
Various neural methods have been proposed for satisfiability problems [18]. A line of research aims at
building standalone neural solvers, which directly predicts the satisfiability [35, 22, 10] or a satisfying
assignment [2, 3, 31] of a given instance. Other approaches integrate the neural modules into classic
solvers, improving the branching heuristics in SAT [34] or #SAT [42] solvers. Yet, despite recent
progress, the interpretation of these neural networks still remains a mystery: why and how can neural
networks learn to tackle satisfiability problems? Answering this question is crucial for utilizing
neural networks on satisfiability problems, especially for designing better neural architectures.
This paper addresses the above question by developing an explainable neural framework that can be
interpreted using graphical models. Specifically, we propose Neural Satisfiability Network (NSNet),
a novel graph neural network (GNN) framework taking the formulation of solving satisfiability
problems as probabilistic inference. Inspired by the inference algorithm Belief Propagation (BP),
NSNet adopts a new graph encoding for propositional formulas and employs a novel message passing
mechanism that subsumes the BP’s updating rules in the latent space. In such a manner, NSNet serves
1

Code is available at https://github.com/zhaoyu-li/NSNet.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

