Distributionally Robust Optimization with Data
Geometry

1

Jiashuo Liu1,∗, Jiayun Wu1,* , Bo Li2 , Peng Cui1,†
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
liujiashuo77@gmail.com,jiayun.wu.work@gmail.com
libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) serves as a robust alternative to empirical risk minimization (ERM), which optimizes the worst-case distribution in an
uncertainty set typically specified by distance metrics including f -divergence and
the Wasserstein distance. The metrics defined in the ostensible high dimensional
space lead to exceedingly large uncertainty sets, resulting in the underperformance
of most existing DRO methods. It has been well documented that high dimensional data approximately resides on low dimensional manifolds. In this work,
to further constrain the uncertainty set, we incorporate data geometric properties
into the design of distance metrics, obtaining our novel Geometric Wasserstein
DRO (GDRO). Empowered by Gradient Flow, we derive a generically applicable
approximate algorithm for the optimization of GDRO, and provide the bounded
error rate of the approximation as well as the convergence rate of our algorithm. We
also theoretically characterize the edge cases where certain existing DRO methods
are the degeneracy of GDRO. Extensive experiments justify the superiority of our
GDRO to existing DRO methods in multiple settings with strong distributional
shifts, and confirm that the uncertainty set of GDRO adapts to data geometry.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms with empirical risk minimization often suffer from poor generalization
performance under distributional shifts in real applications due to the widespread latent heterogeneity,
domain shifts, and data selection bias, etc. It is demanded for machine learning algorithms to
achieve uniformly good performances against potential distributional shifts, especially in high-stake
applications. Towards this goal, distributionally robust optimization (DRO) [27, 23, 29, 4, 13, 11],
stemming from the literature of robust learning, has been proposed and developed in recent years.
It optimizes the worst-case distribution within an uncertainty set P(Ptr ) lying around the training
distribution Ptr . When the testing distribution Pte is contained in P(Ptr ), DRO could guarantee the
generalization performance on Pte .
In principle, the effectiveness of DRO heavily depends on the rationality of its uncertainty set P(Ptr )
which is commonly formulated as a ball surrounding the training distribution endowed with a certain
distance metric. An ideal uncertainty set should be constituted by all realistic distributions that may be
encountered in test environments. However, existing DRO methods adopting the Wasserstein distance
(i.e. WDRO methods [27, 29, 4, 13]) or f -divergence distance (i.e. f -DRO methods [23, 11]) tend to
generate over-flexible uncertainty sets that incorporate unrealistic distributions far beyond the ideal
∗
†

Equal Contributions
Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

