Bayesian Risk Markov Decision Processes

Yifan Lin
Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
ylin429@gatech.edu

Yuxuan Ren
Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
yren79@gatech.edu

Enlu Zhou
Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
enlu.zhou@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
We consider finite-horizon Markov Decision Processes where parameters, such as
transition probabilities, are unknown and estimated from data. The popular distributionally robust approach to addressing the parameter uncertainty can sometimes
be overly conservative. In this paper, we propose a new formulation, Bayesian
risk Markov decision process (BR-MDP), to address parameter uncertainty in
MDPs, where a risk functional is applied in nested form to the expected total cost
with respect to the Bayesian posterior distributions of the unknown parameters.
The proposed formulation provides more flexible risk attitudes towards parameter
uncertainty and takes into account the availability of data in future time stages.
To solve the proposed formulation with the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) risk
functional, we propose an efficient approximation algorithm by deriving an analytical approximation of the value function and utilizing the convexity of CVaR. We
demonstrate the empirical performance of the BR-MDP formulation and proposed
algorithms on a gambler’s betting problem and an inventory control problem.

1

Introduction

Markov decision process (MDP) is a paradigm for modeling sequential decision making under
uncertainty. From a modeling perspective, some parameters of MDPs are unknown and need to
be estimated from data. In this paper, we consider MDPs where transition probability and cost
parameters are not known. A natural question would be: given a finite and probably small set of data,
how does a decision maker find an “optimal” policy that minimizes the expected total cost under the
uncertain transition probability and cost parameters?
A possible approach that mitigates the parameter uncertainty (also known as epistemic uncertainty)
lies in the framework of distributionally robust MDPs (DR-MDPs, [1]). DR-MDP regards the
unknown parameters as random variables and assumes the associated distributions belong to an
ambiguity set that is constructed from the data. DR-MDP then finds the optimal policy that minimizes
the expected total cost with the parameters following the most adversarial distribution within the
ambiguity set. However, distributionally robust approaches might yield overly conservative solutions
that perform poorly for scenarios that are more likely to happen than the worst case. Moreover, as
pointed out in [2], DR-MDP does not explicitly specify the dynamics of the considered problem in
the sense that the distribution of the unknown parameters does not depend on realizations of the data
process, and therefore is generally not time consistent (we refer the reader to [2] for details on time
consistency).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

