Constrained Stochastic Nonconvex Optimization with
State-dependent Markov Data
Abhishek Roy∗

Krishnakumar Balasubramanian†

Saeed Ghadimi‡

Abstract
We study stochastic optimization algorithms for constrained nonconvex stochastic
optimization problems with Markovian data. In particular, we focus on the case
when the transition kernel of the Markov chain is state-dependent. Such stochastic optimization problems arise in various machine learning problems including
strategic classification and reinforcement learning. For this problem, we study both
projection-based and projection-free algorithms. In both cases, we establish that
the number of calls to the stochastic first-order oracle to obtain an appropriately
defined ϵ-stationary point is of the order O(1/ϵ2.5 ). In the projection-free setting
we additionally establish that the number of calls to the linear minimization oracle
is of order O(1/ϵ5.5 ). We also empirically demonstrate the performance of our
algorithm on the problem of strategic classification with neural networks.

1

Introduction

We consider the following stochastic optimization problem
argmin f (θ) = argmin E [F (θ; x)] ,
θ∈Θ

(1)

θ∈Θ

where (i) the expectation is taken over the stationary distribution, πθ , of the random vector x, (ii) F
(and hence f ) is a potentially non-convex function in θ, and (iii) Θ is a compact and convex constraint
set. Stochastic approximation algorithms for solving problem (1), given an independent and identically
distributed (iid) data stream {xk }k drawn from π, are well-studied. Such iid assumptions are
commonly made in various machine learning and statistical problems including empirical risk
minimization [SSBD14], sparse recovery [BJMO12] and compressed sensing [FR13, Lan20]. We
refer to [MB11, ABRW12, RSS12, GL13, SZ13, LZ16, ACD+ 19] for a partial list of non-asymptotic
upper and lower bounds on the oracle complexity of widely-used stochastic approximation algorithms
like the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and the Stochastic Conditional Gradient Algorithm.
Our focus in this work is on the case when the data sequence {xk }k is drawn from a Markov
chain with a state-dependent transition kernel Pθ . Such a setting arises in several machine learning
applications including but not limited to strategic classification [HMPW16, CDP15, MDPZH20,
LW22] and reinforcement learning [Bar92, GSK13, ZJM21, KMMW19, QW20]. Despite their
prevalence in practice, a deeper understanding of the non-asymptotic oracle complexity of stochastic
approximation for Markovian data is only now starting to emerge. We establish non-asymptotic
∗

abroy@ucdavis.edu. Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San Diego. Work done
while being affiliated with the Department of Statistics, UC Davis. Research of this author was supported by
National Science Foundation (NSF) grant CCF-1934568.
†
kbala@ucdavis.edu. Department of Statistics, University of California, Davis. Research of this author
was supported in part by UC Davis CeDAR (Center for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Research)
Innovative Data Science Seed Funding Program and NSF Grant DMS-2053918.
‡
sghadimi@uwaterloo.ca. Department of Management Sciences, University of Waterloo. Research of
this author was supported by an NSERC Discovery Grant.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

