CAESAR: An Embodied Simulator for Generating
Multimodal Referring Expression Datasets

Md Mofijul Islam, Reza Manuel Mirzaiee, Alexi Gladstone, Haley N. Green, Tariq Iqbal
School of Engineering and Applied Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA
{mi8uu, rmm3ya, abg4br, hng9vf, tiqbal}@virginia.edu

Abstract
Humans naturally use verbal utterances and nonverbal gestures to refer to various
objects (known as referring expressions) in different interactional scenarios. As collecting real human interaction datasets are costly and laborious, synthetic datasets
are often used to train models to unambiguously detect relationships among objects.
However, existing synthetic data generation tools that provide referring expressions
generally neglect nonverbal gestures. Additionally, while a few small-scale datasets
contain multimodal cues (verbal and nonverbal), these datasets only capture the
nonverbal gestures from an exo-centric perspective (observer). As models can use
complementary information from multimodal cues to recognize referring expressions, generating multimodal data from multiple views can help to develop robust
models. To address these critical issues, in this paper, we present a novel embodied
simulator, CAESAR, to generate multimodal referring expressions containing both
verbal utterances and nonverbal cues captured from multiple views. Using our simulator, we have generated two large-scale embodied referring expression datasets,
which we have released publicly 1 . We have conducted experimental analyses on
embodied spatial relation grounding using various state-of-the-art baseline models. Our experimental results suggest that visual perspective affects the models’
performance; and that nonverbal cues improve spatial relation grounding accuracy.
Finally, we will release the simulator publicly to allow researchers to generate new
embodied interaction datasets.

1

Introduction

Natural communication forms of humans are inherently multimodal with verbal and nonverbal
(gestures and gaze) signals [1–5]. People use multimodal cues with their interaction partners for
the joint focus of attention on salient objects and events, specifically when they share a physical
space in an environment [3–9]. As humans use multimodal communication forms for interactions, we
need AI-driven agents interacting with us to understand multimodal referring expressions to generate
seamless interactions [3, 10–12].
Comprehending referring expressions has been generally studied in the form of the spatial relation
grounding task [13–26]. This task involves identifying whether the verbal utterance of the spatial
relationships between objects holds in the visual scene [15, 16]. However, the exclusion of nonverbal
signals in the model makes the problem different from how people interact naturally in shared
physical spaces, as people start to use multimodal signals very early in their developmental phase
[1, 2, 5, 27–32]. To address this gap, in this work, we have designed an embodied spatial relation
grounding task, which involves identifying whether a person is verbally and nonverbally (pointing
gesture and gaze) referring to the same objects in the visual scene. This task can help develop learning
frameworks to understand multimodal referring expressions in embodied settings.
1

CAESAR Datasets: caesar-simulator.github.io

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

