Trust Region Policy Optimization
with Optimal Transport Discrepancies:
Duality and Algorithm for Continuous Actions
Antonio Terpin⇤
Automatic Control Laboratory
ETH Zürich
aterpin@ethz.ch

Nicolas Lanzetti*
Batuhan Yardim
Automatic Control Laboratory
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
ETH Zürich
lnicolas@ethz.ch
alibatuhan.yardim@ethz.ch

Florian Dörfler
Automatic Control Laboratory
ETH Zürich
dorfler@ethz.ch

Giorgia Ramponi
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH AI Center
giorgia.ramponi@ai.ethz.ch

Abstract
Policy Optimization (PO) algorithms have been proven particularly suited to handle
the high-dimensionality of real-world continuous control tasks. In this context,
Trust Region Policy Optimization methods represent a popular approach to stabilize
the policy updates. These usually rely on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
to limit the change in the policy. The Wasserstein distance represents a natural
alternative, in place of the KL divergence, to define trust regions or to regularize the objective function. However, state-of-the-art works either resort to its
approximations or do not provide an algorithm for continuous state-action spaces,
reducing the applicability of the method. In this paper, we explore optimal transport discrepancies (which include the Wasserstein distance) to define trust regions,
and we propose a novel algorithm – Optimal Transport Trust Region Policy Optimization (OT-TRPO) – for continuous state-action spaces. We circumvent the
infinite-dimensional optimization problem for PO by providing a one-dimensional
dual reformulation for which strong duality holds. We then analytically derive
the optimal policy update given the solution of the dual problem. This way, we
bypass the computation of optimal transport costs and of optimal transport maps,
which we implicitly characterize by solving the dual formulation. Finally, we
provide an experimental evaluation of our approach across various control tasks.
Our results show that optimal transport discrepancies can offer an advantage over
state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved outstanding results in numerous fields, from resource
management [16], recommendation systems [42], and optimization of chemical reactions [44], to
video-games [18, 43, 10] and board games [39], without sparing the world’s champion of GO [32].
Many of these successful applications rely on Policy Optimization (PO) algorithms, a family of RL
methods that are particularly suited to handle the high-dimensionality of real-world control tasks. PO
algorithms approach the RL setting as an optimization problem in the policy space. In this context, the
main challenge is to provide policy improvement guarantees. One remarkable option in this direction
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

