Structural Kernel Search via Bayesian Optimization
and Symbolical Optimal Transport

Matthias Bitzer Mona Meister Christoph Zimmer
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
{matthias.bitzer3,mona.meister,christoph.zimmer}@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Despite recent advances in automated machine learning, model selection is still
a complex and computationally intensive process. For Gaussian processes (GPs),
selecting the kernel is a crucial task, often done manually by the expert. Additionally, evaluating the model selection criteria for Gaussian processes typically scales
cubically in the sample size, rendering kernel search particularly computationally
expensive. We propose a novel, efficient search method through a general, structured kernel space. Previous methods solved this task via Bayesian optimization
and relied on measuring the distance between GP’s directly in function space
to construct a kernel-kernel. We present an alternative approach by defining a
kernel-kernel over the symbolic representation of the statistical hypothesis that is
associated with a kernel. We empirically show that this leads to a computationally
more efficient way of searching through a discrete kernel space.

1

Introduction

In many real-work applications of machine learning, tuning the hyperparameters or selecting the
machine learning method itself is a crucial part of the workflow. It is often done by experts and
data-scientist. However, the number of possible methods and models is constantly growing, and
it is becoming increasingly important to automatically select the right model for the task at hand.
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a prominent method that can be used for model selection and hyperparameter tuning. It can handle black-box oracles with expensive function evaluations, which are two
characteristics often encountered when doing model selection [17]. Important applications in this
context are choosing the hyperparameters in the training process of deep neural networks (DNN) [17],
or dealing with discrete and structured problems like choosing the architecture of DNN’s [5, 11].
Gaussian processes (GP) are another important model-class. They are often utilized as surrogate
models in BO [17], for time-series and statistical modeling [7, 3] or in active learning loops [23, 15].
The properties of GP’s are mainly governed by its kernel that specifies the assumptions made on the
underlying function. Choosing the right kernel is therefore a crucial part of applying GP’s and is
often done by the expert. Recent work [9] treated the kernel selection as a black-box optimization
problem and used Bayesian optimization to solve it. This allowed searching over a highly structured,
discrete space of kernels. However, their proposed kernel-kernel measures the distance between
two GP’s directly in function space, which is a computationally expensive task itself. This makes
the method difficult to apply for the frequent scenarios where the evaluation of the model selection
criteria requires only a medium amount of time.
We propose measuring the distance between two kernels via their symbolical representation of their
associated statistical hypothesis. We utilize the highly general kernel-grammar, presented in [3], as
underlying kernel space, where each kernel is build from base kernels and operators, like e.g.
LIN + ((SE × PER) + SE)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

