A Policy-Guided Imitation Approach for
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Haoran Xu♠∗ Li Jiang♣∗ Jianxiong Li♣ Xianyuan Zhan♣,♢
♠
JD Technology, Beijing, China
♣
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
♢
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{ryanxhr,jiangli3859}@gmail.com

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) methods can generally be categorized into two
types: RL-based and imitation-based. RL-based methods could in principle enjoy
out-of-distribution generalization but suffer from erroneous off-policy evaluation.
Imitation-based methods avoid off-policy evaluation but are too conservative to
surpass the dataset. In this study, we propose an alternative approach, inheriting
the training stability of imitation-style methods while still allowing logical out-ofdistribution generalization. We decompose the conventional reward-maximizing
policy in offline RL into a guide-policy and an execute-policy. During training, the
guide-policy and execute-policy are learned using only data from the dataset, in a
supervised and decoupled manner. During evaluation, the guide-policy guides the
execute-policy by telling where it should go so that the reward can be maximized.
By doing so, our algorithm allows state-compositionality from the dataset, rather
than action-compositionality conducted in prior imitation-style methods. We dumb
this new approach Policy-guided Offline RL (POR). POR demonstrates the stateof-the-art performance on D4RL, a standard benchmark for offline RL. We also
highlight the benefits of POR in terms of improving with supplementary suboptimal
data and easily adapting to new tasks by only changing the guide-policy. Code is
available at https://github.com/ryanxhr/POR.

1

Introduction

Offline RL, also known as batch RL, allows learning policies from previously collected data, without
online interactions [29, 31]. It is a promising area for bringing RL into real-world domains, such as
robotics [21], healthcare [47] and industrial control [62]. In such scenarios, arbitrary exploration with
untrained policies is costly or dangerous, but sufficient prior data is available. While most off-policy
RL algorithms are applicable in the offline setting by filling the replay buffer with offline data,
improving the policy beyond the level of the behavior policy often entails querying the value function
(i.e., Q function) about values of actions that were not seen in the dataset. Those out-of-distribution
actions can be deemed as adversarial examples of the Q function [28], which cause extrapolation
error of the Q-function. The error will be accumulated by the deadly triad issue [50], propagate
across the state-action space through the iterative dynamic programming procedure [4], and can not
be eliminated without requiring a growing batch of online samples [31].
To alleviate this issue, prior model-free offline RL methods typically add a behavior regularization
term to the policy improvement step, to limit how far it deviates from the behavior policy. This
can be achieved explicitly by calculating some divergence metrics [26, 54, 38, 13], or implicitly
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to Haoran Xu, Xianyuan Zhan.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

