On the Strong Correlation Between Model Invariance
and Generalization
Weijian Deng Stephen Gould Liang Zheng
Australian National University
{firstname.lastname}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Generalization and invariance are two essential properties of machine learning
models. Generalization captures a model’s ability to classify unseen data while
invariance measures the consistency of model predictions on transformed data.
Existing research suggests a positive relationship: a model generalizing well should
be invariant to certain visual factors. Building on this qualitative implication we
make two contributions. First, we introduce effective invariance (EI), a simple and
reasonable measure of model invariance which does not rely on image labels. Given
predictions on a test image and its transformed version, EI measures how well
the predictions agree and with what level of confidence. Second, using invariance
scores computed by EI, we perform large-scale quantitative correlation studies
between generalization and invariance, focusing on rotation and grayscale transformations. From a model-centric view, we observe generalization and invariance of
different models exhibit a strong linear relationship, on both in-distribution and
out-of-distribution datasets. From a dataset-centric view, we find a certain model’s
accuracy and invariance linearly correlated on different test sets. Apart from these
major findings, other minor but interesting insights are also discussed.

1

Introduction

Generalization and invariance are two important model properties in machine learning. The former
characterizes how well a model performs when encountering in-distribution or out-of-distribution
(OOD) test data [1–5]. The latter assesses how consistent model predictions are on transformed
test data [6–12]. Therefore, understanding how the two properties are related would benefit model
decision analysis under dynamic environments.
The importance of model invariance on generalization has been qualitatively explored [9, 12–15].
For example, adding rotation invariance to the model improves its in-distribution (ID) classification
accuracy [14, 16, 17]; a shift-invariant model is robust to perturbation [9]. In addition, some works
provide a neuroscientific perspective to investigate the importance of invariant representations for
pattern recognition [13, 15, 18–22]. Furthermore, theoretical investigations suggest that learning
invariant features benefits model generalization [12, 22]. However, most existing research is limited
to a few ID datasets and model architectures. As such, the relationship of interest remains unknown
in many other scenarios, such as OOD and large-scale test datasets, and other types of models.
Before performing the quantitative study, it is necessary to first quantify generalization and invariance.
For the former, the deep models we consider are well trained, so we simply use the accuracy on
the test set, as in many previous works [3, 2, 23]. In comparison, quantifying invariance is not as
straightforward. Some works use model accuracy drop when the test set undergoes transformations to
indicate invariance ability [24, 7, 17]. While this strategy is useful for a single model, its effectiveness
is limited when comparing the invariance of multiple models. Others resort to consistency, i.e.,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

