Explaining Preferences with Shapley Values

Robert Hu∗†
Amazon
London

Siu Lun Chau∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Jaime Ferrando Huertas
Shaped
New York

Dino Sejdinovic †
School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences
University of Adelaide

Abstract
While preference modelling is becoming one of the pillars of machine learning, the
problem of preference explanation remains challenging and underexplored. In this
paper, we propose P REF -SHAP, a Shapley value-based model explanation framework for pairwise comparison data. We derive the appropriate value functions for
preference models and further extend the framework to model and explain context
specific information, such as the surface type in a tennis game. To demonstrate
the utility of P REF -SHAP, we apply our method to a variety of synthetic and
real-world datasets and show that richer and more insightful explanations can be
obtained over the baseline.

1

Introduction

Preference learning [1] is a classical problem in machine learning, where one is interested in learning
the order relations on a collection of data items. Preference learning algorithms [2–5] often assume
that there is a latent utility function f : X 7→ R dictating the outcome of preferences, where
X denotes the domain of item covariates. An explicit feedback such as item ratings or rankings
from recommender systems can be treated as noisy evaluations of f , whereas pairwise comparison
data (also known as duelling data) arising from, e.g., sports match outcomes [6, 7] can be used to
implicitly infer f , i.e. item x(ℓ) is preferred over (beats) item x(r) when f (x(ℓ) ) > f (x(r) ). As
shown by Kahneman and Tversky [8], humans often struggle with evaluating absolute quantities
when it comes to eliciting preferences, but are broadly capable of evaluating relative differences, a
core observation often exploited in preference learning. Motivated by such, this work will focus on
explaining preferences inferred using duelling data.
Explaining preference models is crucial when they are applied in areas such as recommendation
systems [9], finance [10], and sports science [11] for the practitioner to trust, debug and understand
the value of their findings [12]. However, despite its importance, no prior work has studied this
problem to the best of our knowledge. While one may suggest applying existing explainability tools
such as LIME [13], or SHAP [14] to a learned utility function f , we reason that this approach only
explains the utility but not the mechanism of eliciting preferences itself. We highlight the important
differences between these two viewpoints in our numerical experiments. Moreover, the utility-based
model places a strong rankability assumption on the underlying preferences, meaning that if we
define x(ℓ) ⪯ x(r) ⇐⇒ f (x(ℓ) ) ≤ f (x(r) ), then ⪯ is a total order on all the items. However, as
Pahikkala et al. [15] and Chau et al. [16] have discussed, there are many departures from rankability
in practice, e.g. we might easily see a preference of A over B, B over C, but C over A – conforming
to the rock-paper-scissors relation. Such inconsistent preferences are under frequent study in social
∗
†

Equal contribution, order decided by coinflip
Work mainly done while the authors were with the Department of Statistics, University of Oxford

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

