Pessimism for Offline Linear Contextual Bandits
using `p Confidence Sets

Gene Li
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
gene@ttic.edu

Cong Ma
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
congm@uchicago.edu

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We present a family {b
πp }p≥1 of pessimistic learning rules for offline learning of
linear contextual bandits, relying on confidence sets with respect to different `p
norms, where π
b2 corresponds to Bellman-consistent pessimism (BCP), while π
b∞
is a novel generalization of lower confidence bound (LCB) to the linear setting. We
show that the novel π
b∞ learning rule is, in a sense, adaptively optimal, as it achieves
the minimax performance (up to log factors) against all `q -constrained problems,
and as such it strictly dominates all other predictors in the family, including π
b2 .

1

Introduction

Offline (or batch) reinforcement learning (RL) [17, 18] seeks to learn a good policy from fixed
historical data without active interactions with the environment. This offline paradigm has been
widely adopted in applications including dialog generation [10], autonomous driving [43], and robotic
control [16], etc.
When the offline dataset has insufficient coverage over the state and action spaces, planning via
nominal estimates of either the value function or the model may perform poorly—a phenomenon that
is observed even in a simple two-armed bandit [24]. This challenge motivates the adoption of the
pessimism principle for solving offline RL. In essence, the pessimism principle discounts policies
that are less represented/supported in the offline dataset, and hence is pessimistic/conservative in
outputting a policy. Built on this common principle, a diverse collection of pessimistic learning rules
have been proposed in theory and practice [11, 24, 36, 37, 45, 46, 9, 15, 34, 14, 21, 42]. This leads
us to the following natural question:
Which pessimistic learning rule should one use for solving offline RL problems?
In this paper, we address the question in the setting of offline linear contextual bandits, in which
the expected reward—as a function of the state-action pair—is linear with respect to a known
feature mapping that maps state-action pairs to finite-dimensional vectors. Our goal is to make
sense of previously proposed learning rules for offline RL, and understand which learning rule is
“optimal” in a statistical sense. We present a general family {b
πp }p≥1 of pessimistic learning rules
based on the construction of `p confidence sets for the unknown linear parameter. We advocate
for π
b∞ , a new `∞ learning rule for offline linear contextual bandits, which we call Pessimism via
Uniform Norm Confidence (for short, PUNC).1 PUNC directly extends the lower confidence bound
algorithm proposed in the tabular contextual bandit setting [24]. We show that PUNC (1) achieves a
suboptimality guarantee that dominates other π
bp (up to log factors, which we ignore throughout the
introduction), and (2) has an adaptive minimax optimality property that is unique among the family
{b
πp }p≥1 . In particular, we argue that PUNC dominates prior learning rules which are based on `2
pessimism (e.g., [37, 45, 11]) and which cannot attain adaptive minimax optimality.
1

Throughout the paper, we use π
b∞ and PUNC interchangeably.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

