DC-BENCH: Dataset Condensation Benchmark

1

Justin Cui1 , Ruochen Wang1 , Si Si2 , Cho-Jui Hsieh1

Department of Computer Science, UCLA,

{justincui, ruocwang}@ucla.edu

2

Google Research

sisidaisy@google.com

chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Dataset Condensation is a newly emerging technique aiming at learning a tiny
dataset that captures the rich information encoded in the original dataset. As the
size of datasets contemporary machine learning models rely on becomes increasingly large, condensation methods become a prominent direction for accelerating
network training and reducing data storage. Despite numerous methods have
been proposed in this rapidly growing field, evaluating and comparing different
condensation methods is non-trivial and still remains an open issue. The quality
of condensed dataset are often shadowed by many critical contributing factors to
the end performance, such as data augmentation and model architectures. The
lack of a systematic way to evaluate and compare condensation methods not only
hinders our understanding of existing techniques, but also discourages practical
usage of the synthesized datasets. This work provides the first large-scale standardized benchmark on Dataset Condensation. It consists of a suite of evaluations to
comprehensively reflect the generability and effectiveness of condensation methods through the lens of their generated dataset. Leveraging this benchmark, we
conduct a large-scale study of current condensation methods, and report many
insightful findings that open up new possibilities for future development. The
benchmark library, including evaluators, baseline methods, and generated datasets,
is open-sourced1 to facilitate future research and application.

1

Introduction

Dataset plays a central role in the performance of machine learning models. With advanced data
collection and labeling tools, it becomes easier than ever to construct large scale datasets. The rapidly
growing size of contemporary datasets not only posts challenges to data storage and preprocessing,
but also makes it increasingly expensive to train machine learning models and design new methods,
such as architecture, hyperparameter, and loss function [2, 15, 52, 5]. As a result, data condensation
emerges as a promising direction that aims at compressing the original large scale dataset into a small
subset of information-rich examples.
In this work, we focus on the newly emerging techniques where the condensed dataset comprises of a
set of synthesized samples, learned to matching some statistics to the original dataset or maximizing
some utility. In particular, [48] proposed a dataset distillation algorithm to learn the synthesized
dataset via bi-level optimization, showing outstanding performance than existing data selection
methods under lower compression ratio2 . After that, many data condensation methods have been
proposed to construct synthesized datasets based on various objectives, such as matching gradients [55,
53], embeddings [54], model parameters [4], and kernel ridge regression [32, 33]. It has been reported
that all these data-synthesis methods significantly outperform classical data-selection methods.
1
2

the benchmark is open sourced at https://github.com/justincui03/dc_benchmark
compression ratio = compressed dataset size / full dataset size

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

