On the Complexity of Adversarial Decision Making
Dylan J. Foster

Alexander Rakhlin

Ayush Sekhari

Karthik Sridharan

dylanfoster@microsoft.com

rakhlin@mit.edu

sekhari@mit.edu

ks999@cornell.edu

Abstract
A central problem in online learning and decision making—from bandits to reinforcement learning—is to understand what modeling assumptions lead to sampleefficient learning guarantees. We consider a general adversarial decision making
framework that encompasses (structured) bandit problems with adversarial rewards
and reinforcement learning problems with adversarial dynamics. Our main result is to show—via new upper and lower bounds—that the Decision-Estimation
Coefficient, a complexity measure introduced by Foster et al. [17] in the stochastic counterpart to our setting, is necessary and sufficient to obtain low regret for
adversarial decision making. However, compared to the stochastic setting, one
must apply the Decision-Estimation Coefficient to the convex hull of the class of
models (or, hypotheses) under consideration. This establishes that the price of
accommodating adversarial rewards or dynamics is governed by the behavior of the
model class under convexification, and recovers a number of existing results—both
positive and negative. En route to obtaining these guarantees, we provide new
structural results that connect the Decision-Estimation Coefficient to variants of
other well-known complexity measures, including the Information Ratio of Russo
and Van Roy [47] and the Exploration-by-Optimization objective of Lattimore and
György [32].

1

Introduction

To reliably deploy data-driven decision making methods in real-world systems where safety is critical,
such methods should satisfy two desiderata: (i) provable robustness in the face of dynamic or even
adversarial environments, and (ii) ability to effectively take advantage of problem structure as modeled
by the practitioner. In high-dimensional problems, this entails efficiently generalizing across states
and actions while delicately exploring new decisions.
For decision making in static, stochastic environments, recent years have seen extensive investigation
into optimal sample complexity and algorithm design principles, and the foundations are beginning
to take shape. With an emphasis on reinforcement learning, a burgeoning body of research identifies
specific modeling assumptions under which sample-efficient interactive decision making is possible
[12, 54, 20, 39, 5, 27, 14, 36, 13, 56], as well as general structural conditions that aim to unify these
assumptions [45, 19, 51, 53, 15, 21, 17]. For dynamic or adversarial settings, however, comparatively
little is known outside of (i) positive results for special cases such as adversarial bandit problems
[4, 3, 18, 10, 1, 7, 26, 16, 8, 29], and (ii) a handful of negative results suggesting that online
reinforcement learning in agnostic or adversarial settings can actually be statistically intractable
[48, 37]. These developments raise the following questions: (a) what are the underlying phenomena
that govern the statistical complexity of decision making in adversarial settings? (b) what are the
corresponding algorithmic design principles that attain optimal statistical complexity?
Contributions.
We consider an adversarial variant of the Decision Making with Structured
Observations (DMSO) framework introduced in Foster et al. [17], where a learner or decision-maker
interacts with a sequence of models (reward distributions in the case of bandits, or MDPs in the case
of reinforcement learning) chosen by an adaptive adversary, and aims to minimize regret against the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

