Multi-fidelity Monte Carlo:
a pseudo-marginal approach

Diana Cai
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
dcai@cs.princeton.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
rpa@princeton.edu

Abstract
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is an established approach for uncertainty
quantification and propagation in scientific applications. A key challenge in applying MCMC to scientific domains is computation: the target density of interest is
often a function of expensive computations, such as a high-fidelity physical simulation, an intractable integral, or a slowly-converging iterative algorithm. Thus,
using an MCMC algorithms with an expensive target density becomes impractical, as these expensive computations need to be evaluated at each iteration of the
algorithm. In practice, these computations often approximated via a cheaper, lowfidelity computation, leading to bias in the resulting target density. Multi-fidelity
MCMC algorithms combine models of varying fidelities in order to obtain an approximate target density with lower computational cost. In this paper, we describe
a class of asymptotically exact multi-fidelity MCMC algorithms for the setting
where a sequence of models of increasing fidelity can be computed that approximates the expensive target density of interest. We take a pseudo-marginal MCMC
approach for multi-fidelity inference that utilizes a cheaper, randomized-fidelity
unbiased estimator of the target fidelity constructed via random truncation of a
telescoping series of the low-fidelity sequence of models. Finally, we discuss and
evaluate the proposed multi-fidelity MCMC approach on several applications, including log-Gaussian Cox process modeling, Bayesian ODE system identification,
PDE-constrained optimization, and Gaussian process parameter inference.

1

Introduction

Simulation and computational modeling play a key role in science, engineering, economics, and
many other areas. When these models are high-quality and accurate, they are important for scientific
discovery, design, and data-driven decision making. However, the ability to accurately model
complex physical phenomena often comes with a significant cost—many models involve expensive
computations that then need to be evaluated repeatedly in, for instance, a sampling or optimization
algorithm. Examples of model classes with expensive computations include intractable integrals or
sums, expensive quantum simulations [43], expensive numerical simulations arising from partial
differential equations (PDEs) [38] and large systems of ordinary equations (ODEs).
In many situations, one has the ability to trade off computational cost against fidelity or accuracy
in the result. Such a tradeoff might arise from the choice of discretization or the number of basis
functions when solving a PDE, or the number of quadrature points when estimating an integral. It
is often possible to leverage lower-fidelity models to help accelerate high-quality solutions, e.g.,
by using multigrid methods [23] for spatial discretizations. More generally, multi-fidelity methods
combine multiple models of varying cost and fidelity to accelerate computational algorithms and have
been applied to solving inverse problems [11, 24, 38], trust region optimization [1, 4, 15, 31, 39],
Bayesian optimization [8, 21, 27, 28, 41, 45], Bayesian quadrature [17, 46], and sequential learning
[22, 35].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

