Systematic improvement of neural network quantum
states using Lanczos

Hongwei Chen1,2,3 Douglas Hendry1 Phillip Weinberg1 Adrian E. Feiguin1
1
Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
2
Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, USA
3
Linac Coherent Light Source, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, USA
{chen.hongw, hendry.d, p.weinberg, a.feiguin}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
The quantum many-body problem lies at the center of the most important open
challenges in condensed matter, quantum chemistry, atomic, nuclear, and highenergy physics. While quantum Monte Carlo, when applicable, remains the most
powerful numerical technique capable of treating dozens or hundreds of degrees of
freedom with high accuracy, it is restricted to models that are not afflicted by the
infamous sign problem. A powerful alternative that has emerged in recent years
is the use of neural networks as variational estimators for quantum states. In this
work, we propose a symmetry-projected variational solution in the form of linear
combinations of simple restricted Boltzmann machines. This construction allows
one to explore states outside of the original variational manifold and increase the
representation power with moderate computational effort. Besides allowing one to
restore spatial symmetries, an expansion in terms of Krylov states using a Lanczos
recursion offers a solution that can further improve the quantum state accuracy. We
illustrate these ideas with an application to the Heisenberg J1 − J2 model on the
square lattice, a paradigmatic problem under debate in condensed matter physics,
and achieve state-of-the-art accuracy in the representation of the ground state.

1

Introduction

Understanding correlated quantum systems requires dealing with a large configuration space: datasets
are comprised of all possible electronic configurations ~σ and cannot be stored in the memory of the
largest supercomputer. Hence, the quantum many-body problem can be interpreted as an “extreme
data science” problem [13] from an information processing perspective. In a quantum wave function,
each electronic or spin configuration has an associated complex amplitude ψ(~σ ) determined by
solving for the eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian operator. In particular, if one is interested in the
zero temperature properties of the system, the solution is given by the eigenvector with the smallest
eigenvalue. Finding the exact solution of a N quantum bit system with interactions requires solving
for the eigenvectors of a 2N × 2N matrix. Alternatively, one can formulate the calculation as an
optimization problem in which an “energy functional” E(ψ) has to minimized with respect to all the
2N complex amplitudes.
Since the number of configurations d grows exponentially with the number of degrees of freedom
(electrons, spins), this problem quickly becomes intractable. A solution consists of “compressing’ the
wave function by proposing a suitable guess for the amplitudes based on some variational parameters
α = (α1 , α2 , · · · , αm ). Typically, a functional form ψ(~σ ) = f (~σ , ~
~
α) based on some physical
intuition is utilized to represent the amplitude of given configuration/state ~σ . The optimal parameters
αi are determined by solving the system of equations ∇α E = 0. The objective of this solution is to
achieve the lowest possible energy with a number of parameters m  d.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

