Generalization Bounds for Gradient Methods via
Discrete and Continuous Prior
Xuanyuan Luo
IIIS, Tsinghua University
xuanyuanluo@google.com

Luo Bei
Renmin University of China
rabbit_lb@ruc.edu.cn

Jian Li
IIIS, Tsinghua University
lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu

Abstract
Proving algorithm-dependent generalization error bounds for gradient-type optimization methods has attracted significant attention recently in learning theory.
However, most existing trajectory-based analyses require either restrictive assumptions on the learning rate (e.g., fast decreasing learning rate), or continuous injected
noise (such as the Gaussian noise in Langevin dynamics). In this paper, we introduce a new discrete data-dependent prior to the PAC-Bayesian framework, and
PT
2
prove high probability generalization bounds of order O( n1 · t=1 ( t /"t )2 kgt k )
for floored GD and SGD (i.e. finite precision versions of GD and SGD with precision level "t ) where, where n is the number of training samples, t is the learning
rate at step t, gt is roughly the difference between the average gradient over all
samples and that over only prior samples. kgt k is upper bounded by (typically
much smaller) than the gradient norm krf (Wt )k. We remark that our bounds hold
for nonconvex and nonsmooth loss functions. Moreover, our theoretical results
provide numerically favorable upper bounds of testing errors (0.026 on MNIST
and 0.198 on CIFAR10). Furthermore, we study the generalization bounds for
gradient Langevin Dynamics (GLD). Using the same framework with a carefully
constructed continuous prior, we show a new high probability generalization bound
2 PT
2
2
of order O( n1 + L
t=1 ( t / t ) ) for GLD. The new 1/n rate is obtained using
n2
the concentration of the difference between the gradient of training samples and
that of the prior.

1

Introduction

Bounding generalization error of learning algorithms is one of the most important problems in
machine learning theory. Formally, for a supervised learning problem, the generalization error is
defined as the testing error (or population error) minus the training error (or empirical error). In
particular, we denote R(w, (x, y)) := [hw (x) 6= y] as the error of a single data point (x, y), where
hw (x) is the output of a model with parameter w 2 Rd . Suppose S is the set ofP
training data, each
1
i.i.d. sampled from the population distribution D, and we use R(w, S) := |S|
z2S R(w, z) and
R(w, D) := Ez⇠D [R(w, z)] to denote the training error and the testing error, respectively. The
generalization error of w is formally defined as errgen (w) = R(w, D) R(w, S).

Proving tighter generalization bounds for general nonconvex learning and particularly deep learning
has attracted significant attention recently. While the classical learning theory (uniform convergence theory) which bounds the generalization error by various complexity measures (e.g., the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

