↵-ReQ : Assessing representation quality by
measuring eigenspectrum decay
Kumar Krishna Agrawal†
UC Berkeley
CA, USA

Arnab Kumar Mondal†
Mila & McGill University
Montréal, QC, Canada

Arna Ghosh†
Mila & McGill University
Montréal, QC, Canada

Blake A. Richards
Mila, Montreal Neurological Institute & McGill University
Montréal, QC, Canada
Learning in Machines and Brains Program, CIFAR
Toronto, ON, Canada

Abstract
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) with large-scale unlabelled datasets enables learning useful representations for multiple downstream tasks. However, efficiently
assessing the quality of such representations poses nontrivial challenges. Existing
approaches train linear probes (with frozen features) to evaluate performance on a
given task. This is expensive both computationally, since it requires retraining a
new prediction head for each downstream task, and statistically, which requires
task-specific labels for multiple tasks. This poses a natural question, how do we
efficiently determine the "goodness" of representations learned with SSL across a
wide range of potential downstream tasks? In particular, a task-agnostic statistical measure of representation quality that predicts generalization without explicit
downstream task evaluation would be highly desirable.
In this work, we analyze characteristics of learned representations f✓ in well-trained
neural networks with canonical architectures & across SSL objectives. We observe that the eigenspectrum of the empirical feature covariance Cov(f✓ ) can be
well approximated with the family of a power-law distribution. We analytically
and empirically (using multiple datasets, e.g. CIFAR, STL10, MIT67, ImageNet)
demonstrate that the decay coefficient ↵ serves as a measure of representation
quality for tasks that are solvable with a linear readout, that is, there exist welldefined intervals for ↵ where models exhibit excellent downstream generalization.
Furthermore, our experiments suggest that key design parameters in SSL algorithms, such as BarlowTwins [1], implicitly modulate the decay coefficient of the
eigenspectrum (↵). As ↵ depends only on the features themselves, this measure for
model selection with hyperparameter tuning for BarlowTwins enables the search
with less compute.

1

Introduction

The recent success of self-supervised learning (SSL) has changed the landscape of deep learning
significantly. With well-engineered architectures and training objectives, SSL models learn useful
representations from large datasets without relying on any labels [1, 2, 3]. Despite this progress,
quantifying the representation quality for models trained with SSL is still an open problem. The
†

These authors contributed equally to this work

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

