Why So Pessimistic? Estimating Uncertainties for Offline
RL through Ensembles, and Why Their Independence Matters

Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour

Robotics@Google
kamyar@google.com

Shixiang Shane Gu
Google Research, Brain Team
shanegu@google.com

Ofir Nachum
Google Research, Brain Team
ofirnachum@google.com

Abstract
Motivated by the success of ensembles for uncertainty estimation in supervised
learning, we take a renewed look at how ensembles of Q-functions can be leveraged
as the primary source of pessimism for offline reinforcement learning (RL). We
begin by identifying a critical flaw in a popular algorithmic choice used by many
ensemble-based RL algorithms, namely the use of shared pessimistic target values
when computing each ensemble member’s Bellman error. Through theoretical
analyses and construction of examples in toy MDPs, we demonstrate that shared
pessimistic targets can paradoxically lead to value estimates that are effectively
optimistic. Given this result, we propose MSG, a practical offline RL algorithm
that trains an ensemble of Q-functions with independently computed targets based
on completely separate networks, and optimizes a policy with respect to the lower
confidence bound of predicted action values. Our experiments on the popular
D4RL and RL Unplugged offline RL benchmarks demonstrate that on challenging
domains such as antmazes, MSG with deep ensembles surpasses highly well-tuned
state-of-the-art methods by a wide margin. Additionally, through ablations on
benchmarks domains, we verify the critical significance of using independently
trained Q-functions, and study the role of ensemble size. Finally, as using separate
networks per ensemble member can become computationally costly with larger
neural network architectures, we investigate whether efficient ensemble approximations developed for supervised learning can be similarly effective, and demonstrate
that they do not match the performance and robustness of MSG with separate
networks, highlighting the need for new efforts into efficient uncertainty estimation
directed at RL.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL), also referred to as batch RL [1], is a problem setting in which
one is provided a dataset of interactions with an environment in the form of a Markov decision process
(MDP), and the goal is to learn an effective policy exclusively from this fixed dataset. Offline RL
holds the promise of data-efficiency through data reuse, and improved safety due to minimizing the
need for policy rollouts. As a result, offline RL has been the subject of significant renewed interest in
the machine learning literature [2].
One common approach to offline RL in the model-free setting is to use approximate dynamic
programming (ADP) to learn a Q-value function via iterative regression to backed-up target values.
The predominant algorithmic philosophy with most success in ADP-based offline RL is to encourage
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

