A Statistical Online Inference Approach in Averaged
Stochastic Approximation

Chuhan Xie
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, 100871, China
ch_xie@pku.edu.cn

Zhihua Zhang
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, 100871, China
zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper we propose a general framework to perform statistical online inference
in a class of constant step size stochastic approximation (SA) problems, including
the well-known stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and Q-learning. Regarding a
constant step size SA procedure as a time-homogeneous Markov chain, we establish
a functional central limit theorem (FCLT) for it under weaker conditions, and then
construct confidence intervals for parameters via random scaling. To leverage the
FCLT results in the Markov chain setting, an alternative condition that is more
applicable for SA problems is established. We conduct experiments to perform
inference with both random scaling and other traditional inference methods, and
finds that the former has a more accurate and robust performance.

1

Introduction

Stochastic approximation (SA) is a class of fixed-point algorithms that enjoys a wide range of
applications and research [23, 24, 21, 14]. In general, with the goal of solving an underlying
deterministic equation z(θ ∗ ) = 0, SA algorithms perform iterative updates based on random
approximations of z(θ). An SA procedure has the following form
θt+1 = θt − ηZt , t = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
(1)
where η > 0 is the constant step size and Zt = Z(θt , ξt+1 ) is a random realization satisfying
Eξt+1 Z(θt , ξt+1 ) = z(θt ). Although SA algorithms are initially proposed for solving optimization
problems, a large variety of modern machine learning problems such as TD learning [25] and Qlearning [28] can also be solved via stochastic approximation, and hence studies of such problems in
an SA perspective have emerged in recent years [6, 15, 20, 18].
The celebrated Polyak-Ruppert averaged estimator [22] is often used to stabilize and accelerate SA
algorithms. Instead of using the last iterate of an SA procedure, the estimator takes an average
over all iterates. It is well-known and extensively studied that if the step size η in (1) is replaced
by suitably decaying step sizes, the estimator converges almost surely to the ground-truth solution
θ ∗ , and a central limit theorem (CLT) with optimal covariance can be established for the averaged
iterates. Examples include [5], which proposes the batch-means inference method for SGD-type
estimator; and [4], which gives the very first asymptotic results and a statistical inference framework
for adaptively collected data. Recently, this result has been extended to a functional central limit
theorem (FCLT) in particular settings, such as SGD [16], Local SGD [17], and Q-learning [18].
In these works, however, additional conditions such as (2 + δ)-th bounded moments of noises are
required to obtain such stronger FCLT result, and proofs are based on an elaborated decomposition
on the partial sum, which leads to some cumbersome calculation.
This motivates us to consider whether the same results can be established in a simpler way. In many
real applications, constant step size SA algorithms are often used for convenience, and in this case
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

