Recurrent Video Restoration Transformer with
Guided Deformable Attention
Jingyun Liang1 , Yuchen Fan2 , Xiaoyu Xiang2 , Rakesh Ranjan2 , Eddy Ilg2
Simon Green2 , Jiezhang Cao1 , Kai Zhang1∗, Radu Timofte1,3 , Luc Van Gool1
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 Meta Inc. 3 University of Wurzburg, Germany

Abstract
Video restoration aims at restoring multiple high-quality frames from multiple lowquality frames. Existing video restoration methods generally fall into two extreme
cases, i.e., they either restore all frames in parallel or restore the video frame by
frame in a recurrent way, which would result in different merits and drawbacks.
Typically, the former has the advantage of temporal information fusion. However,
it suffers from large model size and intensive memory consumption; the latter has
a relatively small model size as it shares parameters across frames; however, it
lacks long-range dependency modeling ability and parallelizability. In this paper,
we attempt to integrate the advantages of the two cases by proposing a recurrent
video restoration transformer, namely RVRT. RVRT processes local neighboring
frames in parallel within a globally recurrent framework which can achieve a good
trade-off between model size, effectiveness, and efficiency. Specifically, RVRT
divides the video into multiple clips and uses the previously inferred clip feature to
estimate the subsequent clip feature. Within each clip, different frame features are
jointly updated with implicit feature aggregation. Across different clips, the guided
deformable attention is designed for clip-to-clip alignment, which predicts multiple
relevant locations from the whole inferred clip and aggregates their features by the
attention mechanism. Extensive experiments on video super-resolution, deblurring,
and denoising show that the proposed RVRT achieves state-of-the-art performance
on benchmark datasets with balanced model size, testing memory and runtime.
The codes are available at https://github.com/JingyunLiang/RVRT.

1

Introduction

Video restoration, such as video super-resolution, deblurring, and denoising, has become a hot
topic in recent years. It aims to restore a clear and sharp high-quality video from a degraded (e.g.,
downsampled, blurred, or noisy) low-quality video [80, 11, 4, 38]. It has wide applications in live
streaming [97], video surveillance [49], old film restoration [78], and more.
Parallel methods and recurrent methods have been dominant strategies for solving various video
restoration problems. Typically, those two kinds of methods have their respective merits and demerits.
Parallel methods [2, 25, 80, 72, 36, 63, 99, 27, 35, 4, 38] support distributed deployment and achieve
good performance by directly fusing information from multiple frames, but they often have a large
model size and consume enormous memory for long-sequence videos. In the meanwhile, recurrent
models [24, 59, 21, 23, 26, 28, 9, 11, 45, 55, 98, 62] reuse the same network block to save parameters
and predict the new frame feature based on the previously refined frame feature, but the sequential
processing strategy inevitably leads to information loss and noise amplification [14] for long-range
dependency modelling and makes it hard to be parallelized.
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

