List-Decodable Sparse Mean Estimation via
Difference-of-Pairs Filtering

Ilias Diakonikolas
UW-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
UC, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Ankit Pensia
UW-Madison
ankitp@cs.wisc.edu

Sushrut Karmalkar
UW-Madison
skarmalkar@wisc.edu
Thanasis Pittas
UW-Madison
pittas@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of list-decodable sparse mean estimation. Specifically, for
a parameter α ∈ (0, 1/2), we are given m points in Rn , ⌊αm⌋ of which are i.i.d.
samples from a distribution D with unknown k-sparse mean µ. No assumptions are
made on the remaining points, which form the majority of the dataset. The goal is
to return a small list of candidates containing a vector µ̂ such that ∥µ̂ − µ∥2 is small.
Prior work had studied the problem of list-decodable mean estimation in the dense
setting. In this work, we develop a novel, conceptually simpler technique for listdecodable mean estimation. As the main application of our approach, we provide
the first sample and computationally efficient algorithm for list-decodable sparse
mean estimation. In particular, for distributions with “certifiably bounded” t-th
moments in k-sparse directions and sufficiently light tails, our algorithm achieves
error of (1/α)O(1/t) with sample complexity m = (k log(n))O(t) /α and running
time poly(mnt ). For the specialp
case of Gaussian inliers, our algorithm achieves
the optimal error guarantee Θ( log(1/α)) with quasi-polynomial complexity.
We complement our upper bounds with nearly-matching statistical query and
low-degree polynomial testing lower bounds.

1

Introduction

It is well-established that when a dataset is corrupted by outliers, many commonly-used estimators
fail to produce reliable estimates [Tuk60, ABH+ 72]. The field of robust statistics was developed to
perform reliable statistical inference in the presence of a constant fraction of outliers, even when the
data is high-dimensional [HR09, HRRS86]. Although statistical rates of high-dimensional robust
estimation problems are relatively well-understood by now [DL88, Yat85, DG92, HR09, CGR16], all
of the estimators developed in these works were computationally inefficient, with runtime exponential
in the dimension. The goal of algorithmic robust statistics, beginning with the works of [DKK+ 16,
LRV16], is to design computationally efficient algorithms for high-dimensional robust estimation
tasks. We refer the reader to the survey [DK19] for an introduction to this field.
The bulk of the recent progress in algorithmic robust statistics has focused on the setting where the
fraction of outliers is a small constant, and the majority of samples are inliers, see, e.g., [DKK+ 16,
LRV16, KKM18]. In contrast, when the fraction of outliers outnumbers the fraction of inliers, it is
generally information-theoretically impossible to output a single estimate with non-vacuous error
guarantees. In such situations, we allow the algorithm to return a small list of candidates such that
one of the candidates is close to the true parameter. This list-decodable learning setting was first
introduced in [BBV08] and developed in [CSV17]. We define the model below.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

