ViewFool: Evaluating the Robustness of Visual
Recognition to Adversarial Viewpoints
Yinpeng Dong1,3 , Shouwei Ruan2 , Hang Su1,4,5 , Caixin Kang2 , Xingxing Wei2 , Jun Zhu1,3,4,5⇤
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3
RealAI 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory 5 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
{dongyinpeng,suhangss,dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {shouweiruan,caixinkang,xxwei}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated that visual recognition models lack robustness to
distribution shift. However, current work mainly considers model robustness to 2D
image transformations, leaving viewpoint changes in the 3D world less explored.
In general, viewpoint changes are prevalent in various real-world applications (e.g.,
autonomous driving), making it imperative to evaluate viewpoint robustness. In this
paper, we propose a novel method called ViewFool to find adversarial viewpoints
that mislead visual recognition models. By encoding real-world objects as neural
radiance fields (NeRF), ViewFool characterizes a distribution of diverse adversarial
viewpoints under an entropic regularizer, which helps to handle the fluctuations of
the real camera pose and mitigate the reality gap between the real objects and their
neural representations. Experiments validate that the common image classifiers are
extremely vulnerable to the generated adversarial viewpoints, which also exhibit
high cross-model transferability. Based on ViewFool, we introduce ImageNet-V, a
new out-of-distribution dataset for benchmarking viewpoint robustness of image
classifiers. Evaluation results on 40 classifiers with diverse architectures, objective
functions, and data augmentations reveal a significant drop in model performance
when tested on ImageNet-V, which provides a possibility to leverage ViewFool as
an effective data augmentation strategy to improve viewpoint robustness.

1

Introduction

One of the fundamental challenges of deep learning is to generalize reliably to unseen or shifted test
distributions [16, 23, 44, 58]. Typically, deep learning models can be easily deceived by adversarial
examples [19, 53], which are crafted by applying small perturbations to natural examples. Although
the adversarial perturbations are imperceptible, they are quite sophisticated and can hardly exist in the
wild [3, 30]. Recent works have revealed the vulnerability of visual recognition models to some natural
(image) transformations, including rotation and translation [13], geometric transformations [27],
image corruptions [23], and others [17, 31, 61, 62]. Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is thus
emerging as an essential research topic in closing the gap between human and machine vision [16, 18].
Despite the progress, most works concentrate on the robustness of visual recognition models to 2D
image transformations [13, 16, 23], while less effort has been made to explore model robustness to
3D variations in the physical world, such as viewpoint changes. In numerous real-world applications
(e.g., autonomous driving, surveillance), viewpoint changes are arguably more natural and prevalent,
which can cause severe security and safety consequences if the models cannot deal with such changes.
⇤

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

