Transfer Learning on Heterogeneous Feature Spaces
for Treatment Effects Estimation
Ioana Bica
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Consider the problem of improving the estimation of conditional average treatment
effects (CATE) for a target domain of interest by leveraging related information
from a source domain with a different feature space. This heterogeneous transfer
learning problem for CATE estimation is ubiquitous in areas such as healthcare
where we may wish to evaluate the effectiveness of a treatment for a new patient
population for which different clinical covariates and limited data are available.
In this paper, we address this problem by introducing several building blocks that
use representation learning to handle the heterogeneous feature spaces and a flexible multi-task architecture with shared and private layers to transfer information
between potential outcome functions across domains. Then, we show how these
building blocks can be used to recover transfer learning equivalents of the standard
CATE learners. On a new semi-synthetic data simulation benchmark for heterogeneous transfer learning we not only demonstrate performance improvements of
our heterogeneous transfer causal effect learners across datasets, but also provide
insights into the differences between these learners from a transfer perspective.

1

Introduction

Estimating the personalized effects of interventions from observational data is a fundamental problem
in causal inference that is crucial for decision-making in many domains: in healthcare, for determining
which treatments to give to patients [1], in education, for deciding which school curriculum is best for
each student [2, 3], or in public policy for choosing who would benefit from job training programs [4].
Recently, a large number of machine learning methods have been proposed for estimating conditional
average treatment effects (CATE) which enable such personalized policies [5–16].
Nevertheless, the good performance of these methods on a population of interest relies heavily
on the availability of large enough observational datasets for training [17, 18]. In healthcare, for
instance, this can be challenging when hospitals with few patients cannot collect enough data (e.g.
a large proportion of hospitals in the USA have fewer than 100 beds, which for rare diseases can
results in less than 80 training examples per year [19]). Moreover, in situations such as the COVID
pandemic, each hospital will initially have very limited amount of data to learn the effectiveness
of interventions from [20]. Compared to the predictive setting, this problem is exacerbated in the
treatment effects setting where we need to observe both patients who are treated and not treated to be
able to reliably train a model for CATE estimation to obtain personalized treatment recommendations
for the intended patient population. While data from large national registries can be used to build
global models for general use across hospitals, such models do not take into account the particularities
of different patient populations (e.g. different conditional outcome distributions) and consequently
can perform poorly during deployment [19, 21]. Moreover, various hospitals often record different
(but overlapping) sets of patient covariates [19, 22] which makes this transfer learning problem [23]
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

