Communication-efficient distributed eigenspace
estimation with arbitrary node failures

Vasileios Charisopoulos
Operations Research & Information Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
vc333@cornell.edu

Anil Damle
Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
damle@cornell.edu

Abstract
We develop an eigenspace estimation algorithm for distributed environments with
arbitrary node failures, where a subset of computing nodes can return structurally
valid but otherwise arbitrarily chosen responses. Notably, this setting encompasses
several important scenarios that arise in distributed computing and data-collection
environments such as silent/soft errors, outliers or corrupted data at certain nodes,
and adversarial responses. Our estimator builds upon and matches the performance
√
of a recently proposed non-robust estimator up to an additive Õ(σ α) error, where
2
σ is the variance of the existing estimator and α is the fraction of corrupted nodes.

1

Problem overview and background

Modern machine learning has seen the proliferation of heterogeneous distributed environments
for training and deploying data science pipelines. As communication between machines is often
the most time-consuming operation in distributed systems, the design of communication-efficient
algorithms is of paramount importance for scaling to massive datasets [36]. However, the move to
distributed environments also adds several additional layers of complexity in the design of algorithms.
For example, in the distributed setting we would like our algorithms to be robust and providing
meaningful answers even in settings where some nodes contain outlier data [4], silently fail during
the computation [27, 31], or are compromised and returning malicious results designed to corrupt the
central solution.
This work focuses on distributed eigenspace estimation in the context of robustness to node-level
corruptions. Formally, we assume a computing environment with nodes numbered i = 1, . . . , m,
where every node i observes a local version Ai of an unknown symmetric matrix A ∈ Rd×d ; the goal
is to approximate the subspace spanned by the r ≪ d principal eigenvectors of A. Distributed PCA
is a standard example in this framework: every machine draws n i.i.d. samples from an unknown
distribution P with covariance matrix A and forms a local empirical covariance matrix Ai . Recently
proposed communication-efficient algorithms have every node i transmit Vi , the d × r matrix of
principal eigenvectors of Ai , to a central server, which then aggregates all the local solutions via a
carefully-crafted aggregation procedure [10, 18].
We devise and analyze an algorithm that is robust to a wide range of corruptions that can occur to a
subset of the computational nodes. In particular, we assume that some fraction α of the computational
nodes can respond with completely arbitrary, but structurally valid, responses (i.e., they return
arbitrary matrices Vi with orthonormal columns). This model encompasses three common forms of
node-level corruption that cannot be easily detected by the central machine in isolation:
Silent/soft errors. While computational errors may be rare on single machines, as distributed
workloads span large numbers of nodes the probability that some of them fail becomes significant.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

