Near-Isometric Properties of Kronecker-Structured
Random Tensor Embeddings
Qijia Jiang
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
qjiang@lbl.gov

Abstract
We give uniform concentration inequality for random tensors acting on rank-1
Kronecker structured signals, which parallels a Gordon-type inequality for this class
of tensor structured data. Two variants of the random embedding are considered,
where the embedding dimension depends on explicit quantities characterizing the
complexity of the signal. As applications of the tools developed herein, we illustrate
with examples from signal recovery and optimization.

1

Introduction

It is hardly an overstatement to proclaim that underpins most of the analysis for high-dimensional
statistics and structured signal recovery is the heavy hammer made possible by the machinery of
Gaussian process, and in particular Gordon-type inequality that gives tight characterization of the
suprema of the empirical process with geometric properties of the underlying index set. In this paper,
we put Kronecker-structured random tensors into scrutiny and ask for analog of Gordon’s inequality
for correspondingly tensor-structured signals. We embark with a brief reminder of the classics.
1.1

Gordon’s inequality for Gaussian random matrix

For signal u 2 T ⇢ Rn a vector, it is known for S 2 Rm⇥n random i.i.d standard Gaussian matrix,
E[min kSuk] am w(T ) and E[max kSuk]  am + w(T )
u2T
u2T
p
for am = E[kgm k] ⇡ m where gm ⇠ N (0, Im ) and w(T ) = E[maxx2T g > x] the Gaussian width
for set T ⇢ Sn 1 , a subset of the unit sphere. This statement hinges on the Gaussian min-max
comparison lemma (i.e., Fernique-Slepian theorem), which implies for g, h independent standard
Gaussian vectors,
Eg,h [min max g > v + h> u]  ES [min max v > Su] .
(1)
u2T v2Sm

1

u2T v2Sm

1

This trades the quadratic form for a more innocuous separable process, from which one can see
that the LHS evaluates to the first part of the previous display. The other side is essentially similar. For this expectation bound to justify the attention it deserves, one needs to recognize that
minu2T kSuk (analogously for max) is a Lipschitz function in the Gaussian random matrix S, from
which (dimension-free) concentration inequality, alongside the bound on the expectation derived
above, conspire to deliver a uniform concentration bound as stated below.
Theorem 1 (Gordon’s escape through the mesh [12]). For all u 2 T ⇢ Rn , where T is a (not
necessarily convex) cone, with probability at least 1 2 exp( 2 /2) for S entrywise i.i.d standard
Gaussian,
1
(1 ✏)kuk 
kSuk  (1 + ✏)kuk
am
when m

(w(T )+ )2
.
✏2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

