Spherization Layer:
Representation Using Only Angles

Hoyong Kim, Kangil Kim∗
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,
Gwangju 61005, South Korea
hoyong.kim.21@gm.gist.ac.kr, kangil.kim.01@gmail.com

Abstract
In neural network literature, angular similarity between feature vectors is frequently
used for interpreting or re-using learned representations. However, the inner product in neural networks partially disperses information over the scales and angles
of the involved input vectors and weight vectors. Therefore, when using only
angular similarity on representations trained with the inner product, information
loss occurs in downstream methods, which limits their performance. In this paper, we proposed the spherization layer to represent all information on angular
similarity. The layer 1) maps the pre-activations of input vectors into the specific
range of angles, 2) converts the angular coordinates of the vectors to Cartesian
coordinates with an additional dimension, and 3) trains decision boundaries from
hyperplanes, without bias parameters, passing through the origin. This approach
guarantees that representation learning always occurs on the hyperspherical surface without the loss of any information unlike other projection-based methods.
Furthermore, this method can be applied to any network by replacing an existing layer. We validate the functional correctness of the proposed method in a
toy task, retention ability in well-known image classification tasks, and effectiveness in word analogy test and few-shot learning. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/GIST-IRR/spherization_layer

1

Introduction

The inner product is a key element constituting layers in deep neural networks with a nonlinear activation function. The inner product with the Euclidean norms and the angle, that is, ∥w𝑖 ∥ ∥x 𝑗 ∥ cos θ𝑖 𝑗 ,
has been analyzed in terms of the norms ∥w𝑖 ∥ ∥x 𝑗 ∥ and the angle cos θ𝑖 𝑗 , independently [11, 12, 31].
All factors of the inner product learn distinct information. Therefore, using only one factor results in
information loss when re-using or understanding the information in downstream tasks. This problem
is termed as dispersion problem. The angular similarity between features is frequently used. However, this technique causes the dispersion problem in advanced methods in neural network literature
such as decoupled network [12], representation learning [5, 6, 20, 21, 28], regularization [29, 30],
zero-shot learning [22], and generative model [3, 23]. To mitigate the dispersion problem, numerous
angle-based learning approaches [1, 9, 10, 13, 15, 14, 29, 30, 32] have been proposed. However,
these studies are based on projection onto the hyperspherical surface. In this projection method,
distinction by the scale of features is ignored. Therefore, information loss occurs.
We proposed the spherization layer as an explicit solution for the dispersion to completely eliminate
the interference of the norms in training without drawbacks. This layer is used to locate all represen∗ corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

