Bounding and Approximating Intersectional Fairness
through Marginal Fairness

Mathieu Molina
Inria
FairPlay team
91120 Palaiseau, France
mathieu.molina@inria.fr

Patrick Loiseau
Inria
FairPlay team
91120 Palaiseau, France
patrick.loiseau@inria.fr

Abstract
Discrimination in machine learning often arises along multiple dimensions (a.k.a.
protected attributes); it is then desirable to ensure intersectional fairness—i.e.,
that no subgroup is discriminated against. It is known that ensuring marginal
fairness for every dimension independently is not sufficient in general. Due to
the exponential number of subgroups, however, directly measuring intersectional
fairness from data is impossible. In this paper, our primary goal is to understand
in detail the relationship between marginal and intersectional fairness through
statistical analysis. We first identify a set of sufficient conditions under which an
exact relationship can be obtained. Then, we prove bounds (easily computable
through marginal fairness and other meaningful statistical quantities) in highprobability on intersectional fairness in the general case. Beyond their descriptive
value, we show that these theoretical bounds can be leveraged to derive a heuristic
improving the approximation and bounds of intersectional fairness by choosing,
in a relevant manner, protected attributes for which we describe intersectional
subgroups. Finally, we test the performance of our approximations and bounds on
real and synthetic data-sets.

1

Introduction

Research on fairness in machine learning has been very active in recent years, in particular on fair
classification under group fairness notions, see e.g., [16, 30, 34, 33, 7, 28]. Such notions define
demographic groups based on so-called protected attributes (e.g., gender, race, religion), and impose
that some statistical quantity be constant across the groups. For instance, demographic parity imposes
that the class-1 classification rate is the same for all groups, but other notions were defined such
as equal opportunity [16] or calibration by group [7]—see a survey in [4]. As exact fairness is too
constraining, one often measures unfairness, which roughly quantifies the distance to the fairness
constraint.
Most works on fair classification consider a single protected attribute and hence only two (or a small
number of) groups. Then, they use measures of unfairness to evaluate and penalize classifiers in
order make them more fair. This is making an implicit but very fundamental assumption that one can
estimate the unfairness measure from the data at hand. With only a few groups, this assumption is
indeed easily satisfied as there are sufficiently many data points for each group.
In many—if not most—real-world applications, there are multiple protected attributes (typically
10-20) along which discrimination is prohibited [1, 2]. It is then desirable to consider the strong
notion of intersectional fairness, which roughly specifies that no subgroup (defined by an arbitrary
combination of protected attributes) is unfavorably treated. In that case, however, estimating the
unfairness measure becomes very challenging: as the number of groups is exponentially large (e.g.,
210 for 10 binary protected attributes), it is very likely that the dataset has at least one subgroup
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

