Generalizing Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement
Learning with Variational Causal Reasoning
Wenhao Ding1 , Haohong Lin1 , Bo Li2 , Ding Zhao1
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{wenhaod, haohongl}@andrew.cmu.edu, lbo@illinois.edu, dingzhao@cmu.edu

Abstract
As a pivotal component to attaining generalizable solutions in human intelligence,
reasoning provides great potential for reinforcement learning (RL) agents’ generalization towards varied goals by summarizing part-to-whole arguments and
discovering cause-and-effect relations. However, how to discover and represent
causalities remains a huge gap that hinders the development of causal RL. In this
paper, we augment Goal-Conditioned RL (GCRL) with Causal Graph (CG), a
structure built upon the relation between objects and events. We novelly formulate
the GCRL problem into variational likelihood maximization with CG as latent variables. To optimize the derived objective, we propose a framework with theoretical
performance guarantees that alternates between two steps: using interventional
data to estimate the posterior of CG; using CG to learn generalizable models and
interpretable policies. Due to the lack of public benchmarks that verify generalization capability under reasoning, we design nine tasks and then empirically
show the effectiveness of the proposed method against five baselines on these tasks.
Further theoretical analysis shows that our performance improvement is attributed
to the virtuous cycle of causal discovery, transition modeling, and policy training,
which aligns with the experimental evidence in extensive ablation studies. Code is
available on https://github.com/GilgameshD/GRADER.

1

Introduction

The generalizability, which enables an algorithm to handle unseen tasks, is fruitful yet challenging in
multifarious decision-making domains. Recent literature [1, 2, 3] reveals the critical role of reasoning
in improving the generalization of reinforcement learning (RL). However, most off-the-shelf RL
algorithms [4] have not regarded reasoning as an indispensable accessory, thus usually suffering
from data inefficiency and performance degradation due to the mismatch between training and
testing settings. To attain generalization at the testing stage, some efforts were put into incorporating
domain knowledge to learn structured information, including sub-task decomposition [5] and program
generation [6, 7, 8, 9, 10], which guide the model to solve complicated tasks in an explainable way.
However, such symbolism-dominant methods heavily depend on the re-usability of sub-tasks and
pre-defined grammars, which may not always be accessible in decision-making tasks.
Inspired by the close link between reasoning and the cause-and-effect relationship, causality is recently
incorporated to compactly represent the aforementioned structured knowledge in RL training [11].
Based on the form of causal knowledge, we divide the related works into two categories, i.e.,
implicit and explicit causation. With implicit causal representation, researchers ignore the detailed
causal structure. For instance, [12] extracts invariant features as one node that influences the
reward function, while the other node consists of task-irrelevant features [13, 14, 15, 16]. This
neat structure has good scalability but requires access to multiple environments that share the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

