Adversarial training for high-stakes reliability
Daniel M. Ziegler∗

Seraphina Nix

Peter Schmidt-Nielsen

Tao Lin

Ben Weinstein-Raun

Daniel de Haas

Lawrence Chan†
Adam Scherlis
Buck Shlegeris

Tim Bauman
Noa Nabeshima
Nate Thomas

Redwood Research

Abstract
In the future, powerful AI systems may be deployed in high-stakes settings, where
a single failure could be catastrophic. One technique for improving AI safety in
high-stakes settings is adversarial training, which uses an adversary to generate
examples to train on in order to achieve better worst-case performance.
In this work, we used a safe language generation task (“avoid injuries”) as a
testbed for achieving high reliability through adversarial training. We created
a series of adversarial training techniques—including a tool that assists human
adversaries—to find and eliminate failures in a classifier that filters text completions suggested by a generator. In our task, we determined that we can set very
conservative classifier thresholds without significantly impacting the quality of
the filtered outputs. We found that adversarial training increased robustness to the
adversarial attacks that we trained on—doubling the time for our contractors to
find adversarial examples both with our tool (from 13 to 26 minutes) and without
(from 20 to 44 minutes)—without affecting in-distribution performance.
We hope to see further work in the high-stakes reliability setting, including more
powerful tools for enhancing human adversaries and better ways to measure high
levels of reliability, until we can confidently rule out the possibility of catastrophic
deployment-time failures of powerful models.

1

Introduction

Advances in deep learning have led to increasingly powerful AI systems, for example in sequential
decision making [1, 2, 3, 4], robotics [5, 6], and language modeling and text-based reasoning [7, 8, 9,
10, 11]. Most empirical work on techniques for aligning powerful AI [12, 13, 14, 15, 16] has focused
on achieving good average-case performance in domains where no single action is catastrophic, for
example using human trajectory rankings [17, 18, 19] or imitation learning [20, 21]. However, many
situations where we want to deploy AI systems are high-stakes—that is, it is possible for the system
to take actions that lead to catastrophic outcomes.
In these situations, one of our most important goals is high-stakes reliability: avoiding even a single catastrophic failure while in deployment. Achieving high-stakes reliability is difficult because
some failures might not be encountered during the ordinary course of training, leaving them uncorrected by default. These failures could arise on out-of-distribution data resulting from domain shift
∗
†

Corresponding author. Please direct correspondence to dmz@rdwrs.com.
UC Berkeley. Work done at Redwood Research.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

