Efficient Frameworks for Generalized Low-Rank
Matrix Bandit Problems
Yue Kang
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
yuekang@ucdavis.edu

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Thomas C. M. Lee
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
tcmlee@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
In the stochastic contextual low-rank matrix bandit problem, the expected reward
of an action is given by the inner product between the action’s feature matrix and
some fixed, but initially unknown d1 by d2 matrix Θ∗ with rank r  {d1 , d2 },
and an agent sequentially takes actions based on past experience to maximize
the cumulative reward. In this paper, we study the generalized low-rank matrix
bandit problem, which has been recently proposed in [26] under the Generalized
Linear Model (GLM) framework. To overcome the computational infeasibility and
theoretical restrain of existing algorithms on this problem, we first propose the
G-ESTT framework that modifies the idea from [17] by using Stein’s method on the
subspace estimation and then leverage the estimated subspaces via a regularization
idea. Furthermore, we remarkably improve the efficiency of G-ESTT by using a
novel exclusion idea on the estimated subspace instead, and propose the G-ESTS
framework. We also show that
√ both of our methods are the first algorithm to achieve
the optimal Õ((d1 + d2 )r T ) bound of regret presented in [26] up to logarithm
terms under some
√ mild conditions, which improves upon the current regret of
Õ((d1 + d2 )3/2 rT ) [26]. For completeness, we conduct experiments to illustrate
that our proposed algorithms, especially G-ESTS, are also computationally tractable
and consistently outperform other state-of-the-art (generalized) linear matrix bandit
methods based on a suite of simulations.

1

Introduction

The contextual bandit has proven to be a powerful framework for sequential decision-making problems, with great applications to clinical trials [36], recommendation system [22], and personalized
medicine [4]. This class of problems evaluates how an agent should choose an action from the potential action set at each round based on an updating policy on-the-fly so as to maximize the cumulative
reward or minimize the overall regret. With high dimensional sparse data becoming ubiquitous in
various fields nowadays, the most fundamental (generalized) linear bandit framework, although has
been extensively studied, becomes inefficient in practice. This fact consequently leads to a line of
work on stochastic high dimensional bandit problems with low dimensional structures [16, 24], such
as the LASSO bandit and low-rank matrix bandit.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

