Practical Adversarial Attacks on Spatiotemporal
Traffic Forecasting Models

Fan LIU
AI Thrust&RBM, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
fliu236@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn&liufan@ust.hk
Hao LIU∗
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
Guangzhou HKUST Fok Ying Tung Research Institute
CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
liuh@ust.hk
Wenzhao Jiang
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
wjiang431@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Machine learning based traffic forecasting models leverage sophisticated spatiotemporal auto-correlations to provide accurate predictions of city-wide traffic states.
However, existing methods assume a reliable and unbiased forecasting environment, which is not always available in the wild. In this work, we investigate the
vulnerability of spatiotemporal traffic forecasting models and propose a practical
adversarial spatiotemporal attack framework. Specifically, instead of simultaneously attacking all geo-distributed data sources, an iterative gradient-guided node
saliency method is proposed to identify the time-dependent set of victim nodes.
Furthermore, we devise a spatiotemporal gradient descent based scheme to generate
real-valued adversarial traffic states under a perturbation constraint. Meanwhile,
we theoretically demonstrate the worst performance bound of adversarial traffic
forecasting attacks. Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets show that the
proposed two-step framework achieves up to 67.8% performance degradation on
various advanced spatiotemporal forecasting models. Remarkably, we also show
that adversarial training with our proposed attacks can significantly improve the
robustness of spatiotemporal traffic forecasting models. Our code is available in
https://github.com/usail-hkust/Adv-ST.

1

Introduction

Machine learned spatiotemporal forecasting models have been widely adopted in modern Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS) to provide accurate and timely prediction of traffic dynamics, e.g.,
traffic flow [1], traffic speed [2, 3], and the estimated time of arrival [4, 5]. Despite fruitful progress
in improving the forecasting accuracy and utility [6], little attention has been paid to the robustness
of spatiotemporal forecasting models. For example, Figure 1 demonstrates that injecting slight
adversarial perturbations on a few randomly selected nodes can significantly degrade the traffic
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

