Improved Utility Analysis of Private CountSketch

Rasmus Pagh
Basic Algorithms Research Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen
pagh@di.ku.dk

Mikkel Thorup
Basic Algorithms Research Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen
mikkel2thorup@gmail.com

Abstract
Sketching is an important tool for dealing with high-dimensional vectors that are
sparse (or well-approximated by a sparse vector), especially useful in distributed,
parallel, and streaming settings. It is known that sketches can be made differentially private by adding noise according to the sensitivity of the sketch, and this has
been used in private analytics and federated learning settings. The post-processing
property of differential privacy implies that all estimates computed from the sketch
can be released within the given privacy budget.
In this paper we consider the classical CountSketch, made differentially private
with the Gaussian mechanism, and give an improved analysis of its estimation
error. Perhaps surprisingly, the privacy-utility trade-off is essentially the best one
could hope for, independent of the number of repetitions in CountSketch: The
error is almost identical to the error from non-private CountSketch plus the noise
needed to make the vector private in the original, high-dimensional domain.

1

Introduction

CountSketch was introduced by Charikar, Chen, and Farach-Colton (2004) as a method for ﬁnding
heavy hitters in data streams. In machine learning the same sketch was studied by Weinberger, Dasgupta, Langford, Smola, and Attenberg (2009) under the name feature hashing, or less formally the
“hashing trick”. The idea is to map a high-dimensional vector x ∈ Rd to a lower-dimensional representation Ax ∈ RD , using a certain random linear mapping A. From Ax it is possible to estimate
entries xi , with error that depends on D and the norm of x, and more generally to estimate inner
products. It was shown in (Weinberger et al., 2009) that for y ∈ Rd , ⟨Ax, Ay⟩ is well-concentrated
around ⟨x, y⟩. Recent interest in sketching techniques is motivated by distributed applications such
as federated learning (Kairouz et al., 2021), where many users contribute to creating a model on
their combined data, without transferring data itself. In this context, sketching can be used to identify the large-magnitude entries in the sum of many high-dimensional vectors (one held by each
user), using communication proportional to the number of such entries.
Perhaps the most basic property of CountSketch/feature hashing is the error of estimators for a
single coordinate xi . The sketch directly provides independent, noisy estimators X1 , . . . , Xk , each
symmetric with mean xi . Two main ways of combining these into a more reliable estimator for xi
have been studied: Taking the median estimator (Charikar et al., 2004), or taking the average of
estimators (implicit in Weinberger et al. (2009)). Minton and Price (2014) showed that using the
median estimator with k = Θ(log d) is not only is more robust, but alse decreases the variance of
the estimator by a factor of Ω(log d). Later Larsen, Pagh, and Tětek (2021) showed that using the
median estimator with k = 3 makes the error decrease quadratically with the sketch size D.
In this paper we consider CountSketches that have been made differentially private using the Gaussian mechanism, which is perhaps the most widely used mechanism for making high-dimensional
vectors differentially private. This sketch, which we will refer to as Private CountSketch, works by
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

