Hand-Object Interaction Image Generation

Hezhen Hu1 Weilun Wang 1∗ Wengang Zhou1,2† Houqiang Li1,2†
1
CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department
University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{alexhu, wwlustc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we are dedicated to a new task, i.e., hand-object interaction image
generation, which aims to conditionally generate the hand-object image under the
given hand, object and their interaction status. This task is challenging and researchworthy in many potential application scenarios, such as AR/VR games and online
shopping, etc. To address this problem, we propose a novel HOGAN framework,
which utilizes the expressive model-aware hand-object representation and leverages
its inherent topology to build the unified surface space. In this space, we explicitly
consider the complex self- and mutual occlusion during interaction. During final
image synthesis, we consider different characteristics of hand and object and
generate the target image in a split-and-combine manner. For evaluation, we build a
comprehensive protocol to access both the fidelity and structure preservation of the
generated image. Extensive experiments on two large-scale datasets, i.e., HO3Dv3
and DexYCB, demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our framework both
quantitatively and qualitatively. The code will be available at https://github.
com/play-with-HOI-generation/HOIG.

1

Introduction

As a crucial step for analyzing human actions, hand-object interaction understanding is researchworthy in a broad range of applications related to virtual or augmented reality. Current works
largely focus on hand-object pose estimation (HOPE) [16, 19, 21], which aims to capture the
pose configuration of the given hand-object image. In contrast, its inverse counterpart is seldom
considered. In this work, we aim to explore this novel task and term it Hand-Object Interaction image
Generation (HOIG). Its objective is to generate the interacting hand-object image under the guidance
of the target posture, while preserving the appearance of the source image, as illustrated in Figure 1.
This HOIG task is of both application and research value to the community. On one hand, HOIG
can be potentially applied to many scenarios, such as AR/VR games, online shopping, and data
augmentation, etc. For online shopping, HOIG can give the consumer an immersive experience
and flexibility on object customization. On the other hand, HOIG is of board research interest.
Since it explicitly involves simultaneous generation of two instances (hand and object) with high
interaction relationship, HOIG brings many new challenges to resolve. These characteristics thus
bring new challenges. 1) It requires to process the complex self- and mutual occlusion between the
interacting hand and object. 2) It involves image translation of co-occurring instances, where different
appearance characteristics of the hand and object need to be considered.
∗
†

Contribute equally with the first author.
Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

