Improved Algorithms for Neural Active Learning
Yikun Ban⇤ , Yuheng Zhang⇤ , Hanghang Tong, Arindam Banerjee, and Jingrui He
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{yikunb2, yuhengz2, htong, arindamb, jingrui}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We improve the theoretical and empirical performance of neural-network(NN)based active learning algorithms for the non-parametric streaming setting. In
particular, we introduce two regret metrics by minimizing the population loss that
are more suitable in active learning than the one used in state-of-the-art (SOTA)
related work. Then, the proposed algorithm leverages the powerful representation
of NNs for both exploitation and exploration, has the query decision-maker tailored
for k-class classification problems with the performance guarantee, utilizes the
full feedback, and updates parameters in a more practical and efficient manner.
These careful designs lead to an instance-dependent regret upper bound, roughly
improving by a multiplicative factor O(log T ) and removing the curse of input
dimensionality. Furthermore, we show that the algorithm can achieve the same
performance as the Bayes-optimal classifier in the long run under the hard-margin
setting in classification problems. In the end, we use extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed algorithm and SOTA baselines, to show the improved empirical
performance.

1

Introduction

The Neural Network (NN) is one of the indispensable paradigms in machine learning and is widely
used in multifarious supervised-learning tasks [23]. As more and more complicated NNs are developed, the requirement of the training procedure on the labeled data grows, incurring significant cost
of label annotation. Active learning investigates effective techniques on a much smaller labeled data
set while attaining the comparable generalization performance to passive learning [19]. In this paper,
we focus on the classification problem in the streaming setting of active learning with NN models. At
every round, the learner receives an instance and is compelled to decide on-the-fly whether or not to
observe the label associated with this instance. This problem seeks to maximize the generalization
capability of learned NNs in a sequence of rounds, such that the model has robust performance on the
unseen data from the same distribution [40].
In active learning, given access to the i.i.d. generated instances from a distribution D, suppose
there exist a class of functions F that formulate the mapping from instances to theirs labels. In the
parametric setting, i.e., F has finite VC-dimension [25], existing works
p[24, 14, 7] have shown that the
e
active learning algorithms can achieve the convergence rate of O(1/ N ) to the best population loss
in F, where N is the number of label queries. In the non-parametric setting, recent works [34, 35]
provide the similar convergence results while suffering from the curse of input dimensionality.
Unfortunately, most of NN-based approaches to active learning do not come with the performance
guarantee, despite having powerful empirical results.
The first performance guarantee for neural active learning has been established in a recent work
by [48], and the analysis is for over-parameterized neural networks with the assistance of Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK). We carefully investigate the limitations of [48], which turn into the main
⇤ Both authors contribute equally.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

