Exploring Figure-Ground Assignment Mechanism in
Perceptual Organization

Wei Zhai1
Yang Cao1,3∗
Jing Zhang2
Zheng-Jun Zha1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
The University of Sydney
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
1

{wzhai056,forrest,zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Perceptual organization is a challenging visual task that aims to perceive and group
the individual visual element so that it is easy to understand the meaning of the
scene as a whole. Most recent methods building upon advanced Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) come from learning discriminative representation and
modeling context hierarchically. However, when the visual appearance difference
between foreground and background is obscure, the performance of existing methods degrades significantly due to the visual ambiguity in the discrimination process.
In this paper, we argue that the figure-ground assignment mechanism, which conforms to human vision cognitive theory, can be explored to empower CNN to
achieve a robust perceptual organization despite visual ambiguity. Specifically,
we present a novel Figure-Ground-Aided (FGA) module to learn the configural
statistics of the visual scene and leverage it for the reduction of visual ambiguity.
Particularly, we demonstrate the benefit of using stronger supervisory signals by
teaching (FGA) module to perceive configural cues, i.e., convexity and lower region, that human deem important for the perceptual organization. Furthermore,
an Interactive Enhancement Module (IEM) is devised to leverage such configural priors to assist representation learning, thereby achieving robust perception
organization with complex visual ambiguities. In addition, a well-founded visual
segregation test is designed to validate the capability of the proposed FGA mechanism explicitly. Comprehensive evaluation results demonstrate our proposed FGA
mechanism can effectively enhance the capability of perception organization on
various baseline models. Nevertheless, the model augmented via our proposed
FGA mechanism also outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on four challenging
real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Perceptual organization, which is a vital visual task, refers to the processes by which the disjoint
bits of visual information are structured into the larger coherent units that we eventually experience
as environmental objects. Thanks to the developments of discriminative representation learning
and hierarchical context modeling with convolutional neural networks [17, 33, 48, 77], the past few
years have witnessed tremendous progress in perceptual organization. Recent advanced methods are
usually based on the framework of fully convolutional network (FCN) [5, 33, 50, 76], which learn
a discriminative feature representation and hierarchically model the local context by supervision
derived from human-given labels.
However, the performance of existing methods degrades significantly when deployed in some
challenging tasks with complex visual ambiguity, such as camouflaged object detection [11, 27],
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

