Dual Generator Offline Reinforcement Learning

Quan Vuong1 , Aviral Kumar1,2 , Sergey Levine1,2 , Yevgen Chebotar1
1

Google Research, 2 UC Berkeley

Abstract
In offline RL, constraining the learned policy to remain close to the data is essential
to prevent the policy from outputting out-of-distribution (OOD) actions with erroneously overestimated values. In principle, generative adversarial networks (GAN)
can provide an elegant solution to do so, with the discriminator directly providing
a probability that quantifies distributional shift. However, in practice, GAN-based
offline RL methods have not performed as well as alternative approaches, perhaps
because the generator is trained to both fool the discriminator and maximize return
– two objectives that can be at odds with each other. In this paper, we show that the
issue of conflicting objectives can be resolved by training two generators: one that
maximizes return, with the other capturing the “remainder” of the data distribution
in the offline dataset, such that the mixture of the two is close to the behavior policy.
We show that not only does having two generators enable an effective GAN-based
offline RL method, but also approximates a support constraint, where the policy
does not need to match the entire data distribution, but only the slice of the data
that leads to high long term performance. We name our method DASCO, for
Dual-Generator Adversarial Support Constrained Offline RL. On benchmark tasks
that require learning from sub-optimal data, DASCO significantly outperforms
prior methods that enforce distribution constraint.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms aim to extract policies from datasets of previously
logged experience. The promise of offline RL is to extract decision making engines from existing
data [32]. Such promise is especially appealing in domains where data collection is expensive or
dangerous, but large amounts of data may already exists (e.g., robotics, autonomous driving, taskoriented dialog systems). Real-world datasets often consist of both expert and sub-optimal behaviors
for the task of interest and also include potentially unrelated behavior corresponding to other tasks.
While not all behaviors in the dataset are relevant for solving the task of interest, even sub-optimal
trajectories can provide an RL algorithm with some useful information. In principle, if offline RL
algorithms can combine segments of useful behavior spread across multiple sub-optimal trajectories
together, the combined segments can then perform better than any behavior observed in the dataset.
Effective offline RL requires estimating the value of actions other than those that were taken in the
dataset, so as to pick actions that are better than the actions selected by the behavior policy. However,
this requirement introduces a fundamental tension: the offline RL method must generalize to new
actions, but it should not attempt to use actions in the Bellman backup for which the value simply
cannot be estimated using the provided data. These are often referred to in the literature as out-ofdistribution (OOD) actions [28]. While a wide variety of methods have been proposed to constrain
offline RL to avoid OOD actions [26, 14, 1], the formulation and enforcement of such constraints can
be challenging, and might introduce considerable complexity, such as the need to explicitly estimate
the behavior policy [49] or evaluate high-dimensional integrals [30]. Generative adversarial networks
(GANs) in principle offer an appealing and simple solution: use the discriminator to estimate whether
an action is in-distribution, and train the policy as the “generator” in the GAN formulation to fool
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

