A Single-Timescale Analysis for Stochastic
Approximation with Multiple Coupled Sequences

Han Shen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180, United States
shenh5@rpi.edu

Tianyi Chen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180, United States
chentianyi19@gmail.com

Abstract
Stochastic approximation (SA) with multiple coupled sequences has found broad
applications in machine learning such as bilevel learning and reinforcement learning
(RL). In this paper, we study the finite-time convergence of nonlinear SA with
multiple coupled sequences. Different from existing multi-timescale analysis, we
seek for scenarios where a fine-grained analysis can provide the tight performance
guarantee for single-timescale multi-sequence SA (STSA). At the heart of our
analysis is the smoothness property of the fixed points in multi-sequence SA
that holds in many applications. When all sequences have strongly monotone
increments, we establish the iteration complexity of O(−1 ) to achieve -accuracy,
which improves the existing O(−1.5 ) complexity for two coupled sequences.
When the main sequence does not have strongly monotone increment, we establish
the iteration complexity of O(−2 ). We showcase the power of our result by
applying it to stochastic bilevel and compositional optimization problems, as well
as RL problems, all of which lead to improvements over their existing guarantees.

1

Introduction

Stochastic approximation (SA) is an iterative procedure used to find the zero of a function when only
the noisy estimate of the function is observed. Specifically, with the mapping v : Rd 7→ Rd , the
single-sequence SA seeks to solve for v(x) = 0 with the following iterative update:
xk+1 = xk + αk (v(xk ) + ξk ),

(1)

where αk is the step size and ξk is a random variable. Since its introduction in [46], single-sequence
SA has received great interests because of its broad range of applications to areas including stochastic
optimization and reinforcement learning (RL) [6, 53]. The asymptotic convergence of single-sequence
SA can be established by the ordinary differential equation method; see e.g., [4]. To gain more
insights into the performance difference of various stochastic optimization algorithms, the finite-time
convergence of SA has been widely studied in recent years; see e.g., [43, 42, 30, 50, 54, 52, 41, 13].
While most of the SA studies focus on the single-sequence case, the double-sequence SA was
introduced in [3], which has been extensively applied to the RL methods involving a double-sequence
stochastic update structure [53, 32, 10]. With mappings v : Rd0 × Rd1 7→ Rd0 and h : Rd0 × Rd1 7→
Rd1 , the double-sequence SA seeks to solve v(x, y) = h(x, y) = 0 with the following update:
xk+1 = xk + αk (v(xk , yk ) + ξk ),
yk+1 = yk + βk (h(xk , yk ) + ψk ),

(2a)
(2b)

where αk , βk are the step sizes, and ξk , ψk are random variables. In (2), the update of xk and
that of yk depend on each other and thus the sequences are coupled. To analyze (2), one natural
thought is to stack (xk , yk ) into a larger variable and then resort to the celebrated single-sequence
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

