A Unifying Framework of Off-Policy General Value
Function Evaluation
Tengyu Xu
Meta Platforms, Inc
Menlo Park, CA 94025

Zhuoran Yang
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208

Yingbin Liang
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210

Abstract
General Value Function (GVF) is a powerful tool to represent both the predictive
and retrospective knowledge in reinforcement learning (RL). In practice, often
multiple interrelated GVFs need to be evaluated jointly with pre-collected off-policy
samples. In the literature, the gradient temporal difference (GTD) learning method
has been adopted to evaluate GVFs in the off-policy setting, but such an approach
may suffer from a large estimation error even if the function approximation class
is sufficiently expressive. Moreover, none of the previous work have formally
established the convergence guarantee to the ground truth GVFs under the function
approximation settings. In this paper, we address both issues through the lens of a
class of GVFs with causal filtering, which cover a wide range of RL applications
such as reward variance, value gradient, cost in anomaly detection, stationary
distribution gradient, etc. We propose a new algorithm called GenTD for offpolicy GVFs evaluation and show that GenTD learns multiple interrelated multidimensional GVFs as efficiently as a single canonical scalar value function. We
further show that unlike GTD, the learned GVFs by GenTD are guaranteed to
converge to the ground truth GVFs as long as the function approximation power
is sufficiently large. To our best knowledge, GenTD is the first off-policy GVF
evaluation algorithm that has global optimality guarantee.

1

Introduction

The value function, which represents the expected accumulation of reward [43], serves as a reliable
performance metric of policy in the reinforcement learning (RL) tasks [42, 23]. In many RL
applications, however, looking at only the value function is not enough. For example, in the risksensitive domains such as health care and financial assets, the variance of "reward-to-go" rather
than the value function, i.e., the mean of "reward-to-go", is a more suitable performance metric. As
another example, to obtain a variance-reduced or bias-reduced policy gradient estimator [14, 61, 18],
in addition to the value function, the information of "gradient of value function" is also required.
Moreover, in continuous control domain with differentiable and deterministic policy, the computation
of policy gradient is only possible through "action/state-value gradient" [38, 8, 12], etc. All the
aforementioned metrics can be viewed as predicative knowledge of certain multiple intercorrelated
cumulative "signals" (possibly high-dimensional, e.g., the gradient of value function), and thus
naturally fall into the framework of forward GVFs (refers to forward general value functions)
[48, 57, 32, 33] (see Section 2.1 for the formal definition). One typical approach to evaluate GVFs,
is to learn from samples that pre-collected from one or more behavior policies, which yields an
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

