Neural Payoff Machines: Predicting Fair and Stable
Payoff Allocations Among Team Members

Daphne Cornelisse1

Thomas Rood1 Mateusz Malinowski3
Tal Kachman1,2∗

Yoram Bachrach3

1

2

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Radboud University, Netherlands
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University, Netherlands
3
DeepMind, UK

Abstract
In many multi-agent settings, participants can form teams to achieve collective
outcomes that may far surpass their individual capabilities. Measuring the relative contributions of agents and allocating them shares of the reward that promote
long-lasting cooperation are difficult tasks. Cooperative game theory offers solution concepts identifying distribution schemes, such as the Shapley value, that
fairly reflect the contribution of individuals to the performance of the team or the
Core, which reduces the incentive of agents to abandon their team. Applications of
such methods include identifying influential features and sharing the costs of joint
ventures or team formation. Unfortunately, using these solutions requires tackling
a computational barrier as they are hard to compute, even in restricted settings.
In this work, we show how cooperative game-theoretic solutions can be distilled
into a learned model by training neural networks to propose fair and stable payoff allocations. We show that our approach creates models that can generalize to
games far from the training distribution and can predict solutions for more players
than observed during training. An important application of our framework is Explainable AI: our approach can be used to speed-up Shapley value computations
on many instances.

1

Introduction

The ability of individuals to form teams and collaborate is crucial to their performance in many environments. The success of humans as a species hinges on our capability to cooperate at scale [23].
Similarly, cooperation between learning agents is necessary to achieve high performance in many
environments [28, 7, 45, 24] and is a fundamental problem in artificial intelligence [42, 12]. Individual agents are often not incentivized by the joint reward achieved by a team but rather by their
share of the spoils. Hence, teams are only likely to be formed when the overall gains obtained by
the team are appropriately distributed between its members. However, understanding how collective
outcomes arise from subsets of locally interacting parts, or measuring the impact of individuals on
the team’s performance, remain open problems.
Direct applications exist in multiple domains. One example is identifying the most influential features that drive a model to make a certain prediction [14, 29, 6, 44, 27, 26]; one of the cornerstones
of explainable AI [2, 34]. Another example is sharing the costs of data acquisition or a joint venture
in a fair way between participants [8, 1], or sharing gains between cooperating agents [20, 41]. In
many legislative bodies individual participants have different weights, and passing a decision requires support from a set of participants holding the majority of the weight; different states in the
US electoral college have different numbers of electors, and different countries in the EU Council
∗

Correspondence to tal.kachman@donders.ru.nl

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

