Procedural Image Programs for Representation
Learning

Manel Baradad1 , Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen2 , Jonas Wulff3 , Tongzhou Wang1 ,
Rogerio Feris4 , Antonio Torralba1 , Phillip Isola1
1
MIT CSAIL, 2 JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., 3 Xyla, Inc, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Learning image representations using synthetic data allows training neural networks
without some of the concerns associated with real images, such as privacy and
bias. Existing work focuses on a handful of curated generative processes which
require expert knowledge to design, making it hard to scale up. To overcome
this, we propose training with a large dataset of twenty-one thousand programs,
each one generating a diverse set of synthetic images. These programs are short
code snippets, which are easy to modify and fast to execute using OpenGL. The
proposed dataset can be used for both supervised and unsupervised representation
learning and reduces the gap between pre-training with real and procedurally
generated images by 38%. Code, models, and datasets are available at: https:
//github.com/mbaradad/shaders21k

1

Introduction

Training neural networks using data from hand-crafted generative models is a novel approach that
allows pre-training without access to real data. This technique has been shown to be effective on
downstream tasks for different modalities, such as images [1, 2], videos [3], and text [4]. Despite its
big potential, previous work for images focuses on a handful of generative processes, like fractals [5],
textured polygons [3], or dead-leaves and statistical processes [2].
To achieve good performance with the original set of procedures, expert knowledge is required to
make the generated images match simple image statistics. This makes it hard to improve over existing
work, as these generative models have already been carefully studied and tuned. What would happen
if we used a large set of procedural image programs without curation, instead of focusing on a small
set of programs?
To this end, we collect a large-scale set of programs, each producing a diverse set of images that
display simple shapes and textures (see Figures 1 and 2 for examples). We then use these programs to
generate images and train neural networks with supervised and unsupervised representation learning
methods. These networks can then be used for different downstream tasks, reaching state-of-the-art
performance for methods that do not pre-train using real images.
The generative programs of this collection are coded in a common language, the OpenGL shading
language, that encapsulates the image generation process in a few lines of code. Previous work uses
ad-hoc slow methods for each generative process, which makes it hard to integrate them into the
same framework. Compared to existing approaches, the rendering of our programs is performed at
high throughput (hundreds of frames per second with a single modern GPU), allowing generation on
the fly while training.
As the dataset consists of a large collection of generative processes, we can use each code snippet as a
latent class, which allows learning representations using supervised approaches. In contrast, previous
methods require ad-hoc techniques for clustering the generative parameters into discrete classes [5].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

