Sketch-GNN: Scalable Graph Neural Networks
with Sublinear Training Complexity

Mucong Ding , Tahseen Rabbani , Bang An , Evan Z Wang , Furong Huang
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
{mcding, trabbani, bangan, furongh}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely applied to graph learning problems
such as node classification. When scaling up the underlying graphs of GNNs to a
larger size, we are forced to either train on the complete graph and keep the full
graph adjacency and node embeddings in memory (which is often infeasible) or
mini-batch sample the graph (which results in exponentially growing computational
complexities with respect to the number of GNN layers). Various sampling-based
and historical-embedding-based methods are proposed to avoid this exponential
growth of complexities. However, none of these solutions eliminates the linear
dependence on graph size. This paper proposes a sketch-based algorithm whose
training time and memory grow sublinearly with respect to graph size by training
GNNs atop a few compact sketches of graph adjacency and node embeddings.
Based on polynomial tensor-sketch (PTS) theory, our framework provides a novel
protocol for sketching non-linear activations and graph convolution matrices in
GNNs, as opposed to existing methods that sketch linear weights or gradients
in neural networks. In addition, we develop a locality sensitive hashing (LSH)
technique that can be trained to improve the quality of sketches. Experiments on
large-graph benchmarks demonstrate the scalability and competitive performance
of our Sketch-GNNs versus their full-size GNN counterparts.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art graph learning in numerous applications, including classification [27], clustering [3], recommendation systems [43], social networks [16]
and more, through representation learning of target nodes using information aggregated from neighborhoods in the graph. The manner in which GNNs utilize graph topology, however, makes it
challenging to scale learning to larger graphs or deeper models with desirable computational and
memory efficiency. Full-batch training that stores the Laplacian of the complete graph suffers from
a memory complexity of O(m + ndL + d2 L) on an n-node, m-edge graph with node features of
dimension d when employing an L-layer graph convolutional network (GCN). This linear memory
complexity dependence on n and the limited memory capacity of GPUs make it difficult to train on
large graphs with millions of nodes or more. As an example, the MAG240M-LSC dataset [21] is a
node classification benchmark with over 240 million nodes that takes over 202 GB of GPU memory
when fully loaded.
To address the memory constraints, two major lines of research are proposed: (1) Sampling-based
approaches [18, 11, 12, 14, 45] based on the idea of implementing message passing only between
the neighbors within a sampled mini-batch; (2) Historical-embedding based techniques, such as
GNNAutoScale [17] and VQ-GNN [15]), which maintain the expressive power of GNNs on sampled
subgraphs using historical embeddings. However, all of these methods require the number of mini36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

