Global Convergence and Stability of Stochastic
Gradient Descent
Vivak Patel
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin – Madison
Madison, WI 53706
vivak.patel@wisc.edu

Shushu Zhang
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan – Ann Arbor
shushuz@umich.edu

Bowen Tian
Department of Statistics
The Ohio State University
tian.837@buckeyemail.osu.edu

Abstract
In machine learning, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is widely deployed to train
models using highly non-convex objectives with equally complex noise models.
Unfortunately, SGD theory often makes restrictive assumptions that fail to capture
the non-convexity of real problems, and almost entirely ignore the complex noise
models that exist in practice. In this work, we demonstrate the restrictiveness of
these assumptions using three canonical models in machine learning. Then, we
develop novel theory to address this shortcoming in two ways. First, we establish
that SGD’s iterates will either globally converge to a stationary point or diverge
under nearly arbitrary nonconvexity and noise models. Under a slightly more
restrictive assumption on the joint behavior of the non-convexity and noise model
that generalizes current assumptions in the literature, we show that the objective
function cannot diverge, even if the iterates diverge. As a consequence of our
results, SGD can be applied to a greater range of stochastic optimization problems
with confidence about its global convergence behavior and stability.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its variants are dominant algorithms for solving stochastic
optimization problems arising in machine learning, and have expanded their reach to more complex
problems from estimating Gaussian Processes [Chen et al., 2020], covariance estimation in stochastic
filters [Kim et al., 2021], and systems identification [Hardt et al., 2016, Zhang and Patel, 2020].
Accordingly, understanding the behavior of SGD and its variants has been crucial to their reliable
application in machine learning and beyond. As a result, the theory of these methods has greatly
advanced, most notably for SGD as it is the basis for, and simplest of, these methods. Indeed, SGD
has been analyzed from many perspectives: global convergence analysis [Lei et al., 2019, Gower
et al., 2020, Khaled and Richtárik, 2020, Mertikopoulos et al., 2020, Patel, 2021], local convergence
analysis [Mertikopoulos et al., 2020], greedy and global complexity analysis [Gower et al., 2020,
Khaled and Richtárik, 2020], asymptotic weak convergence [Wang et al., 2021], and saddle point
analysis [Fang et al., 2019, Mertikopoulos et al., 2020, Jin et al., 2021].
While all of these perspectives add new dimensions to our understanding of SGD, the global convergence analysis of SGD is the foundation as it dictates whether local analyses, complexity analyses
or saddle point analyses are even warranted. As surveyed in Patel [2021], these current global
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

