Estimating the intrinsic dimensionality using
Normalizing Flows

Christian Horvat
Department of Physiology
University of Bern
christian.horvat@unibe.ch

Jean-Pascal Pfister
Department of Physiology
Bern, Switzerland
jeanpascal.pfister@unibe.ch

Abstract
How many degrees of freedom are there in a dataset consisting of M samples
embedded in RD ? This number, formally known as intrinsic dimensionality, can be
estimated using nearest neighbor statistics. However, nearest neighbor statistics do
not scale to large datasets as their complexity scales quadratically in M , O(M 2 ).
Additionally, methods based on nearest neighbor statistics perform poorly on
datasets embedded in high dimensions where D  1. In this paper, we propose
a novel method to estimate the intrinsic dimensionality using Normalizing Flows
that scale to large datasets and high dimensions. The method is based on some
simple back-of-the-envelope calculations predicting how the singular values of the
flow’s Jacobian change when inflating the dataset with different noise magnitudes.
Singular values associated with directions normal to the manifold evolve differently
than singular values associated with directions tangent to the manifold. We test
our method on various datasets, including 64x64 RGB images, where we achieve
state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

Learning low-dimensional representations of high-dimensional data is becoming increasingly important in the era of big data. Therefore, representation learning is a very active area of research
[33] with a wide range of applications ranging from neuroscience [27], molecular biology [28],
bioinformatics [12] or image analysis [21]. But how many low-dimensional variables are exactly
needed to accurately describe the original data? Unfortunetly, this number is typically not known and
needs to be estimated - a task formally known as intrinsic dimensionality (ID) estimation.
Moreover, estimating the ID turned out to be an usefull tool for understanding the functioning of
Neural Networks and generative models [23, 11, 1, 31]. In a recent study, [29] verified that the ID
plays a large role in deep learning on natural images and hence motivated the necessity to better
estimate the ID in this setting. In the context of generative models, the ID corresponds to the number
of latent variables generating the data. Some of these generative models do even rely on knowing
the exact number of latent variables generating the data which limits their applicability to real-world
problems where this number is unknown [3, 16].
ID estimation is mathematically challenging. Most approaches rely on the assumption that, locally,
the samples are uniformly distributed, and therefore the ID can be estimated using nearest neighbor
statistics [4]. However, such nearest neighbor methods do not scale to large datasets consisting
of M  1 samples as the complexity scales with O(DM 2 ) where D is the dimensionality of the
embedding space and accounts for calculating the (Euclidean) distance 1 . Thus, this scaling issue
is amplified whenever the embedding space D is of the order of the sample size M , D = O(M ).
1

Therefore, some line of research tries to reduce the complexity of finding the nearest neighbor, see e.g. [25].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

