First Contact: Unsupervised Human-Machine
Co-Adaptation via Mutual Information Maximization
Siddharth Reddy, Sergey Levine, Anca D. Dragan
University of California, Berkeley
{sgr,svlevine,anca}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
How can we train an assistive human-machine interface (e.g., an electromyographybased limb prosthesis) to translate a user’s raw command signals into the actions
of a robot or computer when there is no prior mapping, we cannot ask the user
for supervision in the form of action labels or reward feedback, and we do not
have prior knowledge of the tasks the user is trying to accomplish? The key idea
in this paper is that, regardless of the task, when an interface is more intuitive,
the user’s commands are less noisy. We formalize this idea as a completely
unsupervised objective for optimizing interfaces: the mutual information between
the user’s command signals and the induced state transitions in the environment. To
evaluate whether this mutual information score can distinguish between effective
and ineffective interfaces, we conduct a large-scale observational study on 540K
examples of users operating various keyboard and eye gaze interfaces for typing,
controlling simulated robots, and playing video games. The results show that
our mutual information scores are predictive of the ground-truth task completion
metrics in a variety of domains, with an average Spearman’s rank correlation of
⇢ = 0.43. In addition to offline evaluation of existing interfaces, we use our
unsupervised objective to learn an interface from scratch: we randomly initialize
the interface, have the user attempt to perform their desired tasks using the interface,
measure the mutual information score, and update the interface to maximize mutual
information through reinforcement learning. We evaluate our method through
a small-scale user study with 12 participants who perform a 2D cursor control
task using a perturbed mouse, and an experiment with one expert user playing the
Lunar Lander game using hand gestures captured by a webcam. The results show
that we can learn an interface from scratch, without any user supervision or prior
knowledge of tasks, with less than 30 minutes of human-in-the-loop training.

1

Introduction

Imagine communicating with an intelligent extraterrestrial for the first time. They are trying to get us
to do something (e.g., synthesize a novel molecule and build a space elevator out of it), but we do not
know what that task is, and we cannot understand their language. They might speak, write, wave
their limbs at us in a video, or send us messages through some other modality. They might even be
watching how we act on their messages, and adapting the content of their messages to our behavior.
How do we translate their messages into the actions they want us to take?
To make progress on this problem in the absence of (known) alien signals, we study the related
problem of helping humans communicate their intent to machines via arbitrary command signals;
for example, controlling a robotic arm through a brain-computer interface [1]. When designing
human-machine interfaces, we typically either (a) use human ingenuity to design an interface that is
Code, data, and videos available at https://sites.google.com/view/coadaptation
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

