A Practical, Progressively-Expressive GNN
Lingxiao Zhao
Carnegie Mellon University
lingxiao@cmu.edu
Neil Shah
Snap Inc.
nshah@snap.com

Louis Härtel
RWTH Aachen University
haertel@informatik.rwth-aachen.de
Leman Akoglu
Carnegie Mellon University
lakoglu@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Message passing neural networks (MPNNs) have become a dominant flavor of
graph neural networks (GNNs) in recent years. Yet, MPNNs come with notable limitations; namely, they are at most as powerful as the 1-dimensional
Weisfeiler-Leman (1-WL) test in distinguishing graphs in a graph isomorphism
testing framework. To this end, researchers have drawn inspiration from the
k-WL hierarchy to develop more expressive GNNs. However, current k-WLequivalent GNNs are not practical for even small values of k, as k-WL becomes
combinatorially more complex as k grows. At the same time, several works have
found great empirical success in graph learning tasks without highly expressive
models, implying that chasing expressiveness with a “coarse-grained ruler” of
expressivity like k-WL is often unneeded in practical tasks. To truly understand the expressiveness-complexity tradeoff, one desires a more “fine-grained
ruler,” which can more gradually increase expressiveness. Our work puts forth
such a proposal: Namely, we first propose the (k, c)()-S ET WL hierarchy with
greatly reduced complexity from k-WL, achieved by moving from k-tuples of
nodes to sets with k nodes defined over c connected components in the induced original graph. We show favorable theoretical results for this model in
relation to k-WL, and concretize it via (k, c)()-S ET GNN, which is as expressive as (k, c)()-S ET WL. Our model is practical and progressively-expressive,
increasing in power with k and c. We demonstrate effectiveness on several benchmark datasets, achieving several state-of-the-art results with runtime and memory usage applicable to practical graphs. We open source our implementation at
https://github.com/LingxiaoShawn/KCSetGNN.

1

Introduction

In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have gained considerable attention [58, 60] for their
ability to tackle various node-level [35, 56], link-level [51, 66] and graph-level [9, 40] learning tasks,
given their ability to learn rich representations for complex graph-structured data. The common template for designing GNNs follows the message passing paradigm; these so-called message-passing
neural networks (MPNNs) are built by stacking layers which encompass feature transformation and
aggregation operations over the input graph [25, 39]. Despite their advantages, MPNNs have several limitations including oversmoothing [12, 47, 67], oversquashing [2, 55], inability to distinguish
node identities [63] and positions [62], and expressive power [61].
Since Xu et al.’s [61] seminal work showed that MPNNs are at most as powerful as the first-order
Weisfeiler-Leman (1-WL) test in the graph isomorphism (GI) testing framework, there have been
several follow-up works on improving the understanding of GNN expressiveness [3, 15]. In re36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

