Indicators of Attack Failure: Debugging and
Improving Optimization of Adversarial Examples

Maura Pintor
University of Cagliari, Italy
Pluribus One, Italy
maura.pintor@unica.it
Angelo Sotgiu
University of Cagliari, Italy
angelo.sotgiu@unica.it

Luca Demetrio
University of Genoa, Italy
Pluribus One, Italy
luca.demetrio@unige.it

Ambra Demontis
University of Cagliari, Italy
ambra.demontis@unica.it

Battista Biggio
University of Cagliari, CINI, Italy
Pluribus One, Italy
battista.biggio@unica.it

Nicholas Carlini
Google
nicholas@carlini.com

Fabio Roli
University of Genoa, CINI, Italy
Pluribus One, Italy
fabio.roli@unige.it

Abstract
Evaluating robustness of machine-learning models to adversarial examples is a
challenging problem. Many defenses have been shown to provide a false sense of
robustness by causing gradient-based attacks to fail, and they have been broken
under more rigorous evaluations. Although guidelines and best practices have
been suggested to improve current adversarial robustness evaluations, the lack of
automatic testing and debugging tools makes it difficult to apply these recommendations in a systematic manner. In this work, we overcome these limitations by: (i)
categorizing attack failures based on how they affect the optimization of gradientbased attacks, while also unveiling two novel failures affecting many popular attack
implementations and past evaluations; (ii) proposing six novel indicators of failure,
to automatically detect the presence of such failures in the attack optimization
process; and (iii) suggesting a systematic protocol to apply the corresponding fixes.
Our extensive experimental analysis, involving more than 15 models in 3 distinct
application domains, shows that our indicators of failure can be used to debug and
improve current adversarial robustness evaluations, thereby providing a first concrete step towards automatizing and systematizing them. Our open-source code is
available at: https://github.com/pralab/IndicatorsOfAttackFailure.

1

Introduction

Despite their unprecedented success in many different applications, machine-learning models have
been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [40, 4], i.e., inputs intentionally crafted to
mislead such models at test time. While hundreds of defenses have been proposed to overcome this
issue [46, 29, 43, 36], many of them turned out to be ineffective, as their robustness to adversarial
inputs was significantly overestimated. In particular, some defenses were evaluated by running
existing attacks with inappropriate hyperparameters (e.g., using an insufficient number of iterations),
while others were implicitly obfuscating gradients, thereby causing the optimization of gradient-based
attacks to fail. Such defenses have been shown to yield much lower robustness under more rigorous
robustness evaluations and using attacks carefully adapted to evade them [10, 2].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

