Template based Graph Neural Network with
Optimal Transport Distances

Cédric Vincent-Cuaz
Univ. Côte d’Azur, INRIA, CNRS, LJAD
F-06100 Nice
cedric.vincent-cuaz@inria.fr

Rémi Flamary
IP Paris, CMAP, UMR 7641
F-91120 Palaiseau
remi.flamary@polytechnique.edu

Marco Corneli
Univ. Côte d’Azur, INRIA, CNRS, LJAD
F-06100 Nice
marco.corneli@inria.fr

Titouan Vayer
Univ. Lyon, INRIA, CNRS, ENS de Lyon
LIP UMR 5668, F-69342 Lyon
titouan.vayer@inria.fr

Nicolas Courty
Univ. Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, IRISA
F-56000 Vannes
nicolas.courty@irisa.fr

Abstract
Current Graph Neural Networks (GNN) architectures generally rely on two important components: node features embedding through message passing, and aggregation with a specialized form of pooling. The structural (or topological) information
is implicitly taken into account in these two steps. We propose in this work a novel
point of view, which places distances to some learnable graph templates at the
core of the graph representation. This distance embedding is constructed thanks
to an optimal transport distance: the Fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW) distance,
which encodes simultaneously feature and structure dissimilarities by solving a
soft graph-matching problem. We postulate that the vector of FGW distances to
a set of template graphs has a strong discriminative power, which is then fed to
a non-linear classifier for final predictions. Distance embedding can be seen as a
new layer, and can leverage on existing message passing techniques to promote
sensible feature representations. Interestingly enough, in our work the optimal set
of template graphs is also learnt in an end-to-end fashion by differentiating through
this layer. After describing the corresponding learning procedure, we empirically
validate our claim on several synthetic and real life graph classification datasets,
where our method is competitive or surpasses kernel and GNN state-of-the-art
approaches. We complete our experiments by an ablation study and a sensitivity
analysis to parameters.

1

Introduction

Attributed graphs are characterized by i) the relationships between the nodes of the graph (structural
or topological information) and ii) some specific features or attributes endowing the nodes themselves.
Learning from those data is ubiquitous in many research areas [3], e.g. image analysis [21, 8],
brain connectivity [30], biological compounds [23] or social networks [69], to name a few. Various
methodologies approach the inherent complexity of those data, such as signal processing [54],
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

