Bandit Theory and Thompson Sampling-Guided
Directed Evolution for Sequence Optimization
Hui Yuan1 , Chengzhuo Ni2 , Huazheng Wang3 , Xuezhou Zhang4 , Le Cong5 , Csaba Szepesvári6,7 , and
Mengdi Wang7,8
1,2,4,8

3

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University
5
Department of Pathology and Department of Genetics, Stanford University
6
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
7
DeepMind ⇤†

Abstract
Directed Evolution (DE), a landmark wet-lab method originated in 1960s, enables
discovery of novel protein designs via evolving a population of candidate sequences.
Recent advances in biotechnology has made it possible to collect high-throughput
data, allowing the use of machine learning to map out a protein’s sequence-tofunction relation. There is a growing interest in machine learning-assisted DE
for accelerating protein optimization. Yet the theoretical understanding of DE,
as well as the use of machine learning in DE, remains limited. In this paper, we
connect DE with the bandit learning theory and make a first attempt to study regret
minimization in DE. We propose a Thompson Sampling-guided Directed Evolution
(TS-DE) framework for sequence optimization, where the sequence-to-function
mapping is unknown and querying a single value is subject to costly and noisy
measurements. TS-DE updates a posterior of the function based on collected
measurements. It uses a posterior-sampled function estimate to guide the crossover
recombination and mutation steps in DE. In the case p
of a linear model, we show
e 2 M T ), where d is feature
that TS-DE enjoys a Bayesian regret of order O(d
dimension, M is population size and T is number of rounds. This regret bound
is nearly optimal, confirming that bandit learning can provably accelerate DE. It
may have implications for more general sequence optimization and evolutionary
algorithms.

1

Introduction

Protein engineering means to design a nucleic acids sequence for maximizing a utility function
that measures certain fitness or biochemical/enzymatic properties, i.e., stability, binding affinity,
or catalytic activity. Due to the combinatorial sequence space and lack of knowledge about the
sequence-to-function map, engineering and identifying optimal protein designs were a quite daunting
task. It is only until recently that synthesis of nucleic acid sequences and measurement of protein
⇤
Authors’
emails
are:
{huiyuan, cn10, xz7392, mengdiw}@princeton.edu,
huazheng.wang@oregonstate.edu, congle@stanford.edu, szepesva@ualberta.ca.
†
Mengdi Wang acknowledges support by NSF grants DMS-1953686, IIS-2107304, CMMI-1653435, and
ONR grant 1006977. Le Cong acknowledges support by NIH grant R35-HG011316, and Donald and Delia
Baxter Foundation grant, and NSF grant DMS-1953686. Csaba Szepesvári gratefully acknowledges the funding
from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada, “Design.R AI-assisted CPS
Design” (DARPA) project and the Canada CIFAR AI Chairs Program for Amii.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

