A Damped Newton Method Achieves Global O
and Local Quadratic Convergence Rate

1
k2



Slavomír Hanzely∗
MBZUAI†, KAUST‡
shanzely@gmail.com

Dmitry Kamzolov∗
MBZUAI†
kamzolov.opt@gmail.com

Dmitry Pasechnyuk
MBZUAI†, MIPT§, ISP RAS¶
dmivilensky1@gmail

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT§, ISP RAS¶, HSE∥
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Peter Richtárik
KAUST‡
richtarik@gmail.com

Martin Takáč
MBZUAI†
takac.MT@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present the first stepsize schedule for Newton method resulting in
fast global and local convergence guarantees. In particular, a) we prove an O k12
global rate, which matches the state-of-the-art global rate of cubically regularized
Newton method of Polyak and Nesterov (2006) and of regularized Newton
method of Mishchenko (2021) and Doikov and Nesterov (2021), b) we prove
a local quadratic rate, which matches the best-known local rate of second-order
methods, and c) our stepsize formula is simple, explicit, and does not require
solving any subproblem. Our convergence proofs hold under affine-invariance
assumptions closely related to the notion of self-concordance. Finally, our method
has competitive performance when compared to existing baselines, which share
the same fast global convergence guarantees.

1

Introduction

Second-order optimization methods are the backbone of much of industrial and scientific computing.
With origins that can be tracked back several centuries to the pioneering works of Newton [Newton,
1687], Raphson [Raphson, 1697] and Simpson [Simpson, 1740], they were extensively studied,
generalized, modified, and improved in the last century [Kantorovich, 1948, Moré, 1978, Griewank,
1981a]. For a review of the historical development of the classical Newton-Raphson method, we refer
the reader to the work of Ypma [1995]. The number of extensions and applications of second-order
optimization methods is enormous; for example, the survey of Conn et al. [2000] on trust-region and
quasi-Newton methods cited over a thousand papers.
1.1 Second-order methods and modern machine learning
Despite the rich history of the field, research on second-order methods has been flourishing up to this
day. Some of the most recent development in the area was motivated by the needs of modern machine
learning. Data-oriented machine learning depends on large datasets (both in number of features and
number of datapoints), which are often stored in distributed/decentalized fashion. Consequently,
there is a need for scalable algorithms.
∗

Equal contributions
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United Arab Emirates
‡
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
§
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia
¶
ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Russia
∥
National Research University Higher School of Economics, Russia
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

