Learning NP-Hard Multi-Agent Assignment Planning
using GNN: Inference on a Random Graph and
Provable Auction-Fitted Q-learning

Hyunwook Kang∗
Department of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
hwkang@tamu.edu

Taehwan Kwon
Kakao Brain
isaac.kwon@kakaobrain.com

Jinkyoo Park†
Industrial & Systems Engineering
KAIST
jinkyoo.park@kaist.ac.kr

James R. Morrison†
Electrical Engineering
Central Michigan University
morri1j@cmich.edu

Abstract
This paper explores the possibility of near-optimally solving multi-agent, multi-task
NP-hard planning problems with time-dependent rewards using a learning-based
algorithm. In particular, we consider a class of robot/machine scheduling problems
called the multi-robot reward collection problem (MRRC). Such MRRC problems
well model ride-sharing, pickup-and-delivery, and a variety of related problems.
In representing the MRRC problem as a sequential decision-making problem, we
observe that each state can be represented as an extension of probabilistic graphical
models (PGMs), which we refer to as random PGMs. We then develop a mean-field
inference method for random PGMs. We then propose (1) an order-transferable
Q-function estimator and (2) an order-transferability-enabled auction to select a
joint assignment in polynomial-time. These result in a reinforcement learning
framework with at least 1 − 1/e optimality. Experimental results on solving MRRC
problems highlight the near-optimality and transferability of the proposed methods.
We also consider identical parallel machine scheduling problems (IPMS) and
minimax multiple traveling salesman problems (minimax-mTSP).

1

Introduction

Motivation Consider a set of identical robots seeking to serve a set of spatially distributed tasks.
Each task is given an initial age (which then increases linearly in time). Greater rewards are given to
younger tasks when service is complete according to a predetermined reward rule. Such problems
prevail in operations research, e.g., dispatching drivers to transport customers or scheduling machines
in a factory. Solving such highly structured NP-hard problems with the constraint of ‘no possibility
of two robots assigned to one task at once’ using mathematical optimization schemes is infeasible
or ineffective due to the expensive computational cost, especially when the problem size is large.
Applying decentralized approach using multi-agent modeling frameworkLong et al. (2020); Rashid
et al. (2018); Sunehag et al. (2017) is a possible way to solve a large scale problems. However, due
to the impossibility of inducing consensus among agents in achieving the global objective without
∗
†

First author
correspondence to: Jinkyoo Park (jinkyoo.park@kaist.ac.kr), James R. Morrison (morri1j@cmich.edu)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

