E LEVATER: A Benchmark and Toolkit for Evaluating
Language-Augmented Visual Models

Chunyuan Li∗1♠ , Haotian Liu∗2 , Liunian Harold Li3 , Pengchuan Zhang1 , Jyoti Aneja1
Jianwei Yang1 , Ping Jin1 , Houdong Hu1 , Zicheng Liu1 , Yong Jae Lee2 , Jianfeng Gao1
1
Microsoft 2 University of Wisconsin–Madison 3 UCLA

Abstract
Learning visual representations from natural language supervision has recently
shown great promise in a number of pioneering works. In general, these
language-augmented visual models demonstrate strong transferability to a variety of datasets and tasks. However, it remains challenging to evaluate the
transferablity of these models due to the lack of easy-to-use evaluation toolkits and public benchmarks. To tackle this, we build E LEVATER 1 , the first
benchmark and toolkit for evaluating (pre-trained) language-augmented visual
models. E LEVATER is composed of three components. (i) Datasets. As downstream evaluation suites, it consists of 20 image classification datasets and 35
object detection datasets, each of which is augmented with external knowledge.
(ii) Toolkit. An automatic hyper-parameter tuning toolkit is developed to facilitate model evaluation on downstream tasks. (iii) Metrics. A variety of evaluation metrics are used to measure sample-efficiency (zero-shot and few-shot) and
parameter-efficiency (linear probing and full model fine-tuning). E LEVATER is
platform for Computer Vision in the Wild (CVinW), and is publicly released at
https://computer-vision-in-the-wild.github.io/ELEVATER/.

1

Introduction

Visual recognition has become ubiquitous in our society [76], with applications in geolocalization [66], action recognition [73], street number transcription [58], satellite remote sensing [31], medical imaging [80], self-driving cars [26], etc. Core to these applications are visual
recognition tasks such as image classification (IC) and object detection (OD). It is of high value to
develop transferable visual models that perform well on a wide range of downstream applications.
By leveraging large web crawled image-text corpora, recent advances in language-augmented visual
models such as CLIP [66] and ALIGN [35] have demonstrated strong transfer performance, making this direction one of the most practical visual learning approaches. The reason is twofold: (i)
open-set recognition is made possible by reformulating classification tasks as retrieval; (ii) model
generalization is improved as language supervision significantly increases the coverage of visual
concepts for model training.
The success has immediately inspired many studies of large-scale model pre-training [88, 92, 89, 49,
57, 27, 47, 95]. However, these studies use their own evaluation settings based on customized sets
of downstream tasks where the detailed process of adapting the models to these tasks is typically
not accessible to the public. Thus, it is extremely difficult for researchers to fairly compare models
and develop new models based on other people’s works. To fill this gap, we develop an opensource benchmark and toolkit, E LEVATER, to make the research results (e.g., model’s task-level
transferability) more rigorous, and reproducible. E LEVATER is composed of three components.
∗

1

Equal Technical Contribution ♠ Project Lead
Evaluation of Language-augmented Visual Task-level Transfer

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

