Deep Ensembles Work, But Are They Necessary?
Taiga Abe⇤1

E. Kelly Buchanan⇤1

Geoff Pleiss1

Richard Zemel1

John P. Cunningham1
1
Columbia University
{ta2507,ekb2154,gmp2162,jpc2181}@columbia.edu
zemel@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Ensembling neural networks is an effective way to increase accuracy, and can
often match the performance of individual larger models. This observation poses a
natural question: given the choice between a deep ensemble and a single neural
network with similar accuracy, is one preferable over the other? Recent work
suggests that deep ensembles may offer distinct benefits beyond predictive power:
namely, uncertainty quantification and robustness to dataset shift. In this work, we
demonstrate limitations to these purported benefits, and show that a single (but
larger) neural network can replicate these qualities. First, we show that ensemble
diversity, by any metric, does not meaningfully contribute to an ensemble’s uncertainty quantification on out-of-distribution (OOD) data, but is instead highly
correlated with the relative improvement of a single larger model. Second, we
show that the OOD performance afforded by ensembles is strongly determined by
their in-distribution (InD) performance, and—in this sense—is not indicative of
any “effective robustness.” While deep ensembles are a practical way to achieve
improvements to predictive power, uncertainty quantification, and robustness, our
results show that these improvements can be replicated by a (larger) single model.

1

Introduction

In many real-world settings, practitioners deploy ensembles of neural networks that combine the
outputs of several individual models [e.g. 71, 44, 77]. Though training and evaluating multiple models
is computationally expensive, a wide body of research demonstrates that ensembles achieve better
performance (as measured by accuracy, negative log likelihood, or a variety of other metrics) than
their constituent single models, provided that these models make diverse errors [16]. This benefit is
well-established in the literature: theoretically proven for ensembles formed via boosting or bagging
[67, 6], and demonstrated for deep ensembles that solely rely on the randomness of SGD coupled
with non-convex loss surfaces [46, 18].
Of course, ensembling is not the only way to increase performance; one could also increase the depth
or width of a single neural network. In many settings, a single large model performs similarly to an
ensemble of (smaller) models with a similar number of parameters [48, 40, 74]. This observation
poses a natural question: are there reasons to choose a deep ensemble over a single (larger) neural
network with comparable performance?
Recent research suggests that deep ensembles may be preferable to single models in safety-critical
applications and settings where data shifts significantly away from the training distribution. First,
*

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

