Multi-agent Dynamic Algorithm Configuration

Ke Xue1∗, Jiacheng Xu1∗, Lei Yuan1,2 ,
Miqing Li3 , Chao Qian1†, Zongzhang Zhang1 , Yang Yu1,2
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Polixir Technologies
3
CERCIA, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
{xuek, xujc, yuanl}@lamda.nju.edu.cn,
m.li.8@bham.ac.uk, {qianc, zzzhang, yuy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Automated algorithm configuration relieves users from tedious, trial-and-error tuning tasks. A popular algorithm configuration tuning paradigm is dynamic algorithm
configuration (DAC), in which an agent learns dynamic configuration policies
across instances by reinforcement learning (RL). However, in many complex algorithms, there may exist different types of configuration hyperparameters, and such
heterogeneity may bring difficulties for classic DAC which uses a single-agent RL
policy. In this paper, we aim to address this issue and propose multi-agent DAC
(MA-DAC), with one agent working for one type of configuration hyperparameter.
MA-DAC formulates the dynamic configuration of a complex algorithm with multiple types of hyperparameters as a contextual multi-agent Markov decision process
and solves it by a cooperative multi-agent RL (MARL) algorithm. To instantiate,
we apply MA-DAC to a well-known optimization algorithm for multi-objective
optimization problems. Experimental results show the effectiveness of MA-DAC in
not only achieving superior performance compared with other configuration tuning
approaches based on heuristic rules, multi-armed bandits, and single-agent RL, but
also being capable of generalizing to different problem classes. Furthermore, we
release the environments in this paper as a benchmark for testing MARL algorithms,
with the hope of facilitating the application of MARL.

1

Introduction

Finding right configurations of hyperparameters is critical for many learning and optimization
algorithms [18]. Automated methods, such as algorithm configuration (AC) [17, 27], emerge to
search for right configurations, with the aim of relieving users from tedious, trial-and-error tuning
tasks. However, static configuration policies obtained by AC may not necessarily yield optimal
performance (compared with dynamic policies) since algorithms may require different configurations
at different stages of their execution [38].
Dynamic algorithm configuration (DAC) [3, 1] is a well-known paradigm for obtaining dynamic
configuration policies. Unlike AC, DAC can dynamically adjust the algorithm’s configuration during
the optimization process, through formulating it as a contextual Markov decision process (MDP)
and then solving it by reinforcement learning (RL) [33]. DAC has been found to outperform static
methods on many tasks, including the learning rate tuning of deep neural networks [7], step-size
adaptation of evolution strategies [35], and heuristic selection of AI planning [38].
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

