BEER: Fast O(1/T ) Rate for Decentralized Nonconvex
Optimization with Communication Compression

Haoyu Zhao
Princeton University
haoyu@princeton.edu

Boyue Li
Carnegie Mellon University
boyuel@andrew.cmu.edu

Peter Richtárik
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Zhize Li∗
Carnegie Mellon University
zhizel@andrew.cmu.edu
Yuejie Chi
Carnegie Mellon University
yuejiec@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Communication efficiency has been widely recognized as the bottleneck for largescale decentralized machine learning applications in multi-agent or federated environments. To tackle the communication bottleneck, there have been many efforts
to design communication-compressed algorithms for decentralized nonconvex optimization, where the clients are only allowed to communicate a small amount
of quantized information (aka bits) with their neighbors over a predefined graph
topology. Despite significant efforts, the state-of-the-art algorithm in the nonconvex
setting still suffers from a slower rate of convergence O((G/T )2/3 ) compared with
their uncompressed counterpart, where G measures the data heterogeneity across
different clients, and T is the number of communication rounds. This paper proposes BEER, which adopts communication compression with gradient tracking, and
shows it converges at a faster rate of O(1/T ). This significantly improves over the
state-of-the-art rate, by matching the rate without compression even under arbitrary
data heterogeneity. Numerical experiments are also provided to corroborate our
theory and confirm the practical superiority of BEER in the data heterogeneous
regime.

1

Introduction

Decentralized machine learning is gaining attention in both academia and industry because of its
emerging applications in multi-agent systems such as the internet-of-things (IoT) and networked
autonomous systems [31, 43]. One of the key problems in decentralized machine learning is ondevice training, which aims to optimize a machine learning model using the datasets stored on
(geographically) different clients, and can be formulated as a decentralized optimization problem.
Decentralized optimization aims to solve the following optimization problem without sharing the
local datasets with other clients:
(
)
n
1X
min f (x; D) :=
f (x; Di ) ,
(1)
n i=1
x∈Rd
where f (x; Di ) := Eξi ∼Di f (x; ξi ) for i ∈ [n], and n is the total number of clients. Here, x ∈ Rd is
the machine learning model, f (x; D), f (x; Di ), and f (x; ξi ) denote the loss functions of the model
x on the entire dataset D, the local dataset Di , and a random data sample ξi , respectively. Different
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

