Self-Supervised Contrastive Pre-Training for Time
Series via Time-Frequency Consistency

Xiang Zhang† ∗
Harvard University
xiang_zhang@hms.harvard.edu

Ziyuan Zhao∗
Harvard University
ziyuanzhao@college.harvard.edu

Theodoros Tsiligkaridis
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
ttsili@ll.mit.edu

Marinka Zitnik
Harvard University
marinka@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
Pre-training on time series poses a unique challenge due to the potential mismatch
between pre-training and target domains, such as shifts in temporal dynamics,
fast-evolving trends, and long-range and short-cyclic effects, which can lead to
poor downstream performance. While domain adaptation methods can mitigate
these shifts, most methods need examples directly from the target domain, making
them suboptimal for pre-training. To address this challenge, methods need to
accommodate target domains with different temporal dynamics and be capable
of doing so without seeing any target examples during pre-training. Relative
to other modalities, in time series, we expect that time-based and frequencybased representations of the same example are located close together in the timefrequency space. To this end, we posit that time-frequency consistency (TF-C) —
embedding a time-based neighborhood of an example close to its frequency-based
neighborhood — is desirable for pre-training. Motivated by TF-C, we define a
decomposable pre-training model, where the self-supervised signal is provided by
the distance between time and frequency components, each individually trained by
contrastive estimation. We evaluate the new method on eight datasets, including
electrodiagnostic testing, human activity recognition, mechanical fault detection,
and physical status monitoring. Experiments against eight state-of-the-art methods
show that TF-C outperforms baselines by 15.4% (F1 score) on average in one-toone settings (e.g., fine-tuning an EEG-pretrained model on EMG data) and by 8.4%
(precision) in challenging one-to-many settings (e.g., fine-tuning an EEG-pretrained
model for either hand-gesture recognition or mechanical fault prediction), reflecting
the breadth of scenarios that arise in real-world applications. The source code and
datasets are available at https://github.com/mims-harvard/TFC-pretraining.

1

Introduction

Time series plays important roles in many areas, including clinical diagnosis, traffic analysis, and
climate science [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. While representation learning has considerably advanced analysis
of time series [7, 8, 9] more broadly [10], learning generalizable representations for temporal data
remains a fundamentally challenging problem [8, 11]. There are numerous immediate benefits from
generating such representations, of which pre-training capability is particularly desirable and of
*
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Present address: University of North Carolina at Charlotte, xiang.zhang@uncc.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

