Logical Credal Networks

Radu Marinescu
IBM Research
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com
Alexander Gray
IBM Research
alexander.gray@ibm.com
Tian Gao
IBM Research
tgao@us.ibm.com

Haifeng Qian
AWS AI Labs
qianhf@amazon.com

Debarun Bhattacharjya
IBM Research
debarunb@us.ibm.com

Ryan Riegel
IBM Research
ryan.riegel@ibm.com

Francisco Barahona
IBM Research
barahon@us.ibm.com

Pravinda Sahu
IBM Consulting
pravisah@in.ibm.com

Abstract
We introduce Logical Credal Networks (or LCNs for short) – an expressive probabilistic logic that generalizes prior formalisms that combine logic and probability.
Given imprecise information represented by probability bounds and conditional
probability bounds on logic formulas, an LCN specifies a set of probability distributions over all its interpretations. Our approach allows propositional and first-order
logic formulas with few restrictions, e.g., without requiring acyclicity. We also define a generalized Markov condition that allows us to identify implicit independence
relations between atomic formulas. We evaluate our method on benchmark problems such as random networks, Mastermind games with uncertainty and credit card
fraud detection. Our results show that the LCN outperforms existing approaches;
its advantage lies in aggregating multiple sources of imprecise information.

1

Introduction

Graphical models provide a powerful framework for reasoning about conditional dependency structures over many variables. Bayesian networks [26, 19], for example, rely on precise probabilistic
information and, therefore, encode a single distribution over the variables of interest, while credal
networks and their variants [7, 3, 8, 9], which encode sets of probability distributions, are able to
reason effectively with imprecise information represented by sets of probability values or intervals.
Many (if not all) real-world applications require efficient handling of uncertainty and a compact
representation of a wide variety of knowledge. Indeed, complex concepts and relationships that
typically comprise expert knowledge may be difficult to express in graphical models but can be
represented compactly using classical logic. Consequently, probabilistic logic which combines
probability and logic in a principled manner has emerged over the years as a unified framework to
deal effectively with these complex domains [23, 12, 16, 17, 1, 5, 11, 29, 15, 27, 28]. While some of
these formalisms (e.g., [29, 15, 27]) associate a single real value to the logical formulas to represent
the uncertainty around their truth values, others (e.g., [23, 12, 24]) relax this requirement and allow
specifying lower and upper probability bounds on logical formulas.
In practice, knowledge is typically imprecise and it is often the case that multiple sources of knowledge
need to be combined effectively to improve the solution quality of the problem at hand. For example, in
a practical credit card fraud detection application, it would be desirable to combine a statistical model
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

