Recursive Reinforcement Learning

Ernst Moritz Hahn∗
University of Twente

Mateo Perez∗
University of Colorado Boulder

Sven Schewe∗
University of Liverpool

Fabio Somenzi∗
University of Colorado Boulder

Ashutosh Trivedi∗
University of Colorado Boulder

Dominik Wojtczak∗
University of Liverpool

Abstract
Recursion is the fundamental paradigm to finitely describe potentially infinite
objects. As state-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms cannot directly
reason about recursion, they must rely on the practitioner’s ingenuity in designing
a suitable “flat” representation of the environment. The resulting manual feature
constructions and approximations are cumbersome and error-prone; their lack of
transparency hampers scalability. To overcome these challenges, we develop RL
algorithms capable of computing optimal policies in environments described as a
collection of Markov decision processes (MDPs) that can recursively invoke one
another. Each constituent MDP is characterized by several entry and exit points that
correspond to input and output values of these invocations. These recursive MDPs
(or RMDPs) are expressively equivalent to probabilistic pushdown systems (with
call-stack playing the role of the pushdown stack), and can model probabilistic
programs with recursive procedural calls. We introduce Recursive Q-learning—
a model-free RL algorithm for RMDPs—and prove that it converges for finite,
single-exit and deterministic multi-exit RMDPs under mild assumptions.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning [36] (RL) is a stochastic approximation based approach to optimization,
where learning agents rely on scalar reward signals from the environment to converge to an optimal
behavior. Watkins’s seminal approach [41] to RL, known as Q-learning, judiciously combines
exploration/exploitation with dynamic programming to provide guaranteed convergence [40] to
optimal behaviors in environments modeled as Markov decision processes (MDPs) with finite
state and action spaces. RL has also been applied to MDPs with uncountable state and action
spaces, although convergence guarantees for such environments require strong regularity assumptions.
Modern variants of Q-learning (and other tabular RL algorithms) harness the universal approximability
and ease-of-training rendered by deep neural networks [18] to discover creative solutions to problems
traditionally considered beyond the reach of AI [30, 39, 33].
These RL algorithms are designed with a flat Markovian view of the environment in the form of
a “state, action, reward, and next state” interface [9] in every interaction with the learning agent,
where the states/actions may come from infinite sets. When such infinitude presents itself in the form
of finitely represented recursive structures, the inability of the RL algorithms to handle structured
environments means that the structure present in the environment is not available to the RL algorithm
to generalize its learning upon. The work of [41] already provides a roadmap for hierarchically
structured environments; since then, considerable progress has been made in developing algorithms
for hierarchical RL [6, 13, 37, 31] with varying optimality guarantees. Still, the hierarchical MDPs
∗

Authors listed alphabetically.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

