Algorithms that Approximate Data Removal: New
Results and Limitations
Vinith M. Suriyakumar
MIT EECS
vinithms@mit.edu

Ashia C. Wilson
MIT EECS
ashia07@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of deleting user data from machine learning models trained
using empirical risk minimization (ERM). Our focus is on learning algorithms
which return the empirical risk minimizer and approximate unlearning algorithms
that comply with deletion requests that come in an online manner. Leveraging
the infintesimal jacknife, we develop an online unlearning algorithm that is both
computationally and memory efficient. Unlike prior memory efficient unlearning algorithms, we target ERM trained models that minimize objectives with non-smooth
regularizers, such as the commonly used ℓ1 , elastic net, or nuclear norm penalties.
We also provide generalization, deletion capacity, and unlearning guarantees that
are consistent with state of the art methods. Across a variety of benchmark datasets,
our algorithm empirically improves upon the runtime of prior methods while maintaining the same memory requirements and test accuracy. Finally, we open a new
direction of inquiry by proving that all approximate unlearning algorithms introduced so far fail to unlearn in problem settings where common hyperparameter
tuning methods, such as cross-validation, have been used to select models.

1

Introduction

The right to be forgotten (RtbF) is considered a fundamental human right in many legal systems [27,
21, 5]. The proliferation of techniques that employ user data to do things such as training and
validating machine learning across a variety of organizations has led to reconsideration of how to
interpret RtbF. The European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), California’s
Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), and Canada’s proposed Consumer Privacy Protection Act (CPPA) are
all examples of new pieces of legislation which attempt to codify the RtbF by requiring companies
and organizations to delete a user’s data by request [34].
But what does it mean to delete a user’s data? User data, for example, can be recovered from trained
machine learning models [31] and hyperparameter tuning procedures [25]. This suggests that data
deletion should require organizations to take action on the models and algorithms derived from the
data as well. This interpretation is consistent with the Federal Trade Commission’s recent action
ordering companies to delete the data from users who deleted their account as well as the models
and algorithms derived from the users’ data [7]. Forcing organizations to comply with each deletion
request by retraining, however, comes with potentially significant monetary and time costs. Thus, it
is worth asking if these costs can be managed while still maintaining model performance.
The cost concerns associated with RtbF compliance have prompted several recent works which
formalize and study the problem of unlearning [6]. The aim of these works is to develop techniques
which delete user data from models that are inexpensive in both computation and memory while
maintaining reasonable performance. Most unlearning algorithms proposed so far focus on unlearning
models obtained via empirical risk minimization [14, 28, 4, 23, 20]. However, several of these
methods are memory intensive [4, 15], requiring organizations to store several states of the model
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

