Off-Policy Evaluation with Deficient Support Using
Side Information
Nicolò Felicioni
Politecnico di Milano
nicolo.felicioni@polimi.it

Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema
Politecnico di Milano
maurizio.ferrari@polimi.it

Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Paolo Cremonesi
Politecnico di Milano
paolo.cremonesi@polimi.it

Abstract
The Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE) problem consists in evaluating the performance
of new policies from the data collected by another one. OPE is crucial when
evaluating a new policy online is too expensive or risky. Many of the state-of-theart OPE estimators are based on the Inverse Propensity Scoring (IPS) technique,
which provides an unbiased estimator when the full support assumption holds, i.e.,
when the logging policy assigns a non-zero probability to each action. However,
there are several scenarios where this assumption does not hold in practice, i.e.,
there is deficient support, and the IPS estimator is biased in the general case. In
this paper, we consider two alternative estimators for the deficient support OPE
problem. We first show how to adapt an estimator that was originally proposed
for a different domain to the deficient support setting. Then, we propose another
estimator, which is a novel contribution of this paper. These estimators exploit
additional information about the actions, which we call side information, in order to
make reliable estimates on the unsupported actions. Under alternative assumptions
that do not require full support, we show that the considered estimators are unbiased.
We also provide a theoretical analysis of the concentration when relaxing all the
assumptions. Finally, we provide an experimental evaluation showing how the
considered estimators are better suited for the deficient support setting compared
to the baselines.

1

Introduction

Many real-world decision-making problems can be viewed through the lens of the contextual bandit
framework. Some prominent examples are medical treatments [19], recommendation systems [15, 18,
31, 48], search engines [32], ad-placement systems [9], and many others. In any of these problems,
we have a decision-maker who repeatedly observes a context (e.g., a profile of a patient), samples an
action according to its policy (e.g., provides a medical treatment), and collects a reward (e.g., +1 if
the patient survives). Also, in many of those applications, we have access to additional information
about the actions, which we call side information. For example, in movie recommendation, we may
know the director and the actors of each movie [12]; in a clinical trial, we may have access to a set of
characteristics of each drug [10].
While deploying and evaluating a new policy on a real system may be prohibitively expensive (if
not unfeasible), logged data of contextual bandit problems is relatively cheap to obtain. Hence, it is
desirable to use them to evaluate new policies, without the need to collect new data. This problem is
called Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE). In this case, we have data collected by a given logging policy, and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

