On-Device Training Under 256KB Memory
Ji Lin1⇤ Ligeng Zhu1⇤ Wei-Ming Chen1 Wei-Chen Wang1 Chuang Gan2 Song Han1
1
MIT 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
https://tinyml.mit.edu/on-device-training

Abstract
On-device training enables the model to adapt to new data collected from the
sensors by fine-tuning a pre-trained model. Users can benefit from customized
AI models without having to transfer the data to the cloud, protecting the privacy.
However, the training memory consumption is prohibitive for IoT devices that have
tiny memory resources. We propose an algorithm-system co-design framework to
make on-device training possible with only 256KB of memory. On-device training
faces two unique challenges: (1) the quantized graphs of neural networks are
hard to optimize due to low bit-precision and the lack of normalization; (2) the
limited hardware resource (memory and computation) does not allow full backpropagation. To cope with the optimization difficulty, we propose QuantizationAware Scaling to calibrate the gradient scales and stabilize 8-bit quantized training.
To reduce the memory footprint, we propose Sparse Update to skip the gradient
computation of less important layers and sub-tensors. The algorithm innovation
is implemented by a lightweight training system, Tiny Training Engine, which
prunes the backward computation graph to support sparse updates and offload the
runtime auto-differentiation to compile time. Our framework is the first practical
solution for on-device transfer learning of visual recognition on tiny IoT devices
(e.g., a microcontroller with only 256KB SRAM), using less than 1/1000 of the
memory of PyTorch and TensorFlow while matching the accuracy. Our study
enables IoT devices not only to perform inference but also to continuously adapt to
new data for on-device lifelong learning. A video demo can be found here.

1

Introduction

On-device training allows us to adapt the pre-trained model to newly collected sensory data after
deployment. By training and adapting locally on the edge, the model can learn to improve its
predictions and perform lifelong learning and user customization. For example, fine-tuning a
language model enables continual learning from users’ typing and writing; adapting a vision model
enables recognizing new objects from a mobile camera. By bringing training closer to the sensors, it
also helps to protect user privacy when handling sensitive data (e.g., healthcare).
However, on-device training on tiny edge devices is extremely challenging and fundamentally different
from cloud training. Tiny IoT devices (e.g., microcontrollers) typically have a limited SRAM size
like 256KB. Such a small memory budget is hardly enough for the inference of deep learning
models [47, 46, 7, 11, 43, 24, 44, 59], let alone the training, which requires extra computation for the
backward and extra memory for intermediate activation [18]. On the other hand, modern deep training
frameworks (e.g., PyTorch [56], TensorFlow [4]) are usually designed for cloud servers and require a
large memory footprint (>300MB) even when training a small model (e.g., MobileNetV2-w0.35 [60])
with batch size 1 (Figure. 1).
The huge gap (>1000⇥) makes it impossible to run on tiny IoT devices with current frameworks and
algorithms. Current deep learning training systems like PyTorch [56], TensorFlow [4], JAX [10],
⇤ indicates equal contributions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

