The Hessian Screening Rule

Jonas Wallin
Department of Statistics
Lund University
jonas.wallin@stat.lu.se

Johan Larsson
Department of Statistics
Lund University
johan.larsson@stat.lu.se

Abstract
Predictor screening rules, which discard predictors before fitting a model, have had
considerable impact on the speed with which sparse regression problems, such as
the lasso, can be solved. In this paper we present a new screening rule for solving
the lasso path: the Hessian Screening Rule. The rule uses second-order information
from the model to provide both effective screening, particularly in the case of high
correlation, as well as accurate warm starts. The proposed rule outperforms all
alternatives we study on simulated data sets with both low and high correlation for
`1 -regularized least-squares (the lasso) and logistic regression. It also performs
best in general on the real data sets that we examine.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional data, where the number of features (p) exceeds the number of observations
(n), poses a challenge for many classical statistical models. A common remedy for this issue is to
regularize the model by penalizing the regression coefficients such that the solution becomes sparse. A
popular choice of such a penalization is the `1 -norm, which, when the objective is least-squares, leads
to the well-known lasso [1]. More specifically, we will focus on the following convex optimization
problem:

minimize
f (β; X) + λkβk1 ,
(1)
p
β∈R

where f (β; X) is smooth and convex. We let β̂ be the solution vector for this problem and, abusing
notation, equivalently let β̂ : R 7→ Rp be a function that returns this vector for a given λ. Our focus
lies in solving (1) along a regularization path λ1 , λ2 . . . , λm with λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ λm . We start
the path at λmax , which corresponds to the null (all-sparse) model1 , and finish at some fraction of
λmax for which the model is either almost saturated (in the p ≥ n setting), or for which the solution
approaches the ordinary least-squares estimate. The motivation for this focus is that the optimal λ
is typically unknown and must be estimated through model tuning, such as cross-validation. This
involves repeated refitting of the model to new batches of data, which is computationally demanding.
Fortunately, the introduction of so-called screening rules has improved this situation remarkably.
Screening rules use tests that screen and possibly discard predictors from the model before it is fit,
which effectively reduces the dimensions of the problem and leads to improvements in performance
and memory usage. There are, generally speaking, two types of screening rules: safe and heuristic
rules. Safe rules guarantee that discarded predictors are inactive at the optimum—heuristic rules do
not and may therefore cause violations: discarding active predictors. The possibility of violations
mean that heuristic methods need to validate the solution through checks of the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker
(KKT) optimality conditions after optimization has concluded and, whenever there are violations, rerun optimization, which can be costly particularly because the KKT checks themselves are expensive.
This means that the distinction between safe and heuristic rules only matters in regards to algorithmic
1

λmax is in fact available in closed form—for the lasso it is maxj |xTj y|.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

