SemMAE: Semantic-Guided Masking for Learning
Masked Autoencoders
Gang Li1,2∗, Heliang Zheng3 , Daqing Liu3 , Chaoyue Wang3 , Bing Su4 , Changwen Zheng1†
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences1 ,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences2 ,
JD Explore Academy3 , Renmin University of China4
ucasligang@gmail.com, {zhengheliang,liudaqing1,wangchaoyue9}@jd.com,
bingsu@ruc.edu.cn, changwen@iscas.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, significant progress has been made in masked image modeling to catch
up to masked language modeling. However, unlike words in NLP, the lack
of semantic decomposition of images still makes masked autoencoding (MAE)
different between vision and language. In this paper, we explore a potential visual
analogue of words, i.e., semantic parts, and we integrate semantic information into
the training process of MAE by proposing a Semantic-Guided Masking strategy.
Compared to widely adopted random masking, our masking strategy can gradually
guide the network to learn various information, i.e., from intra-part patterns to
inter-part relations. In particular, we achieve this in two steps. 1) Semantic part
learning: we design a self-supervised part learning method to obtain semantic
parts by leveraging and refining the multi-head attention of a ViT-based encoder.
2) Semantic-guided MAE (SemMAE) training: we design a masking strategy
that varies from masking a portion of patches in each part to masking a portion
of (whole) parts in an image. Extensive experiments on various vision tasks
show that SemMAE can learn better image representation by integrating semantic
information. In particular, SemMAE achieves 84.5% fine-tuning accuracy on
ImageNet-1k, which outperforms the vanilla MAE by 1.4%. In the semantic
segmentation and fine-grained recognition tasks, SemMAE also brings significant
improvements and yields the state-of-the-art performance. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ucasligang/SemMAE.

1

Introduction

Together with transformers, masked language modeling (MLM) has revolutionized the field of
self-supervised learning (SSL) in natural language processing (NLP), which enables training of
generalizable NLP models containing over one hundred billion parameters [5]. The concept of MLM
is quite intuitive, i.e., a portion of the data is removed and a model is trained to predict the removed
content. Recently, significant progress has been made in masked image modeling to catch up to
masked language modeling, where the masking mechanism is a key factor. Context encoder [28], an
inpainting-based masked image modeling (MIM) pioneer, proposes to use a random and fix-shaped
mask; SiT [2] and BEiT [3] use random “blockwise” masks, where patches in the local neighbourhood
are masked together (also called GMML: group mask model learning); MAE [19] randomly masks
out 75% patches of an image. Actually, masking mechanisms define the specific pretext task, i.e.,
what kind of information is to be exploited and what kind of information is to be predicted. Thus
∗
†

This work was performed when Gang Li was visiting JD Explore Academy as a research intern.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

