Learning Interface Conditions in Domain
Decomposition Solvers
Ali Taghibakhshi
Mechanical Science and Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
alit2@illinois.edu

Nicolas Nytko
Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
nnytko2@illinois.edu

Tareq Zaman
Scientific Computing Program
Memorial University of Newfoundland
and Labrador
St. John’s, NL, Canada
tzaman@mun.ca

Scott MacLachlan
Mathematics and Statistics
Memorial University of Newfoundland
and Labrador
St. John’s, NL, Canada
smaclachlan@mun.ca

Luke Olson
Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
lukeo@illinois.edu

Matthew West
Mechanical Science and Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
mwest@illinois.edu

Abstract
Domain decomposition methods are widely used and effective in the approximation of solutions to partial differential equations. Yet the optimal construction
of these methods requires tedious analysis and is often available only in simplified, structured-grid settings, limiting their use for more complex problems. In
this work, we generalize optimized Schwarz domain decomposition methods to
unstructured-grid problems, using Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNNs)
and unsupervised learning to learn optimal modifications at subdomain interfaces.
A key ingredient in our approach is an improved loss function, enabling effective
training on relatively small problems, but robust performance on arbitrarily large
problems, with computational cost linear in problem size. The performance of
the learned linear solvers is compared with both classical and optimized domain
decomposition algorithms, for both structured- and unstructured-grid problems.

1

Introduction

Domain decomposition methods (DDMs) [1, 2, 3] are highly effective in solving the linear and
nonlinear systems of equations that arise from the numerical approximation of solutions to partial
differential equations (PDEs). While most effective on elliptic boundary-value problems, DDMs can
also be applied to nonlinear problems, either using their nonlinear variants, or successively solving
linearizations. Time-dependent problems are normally solved by using a time stepping algorithm in
the time domain for implicit methods, which require the solution of a spatial problem for each time
step. Of these methods, Schwarz methods are particularly popular given their relative simplicity and
ease of parallelization. The common theme is to break the global problem into subproblems, derived
either by projection or by discretizing the same PDE over a physical subdomain, and to use solutions
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

