CascadeXML: Rethinking Transformers for
End-to-end Multi-resolution Training in Extreme
Multi-label Classification
Siddhant Kharbanda Atmadeep Banerjee Erik Schultheis Rohit Babbar
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
{firstname.lastname}@aalto.fi

Abstract
Extreme Multi-label Text Classification (XMC) involves learning a classifier that
can assign an input with a subset of most relevant labels from millions of label
choices. Recent approaches, such as XR-Transformer and LightXML, leverage
a transformer instance to achieve state-of-the-art performance. However, in this
process, these approaches need to make various trade-offs between performance and
computational requirements. A major shortcoming, as compared to the Bi-LSTM
based AttentionXML, is that they fail to keep separate feature representations for
each resolution in a label tree. We thus propose CascadeXML, an end-to-end multiresolution learning pipeline, which can harness the multi-layered architecture of a
transformer model for attending to different label resolutions with separate feature
representations. CascadeXML significantly outperforms all existing approaches
with non-trivial gains obtained on benchmark datasets consisting of up to three
million labels. Code for CascadeXML will be made publicly available at https:
//github.com/xmc-aalto/cascadexml.

1

Introduction

Extreme multi-label text classification (XMC) deals with the problem of predicting the most relevant
subset of labels from an enormously large label space spanning up to millions of labels. Over the years,
extreme classification has found many applications in e-commerce, like product recommendation [7]
and dynamic search advertisement [16], document tagging [1] and open-domain question answering
[6, 26] and thus, practical solutions to this problem can have significant and far-reaching impact.
The output space in extreme classification is not only large but also, the distribution of instances
among labels follows Zipf’s law such that a large fraction of them are tail labels [2, 17]. For example,
in a dataset of Wikipedia corpus containing 500K labels, only 2.1% labels annotate more than 100
data points and 60% of the labels annotate less than 10 data points! This inherently makes learning
meaningful representations at an extreme scale a challenging problem. Further, as the memory
and computational requirements grow linearly with the size of the label space, naive treatment via
classical methods and off-the-shelf solvers fails to deal with such large output spaces [8, 54].
In extreme scenarios with millions of labels, a surrogate step of shortlisting candidate labels becomes
crucial to perform extreme classification and has been adapted by many popular approaches [10, 19,
23, 52, 57]. For each data point, these approaches first solve a simpler task with coarse label-clusters
or meta-labels as the label space to create a shortlist of relevant labels for the extreme classification
task. This effectively reduces the training
√ time and computational complexity of the extreme task to
that of the shortlisting step which is O( L), where L is the number of labels.
Existing works leverage label representation as a centroid of their annotated instances to create a
Hierarchical Label Tree (HLT) [36, 55]. While earlier tree-based methods like Parabel [36] and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

