Towards Effective Multi-Modal Interchanges in
Zero-Resource Sounding Object Localization

Yang Zhao∗ , Chen Zhang∗ , Haifeng Huang∗ , Haoyuan Li, and Zhou Zhao †
Zhejiang University
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
{awalk, zc99, huanghaifeng, lihaoyuan, zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Aiming to locate the object that emits a specified sound in complex scenes, the
task of sounding object localization bridges two perception-oriented modalities of
vision and acoustics, and brings enormous research value to the comprehensive perceptual understanding of machine intelligence. Although there are massive training
data collected in this field, few of them contain accurate bounding box annotations,
hindering the learning process and further application of proposed models. In order
to address this problem, we try to explore an effective multi-modal knowledge
transfer strategy to obtain precise knowledge from other similar tasks and transfer it
through well-aligned multi-modal data to deal with this task in a zero-resource manner. Concretely, we design and propose a novel Two-stream Universal Referring
localization Network (TURN), which is composed of a localization stream and an
alignment stream to carry out different functions. The former is utilized to extract
the knowledge related to referring object localization from the image grounding
task, while the latter is devised to learn a universal semantic space shared between
texts and audios. Moreover, we further develop an adaptive sampling strategy to
automatically identify the overlap between different data domains, thus boosting
the performance and stability of our model. The extensive experiments on various
publicly-available benchmarks demonstrate that TURN can achieve competitive
performance compared with the state-of-the-art approaches without using any
data in this field, which verifies the feasibility of our proposed mechanisms and
strategies. The code is available at https://github.com/AwalkZY/TURN.

1

Introduction

When interacting with the external environment, humans can gather and integrate much information through different types of perception (such as vision, hearing, smell, and taste), thus making
corresponding judgments and decisions based on this. To effectively mimic this ability to bridge
knowledge from various modalities, researchers have been trying to explore the potential of machine
intelligence from different aspects. Among them, as a crucial part of audio-visual learning, the task
of sounding object localization has gained an increasing amount of attention.
Given a specific sound, the goal of sounding object localization is to ascertain the object that emits
it in a complex scene. To tackle this problem, a lot of efforts are made to model the co-occurrence
patterns in the visual and acoustic data and accordingly identify the possible target region. And for
the research and development in this field, there have been numerous aligned data pairs collected into
several publicly-available benchmarks. Nevertheless, few of them contain available box annotations,
which forces the models to acquire knowledge in a weakly supervised manner and increases the
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

