Differentially Private Learning Needs Hidden State
(Or Much Faster Convergence)
Jiayuan Ye, Reza Shokri
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
{jiayuan, reza}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Prior work on differential privacy analysis of randomized SGD algorithms relies
on composition theorems, where the implicit (unrealistic) assumption is that the
internal state of the iterative algorithm is revealed to the adversary. As a result,
the Rényi DP bounds derived by such composition-based analyses linearly grow
with the number of training epochs. When the internal state of the algorithm is
hidden, we prove a converging privacy bound for noisy stochastic gradient descent
(on strongly convex smooth loss functions). We show how to take advantage of
privacy amplification by sub-sampling and randomized post-processing, and prove
the dynamics of privacy bound for “shuffle and partition” and “sample without
replacement” stochastic mini-batch gradient descent schemes. We prove that, in
these settings, our privacy bound converges exponentially fast and is substantially
smaller than the composition bounds, notably after a few number of training
epochs. Thus, unless the DP algorithm converges fast, our privacy analysis shows
that hidden state analysis can significantly amplify differential privacy.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models leak sensitive information about their training data [39, 11]. To protect
user privacy, the widely-used differentially private training algorithm, DP-SGD [1], adds carefully
calibrated noise in each step of updating model parameters. This randomness guarantees that the
models trained on any two neighboring datasets are indistinguishable in probability distributions. To
quantify this indistinguishability, the DP analysis bounds the (moment of) likelihood ratio between a
pair of models trained on any two neighboring datasets. Improving this privacy analysis is crucial for
obtaining a higher (train and test) accuracy of the output model, under a constrained privacy budget.
The main-stream analysis of privacy loss in DP-SGD is based on composition theorems, which
quantify the total privacy loss of the training process across all its iterations. Given that privacypreserving learning via DP-SGD usually suffers from a slow convergence in empirical prediction
accuracy [10], the final bound could be significantly large (and loose). This analysis worsens the
privacy-accuracy trade-off by overestimating the magnitude of required noise for DP training.
To alleviate this problem, one popular direction is to design new variants of the DP-SGD algorithm,
that converge faster, i.e. require a smaller number of iterations to reach a stable training accuracy.
This includes works that derive privacy preserving variants of fast optimization algorithms, such as
performing DP-SGD with momentum [25], adaptive gradient clipping [3, 30], adaptive selection of
step-size and noise scale [4], and using pre-trained or hand-crafted features [34]. All these approaches
aim for a faster training convergence for the DP learning algorithm, such that the composition
analysis is applied to a smaller number of iterations and the total bound remains small.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

