Implications of Model Indeterminacy for Explanations
of Automated Decisions
Marc-Etienne Brunet
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Ashton Anderson
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

mebrunet@cs.toronto.edu

ashton@cs.toronto.edu

Richard Zemel
University of Toronto
Columbia University
Vector Institute
zemel@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
There has been a significant research effort focused on explaining predictive models,
for example through post-hoc explainability and recourse methods. Most of the
proposed techniques operate upon a single, fixed, predictive model. However, it is
well-known that given a dataset and a predictive task, there may be a multiplicity
of models that solve the problem (nearly) equally well. In this work, we investigate
the implications of this kind of model indeterminacy on the post-hoc explanations
of predictive models. We show how it can lead to explanatory multiplicity, and
we explore the underlying drivers. We show how predictive multiplicity, and the
related concept of epistemic uncertainty, are not reliable indicators of explanatory
multiplicity. We further illustrate how a set of models showing very similar
aggregate performance on a test dataset may show large variations in their local
explanations, i.e., for a specific input. We explore these effects for Shapley value
based explanations on three risk assessment datasets. Our results indicate that
model indeterminacy may have a substantial impact on explanations in practice,
leading to inconsistent and even contradicting explanations.

1

Introduction

Data-driven decision making has become a preferred practice within organizations. When the most
important outcomes are readily quantifiable, entire decision making processes may even be automated
using predictive models fit to historic data. With so much to be gained from accurate predictions,
powerful, modern, “black-box" machine learning (ML) models have obvious appeal. Clearly, however,
it is understood that deciding whether to deny access to products like insurance and credit should not
be taken lightly. Governing regulation may require a justification to be provided in conjunction with
a decision, such as one from a set of adverse action codes [34]. Even where such regulation is not
required, there is increasing pressure to make automated decisions more transparent [31]. As a result,
considerable interest has recently been devoted to explaining ML model decisions. Academics have
proposed numerous new techniques [2], new businesses have been founded to address this need, and
regulators have invested significant effort to provide guidance [21].
Thus far, the focus of most machine learning explanation and transparency research has been on a
single learned predictive model. However, it is well-known that given a dataset and a predictive task,
there may be a multiplicity of models that solve the problem (nearly) equally well[5; 6; 30]. What are
the implications of this kind of model indeterminacy for the explanations of automated decisions? It
has been demonstrated that a set of models with very similar performance on a test set may still show
significant predictive multiplicity [20], which is to say, the models make conflicting predictions on
individual data points. Quantifying this kind of model uncertainty in machine learning predictions is
the subject of considerable research interest. For instance it is central to work in Bayesian modelling,
and to discussions of epistemic uncertainty [16]. But to what extent are explanations affected?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

