Drawing out of Distribution with
Neuro-Symbolic Generative Models

Yichao Liang1,2 , Joshua B. Tenenbaum2 , Tuan Anh Le∗,3 & N. Siddharth∗,4
1

University of Oxford, 2 MIT, 3 Google, 4 University of Edinburgh

Abstract

Humans can learn representations of data that are generalpurpose and meaningful. Being general-purpose permits effective reuse when characterizing novel observations, and being
meaningful facilitates tasks like generating or classifying observations. Key to this is a generic process for characterizing
observations—inferring what features are relevant and how they
compose to generate the observations [9, 13, 33]. For example,
when observing handwritten numbers, we learn to characterise
them as sequential compositions (how) of different pen strokes
(what). This is general-purpose as it allows characterizing novel
observations, say doodles instead of numbers, simply as novel
compositions of previously learnt pen strokes. It is also meaningful since pen-strokes themselves are symbolic and interpretable.

ni
gl
ot
O
m

D
ra
w
ui
ck
Q

IS
T
M
N
K

IS
T
N

→

EM

Introduction

M

1

N
IS

T

Learning general-purpose representations from perceptual inputs is a hallmark of human intelligence. For example, people can write out numbers or characters, or even draw doodles, by
characterizing these tasks as different instantiations of the same generic underlying process—
compositional arrangements of different forms of pen strokes. Crucially, learning to do one task,
say writing, implies reasonable competence at another, say drawing, on account of this shared
process. We present Drawing out of Distribution (DooD), a neuro-symbolic generative model of
stroke-based drawing that can learn such general-purpose representations. In contrast to prior
work, DooD operates directly on images, requires no supervision or expensive test-time inference,
and performs unsupervised amortised inference with a symbolic stroke model that better enables
both interpretability and generalization. We evaluate DooD on its ability to generalise across
both data and tasks. We first perform zero-shot transfer from one dataset (e.g. MNIST) to
another (e.g. Quickdraw), across five different datasets, and show that DooD clearly outperforms
different baselines. An analysis of the learnt representations further highlights the benefits of
adopting a symbolic stroke model. We then adopt a subset of the Omniglot challenge tasks,
and evaluate its ability to generate new exemplars (both unconditionally and conditionally), and
perform one-shot classification, showing that DooD matches the state of the art. Taken together,
we demonstrate that DooD does indeed capture general-purpose representations across both data
and task, and takes a further step towards building general and robust concept-learning systems.

Figure 1: DooD trained on MNIST
generalises to other data with no extra
training. Each column denotes a target
and its step-by-step reconstruction.

Current computational approaches capture important aspects of generalizability, but none of these
is simultaneously efficient, reliable, interpretable, and unsupervised [25]. At one end, symbolic
approaches like Lake et al. [24] attribute generalization to an explicit hierarchical composition process
involving sub-strokes, strokes, and characters, and build concomitant models that demonstrate humanlike generalization abilities across different tasks. At the other end, neural approaches like deep
generative models [9, 18, 29] and deep meta-learning [11, 32, 34] favour scalable learning from raw
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

