Time-Conditioned Dances with Simplicial Complexes:
Zigzag Filtration Curve based Supra-Hodge
Convolution Networks for Time-series Forecasting

Yuzhou Chen
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
Temple University
yuzhou.chen@temple.edu

Yulia R. Gel
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas
National Science Foundation
ygl@utdallas.edu

H. Vincent Poor
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Princeton University
poor@princeton.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) offer a new powerful alternative for multivariate
time series forecasting, demonstrating remarkable success in a variety of spatiotemporal applications, from urban flow monitoring systems to health care informatics to financial analytics. Yet, such GNN models pre-dominantly capture only lower
order interactions, that is, pairwise relations among nodes, and also largely ignore
intrinsic time-conditioned information on the underlying topology of multivariate
time series. To address these limitations, we propose a new time-aware GNN
architecture which amplifies the power of the recently emerged simplicial neural
networks with a time-conditioned topological knowledge representation in a form
of zigzag persistence. That is, our new approach, Zigzag Filtration Curve based
Supra-Hodge Convolution Networks (ZFC-SHCN) is built upon the two main
components: (i) a new highly computationally efficient zigzag persistence curve
which allows us to systematically encode time-conditioned topological information,
and (ii) a new temporal multiplex graph representation module for learning higherorder network interactions. We discuss theoretical properties of the proposed
time-conditioned topological knowledge representation and extensively validate
the new time-aware ZFC-SHCN model in conjunction with time series forecasting
on a broad range of synthetic and real-world datasets: traffic flows, COVID-19
biosurveillance, Ethereum blockchain, surface air temperature, wind energy, and
vector autoregressions. Our experiments demonstrate that the ZFC-SHCN achieves
the state-of-the-art performance with lower requirements on computational costs.

1

Introduction

Over the last few years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a new powerful alternative
to traditional statistical and machine learning models in conjunction with univariate and multivariate
time series forecasting tasks [27, 4, 40, 40, 28]. Such successful applications of GNNs range from
urban traffic analytics to forecasting COVID-19 hospitalizations to electrocardiogram monitoring [3,
36, 56, 10, 20]. However, most GNNs remain inherently static and do not explicitly incorporate the
inherent time characteristics of the encoded knowledge [59, 42]. In turn, limitations in capturing the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

