Trajectory balance:
Improved credit assignment in GFlowNets

Nikolay Malkin
Mila, Université de Montréal
Montréal, Québec, Canada

Moksh Jain
Mila, Université de Montréal
Montréal, Québec, Canada

Emmanuel Bengio
Mila, McGill University, Recursion
Montréal, Québec, Canada

Chen Sun
Mila, Université de Montréal
Montréal, Québec, Canada

Yoshua Bengio
Mila, Université de Montréal
Montréal, Québec, Canada
{nikolay.malkin,moksh.jain,chen.sun,yoshua.bengio}@mila.quebec
emmanuel.bengio@recursionpharma.com

Abstract
Generative flow networks (GFlowNets) are a method for learning a stochastic
policy for generating compositional objects, such as graphs or strings, from a
given unnormalized density by sequences of actions, where many possible action
sequences may lead to the same object. We find previously proposed learning
objectives for GFlowNets, flow matching and detailed balance, which are analogous
to temporal difference learning, to be prone to inefficient credit propagation across
long action sequences. We thus propose a new learning objective for GFlowNets,
trajectory balance, as a more efficient alternative to previously used objectives.
We prove that any global minimizer of the trajectory balance objective can define
a policy that samples exactly from the target distribution. In experiments on
four distinct domains, we empirically demonstrate the benefits of the trajectory
balance objective for GFlowNet convergence, diversity of generated samples, and
robustness to long action sequences and large action spaces.

1

Introduction

Generative flow networks [GFlowNets; 3, 4] are models that exploit generalizable structure in an
energy function E to amortize sampling from the corresponding probability density function on a
space of compositional objects X , for example, graphs composed of nodes and edges. A GFlowNet
learns a stochastic policy that generates such structured objects by producing a stochastic sequence of
actions that incrementally modify a partial object (state), e.g., by adding an edge or a node to a graph,
starting from a universal initial state (like an empty graph). A special ‘exit’ action signals that the
construction of the object x ∈ X is completed, and the policy is trained so as to make the likelihood
of generating x proportional to the given unnormalized probability or reward R(x) = e−E(x) .
Like other models in deep reinforcement learning [RL; 25], GFlowNets are trained with a parametric
policy that can be given desired inductive biases (e.g., a particular deep net architecture) and allows
generalization to states not seen in training. Natural domains for applying GFlowNets are those
where exact sampling is intractable and local exploration (MCMC) methods perform poorly, but
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

