Towards Efficient Post-training Quantization of
Pre-trained Language Models
Haoli Bai1,2⇤, Lu Hou1 , Lifeng Shang1 , Xin Jiang1 , Irwin King2 , Michael R. Lyu2
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{baihaoli,houlu3,Shang.Lifeng,Jiang.Xin}@huawei.com,
{king,lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Network quantization has gained increasing attention with the rapid growth of
large pre-trained language models (PLMs). However, most existing quantization
methods for PLMs follow quantization-aware training (QAT) that requires end-toend training with full access to the entire dataset. Therefore, they suffer from slow
training, large memory overhead, and data accessibility issues. In this paper, we
study post-training quantization (PTQ) of PLMs, and propose module-wise quantization error minimization (MREM), an efficient solution to mitigate these issues.
By partitioning the PLM into multiple modules, we minimize the reconstruction
error incurred by quantization for each module. In addition, we design a new model
parallel training strategy such that each module can be trained locally on separate
computing devices without waiting for preceding modules, which brings nearly the
theoretical training speed-up (e.g., 4⇥ on 4 GPUs). Experiments on GLUE and
SQuAD benchmarks show that our proposed PTQ solution not only performs close
to QAT, but also enjoys significant reductions in training time, memory overhead,
and data consumption.

1

Introduction

Large pre-trained language models (PLMs) have achieved remarkable success in various natural
language processing tasks [44, 12, 5]. However, the increasing size and computation overhead also
make it prohibitive to deploy these PLMs on resource-constrained devices. To obtain compact PLMs,
various model compression methods have been proposed, such as pruning [32, 14, 50], knowledge
distillation [40, 42, 24], weight-sharing [10, 25, 46, 22], dynamic computation with adaptive depth or
width [18, 52, 59], and quantization [55, 41, 54, 56, 3, 38, 43].
Among these methods, network quantization enjoys the reduction of both model size and computation overhead without modifying the network architecture, and is thus extensively studied in PLM
quantization [55, 41, 54, 56, 3, 38, 43]. However, most previous methods for PLM quantization
methods follow quantization-aware training (QAT), which suffers from several issues. Specifically,
QAT usually conducts end-to-end back-propagation training over the whole training set, which can
be slow in training time, memory demanding and data consuming. These issues can be somethimes
prohibited for industrial PLMs. Post-training quantization (PTQ), on the other hand, serves as
an appealing alternative that is efficient in training time, memory overhead and data consumption.
Instead of the full training set, PTQ can leverage only a small portion of training data to minimize the layer-wise reconstruction error incurred by quantization [34, 35, 33, 23]. This can be
done by either calibrating the batch normalization statistics [34] or step sizes [35] in quantization
functions. The layer-wise objective also breaks down the end-to-end training, making the prob⇤

This work is partially done during internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

