Inherently Explainable Reinforcement Learning
in Natural Language

Xiangyu Peng†

†

Chen Xing†
Prafulla Kumar Choubey‡ Chien-Sheng Wu, Caiming Xiong
‡
Georgia Institute of Technology
Allen Institute for AI

{xpeng62,riedl}@gatech.edu, raja@allenai.org

Abstract
We focus on the task of creating a reinforcement learning agent that is inherently
explainable—with the ability to produce immediate local explanations by thinking out loud while performing a task and analyzing entire trajectories post-hoc
to produce temporally extended explanations. This Hierarchically Explainable
Reinforcement Learning agent (HEX-RL), 1 operates in Interactive Fictions, textbased game environments in which an agent perceives and acts upon the world
using textual natural language. These games are usually structured as puzzles
or quests with long-term dependencies in which an agent must complete a sequence of actions to succeed—providing ideal environments in which to test an
agent’s ability to explain its actions. Our agent is designed to treat explainability
as a first-class citizen, using an extracted symbolic knowledge graph-based (KG)
state representation coupled with a Hierarchical Graph Attention mechanism
that points to the facts in the internal graph representation that most influenced
the choice of actions. Experiments show that this agent provides significantly
improved explanations over strong baselines, as rated by human participants
generally unfamiliar with the environment, while also matching state-of-the-art
task performance.

1 Introduction
Explainable AI refers to artificial intelligence
methods and techniques that provide humanunderstandable insights into how and why an
AI system chooses actions or makes predictions.
Such explanations are critical for ensuring reliability and improving trustworthiness by increasing
user understanding of the underlying model. In
this work we specifically focus on creating deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents that can explain
their actions in sequential decision making environments through natural language.
In contrast to the majority of contemporary work
in the area which focuses on supervised machine
learning problems which require singular instance
level local explanations (You et al., 2016; Xu et al.,
2015; Wang et al., 2017; Wiegreffe and Marasovic,
2021), such environments—in which agents need
to reason causally about actions over a long series
1 Code: https://github.com/xiangyu-peng/HEX-RL

Observation: Forest Path
The path heads northsouth here.
One particularly large tree with some low
branches stands at the edge of the path...
Action: go up
Game Score: 0
✵ Explanation:
I am in the Forest Path now.
trees are intereactable
✪ Agent needs this action to:
take egg at Up a tree
Observation: Up a tree
Beside you on the branch is a small birds nest
In the birds nest is a large egg encrusted with
precious jewels, scavenged by a childless songbird...
Action: take egg

Game Score: 5

✵ Explanation:
egg is interactable
Observation: Up a tree
Taken.

Figure 1: Excerpt from zork1 with immediate
step-by-step explanations constructed from
the KG represented by and temporally extended explanations by . Colors represent
different categories of KG facts seen in Fig. 2.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

