Optimistic tree search strategies for black-box
combinatorial optimization

Cedric Malherbe1 , Antoine Grosnit1 , Rasul Tutunov1 , Jun Wang1,2 ,
Haitham Bou-Ammar1,2
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 University College London
firstname.lastname@huawei.com

Abstract
The optimization of combinatorial black-box functions is pervasive in computer
science and engineering. However, the combinatorial explosion of the search
space and the lack of natural ordering pose significant challenges for the current
techniques from both theoretical and practical perspectives. In this paper, we
propose to introduce and analyze novel combinatorial black-box solvers that are
based on the recent advances in tree search strategies and partitioning techniques.
A first contribution is the analysis of an algorithm called Optimistic Lipschitz Tree
Search (OLTS) which assumes the Lipschitz constant of the objective function to be
known. We provide linear convergence rates for this algorithm which are shown to
improve upon the logarithmic rates of the baselines under specific conditions. Then,
an adaptive version of OLTS, called Optimistic Combinatorial Tree Search (OCTS),
is introduced for a more realistic setup where we do not have any information on
the Lipschitz constant of the function. Again, similar linear rates are shown to hold
for OCTS. Finally, a numerical assessment is provided to illustrate the potential of
tree searches with respect to state-of-the-art methods over typical benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Finding optima of combinatorial black-box systems is an old problem with ubiquitous applications
including but not limited to hyperparameter tuning [29], object detection [49], radar engineering [41]
or model sparsification [7]. When facing such problems, two routes can generally be distinguished: 1)
model-based techniques such as Bayesian methods [6, 14, 19, 26, 39] or 2) heuristic-based methods
such as genetic and evolutionary algorithms [4, 21]. However, there is consistent gap between those
two types of approaches. While relying on Bayesian modeling, the optimization only focuses on
functions that align with the model and, more importantly, the heavy cost of optimizing the inner
model restricts their use to systems where we can only afford few hundred function evaluations. On
the other hand, heuristics methods are generally too coarse and tend to exploit very few information
on the objective function which can get them easily stuck in local optima [31]. Further, the theoretical
analysis of these approaches are generally loose when predicting their performance and limited to
specific functions [16, 18, 20].
In this work, we aim at filling this gap by proposing the first provable black-box solver for combinatorial functions that rely on minimal assumptions. More precisely, we design novel solvers that come
with provable guarantees and are tailored to optimize functions with moderate or cheap-to-evaluate
cost. To do so, we follow a novel route and propose to develop an approach that employs ideas
from tree searches and partitioning techniques. Precisely, we build upon the works of DIRECT [30]
and SOO [37] and show how to use optimistic tree searches on combinatorial spaces. However,
the application of these techniques to combinatorial structures is limited by three major drawbacks
related to the absence of well suited trees for combinatorial spaces and the use of continuous notions
that are further detailed in the next section.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

