S4ND: Modeling Images and Videos as
Multidimensional Signals Using State Spaces
Eric Nguyen⇤ † , Karan Goel⇤‡ , Albert Gu⇤‡ ,
Gordon W. Downs , Preey Shah‡ , Tri Dao‡ , Stephen A. Baccus§ , Christopher Ré‡
†
Department of BioEngineering, Stanford University
‡
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
§
Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University
‡

{etnguyen,albertgu,gwdowns,preey,trid,baccus}@stanford.edu
{kgoel,chrismre}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Visual data such as images and videos are typically modeled as discretizations
of inherently continuous, multidimensional signals. Existing continuous-signal
models attempt to exploit this fact by modeling the underlying signals of visual
(e.g., image) data directly. However, these models have not yet been able to achieve
competitive performance on practical vision tasks such as large-scale image and
video classification. Building on a recent line of work on deep state space models
(SSMs), we propose S4ND, a new multidimensional SSM layer that extends the
continuous-signal modeling ability of SSMs to multidimensional data including
images and videos. We show that S4ND can model large-scale visual data in
1D, 2D, and 3D as continuous multidimensional signals and demonstrates strong
performance by simply swapping Conv2D and self-attention layers with S4ND
layers in existing state-of-the-art models. On ImageNet-1k, S4ND exceeds the
performance of a Vision Transformer baseline by 1.5% when training with a 1D
sequence of patches, and matches ConvNeXt when modeling images in 2D. For
videos, S4ND improves on an inflated 3D ConvNeXt in activity classification
on HMDB-51 by 4%. S4ND implicitly learns global, continuous convolutional
kernels that are resolution invariant by construction, providing an inductive bias
that enables generalization across multiple resolutions. By developing a simple
bandlimiting modification to S4 to overcome aliasing, S4ND achieves strong zeroshot (unseen at training time) resolution performance, outperforming a baseline
Conv2D by 40% on CIFAR-10 when trained on 8 ⇥ 8 and tested on 32 ⇥ 32
images. When trained with progressive resizing, S4ND comes within ⇠ 1% of a
high-resolution model while training 22% faster.

1

Introduction

Modeling visual data such as images and videos is a canonical problem in deep learning. In the last
few years, many modern deep learning backbones that achieve strong performance on benchmarks
like ImageNet [53] have been proposed. These backbones are diverse, and include 1D sequence
models such as the Vision Transformer (ViT) [13], which treats images as sequences of patches, and
2D and 3D models that use local convolutions over images and videos (ConvNets) [37, 25, 56, 58,
60, 42, 24, 32, 49, 64, 15].
A commonality among modern vision models capable of achieving state-of-the-art (SotA) performance is that they treat visual data as discrete pixels rather than continuous-signals. However, images
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

