A permutation-free kernel two-sample test

Ilmun Kim
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Department of Applied Statistics
Yonsei University
ilmun@yonsei.ac.kr

Shubhanshu Shekhar
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
shubhan2@andrew.cmu.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
aramdas@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
The kernel Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) is a popular multivariate distance
metric between distributions that has found utility in two-sample testing. The usual
kernel-MMD test statistic is a degenerate U-statistic under the null, and thus it has
an intractable limiting distribution. Hence, to design a level-α test, one usually
selects the rejection threshold as the (1−α)-quantile of the permutation distribution.
The resulting nonparametric test has finite-sample validity but suffers from large
computational cost, since every permutation takes quadratic time. We propose the
cross-MMD, a new quadratic-time MMD test statistic based on sample-splitting
and studentization. We prove that under mild assumptions, the cross-MMD has a
limiting standard Gaussian distribution under the null. Importantly, we also show
that the resulting test is consistent against any fixed alternative, and when using the
Gaussian kernel, it has minimax rate-optimal power against local alternatives. For
large sample sizes, our new cross-MMD provides a significant speedup over the
MMD, for only a slight loss in power.

1

Introduction
i.i.d.

We study the two-sample testing problem: given X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ) ∼ P and Y =
i.i.d.
(Y1 , . . . , Ym ) ∼ Q, we test the null hypothesis H0 : P = Q against the alternative H1 : P ̸= Q.
This is a nonparametric hypothesis problem with a composite null hypothesis and a composite
alternative hypothesis. It finds applications in diverse areas such as testing microarray data, clinical
diagnosis, and database attribute matching (Gretton et al., 2012a).
A popular approach to solving this problem is based on the kernel-MMD distance between the two
empirical distributions (Gretton et al., 2006). Given a positive definite kernel k, the kernel-MMD
distance between two distributions P and Q on X , denoted by MMD(P, Q), is defined as
Z
Z
MMD(P, Q) = ∥µ − ν∥k , where µ(·) =
k(x, ·)dP (x), and ν(·) =
k(x, ·)dQ(x). (1)
X

X

Above, µ and ν are commonly called “kernel mean maps”, and denote the kernel mean embeddings
of the distributions P and Q into the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) associated with the
positive-definite kernel k, and ∥ · ∥k denotes the corresponding RKHS norm. Under mild conditions
on the positive definite kernel k (Sriperumbudur et al., 2011), MMD is a metric on the space of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

