Optimal Algorithms for Decentralized Stochastic
Variational Inequalities
Dmitry Kovalev
KAUST,⇤ Saudi Arabia
dakovalev1@gmail.com

Aleksandr Beznosikov
MIPT†, HSE University and Yandex, Russia
anbeznosikov@gmail.com

Abdurakhmon Sadiev
MIPT, Russia
sadiev.aa@phystech.edu
Peter Richtárik
KAUST, Saudi Arabia
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Michael Persiianov
MIPT, Russia
persiianov.mi@phystech.edu
Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT, HSE University and IITP RAS‡, Russia
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Abstract
Variational inequalities are a formalism that includes games, minimization, saddle
point, and equilibrium problems as special cases. Methods for variational inequalities are therefore universal approaches for many applied tasks, including machine
learning problems. This work concentrates on the decentralized setting, which is
increasingly important but not well understood. In particular, we consider decentralized stochastic (sum-type) variational inequalities over fixed and time-varying
networks. We present lower complexity bounds for both communication and local
iterations and construct optimal algorithms that match these lower bounds. Our
algorithms are the best among the available literature not only in the decentralized
stochastic case, but also in the decentralized deterministic and non-distributed
stochastic cases. Experimental results confirm the effectiveness of the presented
algorithms.

1

Introduction

Variational inequalities are a broad and flexible class of problems that includes minimization, saddle
point, Nash equilibrium, and fixed point problems as special cases; see [24, 6] for an introduction.
Over the long history of modern research on variational inequalities spanning at least half a century,
the community developed their own methods and theory, differing from the approaches in their
sister field, optimization. The ExtraGradient / MirrorProx methods due to [38, 52, 34] have a similar
foundational standing in the variational inequalities field that gradient descent occupies in the
optimization literature. As in the case of gradient descent, many modifications [31] and variants [66]
of these methods were proposed and studied in the variational inequalities literature.
⇤

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
‡
Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

