Toward Equation of Motion for Deep Neural
Networks: Continuous-time Gradient Descent and
Discretization Error Analysis

Taiki Miyagawa
NEC Corporation, Japan
miyagawataik@nec.com

Abstract
We derive and solve an “Equation of Motion” (EoM) for deep neural networks
(DNNs), a differential equation that precisely describes the discrete learning dynamics of DNNs. Differential equations are continuous but have played a prominent
role even in the study of discrete optimization (gradient descent (GD) algorithms).
However, there still exist gaps between differential equations and the actual learning dynamics of DNNs due to discretization error. In this paper, we start from
gradient flow (GF) and derive a counter term that cancels the discretization error between GF and GD. As a result, we obtain EoM, a continuous differential
equation that precisely describes the discrete learning dynamics of GD. We also
derive discretization error to show to what extent EoM is precise. In addition, we
apply EoM to two specific cases: scale- and translation-invariant layers. EoM
highlights differences between continuous-time and discrete-time GD, indicating
the importance of the counter term for a better description of the discrete learning
dynamics of GD. Our experimental results support our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Let us first explain our primary motivation for
the present paper. In physics, one of the funWeight parameter
damental goals is to predict the dynamics of
matter and its fundamental constituents. SpecifLearning dynamics
ically, “predict” here means to construct differGradient ﬂow
ential equations that best describe the physical
system under consideration and to solve them.
EoM
+ Counter term
Such differential equations are called Equations
of Motion (EoM). An interesting question here
may be “What is the EoM for deep neural netGradient descent
works (DNNs)?” That is, to what extent can we
Step
predict the discrete learning dynamics of DNNs
by constructing differential equations? This is Figure 1: Our approach. GF fails in describing
our research question.
the learning dynamics of GD due to discretization
Differential equations have played a prominent error. Our counter term approach successfully
role in studying discrete optimization (gradient cancels the discretization error between GF and
descent (GD) algorithms), although they are con- GD and hence allows for a reliable analysis of GD.
tinuous [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. In the context of deep
learning, gradient flow (GF) and stochastic differential equations (SDEs) are used to analyze (stochastic) gradient descent ((S)GD). Research targets include: convergence [6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 9, 14, 17],
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

