Tiered Reinforcement Learning: Pessimism in the Face
of Uncertainty and Constant Regret

Jiawei Huang1∗ Li Zhao2 Tao Qin2 Wei Chen2 Nan Jiang1 Tie-Yan Liu2
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{jiaweih, nanjiang}@illinois.edu
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{lizo, taoqin, weic, tyliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose a new learning framework that captures the tiered structure of many
real-world user-interaction applications, where the users can be divided into two
groups based on their different tolerance on exploration risks and should be treated
separately. In this setting, we simultaneously maintain two policies π O and π E : π O
(“O” for “online”) interacts with more risk-tolerant users from the first tier and
minimizes regret by balancing exploration and exploitation as usual, while π E (“E”
for “exploit”) exclusively focuses on exploitation for risk-averse users from the second tier utilizing the data collected so far. An important question is whether such a
separation yields advantages over the standard online setting (i.e., π E = π O ) for the
risk-averse users. We individually consider the gap-independent vs. gap-dependent
settings. For the former, we prove that the separation is indeed not beneficial from
a minimax perspective. For the latter, we show that if choosing Pessimistic Value
Iteration as the exploitation algorithm to produce π E , we can achieve a constant
regret for risk-averse users independent of the number of episodes K, which is in
sharp contrast to the Ω(log K) regret for any online RL algorithms in the same
setting, while the regret of π O (almost) maintains its online regret optimality and
does not need to compromise for the success of π E .

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been applied to many real-world user-interaction applications to
provide users with better services, such as in recommendation systems [Afsar et al., 2021] and medical
treatment [Yu et al., 2021, Lipsky and Sharp, 2001]. In those scenarios, the users take the role of the
environments and the interaction strategies (e.g. recommendation or medical treatment) correspond to
the agents in RL. In the theoretical study of such problems, most of the existing literature adopts the
online interaction protocol, where in each episode k ∈ [K], the learning agent executes a policy πk
to interact with users (i.e. environments), receives new data to update the policy, and moves on to the
next episode. While this formulation treats each user equivalently when optimizing the regret, many
scenarios have a special “Tiered Structure”2 : users can be divided into multiple groups depending
on their different preference and tolerance about the risk that results from the necessary exploration
to improve the policy, and such grouping is available to the learner in advance so it would be better to
treat them separately. As a concrete example, in medical treatment, after a new treatment plan comes
out, some courageous patients or paid volunteers (denoted as GO ; “O” for “Online”) may prefer it
given the potential risks, while some conservative patients (denoted as GE ; “E” for “Exploit”) may
tend to receive mature and well-tested plans, even if the new one is promising to be more effective.
∗
2

Work done during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
We consider the cases with two tiers in this paper.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

