Improving Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
with Nesterov’s Accelerated Gradient Method
Nghia H. Nguyen⇤
FPT Software AI Center
Ha Noi, Vietnam
nghianhh1@fsoft.com.vn

Tan M. Nguyen⇤
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
tanmnguyen89@ucla.edu

Huyen K. Vo
FPT Software AI Center
Ha Noi, Vietnam
huyenvtk1@fsoft.com.vn

Stanley J. Osher
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
sjo@math.ucla.edu

Thieu N. Vo
Faculty of Mathematics and Statistics
Ton Duc Thang University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
vongocthieu@tdtu.edu.vn

Abstract
We propose the Nesterov neural ordinary differential equations (NesterovNODEs),
whose layers solve the second-order ordinary differential equations (ODEs) limit
of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient (NAG) method, and a generalization called
GNesterovNODEs. Taking the advantage of the convergence rate O(1/k 2 ) of the
NAG scheme, GNesterovNODEs speed up training and inference by reducing the
number of function evaluations (NFEs) needed to solve the ODEs. We also prove
that the adjoint state of a GNesterovNODEs also satisfies a GNesterovNODEs,
thus accelerating both forward and backward ODE solvers and allowing the model
to be scaled up for large-scale tasks. We empirically corroborate the advantage of
GNesterovNODEs on a wide range of practical applications, including point cloud
separation, image classification, and sequence modeling. Compared to NODEs,
GNesterovNODEs require a significantly smaller number of NFEs while achieving
better accuracy across our experiments.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems have been recently integrated into deep neural networks for modeling highdimensional data. The advantage of this approach is that well-developed mathematical modeling
techniques from dynamical systems can be employed to improve neural networks. Along this research
direction, the correspondence between residual networks, a popular class of neural networks with
skip connections, and the numerical solution of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) have been
vastly studied in [15, 57, 47, 4]. The resulting Neural ODEs (NODEs) model when taking the the
discretization step to zero have shown great promises in a wide range of applications including
scientific discovery [24, 62], irregular time series modeling [46, 5], mean-field games [48], and
generative modeling [13, 61]. NODEs model the dynamics of hidden state h(t) 2 RN in a neural
⇤
Co-first authors. Please correspond to: nghianhh1@fsoft.com.vn or tanmnguyen89@ucla.edu or vongocthieu@tdtu.edu.vn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

