Falsification before Extrapolation
in Causal Effect Estimation
Zeshan Hussain⇤
MIT CSAIL & IMES
Cambridge, MA
zeshanmh@mit.edu

Michael Oberst⇤
MIT CSAIL & IMES
Cambridge, MA
moberst@mit.edu

Ming-Chieh Shih⇤
National Dong Hwa University
Hualien, Taiwan
mcshih@gms.ndhu.edu.tw

David Sontag
MIT CSAIL & IMES
Cambridge, MA
dsontag@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs) represent a gold standard when developing
policy guidelines. However, RCTs are often narrow, and lack data on broader
populations of interest. Causal effects in these populations are often estimated
using observational datasets, which may suffer from unobserved confounding and
selection bias. Given a set of observational estimates (e.g. from multiple studies),
we propose a meta-algorithm that attempts to reject observational estimates that
are biased. We do so using validation effects, causal effects that can be inferred
from both RCT and observational data. After rejecting estimators that do not
pass this test, we generate conservative confidence intervals on the extrapolated
causal effects for subgroups not observed in the RCT. Under the assumption that
at least one observational estimator is asymptotically normal and consistent for
both the validation and extrapolated effects, we provide guarantees on the coverage
probability of the intervals output by our algorithm. To facilitate hypothesis testing
in settings where causal effect transportation across datasets is necessary, we give
conditions under which a doubly-robust estimator of group average treatment
effects is asymptotically normal, even when flexible machine learning methods
are used for estimation of nuisance parameters. We illustrate the properties of our
approach on semi-synthetic and real world datasets, and show that it compares
favorably to standard meta-analysis techniques.

1

Introduction

Policy guidelines often rely on conclusions from Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs), whether
considering treatment decisions in healthcare, classroom interventions in education, or social programs in economics [31, 13, 43]. In healthcare, when a target population has reasonable overlap with
the inclusion criteria of RCTs, current clinical treatment guidelines rely primarily on RCTs [23, 22].
For target populations not well-represented in RCTs, observational studies are often used to infer
treatment effects. However, different observational estimates can give conflicting conclusions. We
give an example of this tension when looking at a new chemotherapy for multiple myeloma.
Example 1.1 (Carfilzomib-based Combination Therapy for Newly Diagnosed Multiple Myeloma
(NDMM)). Until 2020, the effect of Carfilzomib-based combination therapy in the NDMM subpopu⇤

Equal contribution. Order determined alphabetically. For code and instructions on data access, please visit:
https://github.com/clinicalml/rct-obs-extrapolation
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

