Sample Complexity of Learning Heuristic Functions
for Greedy-Best-First and A* Search

Shinsaku Sakaue
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
sakaue@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Taihei Oki
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
oki@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Greedy best-first search (GBFS) and A* search (A*) are popular algorithms for pathfinding on large graphs. Both use so-called heuristic functions, which estimate how
close a vertex is to the goal. While heuristic functions have been handcrafted using
domain knowledge, recent studies demonstrate that learning heuristic functions
from data is effective in many applications. Motivated by this emerging approach,
we study the sample complexity of learning heuristic functions for GBFS and A*.
We build on a recent framework called data-driven algorithm design and evaluate
the pseudo-dimension of a class of utility functions that measure the performance of
parameterized algorithms. Assuming that a vertex set of size n is fixed, we present
O(n lg n) and O(n2 lg n) upper bounds on the pseudo-dimensions for GBFS and
A*, respectively, parameterized by heuristic function values. The upper bound for
A* can be improved to O(n2 lg d) if every vertex has a degree of at most d and
to O(n lg n) if edge weights are integers bounded by poly(n). We also give Ω(n)
lower bounds for GBFS and A*, which imply that our bounds for GBFS and A*
under the integer-weight condition are tight up to a lg n factor. Finally, we discuss a
case where the performance of A* is measured by the suboptimality and show that
we can sometimes obtain a better guarantee by combining a parameter-dependent
worst-case bound with a sample complexity bound.

1

Introduction

Given a graph with a start vertex s, a goal vertex t, and non-negative edge weights, we consider
finding an s–t path with a small total weight. The Dijkstra algorithm [16] finds an optimal path by
exploring all vertices that are as close to s as t. It, however, is sometimes impractical for large graphs
since exploring all such vertices is too costly. Heuristic search algorithms are used to address such
situations; among them, greedy best-first search (GBFS) [17] and A* search (A*) [24] are two popular
algorithms. Both GBFS and A* use so-called heuristic functions, which estimate how close an input
vertex is to t. GBFS/A* attempts to avoid redundant exploration by scoring vertices based on heuristic
function values and iteratively expanding vertices with the smallest score. If well-suited heuristic
functions are available, GBFS/A* can run much faster than the Dijkstra algorithm. Furthermore, if
A* uses an admissible heuristic function, i.e., it never overestimates the shortest-path distance to t, it
always finds an optimal path [24]. Traditionally, heuristic functions have been made based on domain
knowledge; e.g., if graphs are road networks, the Euclidean distance gives an admissible heuristic.
When applying GBFS/A* to various real-world problems, a laborious process is to handcraft heuristic
functions. Learning heuristic functions from data can be a promising approach to overcoming the
obstacle due to the recent development of technologies for collecting graph data. Researchers have
demonstrated the effectiveness of this approach in robotics [11, 32, 28, 36], computational organic
chemistry [13], and pedestrian trajectory prediction [36]. With learned heuristic functions, however,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

