Recommender Forest for Efficient Retrieval
Chao Feng1 *, Wuchao Li1 *, Defu Lian1 , Zheng Liu2 , Enhong Chen1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
{chaofeng,liwuchao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{liandefu,cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn, zhengliu@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recommender systems (RS) have to select the top-n items from a massive item set.
For the sake of efficient recommendation, RS usually represents users and items
as latent embeddings and relies on approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNs)
to retrieve the recommendation results. Despite the reduction of running time, the
representation learning is independent of ANNs index construction; thus, the two
operations can be incompatible, which results in a potential loss of recommendation
accuracy. To overcome the above problem, we propose the Recommender Forest
(a.k.a., RecForest), which jointly learns latent embedding and index for an efficient
and high-fidelity recommendation. RecForest consists of multiple K-ary trees, each
of which is a partition of the item set via hierarchical balanced clustering such that
each item is uniquely represented by a path from the root to a leaf. Given such
a data structure, an encoder-decoder-based routing network is developed: it first
encodes user information into user representation; then, leveraging a transformerbased decoder, it identifies the top-n items via beam search. Compared with
the existing methods, RecForest brings in the following advantages: 1) the false
partition of the near-boundary items can be effectively alleviated by the use of
multiple trees; 2) the routing operation becomes much more accurate thanks to the
powerful transformer decoder; 3) the branch parameters are shared across different
tree levels, making the index to be extremely memory-efficient. The experimental
studies are performed on six popular recommendation datasets: with a significantly
simplified training cost, RecForest outperforms competitive baseline approaches in
terms of both recommendation accuracy and efficiency. The code is available at
https://github.com/wuchao-li/RecForest.

1

Introduction

Recommender system (RS) is an important way to address the information overload problem. A
typical recommender system needs to select the top-n items for users from a massive-scale item set.
For the sake of efficient recommendation, RS usually calls for the collaboration of representation
learning and Approximate Nearest Neighbour search (ANNs). In the first place, users and items are
represented by embeddings in the same latent space; in the second place, the item embeddings are
organized with a specific ANNs index, like SCANN and HNSW, such that the top-n recommendation
to the user can be efficiently accomplished. Despite that the recommendation process is greatly
accelerated from the above workflow, the recommendation quality will probably be restricted, given
that the representation model is independently learned and can be incompatible with the ANNs index.
In recent years, many efforts have been devoted to alleviating the incompatibility between the representation model and the ANNs index, especially the effort on joint optimization of both components.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work; Defu Lian is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

