Parametrically Retargetable Decision-Makers Tend To
Seek Power
Alexander Matt Turner, Prasad Tadepalli
Oregon State University
{turneale@, tadepall@eecs.}oregonstate.edu

Abstract
If capable AI agents are generally incentivized to seek power in service of the
objectives we specify for them, then these systems will pose enormous risks, in
addition to enormous benefits. In fully observable environments, most reward
functions have an optimal policy which seeks power by keeping options open
and staying alive [Turner et al., 2021]. However, the real world is neither fully
observable, nor must trained agents be even approximately reward-optimal. We
consider a range of models of AI decision-making, from optimal, to random, to
choices informed by learning and interacting with an environment. We discover
that many decision-making functions are retargetable, and that retargetability is
sufficient to cause power-seeking tendencies. Our functional criterion is simple and
broad. We show that a range of qualitatively dissimilar decision-making procedures
incentivize agents to seek power. We demonstrate the flexibility of our results
by reasoning about learned policy incentives in Montezuma’s Revenge. These
results suggest a safety risk: Eventually, retargetable training procedures may train
real-world agents which seek power over humans.

1

Introduction

Bostrom [2014], Russell [2019] argue that in the future, we may know how to train and deploy
superintelligent AI agents which capably optimize goals in the world. Furthermore, we would not
want such agents to act against our interests by ensuring their own survival, by gaining resources, and
by competing with humanity for control over the future.
Turner et al. [2021] show that most reward functions have optimal policies which seek power over the
future, whether by staying alive or by keeping their options open. Some Markov decision processes
(MDPs) cause there to be more ways for power-seeking to be optimal, than for it to not be optimal.
Analogously, there are relatively few goals for which dying is a good idea.
We show that a wide range of decision-making algorithms produce these power-seeking tendencies—they are not unique to reward maximizers. We develop a simple, broad criterion of functional
retargetability (definition 3.5) which is a sufficient condition for power-seeking tendencies. Crucially,
these results allow us to reason about what decisions are incentivized by most algorithm parameter
inputs, even when it is impractical to compute the agent’s decisions for any given parameter input.
Useful “general” AI agents could be directed to complete a range of tasks. However, we show that
this flexibility can cause the AI to have power-seeking tendencies. In section 2 and section 3, we
discuss how a “retargetability” property creates statistical tendencies by which agents make similar
decisions for a wide range of parameter settings for their decision-making algorithms. Basically, if
a decision-making algorithm is retargetable, then for every configuration under which a decisionmaking algorithm does not choose to seek power, there exist several reconfigurations which do induce
power-seeking. More formally, for every decision-making parameter setting θ which does not induce
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

