Robust Feature-Level Adversaries
are Interpretability Tools
Stephen Casper⇤123 , Max Nadeau⇤234 , Dylan Hadfield-Menell1 , Gabriel Kreiman23
1
MIT CSAIL; 2 Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School;
3
Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines; 4 Harvard College, Harvard University
scasper@mit.edu
mnadeau@college.harvard.edu
⇤ Equal Contribution

Abstract
The literature on adversarial attacks in computer vision typically focuses on pixellevel perturbations. These tend to be very difficult to interpret. Recent work that
manipulates the latent representations of image generators to create “feature-level”
adversarial perturbations gives us an opportunity to explore perceptible, interpretable adversarial attacks. We make three contributions. First, we observe that
feature-level attacks provide useful classes of inputs for studying representations in
models. Second, we show that these adversaries are uniquely versatile and highly
robust. We demonstrate that they can be used to produce targeted, universal, disguised, physically-realizable, and black-box attacks at the ImageNet scale. Third,
we show how these adversarial images can be used as a practical interpretability
tool for identifying bugs in networks. We use these adversaries to make predictions
about spurious associations between features and classes which we then test by
designing “copy/paste” attacks in which one natural image is pasted into another
to cause a targeted misclassification. Our results suggest that feature-level attacks
are a promising approach for rigorous interpretability research. They support the
design of tools to better understand what a model has learned and diagnose brittle
feature associations.1

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples. Conventionally, adversarial
inputs for visual classifiers take the form of small-norm perturbations to natural images [66, 18].
These perturbations reliably cause confident misclassifications. However, to a human, they typically
appear as random or mildly-textured noise. Consequently, it is difficult to interpret these attacks–they
rarely generalize to produce human-comprehensible insights about the target network. In other words,
beyond the observation that such attacks are possible, it is hard to learn much about the underlying
target network from these pixel-level perturbations.
In contrast, many real-world failures of biological vision are caused by perceptible, human-describable
features. For instance, the ringlet butterfly’s predators are stunned by adversarial "eyespots" on its
wings (Appendix A.1, Fig. 7). This falls outside the scope of conventional adversarial examples
because the misclassification results from a feature-level change to an object/image. The adversarial
eyespots are robust in the sense that the same attack works across a variety of different observers,
backgrounds, and viewing conditions. Furthermore, because the attack relies on high-level features,
it is easy for a human to describe it.
1

https://github.com/thestephencasper/feature_level_adv.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

