Avalon: A Benchmark for RL Generalization Using
Procedurally Generated Worlds

Joshua Albrecht

Abraham J. Fetterman

Bartosz Wróblewski

Nicole Seo

Zachary Polizzi

Bryden Fogelman

Michael Rosenthal

James B. Simon

Ellie Kitanidis

Maksis Knutins

Kanjun Qiu

Generally Intelligent∗

Abstract
Despite impressive successes, deep reinforcement learning (RL) systems still fall
short of human performance on generalization to new tasks and environments that
differ from their training. As a benchmark tailored for studying RL generalization,
we introduce Avalon, a set of tasks in which embodied agents in highly diverse
procedural 3D worlds must survive by navigating terrain, hunting or gathering food,
and avoiding hazards. Avalon is unique among existing RL benchmarks in that
the reward function, world dynamics, and action space are the same for every task,
with tasks differentiated solely by altering the environment; its 20 tasks, ranging
in complexity from eat and throw to hunt and navigate, each create worlds in
which the agent must perform specific skills in order to survive. This setup enables
investigations of generalization within tasks, between tasks, and to compositional
tasks that require combining skills learned from previous tasks. Avalon includes
a highly efficient simulator, a library of baselines, and a benchmark with scoring
metrics evaluated against hundreds of hours of human performance, all of which
are open-source and publicly available. We find that standard RL baselines make
progress on most tasks but are still far from human performance, suggesting Avalon
is challenging enough to advance the quest for generalizable RL.

1

Introduction

A central goal of reinforcement learning (RL) is to build systems that can master a spectrum of skills in
environments as noisy and diverse as the real world. While RL algorithms have matched or exceeded
human performance on a number of narrowly-defined tasks such as Go and Atari [4, 7, 28, 34, 40],
existing models typically fail to generalize to unseen tasks and environments, even when testing on
environments drawn from the same distribution as training [11, 45, 46]. The real-world setting is far
more diverse and difficult than most existing RL benchmarks; agents must seamlessly interact in a
highly variable 3D environment, with no access to state information or ability to rely on hard-coded
discrete actions, requiring sensory inputs and a high-dimensional action space.
∗

Correspondence to avalon@generallyintelligent.com.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

