Could Giant Pretrained Image Models Extract
Universal Representations?

Yutong Lin∗13 , Ze Liu∗23 , Zheng Zhang3 , Han Hu3 , Nanning Zheng1 , Stephen Lin3 , Yue Cao3
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Microsoft Research Asia
{t-yutonglin,t-liuze,zhez,hanhu,stevelin}@microsoft.com
nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,caoyue10@gmail.com

Abstract
Frozen pretrained models have become a viable alternative to the pretraining-thenfinetuning paradigm for transfer learning. However, with frozen models there
are relatively few parameters available for adapting to downstream tasks, which
is problematic in computer vision where tasks vary significantly in input/output
format and the type of information that is of value. In this paper, we present
a study of frozen pretrained models when applied to diverse and representative
computer vision tasks, including object detection, semantic segmentation and video
action recognition. From this empirical analysis, our work answers the questions
of what pretraining task fits best with this frozen setting, how to make the frozen
setting more flexible to various downstream tasks, and the effect of larger model
sizes. We additionally examine the upper bound of performance using a giant
frozen pretrained model with 3 billion parameters (SwinV2-G) and find that it
reaches competitive performance on a varied set of major benchmarks with only
one shared frozen base network: 60.0 box mAP and 52.2 mask mAP on COCO
object detection test-dev, 57.6 val mIoU on ADE20K semantic segmentation, and
81.7 top-1 accuracy on Kinetics-400 action recognition. With this work, we hope to
bring greater attention to this promising path of freezing pretrained image models.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning via the pretraining-then-finetuning paradigm is the cornerstone in the success of
deep neural networks. In computer vision, finetuning backbone networks [29, 21, 13, 38] pretrained
on supervised classification leads to top performance for a wide range of visual recognition tasks,
even on tasks where the input or output format differs from that of pretraining, such as video
action recognition [25], object detection [34], and semantic segmentation [58]. In natural language
processing (NLP), finetuned models that are pretrained on masked language modeling (MLM) also
excel at a large variety of NLP tasks, e.g., on eleven tasks in the case of BERT [11].
Though highly effective, the changes to many network parameters make finetuning parameterinefficient. An entirely different model is created for each downstream task, a problem that is
magnified with the rapid increase in model sizes. In NLP, a solution to this problem that has gained
momentum is to freeze pretrained language models when transferring them to downstream tasks. A
small number of task-specific parameters, e.g., task-specific heads [22] or prompts [3, 30, 32, 36],
are introduced, and only these newly added parameters are trained on the downstream task while the
∗
Equal contribution. The work is done when Yutong Lin and Ze Liu are interns at Microsoft Research Asia.
Correspondence to: Yue Cao (caoyue10@gmail.com).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

