Optimal Binary Classification Beyond Accuracy

Shashank Singh
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
shashankssingh44@gmail.com

Justin Khim˚
Amazon
New York, NY
jkhim@amazon.com

Abstract
The vast majority of statistical theory on binary classification characterizes performance in terms of accuracy. However, accuracy is known in many cases to
poorly reflect the practical consequences of classification error, most famously
in imbalanced binary classification, where data are dominated by samples from
one of two classes. The first part of this paper derives a novel generalization of
the Bayes-optimal classifier from accuracy to any performance metric computed
from the confusion matrix. Specifically, this result (a) demonstrates that stochastic
classifiers sometimes outperform the best possible deterministic classifier and (b)
removes an empirically unverifiable absolute continuity assumption that is poorly
understood but pervades existing results. We then demonstrate how to use this generalized Bayes classifier to obtain regret bounds in terms of the error of estimating
regression functions under uniform loss. Finally, we use these results to develop
some of the first finite-sample statistical guarantees specific to imbalanced binary
classification. Specifically, we demonstrate that optimal classification performance
depends on properties of class imbalance, such as a novel notion called Uniform
Class Imbalance, that have not previously been formalized. We further illustrate
these contributions numerically in the case of k-nearest neighbor classification.

1

Introduction

Many binary classification problems exhibit class imbalance, in which one of the two classes vastly
outnumbers the other. Classifiers that perform well with balanced classes routinely fail for imbalanced
classes, and developing reliable techniques for classification in the presence of severe class imbalance
remains a challenging area of research [He and Ma, 2013, Krawczyk, 2016, Fernández et al., 2018].
Many practical approaches have been proposed to improve performance under class imbalance,
including reweighting plug-in estimates of class probabilities [Lewis, 1995], resampling data to
improve class imbalance [Chawla et al., 2002], or reformulating classification algorithms to optimize
different performance metrics [Dembczynski et al., 2013, Fathony and Kolter, 2019, Joachims, 2005].
Extensive discussion of practical methods for handling class imbalance are surveyed in the books of
He and Ma [2013] and Fernández et al. [2018].
Despite the pervasive challenge of class imbalance, our theoretical understanding of class imbalance
is limited. The vast majority of theoretical performance guarantees for classification characterize
classification accuracy or, equivalently, misclassification risk [Mohri et al., 2018], which is typically
an uninformative measure of performance for imbalanced classes. Under measures that are used with
imbalanced classes in practice, such as precision, recall, Fβ scores, and class-weighted scores [Van Rijsbergen, 1974, 1979], existing theoretical guarantees are limited to statistical consistency, in that the
algorithm under consideration asymptotically optimizes the metric of choice [Koyejo et al., 2014,
Menon et al., 2013, Narasimhan et al., 2014]; specifically, there is no finite-sample theory that would
˚

The contributions in this paper were made prior to joining Amazon.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

