Towards Diverse and Faithful One-shot Adaption of
Generative Adversarial Networks
Yabo Zhang ∗,1 Mingshuai Yao1 Yuxiang Wei1 Zhilong Ji2 Jinfeng Bai2 Wangmeng Zuo1,3 (
1

Harbin Institute of Technology

2

Tomorrow Advancing Life

3

Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
One-shot generative domain adaption aims to transfer a pre-trained generator on
one domain to a new domain using one reference image only. However, it remains
very challenging for the adapted generator (i) to generate diverse images inherited
from the pre-trained generator while (ii) faithfully acquiring the domain-specific
attributes and styles of the reference image. In this paper, we present a novel
one-shot generative domain adaption method, i.e., DiFa, for diverse generation
and faithful adaptation. For global-level adaptation, we leverage the difference
between the CLIP embedding of reference image and the mean embedding of
source images to constrain the target generator. For local-level adaptation, we
introduce an attentive style loss which aligns each intermediate token of adapted
image with its corresponding token of the reference image. To facilitate diverse
generation, selective cross-domain consistency is introduced to select and retain
the domain-sharing attributes in the editing latent W+ space to inherit the diversity
of pre-trained generator. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms
the state-of-the-arts both quantitatively and qualitatively, especially for the cases
of large domain gaps. Moreover, our DiFa can easily be extended to zero-shot
generative domain adaption with appealing results. Code is available at https:
//github.com/YBYBZhang/DiFa.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8] have achieved remarkable progress in generating photorealistic and highly-diverse images [11, 12, 18]. However, GANs usually require a large number
of samples for stable training, and suffer from severe mode collapse when trained with insufficient
data (e.g., one image). Recently, several works [2, 10, 27, 29, 34, 37, 39] have been proposed to train
a GAN from scratch with only one or few images, but are limited in generating high quality and
diverse images. In this paper, we resort to one-shot or few-shot generative domain adaption (GDA),
i.e., transferring a pre-trained generator on one domain to a new domain using one or few reference
images (as shown in Fig. 1). Thus, GDA can provide a new perspective to address the above issues
by inheriting the generation ability and diversity of the pre-trained generator.
Many methods [16, 19, 21, 25, 31, 33, 35, 38] have been proposed for one-shot GDA. Nonetheless,
domain-specific attributes and styles usually can be described by language, and thus can be well
depicted by Contrastive-Language-Image-Pretraining (CLIP) [22]. Hence, CLIP-based one-shot GDA
methods [7, 15, 32, 41] have been proposed to adapt a pre-trained generator, e.g., StyleGAN2 [12], to
the target domain. In particular, the domain-gap direction between source and target domains is first
calculated in the CLIP embedding space. Then, the pre-trained generator is transferred by aligning
the CLIP direction between the source and adapted images with the domain-gap direction.
∗

The first author performed this work as an intern at Tomorrow Advancing Life.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

)

