Theoretical analysis of deep neural networks for
temporally dependent observations

Mingliang Ma
Department of Statistics
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611
maminglian@ufl.edu

Abolfazl Safikhani
Department of Statistics
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
asafikha@gmu.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks are powerful tools to model observations over time with
non-linear patterns. Despite the widespread use of neural networks in such settings,
most theoretical developments of deep neural networks are under the assumption of
independent observations, and theoretical results for temporally dependent observations are scarce. To bridge this gap, we study theoretical properties of deep neural
networks on modeling non-linear time series data. Specifically, non-asymptotic
bounds for prediction error of (sparse) feed-forward neural network with ReLU
activation function is established under mixing-type assumptions. These assumptions are mild such that they include a wide range of time series models including
auto-regressive models. Compared to independent observations, established convergence rates have additional logarithmic factors to compensate for additional
complexity due to dependence among data points. The theoretical results are
supported via various numerical simulation settings as well as an application to a
macroeconomic data set.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have the ability to model highly complex relationship among data. If input data
are observed data in past with future observations as response, neural networks can be utilized to
perform time series forecasting. Examples of application of neural networks in forecasting include
biotechnology [1], finance [24], health sciences [20], and business [29], just to name a selected few.
Compared to more traditional time series forecasting methods such as ARIMA models [9], neural
networks have the ability to detect highly non-linear trend and seasonality. In this work, we analyse
the prediction error consistency of (deep) feed-forward neural networks to fit stationary (non-linear)
time series models.
The property of the single hidden layer neural network is well studied in the past few decades. For
example, [21] use single hidden layer neural network with a transformed cosine activation function
to show that a sufficiently complex single hidden layer feed-forward network can approximate any
member of a specific class of functions to any desired degree of accuracy. Such an approximation
property for neural networks with sigmoidal activation function was also analyzed in [4, 5]. Further,
[3] use monotonic homogeneous activation function (general version of ReLU activation function)
and show that both the input dimension and number of hidden units have an effect on the convergence
rate when using single layer neural networks.
There are many recent works which shed some light on the reasoning behind the good performance
of multi-layer (or deep) neural networks. The performance is evaluated via computing mean squared
predictive error which is also called the statistical risk. For example, [6] show that the statistical
risk of a multi-layer neural network depends on the number of layers and the input dimension of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

