Giga-scale Kernel Matrix-Vector Multiplication on
GPU
Robert Hu
Amazon ∗
robyhu@amazon.co.uk

Siu Lun Chau
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
siu.chau@stats.ox.ac.uk

Dino Sejdinovic
School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences
University of Adelaide ∗
dino.sejdinovic@adelaide.edu.au
Joan Alexis Glaunès
MAP5
Université Paris Descartes
alexis.glaunes@mi.parisdescartes.fr

Abstract
Kernel matrix-vector multiplication (KMVM) is a foundational operation in machine learning and scientific computing. However, as KMVM tends to scale
quadratically in both memory and time, applications are often limited by these computational constraints. In this paper, we propose a novel approximation procedure
coined Faster-Fast and Free Memory Method (F3 M) to address these scaling issues
of KMVM for tall (108 ∼ 109 ) and skinny (D ≤ 7) data. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that F3 M has empirical linear time and memory complexity with a
relative error of order 10−3 and can compute a full KMVM for a billion points in
under a minute on a high-end GPU, leading to a significant speed-up in comparison
to existing CPU methods. We demonstrate the utility of our procedure by applying
it as a drop-in for the state-of-the-art GPU-based linear solver FALKON, improving
speed 1.5-5.5 times at the cost of < 1% drop in accuracy. We further demonstrate competitive results on Gaussian Process regression coupled with significant
speedups on a variety of real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Kernel matrix-vector multiplication (KMVM) is one of the most important operations needed in
scientific computing with core applications in diffeomorphic registration, geometric learning [11],
[31], numerical analysis [28], fluid dynamics [6], and machine learning [27]. For a dataset of size
n, KMVM using direct computation has complexity and memory footprint O(n2 ), both unfeasible
for modern large scale applications where n ≈ 109 is becoming increasingly common. Pioneering
contributions presented in the Fast Multipole Method (FMM) [10] amend the complexity of these
problems to O(n log (ϵ−1 )), where ϵ is the chosen error tolerance, with varying reductions in memory
footprint for data restricted to dimension D = 2. Subsequent developments in [8, 17] mainly focused
on extending approximations for a broader set of kernels for a fixed dimensionality D ≤ 3, tailored
for problems in physics with narrow data such as electrostatics, stellar dynamics, Stokes flow, and
acoustic problems, amongst others.
∗

Work mainly done while the authors were with the Department of Statistics, University of Oxford.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

