Causal Identification under Markov equivalence:
Calculus, Algorithm, and Completeness

Amin Jaber
Purdue University
jaber0@purdue.edu

Adèle H. Ribeiro
Columbia University
adele@cs.columbia.edu

Jiji Zhang
Hong Kong Baptist University
zhangjiji@hkbu.edu.hk

Elias Bareinboim
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
One common task in many data sciences applications is to answer questions about
the effect of new interventions, like: ‘what would happen to Y if we make X equal
to x while observing covariates Z = z?’. Formally, this is known as conditional
effect identification, where the goal is to determine whether a post-interventional
distribution is computable from the combination of an observational distribution
and assumptions about the underlying domain represented by a causal diagram.
A plethora of methods was developed for solving this problem, including the
celebrated do-calculus [Pearl, 1995]. In practice, these results are not always
applicable since they require a fully specified causal diagram as input, which is
usually not available. In this paper, we assume as the input of the task a less
informative structure known as a partial ancestral graph (PAG), which represents a
Markov equivalence class of causal diagrams, learnable from observational data.
We make the following contributions under this relaxed setting. First, we introduce
a new causal calculus, which subsumes the current state-of-the-art, PAG-calculus.
Second, we develop an algorithm for conditional effect identification given a PAG
and prove it to be both sound and complete. In words, failure of the algorithm to
identify a certain effect implies that this effect is not identifiable by any method.
Third, we prove the proposed calculus to be complete for the same task.

1

Introduction

Despite the recent advances in AI and machine learning, the current generation of intelligent systems
still lacks the pivotal ability to represent, learn, and reason with cause and effect relationships. The
discipline of causal inference aims to ‘algorithmitize’ causal reasoning capabilities towards producing
human-like machine intelligence and rational decision-making [Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018, Pearl,
2019, Bareinboim and Pearl, 2016]. One fundamental type of inference in this setting is concerned
with the effect of new interventions, e.g., ‘what would happen to outcome Y if X were set to x?’
More generally, we may be interested in Y ’s distribution in a sub-population picked out by the value
of some covariates Z = z’. For example, a legislator might be interested in the impact that increasing
the minimum wage (X = x) has on profits (Y ) in small businesses (Z = z), which is written in
causal language as the interventional distribution P (y|do(x), z), or Px (y|z). One method capable of
answering such questions is through controlled experimentation [Fisher, 1951].
In many practical settings found throughout the empirical sciences, AI, and machine learning, it
is not always possible to perform a controlled experiment due to ethical, financial, and technical
considerations. This motivates the study of a problem known as causal effect identification [Pearl,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

