Back Razor: Memory-Efficient Transfer Learning by
Self-Sparsified Backpropagation

Ziyu Jiang†∗, Xuxi Chen‡ ∗ , Xueqin Huang† , Xianzhi Du§ , Denny Zhou§ , Zhangyang Wang‡
†
Texas A&M University ‡ University of Texas at Austin § Google
{jiangziyu,xueq13}@tamu.edu,{xxchen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu
{xianzhi,dennyzhou}@google.com

Abstract
Transfer learning from the model trained on large datasets to customized downstream tasks has been widely used as the pre-trained model can greatly boost the
generalizability. However, the increasing sizes of pre-trained models also lead
to a prohibitively large memory footprints for downstream transferring, making
them unaffordable for personal devices. Previous work recognizes the bottleneck
of the footprint to be the activation, and hence proposes various solutions such as
injecting specific lite modules. In this work, we present a novel memory-efficient
transfer framework called Back Razor, that can be plug-and-play applied to any
pre-trained network without changing its architecture. The key idea of Back Razor
is asymmetric sparsifying: pruning the activation stored for back-propagation,
while keeping the forward activation dense. It is based on the observation that the
stored activation, that dominates the memory footprint, is only needed for backpropagation. Such asymmetric pruning avoids affecting the precision of forward
computation, thus making more aggressive pruning possible. Furthermore, we
conduct the theoretical analysis for the convergence rate of Back Razor, showing
that under mild conditions, our method retains the similar convergence rate as
vanilla SGD. Extensive transfer learning experiments on both Convolutional Neural Networks and Vision Transformers with classification, dense prediction, and
language modeling tasks show that Back Razor could yield up to 97% sparsity,
saving 9.2x memory usage, without losing accuracy. The code is available at:
https://github.com/VITA-Group/BackRazor_Neurips22.

1

Introduction

Edge devices equipped with deep learning applications are becoming ubiquitous. However, only
deploying pre-trained models is not sufficient: these edge devices may keep collecting novel data that
general pre-trained models have never seen before, and fine-tuning on them would notably improve
the model’s performance. A typical approach is to upload these newly collected data to cloud servers
for fine-tuning, and download the trained model from the cloud to local devices. However, such
a way has potential privacy issues due to data sensitivity and also imposes undesirable pressures
on the Internet bandwidth, brought by transmitting both the collected data and trained models.
These challenges motivate researchers to explore on-device learning methods, i.e., how to fine-tune
pre-trained models on memory-limited devices.
One of the main challenges of fine-tuning on edge devices is the memory constraints. Figure 1
exemplifies the memory usage of training some popular networks: ResNet50 with a small batch
size of 16 can easily exceed the memory limitation of onboard devices. The newly emerged Vision
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

