Fast Bayesian Coresets via Subsampling and
Quasi-Newton Refinement

Cian Naik
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
cian.naik@stats.ox.ac.uk

Judith Rousseau
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
judith.rousseau@stats.ox.ac.uk

Trevor Campbell
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
trevor@stat.ubc.ca

Abstract
Bayesian coresets approximate a posterior distribution by building a small weighted
subset of the data points. Any inference procedure that is too computationally
expensive to be run on the full posterior can instead be run inexpensively on the
coreset, with results that approximate those on the full data. However, current
approaches are limited by either a significant run-time or the need for the user to
specify a low-cost approximation to the full posterior. We propose a Bayesian
coreset construction algorithm that first selects a uniformly random subset of
data, and then optimizes the weights using a novel quasi-Newton method. Our
algorithm is a simple to implement, black-box method, that does not require the
user to specify a low-cost posterior approximation. It is the first to come with a
general high-probability bound on the KL divergence of the output coreset posterior.
Experiments demonstrate that our method provides significant improvements in
coreset quality against alternatives with comparable construction times, with far
less storage cost and user input required.

1

Introduction

Bayesian methods are key tools for parameter estimation and uncertainty quantification, but exact
inference is rarely possible for complex models. Currently, the gold standard method for approximate
inference is Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [1; 2; 3, Ch. 11,12], which involves simulating a
Markov chain whose stationary distribution is the Bayesian posterior. However, modern applications
are often concerned with very large datasets; in this setting, MCMC methods typically have a Θ(N T )
complexity—for T samples and dataset size N —which quickly becomes intractable as N increases.
Motivated by stochastic methods in variational inference [4, 5], this cost can be reduced by involving
only a random subsample of M ≪ N data points in each Markov chain iteration [6–13]. This reduces
the per-iteration computation time of MCMC, but it can create substantial error in the stationary
distribution of the resulting Markov chain and cause slow mixing [11, 14–17].
Bayesian coresets [18–23] provide an alternative for reducing the cost of MCMC and other inference
methods. The key idea is that in a large-scale data setting, much of the data is often redundant. In
particular, there often exists a fixed small, weighted subset of the data—a coreset—that suffices to
capture the dataset as a whole in some sense [21]. Thus, if one can find such a coreset, it can be
used in place of the full dataset in the MCMC algorithm, providing the simplicity, generality, and
per-iteration speed of data-subsampled MCMC without the statistical drawbacks. Current state-of36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

