OPEN: Orthogonal Propagation with Ego-Network
Modeling
Liang Yang 1,⇤, Lina Kang 1,⇤ , Qiuliang Zhang 1,⇤ , Mengzhe Li 1 , Bingxin Niu 1 ,
Dongxiao He 2,†, Zhen Wang 3,4 , Chuan Wang 5 , Xiaochun Cao 6 , Yuanfang Guo 7,8
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
4
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
5
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, CAS, Beijing, China
6
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
7
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
8
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
yangliang@vip.qq.com, itkanglina@163.com, 3463194784@qq.com
limengzhefree@foxmail.com, niubingxin666@163.com, hedongxiao@tju.du.cn
w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn,{wangchuan,caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, andyguo@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
To alleviate the unfavorable effect of noisy topology in Graph Neural networks
(GNNs), some efforts perform the local topology refinement through the pairwise
propagation weight learning and the multi-channel extension. Unfortunately, most
of them suffer a common and fatal drawback: irrelevant propagation to one node
and in multi-channels. These two kinds of irrelevances make propagation weights
in multi-channels free to be determined by the labeled data, and thus the GNNs
are exposed to overfitting. To tackle this issue, a novel Orthogonal Propagation
with Ego-Network modeling (OPEN) is proposed by modeling relevances between
propagations. Specifically, the relevance between propagations to one node is
modeled by whole ego-network modeling, while the relevance between propagations in multi-channels is modeled via diversity requirement. By interpreting the
propagations to one node from the perspective of dimension reduction, propagation weights are inferred from principal components of the ego-network, which
are orthogonal to each other. Theoretical analysis and experimental evaluations
reveal four attractive characteristics of OPEN as modeling high-order relationships
beyond pairwise one, preventing overfitting, robustness, and high efficiency.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been proven to be a powerful tool to explore irregular graph
data by seamlessly combining graph topology and node attributes for node representation learning
[1, 2]. From the perspective of spectral graph theory, GNNs, such as GCN [3] and ChebyNet [4], are
proposed from graph signal filtering, whose filters are derived from the topology of whole graph, and
their success is attributed to low-passing filtering. From the perspective of spatial propagation, GNNs,
such as GraphSage [5] and MPNN [6], are presented by following the aggregation and combination
scheme for node attributes smoothing [7]. Recent progress demonstrates the equivalence between
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

