Tractable Optimality in Episodic Latent MABs

Jeongyeol Kwon
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jeongyeol.kwon@wisc.edu

Yonathan Efroni
Meta, New York
jonathan.efroni@gmail.com

Constantine Caramanis
The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Shie Mannor
Technion, NVIDIA
shie@ee.technion.ac.il,
smannor@nvidia.com

Abstract
We consider a multi-armed bandit problem with A actions and M latent contexts,
where an agent interacts with the environment for an episode of H time steps.
Depending on the length of the episode, the learner may not be able to estimate
accurately the latent context. The resulting partial observation of the environment
makes the learning task significantly more challenging. Without any additional
structural assumptions, existing techniques to tackle partially observed settings
imply the decision maker can learn a near-optimal policy with O(A)H episodes,
but do not promise more. In this work, we show that learning with polynomial
samples in A is possible. We achieve this by using techniques from experiment
design. Then, through a method-of-moments approach, we design a procedure that
provably learns a near-optimal policy with O(poly(A) + poly(M, H)min(M,H) )
interactions. In practice, we show that we can formulate the moment-matching via
maximum likelihood estimation. In our experiments, this significantly outperforms
the worst-case guarantees, as well as existing practical methods.

1

Introduction

In Multi-Armed Bandits (MABs), an agent learns to act optimally by interacting with an unknown
environment. In many applications, interaction sessions are short, relative to the complexity of the
overall task. As a motivating example, we consider a large content website that interacts with users
arriving to the site, by making sequential recommendations. In each such episode, the system has
only a few chances to recommend items before the user leaves the website – an interaction time
typically much smaller than the number of actions or the types of users. In such settings, agents often
have access to short horizon episodes, and have to learn how to process observations from different
episodes to learn the best adaptation strategy.
Motivated by such examples, we consider the problem of learning a near-optimal policy in Latent
Multi-Armed Bandits (LMABs). In each episode with time-horizon H, the agent interacts with one of
M possible MAB environments (e.g., type of user) randomly chosen by nature. Without knowing the
identity of the environment (we call this the latent context), an agent aims to maximize the expected
cumulative reward per episode (see Definition 2.1 for a formal description). The LMAB framework
is different from the setting considered in [31] where multiple episodes proceed in parallel without
limiting the horizon of an episode H. For long horizons H, we show that it is possible to find a
near-optimal policy and to determine near-optimal actions for each episode, as if we knew the hidden
context. If H ≪ A where A is the total number of actions, however, this is no longer possible. Instead,
we aim to learn the best history-dependent policy for H time steps.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

