What Makes a “Good” Data Augmentation in
Knowledge Distillation – A Statistical Perspective

Huan Wang1,2,†
Suhas Lohit2,∗
Mike Jones2
Yun Fu1
1
2
Northeastern University, Boston, MA
MERL, Cambridge, MA
Project: http://huanwang.tech/Good-DA-in-KD

Standard DA

wrn_40_2/wrn_16_2, CIFAR100

How to define
“stronger” DA?

Teacher
(fixed)
Input 𝑥
KL Div.
loss

Stronger DA
Student

S. test loss

Raw input 𝑥!

1.10
1.05
1.00

Pearson: 0.9581 (p-value: 0.00%)
Spearman: 0.9667 (p-value: 0.00%)
Kendall: 0.8889 (p-value: 0.02%)

0.00425 0.00450 0.00475 0.00500 0.00525 0.00550
T. stddev

Input 𝑥’

(a) Apply additional stronger DA in KD

Identity
Flip
Crop+Flip
Cutout
AutoAugment
Mixup
CutMix
CutmixPick (S. ent.)
CutmixPick (T. ent.)

(b) S. test loss vs. T. stddev with different DA schemes

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of applying a stronger data augmentation (DA) in addition to the standard
DA (random crop and flip) in knowledge distillation (KD). We ask: What makes a “good” DA when
it is applied to KD in the manner of (a)? (b) We present a proven proposition (Proposition 3.1) to
answer this question rigorously, along with a practical metric to evaluate the “goodness” of a DA.
The proposed metric is called stddev of teacher’s mean probability (shorted as T. stddev). As seen in
(b), there is a strong positive correlation (p-value < 5% is typically considered statistically significant)
between the student’s test loss (S. test loss) and T. stddev, showing that T. stddev well captures the
“goodness” of different DA schemes in KD. The most striking fact from this plot may be: T. stddev is
purely calculated with the teacher (no any student used) while it can “predict” the relative order of
the student’s performance, implying the “goodness” of DA in KD probably is student-invariant.

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is a general neural network training approach that uses
a teacher model to guide the student model. Existing works mainly study KD from
the network output side (e.g., trying to design a better KD loss function), while
few have attempted to understand it from the input side. Especially, its interplay
with data augmentation (DA) has not been well understood. In this paper, we ask:
Why do some DA schemes (e.g., CutMix) inherently perform much better than
others in KD? What makes a “good” DA in KD? Our investigation from a statistical
perspective suggests that a good DA scheme should reduce the covariance of the
teacher-student cross-entropy. A practical metric, the stddev of teacher’s mean
probability (T. stddev), is further presented and well justified empirically. Besides
the theoretical understanding, we also introduce a new entropy-based data-mixing
DA scheme, CutMixPick, to further enhance CutMix. Extensive empirical studies
support our claims and demonstrate how we can harvest considerable performance
gains simply by using a better DA scheme in knowledge distillation.
†

This paper originates from Huan’s summer internship work at MERL.

* Corresponding author: slohit@merl.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

