Guaranteed Conservation of Momentum
for Learning Particle-based Fluid Dynamics
Lukas Prantl
Technical University of Munich
lukas.prantl@tum.de
Vladlen Koltun
Apple

Benjamin Ummenhofer
Intel Labs

Nils Thuerey
Technical University of Munich

Abstract
We present a novel method for guaranteeing linear momentum in learned physics
simulations. Unlike existing methods, we enforce conservation of momentum with
a hard constraint, which we realize via antisymmetrical continuous convolutional
layers. We combine these strict constraints with a hierarchical network architecture,
a carefully constructed resampling scheme, and a training approach for temporal
coherence. In combination, the proposed method allows us to increase the physical
accuracy of the learned simulator substantially. In addition, the induced physical
bias leads to significantly better generalization performance and makes our method
more reliable in unseen test cases. We evaluate our method on a range of different,
challenging fluid scenarios. Among others, we demonstrate that our approach
generalizes to new scenarios with up to one million particles. Our results show that
the proposed algorithm can learn complex dynamics while outperforming existing
approaches in generalization and training performance. An implementation of our
approach is available at https://github.com/tum-pbs/DMCF.

1

Introduction

Learning physics simulations with machine learning techniques opens up a wide range of intriguing
paths to predict the dynamics of complex physical phenomena such as fluids [28, 23, 48, 37]. As
traditional simulators for fluids employ handcrafted simplifications [31] and require vast amounts of
computational resources [44], recent learning-based methods have shown highly promising results.
In face of the impressive performance and accuracy of these techniques, it is surprising to see that
they still neglect some of the most basic physical principles, like the symmetries that arise from
Newton’s third law of motion and the conservation of momentum. This makes learned simulators less
predictable and can lead to severe implications when basing decisions on the simulation outcomes.
Predicting physical properties with neural networks is commonly treated as a regression problem
[27, 51, 54], where the training signal is defined as a soft constraint. This simple and desirable
formulation allows to effectively learn and approximate physical processes but also gives way to
unwanted shortcuts that deviate from the basic laws of physics. At the same time network architectures
are usually designed with generalizability in mind, e.g., with applications ranging from geometry
processing [34] to physical simulations [2]. In contrast, we propose a lean and efficient architecture
that provides a stable and large receptive field, while adhering to the desired physical constraints. At
training time, we dynamically take the unrolled evolution of the physical state into account to ensure
stability when training with longer sequences.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

