Discovering Design Concepts for CAD Sketches

Yuezhi Yang∗
The University of Hong Kong
Microsoft Research Asia
yzyang@cs.hku.hk

Hao Pan
Microsoft Research Asia
haopan@microsoft.com

Abstract
Sketch design concepts are recurring patterns found in parametric CAD sketches.
Though rarely explicitly formalized by the CAD designers, these concepts are
implicitly used in design for modularity and regularity. In this paper, we propose a
learning based approach that discovers the modular concepts by induction over raw
sketches. We propose the dual implicit-explicit representation of concept structures
that allows implicit detection and explicit generation, and the separation of structure
generation and parameter instantiation for parameterized concept generation, to
learn modular concepts by end-to-end training. We demonstrate the design concept
learning on a large scale CAD sketch dataset and show its applications for design
intent interpretation and auto-completion.

1

Introduction

Parametric CAD modeling is a standard paradigm for mechanical CAD design nowadays. In
parametric modeling, CAD sketches are fundamental 2D shapes used for various 3D construction
operations. As shown in Fig. 1, a CAD sketch is made of primitive geometric elements (e.g. lines,
arcs, points) which are constrained by different relationships (e.g. coincident, parallel, tangent); the
sketch graph of primitive elements and constraints captures design intents, and allows adaptation and
reuse of designed parts by changing parameters and updating all related elements automatically [1].
Designers are therefore tasked with the meticulous design of such sketch graphs, so that the inherent
high-level design intents are easy to interpret and disentangle. To this end, meta-structures (Fig. 1),
which we call sketch concepts in this paper, capture repetitive design patterns and regulate the design
process with more efficient intent construction and communication [9, 12]. Concretely, each sketch
concept is a structure that encapsulates specific primitive elements and their compositional constraints,
and the interactions of its internal elements with outside only go through the interface of the concept.
How to discover these modular concepts automatically from raw sketch graphs? In this paper, we cast
this task as a program library induction problem by formulating a domain specific language (DSL) for
sketch generation, where a sketch graph is formalized as a program, and sketch concepts are modular
functions that abstract primitive elements and compose the program (Fig. 1). Discovering sketch
concepts thus becomes the induction of library functions from sketch programs. While previous
works address the general library induction problem via expensive combinatorial search [20, 5, 7],
we present a simple end-to-end deep learning solution for sketch concepts. Specifically, we bridge
the implicit and explicit representations of sketch concepts, and separate concept structure generation
from parameter instantiation, so that a powerful deep network can detect and generate sketch concepts,
by training with the inductive objective of reconstructing sketch with modular concepts.
We conduct experiments on large-scale sketch datasets [17]. The learned sketch concepts show that
they provide modular interpretation of design sketches. The network can also be trained on incomplete
input sketches and learn to auto-complete them. Comparisons with state-of-the-art approaches that
∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

