Finding Differences Between Transformers and
ConvNets Using Counterfactual Simulation Testing

Nataniel Ruiz
Boston University
nruiz9@bu.edu

Sarah Adel Bargal
Georgetown University
sarah.bargal@georgetown.edu

Kate Saenko
Boston University
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
saenko@bu.edu

Cihang Xie
University of California
Santa Cruz
cixie@ucsc.edu

Stan Sclaroff
Boston University
sclaroff@bu.edu

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks tend to be evaluated on static test sets. One shortcoming of this is the fact that these deep neural networks cannot be easily evaluated
for robustness issues with respect to specific scene variations. For example, it is
hard to study the robustness of these networks to variations of object scale, object
pose, scene lighting and 3D occlusions. The main reason is that collecting real
datasets with fine-grained naturalistic variations of sufficient scale can be extremely
time-consuming and expensive. In this work, we present Counterfactual Simulation
Testing, a counterfactual framework that allows us to study the robustness of neural
networks with respect to some of these naturalistic variations by building realistic
synthetic scenes that allow us to ask counterfactual questions to the models, ultimately providing answers to questions such as “Would your classification still be
correct if the object were viewed from the top?” or “Would your classification still
be correct if the object were partially occluded by another object?”. Our method
allows for a fair comparison of the robustness of recently released, state-of-the-art
Convolutional Neural Networks and Vision Transformers, with respect to these
naturalistic variations. We find evidence that ConvNext is more robust to pose
and scale variations than Swin, that ConvNext generalizes better to our simulated
domain and that Swin handles partial occlusion better than ConvNext. We also
find that robustness for all networks improves with network scale and with data
scale and variety. We release the Naturalistic Variation Object Dataset (NVD),
a large simulated dataset of 272k images of everyday objects with naturalistic
variations such as object pose, scale, viewpoint, lighting and occlusions. Project
page: https://counterfactualsimulation.github.io

1

Introduction

Testing computer vision models is a challenging endeavour. In order to claim the superiority of a
model, the computer vision community usually studies validation accuracy on the ImageNet [12]
dataset. Comparing models uniquely using Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy on this dataset can result
in an incomplete evaluation of the advantages and disadvantages of each model. Recently, Vision
Transformers (ViTs) [15] have been proposed as an alternative deep neural network model to rival
Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) [39] for computer vision tasks.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

