Understanding Programmatic Weak Supervision
via Source-aware Influence Function

1

Jieyu Zhang1∗, Haonan Wang2∗, Cheng-Yu Hsieh1 , Alexander Ratner1,3
University of Washington 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 3 Snorkel AI, Inc.
{jieyuz2, cydhsieh, ajratner}@cs.washington.edu
{haonan3}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Programmatic Weak Supervision (PWS) aggregates the source votes of multiple
weak supervision sources into probabilistic training labels, which are in turn used
to train an end model. With its increasing popularity, it is critical to have some tool
for users to understand the influence of each component (e.g., the source vote or
training data) in the pipeline and interpret the end model behavior. To achieve this,
we build on Influence Function (IF) and propose source-aware IF2 , which leverages
the generation process of the probabilistic labels to decompose the end model’s
training objective and then calculate the influence associated with each (data,
source, class) tuple. These primitive influence score can then be used to estimate
the influence of individual component of PWS, such as source vote, supervision
source, and training data. On datasets of diverse domains, we demonstrate multiple
use cases: (1) interpreting incorrect predictions from multiple angles that reveals
insights for debugging the PWS pipeline, (2) identifying mislabeling of sources with
a gain of 9%-37% over baselines, and (3) improving the end model’s generalization
performance by removing harmful components in the training objective (13%-24%
better than ordinary IF).

1

Introduction

One of the major bottlenecks for deploying modern machine learning models is the need for a
substantial amounts of human-labeled training data, often annotated over long periods of time and
at great expense. As machine learning models become increasingly powerful but also data hungry,
new “data-centric” AI development workflows and systems have emerged, wherein the labeling and
development of this training data is positioned and supported as the central development activity.
One recent and increasingly popular type of data-centric AI development uses Programmatic
Weak Supervision (PWS), wherein users focus on developing a diversity of noisy, programmatic
supervision sources [32, 33, 50, 46] to programmatically annotate training data in an efficient way.
Specifically, these weak supervision sources, e.g., heuristics, knowledge bases, and pre-trained
models, are often abstracted as labeling functions (LFs) [33], which is a user-defined program that
provides potentially noisy labels for some subset of the data. So far, different modeling techniques
have been developed to aggregate the noisy votes of LFs to produce training labels (often referred to
as a label model) [33, 31, 14, 40]. Finally, these training labels are in turn used to train an end model
for the downstream classification tasks. In this study, we focus on this two-stage PWS pipeline [46].
With the increasing popularity of PWS in various applications [13, 36, 40, 19], it is of great importance
to provide practitioners with a tool that helps them understand the behavior of a trained end model
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
The implementation is avaiable at the WRENCH benchmark:https://github.com/JieyuZ2/
wrench
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

