Semi-Discrete Normalizing Flows
through Differentiable Tessellation
Ricky T. Q. Chen
Meta AI
rtqichen@meta.com

Brandon Amos
Meta AI
bamos@meta.com

Maximilian Nickel
Meta AI
maxn@meta.com

Abstract
Mapping between discrete and continuous distributions is a difficult task and many
have had to resort to heuristical approaches. We propose a tessellation-based approach that directly learns quantization boundaries in a continuous space, complete
with exact likelihood evaluations. This is done through constructing normalizing
flows on convex polytopes parameterized using a simple homeomorphism with an
efficient log determinant Jacobian. We explore this approach in two application
settings, mapping from discrete to continuous and vice versa. Firstly, a Voronoi
dequantization allows automatically learning quantization boundaries in a multidimensional space. The location of boundaries and distances between regions can
encode useful structural relations between the quantized discrete values. Secondly,
a Voronoi mixture model has near-constant computation cost for likelihood evaluation regardless of the number of mixture components. Empirically, we show
improvements over existing methods across a range of structured data modalities.

1

Introduction

Likelihood-based models have seen increasing usage across multiple data modalities. Across a variety
of modeling approaches, the family of normalizing flows stands out as a large amount of structure
can be incorporated into the model, aiding its usage in modeling a wide variety of domains such as
images [7, 23], graphs [29], invariant distributions [2, 25] and molecular structures [42]. However,
the majority of works focus on only continuous functions and continuous random variables. This
restriction can make it difficult to apply such models to distributions with implicit discrete structures,
e.g. distributions with discrete symmetries, multimodal distributions, distributions with holes.
In this work, we incorporate discrete structure into standard normalizing flows, while being entirely
composable with any other normalizing flow. Specifically, we propose a homeomorphism between
the unbounded domain and convex polytopes, which are defined through a learnable tessellation of
the domain, i.e. a set of disjoint subsets that together fully cover the domain. This homeomorphism is
cheap to compute, has a cheap inverse, and results in an efficient formulation of the resulting change
in density. In other words, this transformation is highly scalable—at least computationally.
Our method has the potential to be useful for a variety of applications. Firstly, the learned tessellation
naturally allows defining a dequantization method for discrete variables. This allows likelihood-based
models that normally only act on continuous spaces, such as normalizing flows, to work directly on
discrete data in a flexible choice of embedding space with the ability to capture relational structure.
Secondly, if we take each convex polytope as the support of a single mixture component, then the full
tessellation defines a mixture model with disjoint components. This allows us to scale to mixtures
of normalizing flows while retaining the compute cost of a single model. Following semi-discrete
optimal transportation [37], which defines couplings between discrete and continuous measures, we
refer to our models as semi-discrete normalizing flows that learn transformations between discrete
and continuous random variables.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

