Trustworthy Monte Carlo
Juha Harviainen
University of Helsinki
juha.harviainen@helsinki.fi

Petteri Kaski
Aalto University
petteri.kaski@aalto.fi

Mikko Koivisto
University of Helsinki
mikko.koivisto@helsinki.fi

Abstract
Monte Carlo integration is a key technique for designing randomized approximation
schemes for counting problems, with applications, e.g., in machine learning and
statistical physics. The technique typically enables massively parallel computation,
however, with the risk that some of the delegated computations contain spontaneous
or adversarial errors. We present an orchestration of the computations such that
the outcome is accompanied with a proof of correctness that can be verified with
substantially less computational resources than it takes to run the computations
from scratch with state-of-the-art algorithms. Specifically, we adopt an algebraic
proof system developed in computational complexity theory, in which the proof
is represented by a polynomial; evaluating the polynomial at a random point
amounts to a verification of the proof with probabilistic guarantees. We give
examples of known Monte Carlo estimators that admit verifiable extensions with
moderate computational overhead: for the permanent of zero–one matrices, for the
model count of disjunctive normal form formulas, and for the gradient of logistic
regression models. We also discuss the prospects and challenges of engineering
efficient verifiable approximation schemes more generally.

1

Introduction

Can we trust a result computed by a machine? Putting aside questions about the sensibility of the
computational task itself, trust stems from one’s belief in the correctness of the selected algorithm, its
implementation in software, and execution on hardware. All these ingredients are prone to errors,
especially when the task is hard, the algorithm is advanced, and the computations are extensive
(distributed and long). Trustworthy computation is one pillar of trustworthy AI [28], and it is an issue
particularly when one “outsources” computations to other computational agents, e.g., to millions of
Internet users to make use of their idle cycles—some users could be dishonest and return seemingly
valid results without running any actual computation [6, 26].
Ideally, the outcome of the computations would be accompanied with a certificate of correctness, or
proof, the user can verify. Furthermore, verification should be computationally easy in that it should
consume substantially less computational resources than it takes to run the computations from scratch
with state-of-the-art algorithms. For many decision and search problems such proofs are available;
e.g., a certificate of satisfiability of a given Boolean formula is simply a satisfying truth assignment.
For optimization problems, the cost of the found (locally optimal) solution is typically easy to verify,
and certificates of optimality are sometimes obtained by linear programming duality. Certifying
algorithms extend the output accordingly with an easy-to-verify proof [20]. For counting problems,
which are central in applications involving probabilistic reasoning, such certificates are typically not
readily available, and it is not immediate whether such certificates exist in the first place.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

