A Contrastive Framework for Neural Text Generation
Yixuan Su♠

Tian Lan♢ Yan Wang♢ Dani Yogatama♣
Lingpeng Kong♡ Nigel Collier♠
♠
Language Technology Lab, University of Cambridge
♢
♣
Tencent AI Lab
DeepMind
♡
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
{ys484,nhc30}@cam.ac.uk
lantiangmftby@gmail.com, yanwang.branden@gmail.com
dyogatama@deepmind.com, lpk@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Text generation is of great importance to many natural language processing applications. However, maximization-based decoding methods (e.g., beam search)
of neural language models often lead to degenerate solutions—the generated text
is unnatural and contains undesirable repetitions. Existing approaches introduce
stochasticity via sampling or modify training objectives to decrease the probabilities
of certain tokens (e.g., unlikelihood training). However, they often lead to solutions
that lack coherence. In this work, we show that an underlying reason for model
degeneration is the anisotropic distribution of token representations. We present a
contrastive solution: (i) SimCTG, a contrastive training objective to calibrate the
model’s representation space, and (ii) a decoding method—contrastive search—to
encourage diversity while maintaining coherence in the generated text. Extensive
experiments and analyses on three benchmarks from two languages demonstrate
that our proposed approach significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art text
generation methods as evaluated by both human and automatic metrics.1

1

Introduction

Open-ended neural text generation [19, 23] with Transformer [25] is an indispensable component in
various natural language applications, such as story generation [7, 20], contextual text completion [18],
and dialogue systems [22]. However, the conventional approach of training a language model with
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) and decoding the most likely sequence is often not sufficient
[10, 27]. Specifically, this modelling formulation often leads to the problem of degeneration, i.e., the
generated texts from the language model tend to be dull and contain undesirable repetitions at different
levels (e.g., token-, phrase-, and sentence-level) [4]. To alleviate this problem, previous solutions
modify the decoding strategy by sampling from less likely vocabularies [7, 10]. While reducing
the generated repetition, these sampling methods introduce another critical problem (semantic
inconsistency)—the sampled text tends to diverge from or even contradict to the original semantics
defined by the human-written prefix [1]. Another approach addresses the degeneration problem by
modifying the model’s output vocabulary distribution with unlikelihood training [27].
In this work, we argue that the degeneration of neural language models stems from the anisotropic
distribution of token representations, i.e., their representations reside in a narrow subset of the entire
space [6, 5, 21]. In Figure 1(a), we showcase a cosine similarity matrix of token representations (taken
from the output layer of the Transformer) produced by GPT-2. We see that the cosine similarities
between tokens within a sentence are over 0.95, meaning that these representations are close to each
1

Our code and models are publicly available at https://github.com/yxuansu/SimCTG.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

