CLEVRER-Humans: Describing Physical and
Causal Events the Human Way

Jiayuan Mao∗
MIT

Xuelin Yang∗
Stanford University

Noah D. Goodman
Stanford University

Xikun Zhang
Stanford University
Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Abstract
Building machines that can reason about physical events and their causal relationships is crucial for flexible interaction with the physical world. However, most
existing physical and causal reasoning benchmarks are exclusively based on synthetically generated events and synthetic natural language descriptions of causal
relationships. This design brings up two issues. First, there is a lack of diversity in
both event types and natural language descriptions; second, causal relationships
based on manually-defined heuristics are different from human judgments. To
address both shortcomings, we present the CLEVRER-Humans benchmark, a video
reasoning dataset for causal judgment of physical events with human labels. We
employ two techniques to improve data collection efficiency: first, a novel iterative
event cloze task to elicit a new representation of events in videos, which we term
Causal Event Graphs (CEGs); second, a data augmentation technique based on
neural language generative models. We convert the collected CEGs into questions
and answers to be consistent with prior work. Finally, we study a collection of
baseline approaches for CLEVRER-Humans question-answering, highlighting the
great challenges set forth by our benchmark.

1

Introduction

The ability to reason about physical events and their causal relationships from visual observations
lies at the core of human intelligence. It is crucial for humans to holistically understand and flexibly
interact with the physical world [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Natural language provides a way for humans to
express such causal understanding [6], and we can use natural language as a lens to evaluate machine
understanding of physical events and causal judgments. This brings us two major advantages. First,
compared to bounding boxes and timecodes, language provides a more flexible interface for describing
events. Furthermore, it naturally enables the generation of human-interpretable explanations.
We have seen significant progress toward machine reasoning about physical events and causal
structures, driven by datasets such as CLEVRER [7] and CATER [8]. These datasets pair videos
containing physical object interactions (e.g., collisions) with natural language question-answer pairs.
However, there are two important design flaws in existing datasets. First, the categories of physical
events are designed manually and identified through heuristic rules over object locations and velocities,
significantly restricting the datasets’ diversity. For example, the CLEVRER dataset only contains
three types of events (object enter, object exit, and collision). Second, the causal relationships of
∗

indicates equal contribution. Authors ordered alphabetically. Correspondence to: jiayuanm@mit.edu.
Project page: https://sites.google.com/stanford.edu/clevrer-humans/home.
Dataset DOI: https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.5tb2rbp7c.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

