Spectral Bias Outside the Training Set for Deep
Networks in the Kernel Regime
Benjamin Bowman
UCLA Department of Mathematics
benbowman314@math.ucla.edu
Guido Montúfar
UCLA Departments of Mathematics and Statistics and MPI MIS
montufar@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
We provide quantitative bounds measuring the L2 difference in function space between the trajectory of a finite-width network trained on finitely many samples from
the idealized kernel dynamics of infinite width and infinite data. An implication of
the bounds is that the network is biased to learn the top eigenfunctions of the Neural
Tangent Kernel not just on the training set but over the entire input space. This bias
depends on the model architecture and input distribution alone and thus does not
depend on the target function which does not need to be in the RKHS of the kernel.
The result is valid for deep architectures with fully connected, convolutional, and
residual layers. Furthermore the width does not need to grow polynomially with
the number of samples in order to obtain high probability bounds up to a stopping
time. The proof exploits the low-effective-rank property of the Fisher Information
Matrix at initialization, which implies a low effective dimension of the model (far
smaller than the number of parameters). We conclude that local capacity control
from the low effective rank of the Fisher Information Matrix is still underexplored
theoretically.

1

Introduction

Training heavily overparameterized networks via gradient based optimization has become standard
operating procedure in deep learning. Overparameterized networks are able to interpolate arbitrary
labels both in principle and in practice (Zhang et al., 2017), rendering classical PAC learning theory
insufficient to explain the generalization of networks within this modality. The high capacity of
modern networks ensures that there are both good and bad empirical risk minimizers. Miraculously
the network preferentially chooses the good solutions and sidesteps those that are unfavorable, posing
a challenge and opportunity to today’s researchers.
The success of overparameterized networks has prompted the theoretical community to search for
more subtle forms of capacity control (Neyshabur et al., 2015, 2017; Gunasekar et al., 2017). The
contemporary point-of-view is that the data distribution, model parameterization, and optimization
algorithm are all relevant in limiting complexity. This has led to a variety of efforts to characterize
the properties that networks and related models are biased towards when optimized via gradient
descent. Examples include max-margin bias for classification problems (Soudry et al., 2018; Ji &
Telgarsky, 2019; Nacson et al., 2019; Gunasekar et al., 2018), minimum nuclear norm bias for matrix
factorization (Gunasekar et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Gunasekar et al., 2018), and minimum RKHS
norm bias in the kernel regime (Zhang et al., 2020).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

