Data-Efficient Pipeline for Offline Reinforcement
Learning with Limited Data

Allen Nie∗ Yannis Flet-Berliac Deon R. Jordan
William Steenbergen Emma Brunskill
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
*anie@stanford.edu

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) can be used to improve future performance by
leveraging historical data. There exist many different algorithms for offline RL, and
it is well recognized that these algorithms, and their hyperparameter settings, can
lead to decision policies with substantially differing performance. This prompts
the need for pipelines that allow practitioners to systematically perform algorithmhyperparameter selection for their setting. Critically, in most real-world settings,
this pipeline must only involve the use of historical data. Inspired by statistical
model selection methods for supervised learning, we introduce a task- and methodagnostic pipeline for automatically training, comparing, selecting, and deploying
the best policy when the provided dataset is limited in size. In particular, our
work highlights the importance of performing multiple data splits to produce more
reliable algorithm-hyperparameter selection. While this is a common approach
in supervised learning, to our knowledge, this has not been discussed in detail
in the offline RL setting. We show it can have substantial impacts when the
dataset is small. Compared to alternate approaches, our proposed pipeline outputs
higher-performing deployed policies from a broad range of offline policy learning
algorithms and across various simulation domains in healthcare, education, and
robotics. This work contributes toward the development of a general-purpose
meta-algorithm for automatic algorithm-hyperparameter selection for offline RL.

1

Introduction

Offline/batch reinforcement learning has the potential to learn better decision policies from existing
real-world datasets on sequences of decisions made and their outcomes. In many of these settings,
tuning methods online is infeasible and deploying a new policy involves time, effort and potential
negative impact. Many of the existing datasets for applications that may benefit from offline RL may
be fairly small in comparison to supervised machine learning. For instance, the MIMIC intensive care
unit dataset on sepsis that is often studied in offline RL has 14k patients (Komorowski et al., 2018),
the number of students frequently interacting with an online course will often range from hundreds to
tens of thousands (Bassen et al., 2020), and the number of demonstrations collected from a human
operator manipulating a robotic arm is often on the order of a few hundred per task (Mandlekar
et al., 2018). In these small data regimes, recent studies (Mandlekar et al., 2021; Levine et al.,
2020) highlight that with limited data, the selection of hyperparameters using the training set is often
challenging. Yet hyperparameter selection also has a substantial influence on the resulting policy’s
performance, particularly when the algorithm leverages deep neural networks.
One popular approach to address this is to learn policies from particular algorithm-hyperparameter
pairs on a training set and then use offline policy selection, which selects the best policy given a
validation set (Thomas et al., 2015a, 2019; Paine et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2021). However, when
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

