Mixture-of-Experts with Expert Choice Routing

Yanqi Zhou, Tao Lei, Hanxiao Liu, Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Vincent Y. Zhao, Andrew Dai, Zhifeng
Chen, Quoc Le, and James Laudon
Google, Mountain View, CA, USA
{yanqiz, taole, hanxiaol, dunan, huangyp, vzhao, adai, zhifengc, qvl,
jlaudon}@google.com

Abstract
Sparsely-activated Mixture-of-experts (MoE) models allow the number of parameters to greatly increase while keeping the amount of computation for a given
token or a given sample unchanged. However, a poor expert routing strategy can
cause certain experts to be under-trained, leading to an expert being under or
over-specialized. Prior work allocates a fixed number of experts to each token
using a top-k function regardless of the relative importance of different tokens. To
address this, we propose a heterogeneous mixture-of-experts employing an expert
choice method. Instead of letting tokens select the top-k experts, we have experts
selecting the top-k tokens. As a result, each token can be routed to a variable
number of experts and each expert can have a fixed bucket size. We systematically
study pre-training speedups using the same computational resources of the Switch
Transformer top-1 and GShard top-2 gating of prior work and find that our method
improves training convergence time by more than 2×. For the same computational
cost, our method demonstrates higher performance in fine-tuning 11 selected tasks
in the GLUE and SuperGLUE benchmarks. For a smaller activation cost, our
method outperforms the T5 dense model in 7 out of the 11 tasks.

1

Introduction

Scaling up model capacity, dataset size, and training time has demonstrated huge success in enhancing
the performance of computer vision architectures [4, 11, 13, 14] as well as neural language models [2,
20, 26, 27]. The final model quality has been found to have a power-law relationship with the amount
of data, model size, and compute time [16, 20]. However, training efficiency, which is defined as
the total amount of computation used to achieve superior model quality than the state of the art
system [21], should receive greater attention as we increase our efforts towards green AI [29].
Sparsely gated mixture-of-experts [31] (MoE) provides an effective way to scale model capacity
given a fixed computational cost, and has recently played an important role in increasing the training
efficiency of large-scale language models [10, 21]. MoE operate by adopting a number of experts,
each as a sub-network, and by activating only one or a few experts for each input token. A gating
network must be chosen and optimized in order to route each token to the most suited expert(s). For
example, recent work has implemented sparse routing via k-means clustering [12], linear assignment
to maximize token-expert affinities [22], or hashing [8, 28]. Many of the prior work use a routing
strategy concerning the token choice, where each token selects the best one or two experts.
We argue that the independent token choice of prior work often leads to an imbalanced load of experts,
which causes training inefficiency and sub-optimal training of the model. In order to mitigate this
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

