Understanding Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Based on Domain Similarity and Few-Shot Difficulty
Jaehoon Oh⇤
KAIST DS
Daejeon, South Korea

Sungnyun Kim⇤
KAIST AI
Seoul, South Korea

Namgyu Ho⇤
KAIST AI
Seoul, South Korea

jhoon.oh@kaist.ac.kr

ksn4397@kaist.ac.kr

itsnamgyu@kaist.ac.kr

Jin-Hwa Kim
NAVER AI Lab, SNU AIIS
Seongnam, South Korea

Hwanjun Song†
NAVER AI Lab
Seongnam, South Korea

Se-Young Yun†
KAIST AI
Seoul, South Korea

j1nhwa.kim@navercorp.com

hwanjun.song@navercorp.com

yunseyoung@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Cross-domain few-shot learning (CD-FSL) has drawn increasing attention for
handling large differences between the source and target domains–an important
concern in real-world scenarios. To overcome these large differences, recent works
have considered exploiting small-scale unlabeled data from the target domain
during the pre-training stage. This data enables self-supervised pre-training on
the target domain, in addition to supervised pre-training on the source domain.
In this paper, we empirically investigate which pre-training is preferred based on
domain similarity and few-shot difficulty of the target domain. We discover that
the performance gain of self-supervised pre-training over supervised pre-training
becomes large when the target domain is dissimilar to the source domain, or the
target domain itself has low few-shot difficulty. We further design two pre-training
schemes, mixed-supervised and two-stage learning, that improve performance. In
this light, we present six findings for CD-FSL, which are supported by extensive
experiments and analyses on three source and eight target benchmark datasets with
varying levels of domain similarity and few-shot difficulty. Our code is available at
https://github.com/sungnyun/understanding-cdfsl.

1

Introduction

Few-shot learning (FSL) is a machine learning paradigm to learn novel classes from few examples
with supervised information [66, 69]. Unlike standard supervised learning, a model is pre-trained
on the source dataset consisting of base classes and then transferred into the target dataset consisting
of novel classes with few examples, where base and novel classes are disjoint but share similar data
domains. However, this underlying assumption is not applicable to real-world scenarios because
source (base classes) and target (novel classes) domains are different in general. This leads to poor
generalization performance because of the change in feature and label distributions, posing a new
challenge in FSL [24, 64].
In this regard, cross-domain few-shot learning (CD-FSL) is gaining immense attention with the BSCDFSL (Broader Study of CD-FSL) benchmark [24], which enables us to evaluate real-world few-shot
learning tasks. The BSCD-FSL benchmark is a collection of four different datasets with varying
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

