Improving Intrinsic Exploration with
Language Abstractions
Jesse Mu1⇤, Victor Zhong2,3 , Roberta Raileanu3 , Minqi Jiang3,4 ,
Noah Goodman1 , Tim Rocktäschel4* , Edward Grefenstette4,5*
1
Stanford University, 2 University of Washington, 3 Meta AI, 4 University College London, 5 Cohere

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) agents are particularly hard to train when rewards
are sparse. One common solution is to use intrinsic rewards to encourage agents
to explore their environment. However, recent intrinsic exploration methods often
use state-based novelty measures which reward low-level exploration and may not
scale to domains requiring more abstract skills. Instead, we explore language as a
general medium for highlighting relevant abstractions in an environment. Unlike
previous work, we evaluate whether language can improve over existing exploration
methods by directly extending (and comparing to) competitive intrinsic exploration
baselines: AMIGo (Campero et al., 2021) and NovelD (Zhang et al., 2021). These
language-based variants outperform their non-linguistic forms by 47–85% across
13 challenging tasks from the MiniGrid and MiniHack environment suites.

1

Introduction

A central challenge in reinforcement learning (RL) is designing agents that can solve complex,
long-horizon tasks with sparse rewards. In the absence of extrinsic rewards, one popular solution is
to provide intrinsic rewards for exploration [34, 35, 42, 43]. This invariably leads to the challenging
question: how should one measure exploration? One common answer is that an agent should
be rewarded for attaining “novel” states in the environment, but naive measures of novelty have
limitations. For example, consider an agent that starts in the kitchen of a large house and must make
an omelet. Simple state-based exploration will reward an agent for visiting every room in the house,
but a more effective strategy would be to stay put and use the stove. Moreover, like kitchens with
different-colored appliances, states can look cosmetically different but have the same underlying
semantics, and thus are not truly novel. Together, these constitute two fundamental challenges for
intrinsic exploration: first, how can we reward true progress in the environment over meaningless
exploration? Second, how can we tell when a state is not just superficially, but semantically novel?
Fortunately, humans are equipped with a powerful tool for solving both problems: language. As a
cornerstone of human intelligence, language has strong priors over the features and behaviors needed
for exploration and skill acquisition. It also describes a rich and compositional set of meaningful
behaviors as simple as directions (e.g. move left) and as abstract as conjunctions of high level tasks
(e.g. retrieve the ring and defeat the wizard) that can categorize and unify many possible world states.
Our aim is to see whether language abstractions can improve existing state-based exploration methods
in RL. While language-guided exploration methods exist in the literature [3, 5, 12, 13, 21–24, 31,
44, 51, 53], we make two key contributions over prior work. First, existing methods assume access
to a high-level linguistic instruction for reward shaping, or otherwise assume that any intermediate
language annotations encountered are always helpful for learning. Instead, we study settings without
⇤

Work done while at Meta AI. Correspondence to muj@stanford.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

