Efficient and Effective Multi-task Grouping via
Meta Learning on Task Combinations

Xiaozhuang Song∗
Southern University of Science and Technology
shawnsxz97@gmail.com
Wei Cao
Microsoft Research
wei.cao@microsoft.com

Shun Zheng
Microsoft Research
shun.zheng@microsoft.com

James J.Q. Yu
Southern University of Science and Technology
yujq3@sustech.edu.cn

Jiang Bian
Microsoft Research
jiang.bian@microsoft.com

Abstract
As a longstanding learning paradigm, multi-task learning has been widely applied
into a variety of machine learning applications. Nonetheless, identifying which
tasks should be learned together is still a challenging fundamental problem because
the possible task combinations grow exponentially with the number of tasks, and
existing solutions heavily relying on heuristics may probably lead to ineffective
groupings with severe performance degradation. To bridge this gap, we develop a
systematic multi-task grouping framework with a new meta-learning problem on
task combinations, which is to predict the per-task performance gains of multi-task
learning over single-task learning for any combination. Our underlying assumption
is that no matter how large the space of task combinations is, the relationships
between task combinations and performance gains lie in some low-dimensional
manifolds and thus can be learnable. Accordingly, we develop a neural meta learner,
MTG-Net, to capture these relationships, and design an active learning strategy to
progressively select meta-training samples. In this way, even with limited meta
samples, MTG-Net holds the potential to produce reasonable gain estimations
on arbitrary task combinations. Extensive experiments on diversified multi-task
scenarios demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our method. Specifically,
in a large-scale evaluation with 27 tasks, which produce over one hundred million
task combinations, our method almost doubles the performance obtained by the
existing best solution given roughly the same computational cost. Data and code
are available at https://github.com/ShawnKS/MTG-Net.

1

Introduction

Multi-task learning (MTL), as a longstanding learning paradigm [37, 50], has been widely applied
into a variety of machine learning applications, ranging from language understanding [11], visual
recognition [33, 41], and robotic control [19] to drug discovery [36] and clinical therapeutics [17, 30].
The major motivation behind is to boost the performance of single-task learning (STL) by leveraging
the additional supervision signals from other relevant tasks.
∗

Work is done during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

