A Lagrangian Duality Approach to Active Learning

Juan Elenter ∗
University of Pennsylvania
elenter@seas.upenn.edu

Navid NaderiAlizadeh
University of Pennsylvania
nnaderi@seas.upenn.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
University of Pennsylvania
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We consider the pool-based active learning problem, where only a subset of the
training data is labeled, and the goal is to query a batch of unlabeled samples
to be labeled so as to maximally improve model performance. We formulate
the problem using constrained learning, where a set of constraints bounds the
performance of the model on labeled samples. Considering a primal-dual approach,
we optimize the primal variables, corresponding to the model parameters, as well as
the dual variables, corresponding to the constraints. As each dual variable indicates
how significantly the perturbation of the respective constraint affects the optimal
value of the objective function, we use it as a proxy of the informativeness of
the corresponding training sample. Our approach, which we refer to as Active
Learning via Lagrangian dualitY, or ALLY, leverages this fact to select a diverse
set of unlabeled samples with the highest estimated dual variables as our query
set. We demonstrate the benefits of our approach in a variety of classification and
regression tasks and discuss its limitations depending on the capacity of the model
used and the degree of redundancy in the dataset. We also examine the impact of
the distribution shift induced by active sampling and show that ALLY can be used
in a generative mode to create novel, maximally-informative samples.

1

Introduction

One of the key drivers of the recent progress in machine learning is the availability of massive,
high-quality datasets, which enables training models comprising millions, or even billions, of
parameters [1, 2, 3]. Nevertheless, in some areas, such as healthcare, obtaining labeled training data
is challenging and/or expensive [4, 5, 6]. This has given rise to a class of approaches, collectively
referred to as active learning, whose goal is to minimize the labeling effort for training machine
learning models.
Active learning methods aim to improve data efficiency by querying the labels of samples presumed
informative, in a feedback-driven fashion. In recent years, the pool-based active learning setting,
in which queries are drawn from a large, static pool of unlabeled samples has drawn significant
attention [7, 8, 9]. This is due to the abundance of such unlabeled pools and the compatibility of the
pool-based setting with the training of deep neural networks.
Most active learners rely on defining a notion of informativeness of a given sample, such as model
uncertainty [10, 11], expected model change [12, 13] or expected error reduction [14, 15]. However,
in the batch setting, where multiple samples are queried simultaneously, not contemplating the
information overlap between the samples can lead to sub-optimal queries. Consequently, batch
diversity needs to be taken into account, often at the expense of individual sample informativeness
[16].
In this paper, we demonstrate how a constrained learning formulation of the problem enables the use
of Lagrangian duality for detecting informative samples. In particular, we bound the loss incurred by
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

