Maximizing and Satisficing in Multi-armed Bandits
with Graph Information∗

Parth K. Thaker
Arizona State University
pkthaker@asu.edu

Mohit Malu
Arizona State University
mmalu@asu.edu

Nikhil Rao
Microsoft
nikhilrao86@gmail.com

Gautam Dasarathy
Arizona State University
gautamd@asu.edu

Abstract
Pure exploration in multi-armed bandits has emerged as an important framework for
modeling decision making and search under uncertainty. In modern applications
however, one is often faced with a tremendously large number of options and
even obtaining one observation per option may be too costly rendering traditional
pure exploration algorithms ineffective. Fortunately, one often has access to
similarity relationships amongst the options that can be leveraged. In this paper,
we consider the pure exploration problem in stochastic multi-armed bandits where
the similarities between the arms is captured by a graph and the rewards may be
represented as a smooth signal on this graph. In particular, we consider the problem
of finding the arm with the maximum reward (i.e., the maximizing problem) or one
that has sufficiently high reward (i.e., the satisficing problem) under this model.
We propose novel algorithms GRUB (GRaph based UcB) and ζ-GRUB for these
problems and provide theoretical characterization of their performance which
specifically elicits the benefit of the graph side information. We also prove a lower
bound on the data requirement that shows a large class of problems where these
algorithms are near-optimal. We complement our theory with experimental results
that show the benefit of capitalizing on such side information.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit has emerged as an important paradigm for modeling sequential decision
making and learning under uncertainty. Practical applications include design policies for sequential
experiments [44], combinatorial online leaning tasks [9], collaborative learning on social media
networks [30, 4], latency reduction in cloud systems [23] and many others [8, 59, 50, 24]. In the
traditional multi-armed bandit problem, the goal of the agent is to sequentially choose among a set
of actions or arms to maximize a desired performance criterion or reward. This objective demands
a delicate tradeoff between exploration (of new arms) and exploitation (of promising arms). An
important variant of the reward maximization problem is the identification of arms with the highest
(or near-highest) expected reward. This best arm identification [41, 13] problem, which is one
of pure exploration, has a wide range of important applications like identifying and testing drugs
to treat infectious diseases like COVID-19, finding relevant users to run targeted ad campaigns,
hyperparameter optimization in neural networks and recommendation systems. The broad range of
∗
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation through the awards CCF-2048223,
CNS-2003111, CCF-2029044, and OAC-1934766. This work was also supported partly by the ASU SenSIP
Center

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

