Large-Scale Retrieval for Reinforcement Learning

Peter C. Humphreys∗, Arthur Guez∗ , Olivier Tieleman,
Laurent Sifre, Théophane Weber, Timothy Lillicrap
Deepmind, London
{peterhumphreys, aguez, ...}@google.com

Abstract
Effective decision making involves flexibly relating past experiences and relevant
contextual information to a novel situation. In deep reinforcement learning (RL),
the dominant paradigm is for an agent to amortise information that helps decisionmaking into its network weights via gradient descent on training losses. Here,
we pursue an alternative approach in which agents can utilise large-scale contextsensitive database lookups to support their parametric computations. This allows
agents to directly learn in an end-to-end manner to utilise relevant information
to inform their outputs. In addition, new information can be attended to by the
agent, without retraining, by simply augmenting the retrieval dataset. We study
this approach for offline RL in 9x9 Go, a challenging game for which the vast
combinatorial state space privileges generalisation over direct matching to past
experiences. We leverage fast, approximate nearest neighbor techniques in order to
retrieve relevant data from a set of tens of millions of expert demonstration states.
Attending to this information provides a significant boost to prediction accuracy
and game-play performance over simply using these demonstrations as training
trajectories, providing a compelling demonstration of the value of large-scale
retrieval in offline RL agents.

1

Introduction

How can reinforcement learning (RL) agents leverage relevant information to inform their decisions?
Deep RL agents have typically been represented as a monolithic parametric function, trained to
gradually amortise useful information from experience by gradient descent. This has been effective [25, 38], but is a slow means of integrating experience, with no straightforward way for an agent
to incorporate new information without many additional gradient updates. In addition, this requires
increasingly massive models (see e.g. [31]) as environments become more complex – scaling is driven
by the dual role of the parametric function, which must support both computation and memorisation.
Finally, this approach has a further drawback of particular relevance in RL – the only way in which
previously encountered information (that is not contained in working memory) can aid decision
making in a novel situation is indirectly through weight changes mediated by network losses. There
is no end-to-end means for an agent to attend to information outside of working memory to directly
inform its actions. While there has been a significant amount of work focused on increasing the information available from previous experiences within an episode (e.g., recurrent networks, slot-based
memory [19, 28]), more extensive direct use of more general forms of experience or data has been
limited, although some recent works have begun to explore utilising inter-episodic information from
the same agent [6, 10, 29, 34, 41]. We seek to drastically expand the scale of information that is
accessible to an agent, allowing it to attend to tens of millions of pieces of information, while learning
in an end-to-end manner how to use this information for decision making. We view this as a first step
towards a vision in which an agent can flexibly draw on diverse and large-scale information sources,
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

