Task Discovery: Finding the Tasks that
Neural Networks Generalize on
Andrei Atanov Andrei Filatov Teresa Yeo Ajay Sohmshetty Amir Zamir
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)
https://taskdiscovery.epfl.ch

Abstract
When developing deep learning models, we usually decide what task we want
to solve then search for a model that generalizes well on the task. An intriguing
question would be: what if, instead of fixing the task and searching in the model
space, we fix the model and search in the task space? Can we find tasks that the
model generalizes on? How do they look, or do they indicate anything? These are
the questions we address in this paper.
We propose a task discovery framework that automatically finds examples of such
tasks via optimizing a generalization-based quantity called agreement score. We
demonstrate that one set of images can give rise to many tasks on which neural
networks generalize well. These tasks are a reflection of the inductive biases of
the learning framework and the statistical patterns present in the data, thus they
can make a useful tool for analysing the neural networks and their biases. As an
example, we show that the discovered tasks can be used to automatically create
“adversarial train-test splits” which make a model fail at test time, without changing
the pixels or labels, but by only selecting how the datapoints should be split between
the train and test sets. We end with a discussion on human-interpretability of the
discovered tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are found to generalize well, i.e., exhibit low test error when trained on
human-labelled tasks. This can be seen as a consequence of the models’ inductive biases that favor
solutions with low test error over those which also have low training loss but higher test error. In this
paper, we aim to find what are examples of other tasks1 that are favored by neural networks, i.e., on
which they generalize well. We will also discuss some of the consequences of such findings.
We start by defining a quantity called agreement score (AS) to measure how well a network generalizes
on a task. It quantifies whether two networks trained on the same task with different training
stochasticity (e.g., initialization) make similar predictions on new test images. Intuitively, a high
AS can be seen as a necessary condition for generalization, as there cannot be generalization if the
AS is low and networks converge to different solutions. On the other hand, if the AS is high, then
there is a stable solution that different networks converge to, and, therefore, generalization is possible
(see Appendix J). We show that the AS indeed makes for a useful metric and differentiates between
human- and random-labelled tasks (see Fig. 1-center).
Given the AS as a prerequisite of generalization, we develop a task discovery framework that
optimizes it and finds new tasks on which neural networks generalize well. Experimentally, we found
that the same images can allow for many different tasks on which different network architectures
generalize (see an example in Fig. 1-right).
1

In the context of this paper, generally, a “task” is a labelling of a dataset, and any label set defines a “task”.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

