Queue Up Your Regrets: Achieving the Dynamic
Capacity Region of Multiplayer Bandits

Ilai Bistritz, Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
{bistritz,bambos}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Consider N cooperative agents such that for T turns, each agent n takes an action an and receives a stochastic reward rn (a1 , . . . , aN ). Agents cannot observe
the actions of other agents and do not know even their own reward function. The
agents can communicate with their neighbors on a connected graph G with diameter d (G). We want each agent n to achieve an expected average reward of at least
λn over time, for a given quality of service (QoS) vector λ. A QoS vector λ is not
necessarily achievable. By giving up on immediate reward, knowing that the other
agents will compensate later, agents can improve their achievable capacity region.
Our main observation is that the gap between λn t and the accumulated reward
of agent n, which we call the QoS regret, behaves like a queue. Inspired by this
observation, we propose a distributed algorithm that aims to learn a max-weight
matching of agents to actions. In each epoch, the algorithm employs a consensus
phase where the agents agree on a certain weighted sum of rewards by communicating only O (d (G)) numbers every turn. Then, the algorithm uses distributed
successive elimination on a random subset of action profiles to approximately
maximize this weighted sum of rewards. We prove a bound on the accumulated
sum of expected QoS regrets of all agents, that holds if λ is a safety margin εT
away from the boundary of the capacity region, where εT → 0 as T → ∞. This
bound implies that, for large T , our algorithm can achieve any λ in the interior of
the dynamic capacity region, while all agents are guaranteed an empirical √
average

expected QoS regret of Õ (1) over t = 1, . . . , T which never exceeds Õ t for
any t. We then extend our result to time-varying i.i.d. communication graphs.

1

Introduction

Consider a group of artificial cooperative agents interacting in a shared environment. Each agent
has a reward rn (a) that is a function of the actions of all agents a and represents a local performance metric. Examples include wireless devices, robots in a facility, or autonomous vehicles. The
designer wants to program these agents with a distributed protocol that guarantees at least a certain
average reward for each agent, which we term its QoS. Wireless devices interact by transmitting and
interfering with each other over multiple channels, and the wireless protocol guarantees the advertised throughput for all of them. Multitasking robots interact by cooperating to make progress on
their tasks at a certain rate, following a distributed learning algorithm with this objective in mind.
The main challenge in designing such a distributed protocol or algorithm is that the agents are local
and do not know enough about each other to guarantee the QoS of their peers.
In data-driven decision-making, agents do not know their reward function, and can only observe its
value at the current action profile a (t), known as bandit feedback. The agents also do not know the
reward functions of their peers, or even their bandit feedback. As a result, agents have to learn both
how to optimize their reward function, and when to prioritize other agents instead.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

