Adjoint-aided inference of Gaussian process driven
differential equations

Paterne Gahungu∗
Quantum Leap Africa
African Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Rwanda
paterne.gahungu@aims.ac.rw

Christopher W. Lanyon∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield, UK
c.w.lanyon@sheffield.ac.uk

Mauricio A. Álvarez
Department of Computer Science
University of Manchester, UK

Engineer Bainomugisha
Department of Computer Science
Makerere University, Uganda

Michael T. Smith
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield, UK

Richard D. Wilkinson
School of Mathematical Sciences
University of Nottingham, UK

Abstract
Linear systems occur throughout engineering and the sciences, most notably as
differential equations. In many cases the forcing function for the system is unknown,
and interest lies in using noisy observations of the system to infer the forcing, as
well as other unknown parameters. In differential equations, the forcing function is
an unknown function of the independent variables (typically time and space), and
can be modelled as a Gaussian process (GP). In this paper we show how the adjoint
of a linear system can be used to efficiently infer forcing functions modelled as GPs,
using a truncated basis expansion of the GP kernel. We show how exact conjugate
Bayesian inference for the truncated GP can be achieved, in many cases with
substantially lower computation than would be required using MCMC methods.
We demonstrate the approach on systems of both ordinary and partial differential
equations, and show that the basis expansion approach approximates well the true
forcing with a modest number of basis vectors. Finally, we show how to infer point
estimates for the non-linear model parameters, such as the kernel length-scales,
using Bayesian optimisation.

1

Introduction

Linear systems are used as models throughout the sciences and engineering, encompassing a wide
range of both ordinary and partial differential equations (including the heat, wave, Schrödinger’s,
Maxwell’s equations etc), as well as systems of linear algebraic equations (such as eigenvalue
problems). To fix notation, let L : U → V be a linear operator between Banach spaces U and V (i.e.,
complete normed spaces, Kreyszig (1991)) . A prototypical linear system is then of the form
Lu = f,

(1)

where u ∈ U is the quantity of interest being modelled, and f ∈ V is the forcing function of the
system. Given a fully specified operator L and forcing function f (and possibly initial and boundary
conditions), solving the system for u is referred to as the forward problem. Typically, this is a
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

