Learning Superpoint Graph Cut for 3D Instance
Segmentation

Le Hui† , Linghua Tang† , Yaqi Shen, Jin Xie∗ , Jian Yang∗
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{le.hui, tanglinghua, syq, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
3D instance segmentation is a challenging task due to the complex local geometric
structures of objects in point clouds. In this paper, we propose a learning-based
superpoint graph cut method that explicitly learns the local geometric structures of
the point cloud for 3D instance segmentation. Specifically, we first oversegment
the raw point clouds into superpoints and construct the superpoint graph. Then,
we propose an edge score prediction network to predict the edge scores of the
superpoint graph, where the similarity vectors of two adjacent nodes learned
through cross-graph attention in the coordinate and feature spaces are used for
regressing edge scores. By forcing two adjacent nodes of the same instance to be
close to the instance center in the coordinate and feature spaces, we formulate a
geometry-aware edge loss to train the edge score prediction network. Finally, we
develop a superpoint graph cut network that employs the learned edge scores and
the predicted semantic classes of nodes to generate instances, where bilateral graph
attention is proposed to extract discriminative features on both the coordinate and
feature spaces for predicting semantic labels and scores of instances. Extensive
experiments on two challenging datasets, ScanNet v2 and S3DIS, show that our
method achieves new state-of-the-art performance on 3D instance segmentation.
Code is available at https://github.com/fpthink/GraphCut.

1

Introduction

In recent years, with the development of 3D sensors, such as LiDAR and Kinect camera, various 3D
computer vision tasks have been receiving more and more attention. 3D instance segmentation is
a fundamental task in 3D scene understanding and has been widely used in kinds of applications
such as self-driving cars, virtual reality, and robotic navigation. Although recent progress in 3D
instance segmentation is encouraging, it is still a challenging task due to irregularities and context
uncertainties of 3D points in 3D scenes with complex geometric structures.
Many efforts have been dedicated to 3D instance segmentation and achieved promising performance.
These methods can be mainly divided into two categories: detection-based methods [44, 45] and
clustering-based methods [40, 18]. Among detection-based methods, 3D-BoNet [44] first detects
the 3D bounding boxes and then employs a mask prediction network to predict the object mask
for 3D instance segmentation. However, for objects with complex geometric structures, detectionbased methods [45] cannot obtain accurate 3D bounding boxes, thereby degrading the instance
segmentation performance. The clustering-based method SGPN [40] clusters 3D points based
†

Equal Contributions, ∗ Corresponding authors.
Le Hui, Linghua Tang, Yaqi Shen, Jin Xie, and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent
Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of
Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology, China.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

