Rate-Optimal Online Convex Optimization
in Adaptive Linear Control

Asaf Cassel∗

Alon Cohen†

Tomer Koren‡

Abstract
We consider the problem of controlling an unknown linear dynamical system under
adversarially changing convex costs and full feedback of both the state and cost
function.√ We present the first computationally-efficient algorithm that attains an
optimal 𝑇-regret rate compared to the best stabilizing linear controller in hindsight,
while avoiding stringent assumptions on the costs such as strong convexity. Our
approach is based on a careful design of non-convex lower confidence bounds for
the online costs, and uses a novel technique for computationally-efficient regret
minimization of these bounds that leverages their particular non-convex structure.

1

Introduction

We study a general setting of online adaptive linear control, where a learner attempts to stabilize an
initially unknown discrete-time linear dynamical system while minimizing its cumulative cost with
respect to an arbitrary sequence of convex loss functions. The system dynamics evolve according to
𝑥 𝑡+1 = 𝐴★𝑥 𝑡 + 𝐵★𝑢 𝑡 + 𝑤 𝑡 ,
∈ R𝑑𝑥 , 𝑢

∈ R𝑑𝑢 are the (fully observable) system’s state and learner’s control at time step

where 𝑥 𝑡
𝑡
𝑡, and 𝑤 𝑡 ∈ R𝑑𝑥 is the system noise added at step 𝑡 which is a zero-mean i.i.d. Gaussian random
variable. The matrices 𝐴★ ∈ R𝑑𝑥 ×𝑑𝑥 and 𝐵★ ∈ R𝑑𝑥 ×𝑑𝑢 are the system parameters, which are assumed
to be unknown ahead of time and need to be learned adaptively. The goal is to minimize regret with
respect to a sequence of convex loss functionsÍ𝑐 1 , . . . , 𝑐𝑇 over 𝑇 time steps, namely, the difference
between the learner’s cumulative control cost 𝑇𝑡=1 𝑐 𝑡 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑢 𝑡 ) and the best cumulative cost achieved
by a control policy from a given set of benchmark policies.
This general framework encapsulates numerous variations of learning in linear control that have
been studied extensively in the literature. When the system parameters are known ahead of time
and the costs are fixed and known (convex) quadratics, this amounts to the classical “planning”
formulation of linear-quadratic (LQ) stochastic control; see [12]. The special case where the costs
are fixed and known quadratics but the system parameters are unknown has been addressed much
more recently [1, 21, 31]. This was recently extended to allow for a fixed and known convex
cost [33] and later for stochastic i.i.d. costs [15]. On the other hand, the case where the system
parameters are known but the quadratic costs are allowed to vary arbitrarily between rounds was
first addressed in [20], and has been later extended in various ways to allow for arbitrarily-varying
convex costs√[5, 6, 36, 13]. In all of these special cases, we now know of efficient algorithms with
rate-optimal 𝑇 regret guarantees.
For the online adaptive linear control problem in its full generality, however, no regret-optimal
algorithms are presently known. The state-of-the-art is due to [36] that achieved 𝑇 2/3 -regret using a
∗ Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University; acassel@mail.tau.ac.il.
† School of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, and Google Tel Aviv; alonco@tauex.tau.ac.il.
‡ Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Google Tel Aviv; tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

