M O C O DA: Model-based Counterfactual Data
Augmentation

Silviu Pitis∗ 1 Elliot Creager1 Ajay Mandlekar2 Animesh Garg1,2
1
University of Toronto and Vector Institute, 2 NVIDIA

Abstract
The number of states in a dynamic process is exponential in the number of objects,
making reinforcement learning (RL) difficult in complex, multi-object domains.
For agents to scale to the real world, they will need to react to and reason about
unseen combinations of objects. We argue that the ability to recognize and use
local factorization in transition dynamics is a key element in unlocking the power
of multi-object reasoning. To this end, we show that (1) known local structure in
the environment transitions is sufficient for an exponential reduction in the sample
complexity of training a dynamics model, and (2) a locally factored dynamics
model provably generalizes out-of-distribution to unseen states and actions. Knowing the local structure also allows us to predict which unseen states and actions this
dynamics model will generalize to. We propose to leverage these observations in a
novel Model-based Counterfactual Data Augmentation (M O C O DA) framework.
M O C O DA applies a learned locally factored dynamics model to an augmented
distribution of states and actions to generate counterfactual transitions for RL.
M O C O DA works with a broader set of local structures than prior work and allows for direct control over the augmented training distribution. We show that
M O C O DA enables RL agents to learn policies that generalize to unseen states
and actions. We use M O C O DA to train an offline RL agent to solve an out-ofdistribution robotics manipulation task on which standard offline RL algorithms
fail.1

1

Introduction

Modern reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have demonstrated remarkable success in several
different domains such as games [42, 53] and robotic manipulation [23, 4]. By repeatedly attempting
a single task through trial-and-error, these algorithms can learn to collect useful experience and
eventually solve the task of interest. However, designing agents that can generalize in off-task and
multi-task settings remains an open and challenging research question. This is especially true in the
offline and zero-shot settings, in which the training data might be unrelated to the target task, and
may lack sufficient coverage over possible states.
One way to enable generalization in such cases is through structured representations of states,
transition dynamics, or task spaces. These representations can be directly learned, sourced from
known or learned abstractions over the state space, or derived from causal knowledge of the world.
Symmetries present in such representations enable compositional generalization to new configurations
of states or tasks, either by building the structure into the function approximator or algorithm
[28, 58, 15, 43], or by using the structure for data augmentation [3, 33, 51].
In this paper, we extend past work on structure-driven data augmentation by using a locally factored
model of the transition dynamics to generate counterfactual training distributions. This enables
agents to generalize beyond the support of their original training distribution, including to novel
∗

Correspondence to spitis@cs.toronto.edu
Visualizations & code available at https://sites.google.com/view/mocoda-neurips-22/
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
1

