Incrementality Bidding via Reinforcement Learning
under Mixed and Delayed Rewards

Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru
Google
ashwinkumarbv@google.com

Zhe Feng
Google Research
zhef@google.com

Tianxi Li
University of Virginia
tianxili@virginia.edu

Haifeng Xu
University of Chicago
haifengxu@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Incrementality, which measures the causal effect of showing an ad to a potential
customer (e.g. a user in an internet platform) versus not, is a central object for
advertisers in online advertising platforms. This paper investigates the problem of
how an advertiser can learn to optimize the bidding sequence in an online manner
without knowing the incrementality parameters in advance. We formulate the offline
version of this problem as a specially structured episodic Markov Decision Process
(MDP) and then, for its online learning counterpart, propose
a novel reinforcement
√
learning (RL) algorithm with regret at most e
O(H 2 T ), which depends on the
number of rounds H and number of episodes T , but does not depend on the number
of actions (i.e., possible bids). A fundamental difference between our learning
problem from standard RL problems is that the realized reward feedback from
conversion incrementality is mixed and delayed. To handle this difficulty we
propose and analyze a novel pairwise moment-matching algorithm to learn the
conversion incrementality, which we believe is of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, online advertising systems (e.g. Google, Facebook, and Amazon) have demonstrated
their significant power for connecting advertisers and potential customers. Moreover, automated
auctions are widely used in online ad platforms for matching advertisers and users, and for price
discovery [23, 8]. Many advertisers are bidding repeatedly online to show ads to users. Therefore,
an important problem for advertisers is to design efficient bidding algorithms to maximize their
accumulated utility. Moreover, this is also an important problem for online ad platforms, because
auto-bidding — i.e., the advertisers authorize ad platforms to bid on behalf of them —has become
prevalent in online advertising [9, 11].
A growing body of work is investigating the problem of learning to bid in repeated auctions [25, 10,
5, 13, 12, 4, 20, 19]. However, existing work assumes that the value of showing ads to a user (after
winning the auction) comes from either an oblivious adversary or is sampled from an underlying
fixed distribution. Unfortunately, this ignored the crucial causal effect of showing an ad to a potential
customer and cannot capture how much an ad will change the user’s conversion rate, which should
have been what the advertiser is bidding for. For example, if a user sees the same ad multiple times in
a very short time period, then the conversion 1 of this user may not be much better — in fact, may
1
A conversion represents a desired interaction between the user and advertiser, e.g., download the App or
buy the products from the advertiser.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

