Brownian Noise Reduction:
Maximizing Privacy Subject to Accuracy Constraints
Justin Whitehouse
Carnegie Mellon University
jwhiteho@andrew.cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Carnegie Mellon University
aramdas@cmu.edu

Ryan Rogers
LinkedIn
rrogers@linkedin.com

Abstract
There is a disconnect between how researchers and practitioners handle privacyutility tradeoffs. Researchers primarily operate from a privacy first perspective,
setting strict privacy requirements and minimizing risk subject to these constraints.
Practitioners often desire an accuracy first perspective, possibly satisfied with the
greatest privacy they can get subject to obtaining sufficiently small error. Ligett
et al. [2017] have introduced a “noise reduction” algorithm to address the latter
perspective. The authors show that by adding correlated Laplace noise and progressively reducing it on demand, it is possible to produce a sequence of increasingly
accurate estimates of a private parameter while only paying a privacy cost for the
least noisy iterate released. In this work, we generalize noise reduction to the
setting of Gaussian noise, introducing the Brownian mechanism. The Brownian
mechanism works by first adding Gaussian noise of high variance corresponding
to the final point of a simulated Brownian motion. Then, at the practitioner’s
discretion, noise is gradually decreased by tracing back along the Brownian path to
an earlier time. Our mechanism is more naturally applicable to the common setting of bounded `2 -sensitivity, empirically outperforms existing work on common
statistical tasks, and provides customizable control of privacy loss over the entire
interaction with the practitioner. We complement our Brownian mechanism with
ReducedAboveThreshold, a generalization of the classical AboveThreshold algorithm that provides adaptive privacy guarantees. Overall, our results demonstrate
that one can meet utility constraints while still maintaining strong levels of privacy.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, differential privacy has seen industry-wide adoption as a means of protecting
sensitive information [Erlingsson et al., 2014, Greenberg, 2016]. By injecting appropriate amounts
of noise, differentially private algorithms allow the computation of population-level quantities of
interest while guaranteeing individual-level privacy. Of the private mechanisms used in industry,
those relating to private empirical risk minimization (ERM) are perhaps the most impactful, in part
due to their application in machine learning tasks [Abadi et al., 2016, Song et al., 2013]. Researchers
have developed many private ERM mechanisms, ranging from least squares minimzation [Sheffet,
2017, Chaudhuri et al., 2011] to subsampled gradient descent [Abadi et al., 2016, Balle and Wang,
2018, Wang et al., 2019]. Despite this vast literature, most existing results take the same broad
approach: they aim to minimize error (statistical risk) subject to strict privacy guarantees. While this
strict adherence to privacy constraints may be necessary in some applications, it often provides weak
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

