Feature Learning in L2-regularized DNNs:
Attraction/Repulsion and Sparsity

Arthur Jacot
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
arthur.jacot@nyu.edu

Eugene Golikov
Chair of Statistical Field Theory
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
evgenii.golikov@epfl.ch

Clément Hongler
Chair of Statistical Field Theory
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
clement.hongler@epfl.ch

Franck Gabriel
Institut de Science Financière et d’Assurances
Université Lyon 1
franckr.gabriel@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the loss surface of DNNs with L2 regularization. We show that the
loss in terms of the parameters can be reformulated into a loss in terms of
the layerwise activations Zℓ of the training set. This reformulation reveals the
dynamics behind feature learning: each hidden representations Zℓ are optimal
w.r.t. to an attraction/repulsion problem and interpolate between the input and
output representations, keeping as little information from the input as necessary
to construct the activation of the next layer. For positively homogeneous nonlinearities, the loss can be further reformulated in terms of the covariances of the
hidden representations, which takes the form of a partially convex optimization
over a convex cone.
This second reformulation allows us to prove a sparsity result for homogeneous
DNNs: any local minimum of the L2 -regularized loss can be achieved with at
most N (N + 1) neurons in each hidden layer (where N is the size of the training
set). We show that this bound is tight by giving an example of a local minimum
that requires N 2 /4 hidden neurons. But we also observe numerically that in more
traditional settings much less than N 2 neurons are required to reach the minima.

1

Introduction

It is generally believed that the success of deep learning hinges on the ability of deep neural networks
(DNNs) to learn features that are well suited to the task they are trained on. There is however little
understanding of what these features are and how they are selected by the network.
On the other hand, recent results [12] have shown that it is possible to train DNNs without feature
learning. This suggests the existence of two regimes of DNNs, a kernel regime (also called lazy or
NTK regime) without feature learning and an active regime where features are learned. The presence
or absence of feature learning can depend on multiple factors, such as the initialization/parametrization
of DNNs [3, 25, 17, 13], very large depths [10] or large learning rate [16, 5].
In this paper, we focus on the impact of L2 regularization on feature learning in DNNs. This analysis
is further motivated by recent results [8, 9, 4] which show that the implicit bias of gradient descent
on losses such as the cross entropy (which decay exponentially towards infinity) is essentially the
same as the bias induced by L2 regularization in DNNs.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

