M3ViT: Mixture-of-Experts Vision Transformer
for Efficient Multi-task Learning
with Model-Accelerator Co-design

Hanxue Liang1∗, Zhiwen Fan1∗ , Rishov Sarkar2 , Ziyu Jiang3 , Tianlong Chen1 ,
Kai Zou4 , Yu Cheng5 , Cong Hao2 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Texas A&M University, 4 Protagolabs Inc, 5 Microsoft Research
{haliang,zhiwenfan,tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu
{rishov.sarkar,callie.hao}@gatech.edu, jiangziyu@tamu.edu
kz@protagolabs.com, yu.cheng@microsoft.com

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) encapsulates multiple learned tasks in a single model
and often lets those tasks learn better jointly. However, when deploying MTL onto
those real-world systems that are often resource-constrained or latency-sensitive,
two prominent challenges arise: (i) during training, simultaneously optimizing all
tasks is often difficult due to gradient conflicts across tasks, and the challenge is
amplified when a growing number of tasks have to be squeezed into one compact
model; (ii) at inference, current MTL regimes have to activate nearly the entire
model even to just execute a single task. Yet most real systems demand only one or
two tasks at each moment, and switch between tasks as needed: therefore such “all
tasks activated” inference is also highly inefficient and non-scalable.
In this paper, we present a model-accelerator co-design framework to enable efficient on-device MTL, that tackles both training and inference bottlenecks. Our
framework, dubbed M3 ViT, customizes mixture-of-experts (MoE) layers into a
vision transformer (ViT) backbone for MTL, and sparsely activates task-specific
experts during training, which effectively disentangles the parameter spaces to
avoid different tasks’ training conflicts. Then at inference with any task of interest,
the same design allows for activating only the task-corresponding sparse “expert”
pathway, instead of the full model. Our new model design is further enhanced by
hardware-level innovations, in particular, a novel computation reordering scheme
tailored for memory-constrained MTL that achieves zero-overhead switching between tasks and can scale to any number of experts. Extensive experiments on
PASCAL-Context [1] and NYUD-v2 [2] datasets at both software and hardware
levels are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed design. When
executing single-task inference, M3 ViT achieves higher accuracies than encoderfocused MTL methods, while significantly reducing 88% inference FLOPs. When
implemented on a hardware platform of one Xilinx ZCU104 FPGA, our co-design
framework reduces the memory requirement by 2.40×, while achieving energy
efficiency up to 9.23× higher than a comparable FPGA baseline. Code is available
at: https://github.com/VITA-Group/M3ViT.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViTs) [3, 4, 5, 6], as the latest performant deep models, have achieved impressive
performance on various computer vision tasks [7, 8, 9]. These models are specially trained or tested
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

