Redeeming Intrinsic Rewards via Constrained
Optimization
Eric Chen⇤, Zhang-Wei Hong * † , Joni Pajarinen‡ & Pulkit Agrawal†§
Improbable AI Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab†
Aalto University‡
NSF AI Institute for AI and Fundamental Interactions (IAIFI)§

Abstract
State-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms typically use random sampling (e.g., ✏-greedy) for exploration, but this method fails on hard exploration tasks
like Montezuma’s Revenge. To address the challenge of exploration, prior works
incentivize exploration by rewarding the agent when it visits novel states. Such
intrinsic rewards (also called exploration bonus or curiosity) often lead to excellent
performance on hard exploration tasks. However, on easy exploration tasks, the
agent gets distracted by intrinsic rewards and performs unnecessary exploration
even when sufficient task (also called extrinsic) reward is available. Consequently,
such an overly curious agent performs worse than an agent trained with only task
reward. Such inconsistency in performance across tasks prevents the widespread
use of intrinsic rewards with RL algorithms. We propose a principled constrained
optimization procedure called Extrinsic-Intrinsic Policy Optimization (EIPO) that
automatically tunes the importance of the intrinsic reward: it suppresses the intrinsic reward when exploration is unnecessary and increases it when exploration is
required. The results is superior exploration that does not require manual tuning
in balancing the intrinsic reward against the task reward. Consistent performance
gains across sixty-one ATARI games validate our claim. The code is available at
https://github.com/Improbable-AI/eipo.

1

Introduction

The goal of reinforcement learning (RL) [1] is to find a mapping from states to actions (i.e., a
policy) that maximizes reward. At every learning iteration, an agent is faced with a question: has the
maximum possible reward been achieved? In many practical problems, the maximum achievable
reward is unknown. Even when the maximum achievable reward is known, if the current policy
is sub-optimal then the agent is faced with another question: would spending time improving its
current strategy lead to higher rewards (exploitation), or should it attempt a different strategy in
the hope of discovering potentially higher reward (exploration)? Pre-mature exploitation is akin to
getting stuck in a local-optima and precludes the agent from exploring. Too much exploration on the
other hand can be distracting, and prevent the agent from perfecting a good strategy. Resolving the
exploration-exploitation dilemma [1] is therefore essential for data/time efficient policy learning.
In simple decision making problems where actions do not affect the state (e.g. bandits or contextual
bandits [2]), provably optimal algorithms for balancing exploration against exploitation are known [3,
2]. However, in the general settings where RL is used, such algorithms are unknown. In the absence
of methods that work well in both theory and practice, state-of-the-art RL algorithms rely on heuristic
exploration strategies such as adding noise to actions or random sampling of sub-optimal actions
⇤

denotes equal contribution. Correspondence to pulkitag@mit.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

