Mirror Descent with Relative Smoothness in Measure
Spaces, with application to Sinkhorn and EM

Pierre-Cyril Aubin-Frankowski
DI ENS, Ecole normale supérieure,
Université PSL, CNRS, INRIA Paris
pierre-cyril.aubin@inria.fr

Anna Korba
CREST, ENSAE
IP Paris
anna.korba@ensae.fr

Flavien Léger
INRIA Paris
flavien.leger@inria.fr

Abstract
Many problems in machine learning can be formulated as optimizing a convex
functional over a vector space of measures. This paper studies the convergence of
the mirror descent algorithm in this infinite-dimensional setting. Defining Bregman divergences through directional derivatives, we derive the convergence of the
scheme for relatively smooth and convex pairs of functionals. Such assumptions
allow to handle non-smooth functionals such as the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. Applying our result to joint distributions and KL, we show that Sinkhorn’s
primal iterations for entropic optimal transport in the continuous setting correspond
to a mirror descent, and we obtain a new proof of its (sub)linear convergence. We
also show that Expectation Maximization (EM) can always formally be written as
a mirror descent. When optimizing only on the latent distribution while fixing the
mixtures parameters – which corresponds to the Richardson–Lucy deconvolution
scheme in signal processing – we derive sublinear rates of convergence.

1

Introduction

Many important problems in machine learning and computational statistics can be cast as an optimization problem over the space of probability distributions, where the objective functional assesses the
dissimilarity to a target distribution µ̄ on Rd . Classical dissimilarities include f -divergences, Integral
Probability Metrics (IPMs), or optimal transport distances among others. In Bayesian inference
for instance, it is common to optimize the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence to the target, which
corresponds to the posterior distribution of the parameters of interest. In generative modelling, the
goal is to generate data whose distribution is similar to the training set distribution defined by samples
of the target, where the similarity is often measured by an integral probability metric or an optimal
transport distance (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Dziugaite et al., 2015). In supervised learning, optimizing
an infinite-width one hidden layer neural network, e.g. through the mean squared error, corresponds
to minimizing a functional on the space of probability distributions over the parameters of the network
(Chizat and Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2018; Rotskoff and Vanden-Eijnden, 2018). In particular, the
objective functional can be identified to a Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) in the well-specified
setting (Arbel et al., 2019). Many other problems in machine learning can be formalized in this
framework (Chu et al., 2019).
Once the objective functional is chosen, one has to select an optimization algorithm that is wellsuited to the geometry of the problem. In this article, we consider the widely used mirror descent
scheme, a first-order optimization method based on Bregman divergences. While the traditional
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

