Open High-Resolution Satellite Imagery:
The WorldStrat Dataset – With Application to
Super-Resolution

Julien Cornebise∗
University College London
& Why How Ltd

Ivan Oršolić∗
Why How Ltd

Freddie Kalaitzis
University of Oxford

ivanorsolic@gmail.com

freddie.kalaitzis@cs.ox.ac.uk

j.cornebise@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Analyzing the planet at scale with satellite imagery and machine learning is a
dream that has been constantly hindered by the cost of difficult-to-access highlyrepresentative high-resolution imagery. To remediate this, we introduce here the
WorldStratified dataset. The largest and most varied such publicly available
dataset, at Airbus SPOT 6/7 satellites’ high resolution of up to 1.5 m/pixel, empowered by European Space Agency’s (ESA) Phi-Lab as part of the ESA-funded
QueryPlanet project, we curate nearly 10,000 km² of unique locations to ensure
stratified representation of all types of land-use across the world: from agriculture
to ice caps, from forests to multiple urbanization densities. We also enrich those
with locations typically under-represented in ML datasets: sites of humanitarian interest, illegal mining sites, and settlements of persons at risk. We temporally-match
each high-resolution image with multiple low-resolution images from the freely
accessible lower-resolution Sentinel-2 (S2) satellites at 10 m/pixel. We accompany
this dataset with an open-source Python package to: rebuild or extend the WorldStrat dataset, train and infer baseline algorithms, and learn with abundant tutorials,
all compatible with the popular eo-learn toolbox. We hereby hope to foster broadspectrum applications of ML to satellite imagery, and possibly develop from free
public low-resolution Sentinel-2 imagery the same power of analysis allowed by
costly private high-resolution imagery. We illustrate this specific point by training
and releasing several highly compute-efficient baselines on the task of Multi-Frame
Super-Resolution. License-wise, the high-resolution Airbus imagery is CC-BY-NC,
while the labels, Sentinel-2 imagery, and trained weights are under CC-BY, and the
source code and pre-trained models under BSD, to allow for the widest use and dissemination. The dataset is available at https://zenodo.org/record/6810792,
the software package at https://github.com/worldstrat/worldstrat, and
homepage at https://worldstrat.github.io.

Figure 1: A glimpse at the variety of land uses covered by high-resolution imagery in the dataset.
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

