Score-Based Diffusion meets
Annealed Importance Sampling
Arnaud Doucet, Will Grathwohl, Alexander G. D. G. Matthews & Heiko Strathmann ⇤
DeepMind
{arnauddoucet,wgrathwohl,alexmatthews,strathmann}@google.com

Abstract
More than twenty years after its introduction, Annealed Importance Sampling
(AIS) remains one of the most effective methods for marginal likelihood estimation. It relies on a sequence of distributions interpolating between a tractable
initial distribution and the target distribution of interest which we simulate from
approximately using a non-homogeneous Markov chain. To obtain an importance
sampling estimate of the marginal likelihood, AIS introduces an extended target
distribution to reweight the Markov chain proposal. While much effort has been
devoted to improving the proposal distribution used by AIS, an underappreciated
issue is that AIS uses a convenient but suboptimal extended target distribution.
We here leverage recent progress in score-based generative modeling (SGM) to
approximate the optimal extended target distribution minimizing the variance of the
marginal likelihood estimate for AIS proposals corresponding to the discretization
of Langevin and Hamiltonian dynamics. We demonstrate these novel, differentiable,
AIS procedures on a number of synthetic benchmark distributions and variational
auto-encoders.

1

Introduction

Evaluating the marginal likelihood, also known as evidence, is of key interest in Bayesian statistics as
it allows not only model comparison but is also often used to select hyperparameters. A large variety
of Monte Carlo methods have been proposed to address this problem, including path sampling [19],
AIS [37] and related Sequential Monte Carlo methods [13]. An appealing feature of AIS is that it
provides an unbiased estimate of the marginal likelihood and can thus be used to define an evidence
lower bound (ELBO) or mutual information bounds; see e.g. [53, 51, 7].
AIS builds a proposal distribution using a Markov chain (xk )K
k=0 initialized at an easy-to-sample
distribution followed by a sequence of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) transitions targeting
typically annealed versions of the posterior. By proceeding this way, we obtain a proposal xK whose
distribution is expected to be a reasonable approximation to the target posterior. However, this
distribution is intractable as it requires integrating the joint proposal distribution over previous states
1
(xk )K
k=0 . AIS bypasses this issue by instead using Importance Sampling (IS) on the whole path
K
(xk )k=0 through the introduction of an artificial extended target distribution whose marginal at time
K coincides with the posterior.
There has been much work devoted to improving AIS in machine learning and statistics but also
in physics where it was introduced independently in [29, 9]. A standard approach to improve AIS
is to modify the intermediate distributions [45, 21, 34] and corresponding transition kernels of the
proposal [10, 53, 18, 51, 54]. We here address a distinct problem. For a given proposal, it was shown
in [13] that the extended target distribution minimizing the variance of the evidence estimate is not
⇤

alphabetical order, equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

