Predicting Label Distribution from Multi-label
Ranking

Yunan Lu, Xiuyi Jia∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China
{luyn, jiaxy}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Label distribution can provide richer information about label polysemy than logical
labels in multi-label learning. There are currently two strategies including LDL
(label distribution learning) and LE (label enhancement) to predict label distributions. LDL requires experts to annotate instances with label distributions and
learn a predictive mapping on such a training set. LE requires experts to annotate
instances with logical labels and generates label distributions from them. However,
LDL requires costly annotation, and the performance of the LE is unstable. In
this paper, we study the problem of predicting label distribution from multi-label
ranking which is a compromise w.r.t. annotation cost but has good guarantees for
performance. On the one hand, we theoretically investigate the relation between
multi-label ranking and label distribution. We define the notion of EAE (expected
approximation error) to quantify the quality of an annotation, give the bounds of
EAE for multi-label ranking, and derive the optimal range of label distribution
corresponding to a particular multi-label ranking. On the other hand, we propose a
framework of label distribution predicting from multi-label ranking via conditional
Dirichlet mixtures. This framework integrates the processes of recovering and
learning label distributions end-to-end and allows us to easily encode our knowledge about current tasks by a scoring function. Finally, we implement extensive
experiments to validate our proposal.

1

Introduction

The label polysemy problem has been a popular research topic in machine learning area, in which an
instance is described by multiple labels simultaneously. MLL (multi-label learning) [23] deals with
label polysemy by assigning a vector with logical values to the instance, in which each logical value
indicates whether the corresponding label is associated with the instance. However, MLL only gives
which labels can describe the instance, but cannot directly answer a question with more polysemy,
i.e., how much does each label describe the instance. Hence, label distribution [4], a real-valued
vector that explicitly gives the description degrees of labels to an instance, is introduced to answer
this question. Obviously, label distribution provides richer information about label polysemy than
logical labels, and it has been applied in many practical application scenarios, such as sentiment
analysis [14, 35, 39], facial age estimation [3, 6, 30], and so on.
There are two main methods for obtaining label distribution to characterize label polysemy. The first
type is LDL (label distribution learning) [4], that is, learning a predictive mapping from a feature
vector to a label distribution. LDL requires experts to directly annotate the instances with label
distributions as a training set. Such methods focus on how to design a well performed LDL algorithm.
Typical works include some algorithms [10, 20, 25, 37, 38] that improve LDL performance by mining
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

