Let Images Give You More:
Point Cloud Cross-Modal Training for Shape Analysis

Xu Yan1,2† , Heshen Zhan1,2† , Chaoda Zheng1,2 , Jiantao Gao4 ,
Ruimao Zhang3 , Shuguang Cui2,1,5 , Zhen Li2,1∗
1
FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen, 2 SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen,
3
SDS, CUHK-Shenzhen, 4 USV, Shanghai University, 5 Pengcheng Lab
{xuyan1@link.,heshenzhan@link.,lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Although recent point cloud analysis achieves impressive progress, the paradigm
of representation learning from a single modality gradually meets its bottleneck. In
this work, we take a step towards more discriminative 3D point cloud representation
by fully taking advantages of images which inherently contain richer appearance
information, e.g., texture, color, and shade. Specifically, this paper introduces
a simple but effective point cloud cross-modality training (PointCMT) strategy,
which utilizes view-images, i.e., rendered or projected 2D images of the 3D object,
to boost point cloud analysis. In practice, to effectively acquire auxiliary knowledge
from view images, we develop a teacher-student framework and formulate the crossmodal learning as a knowledge distillation problem. PointCMT eliminates the
distribution discrepancy between different modalities through novel feature and
classifier enhancement criteria and avoids potential negative transfer effectively.
Note that PointCMT effectively improves the point-only representation without
architecture modification. Sufficient experiments verify significant gains on various
datasets using appealing backbones, i.e., equipped with PointCMT, PointNet++ and
PointMLP achieve state-of-the-art performance on two benchmarks, i.e., 94.4%
and 86.7% accuracy on ModelNet40 and ScanObjectNN, respectively. Code will
be made available at https://github.com/ZhanHeshen/PointCMT.

1

Introduction

As the fundamental 3D representation, point clouds have attracted increasing attention for various
applications, e.g., self-driving [2, 33, 34], robotics perception [7, 13, 6], etc. Generally, a point cloud
consists of sparse and unordered points in the 3D space, which is significantly different from a 2D
image with a dense and regular pixel array. Prior studies treat the understanding of 2D images and 3D
point clouds as two separate problems, and both have their own merits and drawbacks. Concretely,
rich color and fine-grained texture are easily obtained in 2D images, but they are ambiguous in depth
and shape sensing. Previous works extract features on images through convolution neural networks
(CNN). In contrast, point clouds are superior in providing spatial and geometric information but only
preserve sparse and textureless features. Several prior studies process features on unstructured point
clouds through local aggregation operators [34, 43]. It is natural to raise a question: Could we use the
rich information hidden in 2D images to boost 3D point cloud shape analysis?
To address the above issue, one straightforward way is to leverage the benefits of both images and
point clouds, i.e., fusing information from two complementary representations with task-specific
design [58, 24, 10, 32, 42]. However, utilizing additional image representation requires designing
∗

Corresponding author: Zhen Li. † Equal first authorship.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

