Optimal Gradient Sliding and its Application to
Distributed Optimization Under Similarity
Dmitry Kovalev
KAUST,⇤ Saudi Arabia
dakovalev1@gmail.com

Aleksandr Beznosikov
MIPT†, HSE University and Yandex, Russia
anbeznosikov@gmail.com

Ekaterina Borodich
MIPT and HSE University, Russia
borodich.ed@phystech.edu

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT, HSE University and IITP RAS‡, Russia
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Gesualdo Scutari
Purdue University, USA
gscutari@purdue.edu

Abstract
We study structured convex optimization problems, with additive objective r :=
p + q, where r is (µ-strongly) convex, q is Lq -smooth and convex, and p is Lp smooth, possibly nonconvex. For such a class of problems, we proposed an inexact
accelerated gradient sliding method that can skip the gradient computation for one
of these componentspwhile still achieving
p optimal complexity of gradient calls of
p and q, that is, O( Lp /µ) and O( Lq /µ), respectively. This result is much
p
sharper than the classic black-box complexity O( (Lp + Lq )/µ), especially when
the difference between Lp and Lq is large. We then apply the proposed method to
solve distributed optimization problems over master-worker architectures, under
agents’ function similarity, due to statistical data similarity or otherwise. The
distributed algorithm achieves for the first time lower complexity bounds on both
communication and local gradient calls, with the former having being a longstanding open problem. Finally the method is extended to distributed saddleproblems (under function similarity) by means of solving a class of variational
inequalities, achieving lower communication and computation complexity bounds.

1

Introduction

We consider structured convex programming in the form [6, 13, 35]:
min r(x) := q(x) + p(x),

x2Rd

(1)

where r is assumed to be convex and decomposed as the sum of a smooth, possibly nonconvex
function p and a smooth convex function q. First order information of p and q is accessible separately.
We are interested in scenarios where the cost of evaluating the gradient of the two functions is not
even, but computing, say rp, is much more resource demanding than rq. The motivating application
for this scenario is distributed optimization over master-worker systems, as discussed next.
⇤

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
‡
Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

