Understanding the Failure of Batch Normalization for
Transformers in NLP
Jiaxi Wang1 , Ji Wu1,2 , Lei Huang3
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for Precision Medicine, Tsinghua University
{wjx20@mails, wuji_ee@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn
3
SKLSDE, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
huangleiAI@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) is a core and prevalent technique in accelerating the
training of deep neural networks and improving the generalization on Computer
Vision (CV) tasks. However, it fails to defend its position in Natural Language
Processing (NLP), which is dominated by Layer Normalization (LN). In this paper,
we are trying to answer why BN usually performs worse than LN in NLP tasks
with Transformer models. We find that the inconsistency between training and
inference of BN is the leading cause that results in the failure of BN in NLP.
We define Training Inference Discrepancy (TID) to quantitatively measure this
inconsistency and reveal that TID can indicate BN’s performance, supported by
extensive experiments, including image classification, neural machine translation,
language modeling, sequence labeling, and text classification tasks. We find that
BN can obtain much better test performance than LN when TID keeps small through
training. To suppress the explosion of TID, we propose Regularized BN (RBN) that
adds a simple regularization term to narrow the gap between batch statistics and
population statistics of BN. RBN improves the performance of BN consistently and
outperforms or is on par with LN on 17 out of 20 settings, involving ten datasets
and two common variants of Transformer1 .

1

Introduction

Deep learning [19] has revolutionized Computer Vision (CV) [18] and Natural Language Processing
(NLP) [39]. Normalization layers are key components to stabilize and accelerate the training in
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). In CV, Batch Normalization (BN) [15] is the default normalization
technique and reveals superior performance over other normalization techniques in image recognition
tasks by enforcing the input of a neuron to have zero mean and unit variance within a mini-batch
data. Furthermore, a growing number of theoretical works analyze the excellent properties of BN
in benefiting optimization [15, 34, 4, 12, 7, 8]. While BN almost dominates in CV with empirical
success and theoretical properties, Layer Normalization (LN) is the leading normalization technique
in NLP, especially for Transformer models that achieve the state-of-the-art performance on extensive
tasks, including machine translation [39], natural language understanding [9], text generation [32],
few shot learning [5], to name a few. As a direct substitute of LN, BN performs poorly in Transformer
for neural machine translation [36]. It remains elusive to explain the failure of BN in NLP community.
In this work, we are trying to take a step forward. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/wjxts/RegularizedBN

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

