Compressible-composable NeRF via
Rank-residual Decomposition

Jiaxiang Tang1 , Xiaokang Chen1 , Jingbo Wang2 , Gang Zeng1,3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Intelligent Terminal Key Laboratory of SiChuan Province
{tjx, pkucxk}@pku.edu.cn, wj020@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, zeng@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has emerged as a compelling method to represent
3D objects and scenes for photo-realistic rendering. However, its implicit representation causes difficulty in manipulating the models like the explicit mesh representation. Several recent advances in NeRF manipulation are usually restricted by a
shared renderer network, or suffer from large model size. To circumvent the hurdle,
in this paper, we present a neural field representation that enables efficient and convenient manipulation of models. To achieve this goal, we learn a hybrid tensor rank
decomposition of the scene without neural networks. Motivated by the low-rank
approximation property of the SVD algorithm, we propose a rank-residual learning
strategy to encourage the preservation of primary information in lower ranks. The
model size can then be dynamically adjusted by rank truncation to control the levels
of detail, achieving near-optimal compression without extra optimization. Furthermore, different models can be arbitrarily transformed and composed into one
scene by concatenating along the rank dimension. The growth of storage cost can
also be mitigated by compressing the unimportant objects in the composed scene.
We demonstrate that our method is able to achieve comparable rendering quality
to state-of-the-art methods, while enabling extra capability of compression and
composition. Code is available at https://github.com/ashawkey/CCNeRF.

1

Introduction

Photo-realistic rendering and manipulation of 3D scenes have been long standing problems with
numerous real-world applications, such as VR/AR, computer games, and video creation. Recently,
the volumetric Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) representations [26, 1, 8, 27] show impressive progress
in rendering photo-realistic images with rich details. However, due to this implicit representation
of geometry and appearance, manipulating the underlying scenes encoded by NeRF still remains a
challenging problem. To solve this problem, some works [21, 45, 19] introduce scene-specific features
and scene agnostic rendering network, so that scenes trained with a shared rendering network can
be composed together. However, the constrained and biased capability of these rendering networks
causes difficulty in extending to various objects or scenes. New objects have to be trained with
a fixed rendering network to be compatible with the old objects. Other works [36] discard the
rendering network and adopt an no-neural-network NeRF representation, which is more convenient
to manipulate the reconstructed scenes and is still able to render high-quality images. Nevertheless,
the large storage requirement for each single model is detrimental to composing complex scenes with
lots of objects.
We present a novel approach that allows efficient and convenient manipulation of scenes represented
with our model. Two aspects should be fulfilled to achieve this goal. The first is that we can
dynamically adjust the model size to support different levels of detail (LOD) in different scenarios.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

