Non-Gaussian Tensor Programs

Eugene Golikov
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
evgenii.golikov@epfl.ch

Greg Yang
Microsoft Research
Seattle, USA
gregyang@microsoft.com

Abstract
Does it matter whether one randomly initializes a neural network (NN) from
Gaussian, uniform, or other distributions? We show the answer is ”yes” in some
parameter tensors (the so-called matrix-like parameters) but ”no” in others when
the NN is wide. This is a specific instance of a more general universality principle
for Tensor Programs (TP) that informs precisely when the limit of a program
depends on the distribution of its initial matrices and vectors. To obtain this
principle, we develop the theory of non-Gaussian Tensor Programs. As corollaries,
we obtain all previous consequences of the TP framework (such as NNGP/NTK
correspondence, Free Indepedence Principle, Dynamical Dichotomy Theorem, and
µ-parametrization) for NNs with non-Gaussian weights. 1

1

Introduction

Universality in Neural Network Initialization Common initialization schemes of neural networks
(e.g., [6, 11]) define specific ways of scaling initial layer weights with layer sizes. However, in
general, they do not express any preference on the initial weight distribution beyond iid sampling.
While some works [13, 12] use a Gaussian distribution, other practitioners advocate for a uniform
one since it is possible to sample very large weights from a Gaussian, causing numerical instabilities.
However, a theorist, especially with a background on physics or probability theory, would suspect
that the precise choice of distribution does not matter as the neural network’s width tends to infinity.
This is a belief in the general concept of universality — large systems display a consistent behavior
at a macroscopic scale regardless of the microscopic details.2
This consideration has led deep learning practitioners to treat the distribution of random initialization
as a matter of personal choice. However, as we shall see, the reality appears to be more subtle: roughly
speaking, distribution universality holds for hidden weights but does not hold for other parameters
like input and output weights. We formulate the precise universality principle (Principle 2) for neural
network random intialization in Section 2. We do so in plain English, but deducing this principle
requires some fundamental advancements in the theory of Tensor Programs. Below, we briefly review
this theory before describing our contributions to it.
Tensor Programs Just like autograd [25] empirically automates the calculation of chain rule of
arbitrary computation graphs, Tensor Programs (TP) [28] has automated the theoretical calculation
of infinite-width limits of the same (where width of a computation graph corresponds to the size
of matrices). What previously were difficult limits to calculate, now becomes routine via TP.
For example, [17] in 1994 showed that randomly initialized wide shallow neural networks are
Gaussian Processes (which is called the Neural Network-Gaussian Process Correspondence, or
1

We refer the reader to the arXiv version for the latest version of the manuscript.
The simplest example of universality: taking the average of many iid copies of a random variable always
yield its mean, regardless of whether the variable is Gaussian, uniform, Laplace, etc.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

