Towards Understanding the Condensation of Neural
Networks at Initial Training

Hanxu Zhou1 , Qixuan Zhou1 , Tao Luo1,2 , Yaoyu Zhang1,3∗, Zhi-Qin John Xu1†,
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Institute of Natural Sciences, MOE-LSC
and Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
CMA-Shanghai, Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Technology

Abstract
Empirical works show that for ReLU neural networks (NNs) with small initialization, input weights of hidden neurons (the input weight of a hidden neuron
consists of the weight from its input layer to the hidden neuron and its bias term)
condense onto isolated orientations. The condensation dynamics implies that the
training implicitly regularizes a NN towards one with much smaller effective size.
In this work, we illustrate the formation of the condensation in multi-layer fully
connected NNs and show that the maximal number of condensed orientations in
the initial training stage is twice the multiplicity of the activation function, where
“multiplicity” indicates the multiple roots of activation function at origin. Our
theoretical analysis confirms experiments for two cases, one is for the activation
function of multiplicity one with arbitrary dimension input, which contains many
common activation functions, and the other is for the layer with one-dimensional
input and arbitrary multiplicity. This work makes a step towards understanding
how small initialization leads NNs to condensation at the initial training stage.

1

Introduction

The question why over-parameterized neural networks (NNs) often show good generalization attracts
much attention (Breiman, 1995; Zhang et al., 2021). Luo et al. (2021) found that when initialization
is small, the input weights of hidden neurons in two-layer ReLU NNs (the input weight or the feature
of a hidden neuron consists of the weight from its input layer to the hidden neuron and its bias term)
condense onto isolated orientations during the training. As illustrated in the cartoon example in Fig.
1, the condensation transforms a large network, which is often over-parameterized, to the one of only
a few effective neurons, leading to an output function with low complexity. Since, in most cases, the
complexity bounds the generalization error (Bartlett and Mendelson, 2002), the study of condensation
could provide insight to how over-parameterized NNs are implicitly regularized to achieve good
generalization performance in practice.
Small initialization leads NNs to rich non-linearity during the training (Mei et al., 2019; Rotskoff and
Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Chizat and Bach, 2018; Sirignano and Spiliopoulos, 2020). For example, in
over-parameterized regime, small initialization can achieve low generalization error (Advani et al.,
2020). Irrespective of network width, small initialization can make two-layer ReLU NNs converge
to a solution with maximum margin (Phuong and Lampert, 2020). Small initialization also enables
neural networks to learn features actively (Lyu et al., 2021; Luo et al., 2021). The gradual increment
of the condensed orientations is consistent with many previous works, which show that the network
∗
†

Corresponding author: zhyy.sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn.
Corresponding author: xuzhiqin@sjtu.edu.cn.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

