A Fast Scale-Invariant Algorithm for
Non-negative Least Squares with Non-negative Data∗

Jelena Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jelena@cs.wisc.edu

Chenghui Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison
cli539@wisc.edu

Swati Padmanabhan
University of Washington, Seattle
pswati@uw.edu

Chaobing Song
University of Wisconsin-Madison
chaobing.song@wisc.edu

Abstract
Nonnegative (linear) least square problems are a fundamental class of problems
that is well-studied in statistical learning and for which solvers have been implemented in many of the standard programming languages used within the machine
learning community. The existing off-the-shelf solvers view the non-negativity
constraint in these problems as an obstacle and, compared to unconstrained least
squares, perform additional effort to address it. However, in many of the typical
applications, the data itself is nonnegative as well, and we show that the nonnegativity in this case makes the problem easier. In particular, while the worst-case
dimension-independent oracle complexity for unconstrained least squares problems
necessarily scales with one of the data matrix constants (typically the spectral norm)
and these problems are solved to additive error, we show that nonnegative least
squares problems with nonnegative data are solvable to multiplicative error and
with complexity independent of any matrix constants. The algorithm we introduce
is accelerated and based on a primal-dual perspective. We further show how to
provably obtain linear convergence using adaptive restart coupled with our method
and demonstrate its effectiveness on large-scale data via numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Nonnegative least squares (NNLS) problems, defined by minx≥0 12 ∥Ax − b∥22 , where A ∈ Rm×n
and b ∈ Rm , are fundamental problems and have been studied for decades in optimization and statistical learning [26, 7, 23], with various off-the-shelf solvers available in standard packages of Python
(as optimize.nnls in the SciPy package), Julia (as nnls.jl), and MATLAB (as lsqnonneg).
Within machine learning, NNLS problems arise whenever having negative labels is not meaningful,
for example, when representing prices, age, pixel intensities, chemical concentrations, or frequency
counts. NNLS is also widely used as a subroutine in nonnegative matrix factorization [10, 18, 25] to
extract sparse features in applications like clustering, collaborative filtering, and community detection.
From a statistical perspective, NNLS problems can be shown to possess a regularization property
that enforces sparsity similar to LASSO [46], while being comparatively simpler, without the need to
tune a regularization parameter or perform cross-validation [44, 8, 17, 24, 49, 43].
From an algorithmic standpoint, the nonnegativity constraint in NNLS problems is typically viewed
as an obstacle: most NNLS algorithms perform additional work to handle it, and the problem is
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

