PaCo: Parameter-Compositional Multi-Task
Reinforcement Learning

Lingfeng Sun1∗† Haichao Zhang2∗ Wei Xu2 Masayoshi Tomizuka1
1
2
University of California Berkeley
Horizon Robotics
lingfengsun@berkeley.edu

{haichao.zhang, wei.xu}@horizon.ai

tomizuka@berkeley.edu

Abstract
The purpose of multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) is to train a single policy
that can be applied to a set of different tasks. Sharing parameters allows us to take
advantage of the similarities among tasks. However, the gaps between contents and
difficulties of different tasks bring us challenges on both which tasks should share
the parameters and what parameters should be shared, as well as the optimization
challenges due to parameter sharing. In this work, we introduce a parametercompositional approach (PaCo) as an attempt to address these challenges. In this
framework, a policy subspace represented by a set of parameters is learned. Policies
for all the single tasks lie in this subspace and can be composed by interpolating
with the learned set. It allows not only flexible parameter sharing but also a natural
way to improve training. We demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance on
Meta-World benchmarks, verifying the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has made massive progress in solving complex tasks in different
domains. Despite the success of RL in various robotic tasks, most of the improvements are restricted
to single tasks in locomotion or manipulation. Although many similar tasks with different target
and interacting objects are accomplished by the same robot, they are usually defined as individual
tasks and solved separately. On the other hand, as intelligent agents, humans usually spend less time
learning similar tasks and can acquire new skills using existing ones. This motivates us to think
about the advantages of training a set of tasks with certain similarities together efficiently. Multi-task
reinforcement learning (MTRL) aims to train an effective policy that can be applied to the same robot
to solve different tasks. Compared to training each task separately, a multi-task policy should be
efficient in the number of parameters and training samples and benefit from the sharing process.
The key challenge in multi-task RL methods is determining what should be shared among tasks
and how to share. It is reasonable to assume the existence of similarities among all the tasks
picked (usually on the same robot) since training completely different tasks together is meaningless.
However, the gaps between different tasks can be significant even within the set. For tasks using
the same skill but with different goals, it’s natural to share all the parameters and add the goal into
state representation to turn the policy into a goal-conditioned policy. For tasks with different skills,
sharing policy parameters can be efficient for related tasks but may bring additional difficulties for
uncorrelated skills (e.g., push and peg-insert-side in Meta-World [36]), due to additional challenges
in learning brought by the conflictions between tasks.
Recent works on multi-task RL proposed different methods on this problem, which can be roughly
divided into three categories. Some focus on modeling share-structures for sub-policies of different
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while interning at Horizon Robotics.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

