Generative Status Estimation and Information
Decoupling for Image Rain Removal
Di Lin1,† , Xin Wang2,† , Jia Shen1 , Renjie Zhang2 , Ruonan Liu1 , Miaohui Wang3 ,
Wuyuan Xie3 , Qing Guo4 , and Ping Li2,*
1

Tianjin University, China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
3
Shenzhen University, China
4
Center for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore
p.li@polyu.edu.hk
2

Abstract
Image rain removal requires the accurate separation between the pixels of the rain
streaks and object textures. But the confusing appearances of rains and objects
lead to the misunderstanding of pixels, thus remaining the rain streaks or missing
the object details in the result. In this paper, we propose SEIDNet equipped with
the generative Status Estimation and Information Decoupling for rain removal.
In the status estimation, we embed the pixel-wise statuses into the status space,
where each status indicates a pixel of the rain or object. The status space allows
sampling multiple statuses for a pixel, thus capturing the confusing rain or object.
In the information decoupling, we respect the pixel-wise statuses, decoupling the
appearance information of rain and object from the pixel. Based on the decoupled
information, we construct the kernel space, where multiple kernels are sampled
for the pixel to remove the rain and recover the object appearance. We evaluate
SEIDNet on the public datasets, achieving state-of-the-art performances of image
rain removal. The experimental results also demonstrate the generalization of
SEIDNet, which can be easily extended to achieve state-of-the-art performances on
other image restoration tasks (e.g., snow, haze, and shadow removal). We release
the implementation of SEIDNet via https://github.com/wxxx1025/SEIDNet.

1

Introduction

Image rain removal relies on the understanding of the appearances of the rains and the objects. Most
of the current methods employ the discriminative network to learn the visual features of the pixels,
for representing the visual appearances of the rain streaks and object textures. Based on the visual
features, the network learns the shared [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] or dynamic convolutional kernels [8, 9] for
rain removal on the pixels. Intuitively, the kernels for rain removal respect the pixel-wise statuses
(i.e., rain or object), reducing the rainy intensities and recovering the object details of the pixels.
The challenge of rain removal mainly stems from the fact that some of the rains are similar to the
objects (see the input regions in Figure 1(a)). The confusion between the rains and the objects
is inevitably encoded into the visual features. It yields the inappropriate kernels for the pixels,
contributing to the erroneous results like leaving the rain streaks and removing the object textures
in the image (see the predictions in the pink rectangles of Figure 1(b)). The discriminative network
provides a deterministic kernel for a pixel. But it loses the chance of computing more appropriate
† Di Lin and Xin Wang contributed equally to this work.
* Ping Li is the corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

