Uncoupled Learning Dynamics with O(log T) Swap
Regret in Multiplayer Games

Ioannis Anagnostides
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu

Gabriele Farina
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Christian Kroer
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Chung-Wei Lee
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90007
leechung@@usc.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90007
haipengl@usc.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Carnegie Mellon University
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In this paper we establish efficient and uncoupled learning dynamics so that, when
employed by all players in a general-sum multiplayer game, the swap regret of
each player after T repetitions of the game is bounded by O(log T ), improving
4
over
√the prior best bounds of O(log (T )). At the same time, we guarantee optimal
O( T ) swap regret in the adversarial regime as well. To obtain these results,
our primary contribution is to show that when all players follow our dynamics
with a time-invariant learning rate, the second-order path lengths of the dynamics
up to time T are bounded by O(log T ), a fundamental property which could
have further implications beyond near-optimally bounding the (swap) regret. Our
proposed learning dynamics combine in a novel way optimistic regularized learning
with the use of self-concordant barriers. Further, our analysis is remarkably
simple, bypassing the cumbersome framework of higher-order smoothness recently
developed by Daskalakis, Fishelson, and Golowich (NeurIPS’21).

1

Introduction

Online learning and game theory share an intricately connected history tracing back to the inception
of the modern no-regret framework with Robinson’s analysis of fictitious play [Robinson, 1951]
and Blackwell’s approachability theorem [Blackwell, 1956]. Indeed, the no-regret framework
addresses the fundamental question of how independent and decentralized agents can “learn” with
only limited feedback from their environment, and has led to celebrated connections with gametheoretic equilibrium concepts [Hart and Mas-Colell, 2000, Foster and Vohra, 1997]. One of the
remarkable features of these results is that the learning dynamics are fully uncoupled [Hart and
Mas-Colell, 2000]: each player is completely agnostic to the utilities of the other players. Thus, there
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

