Toward a realistic model of speech processing in the
brain with self-supervised learning

Juliette Millet∗ 1,2,3 Charlotte Caucheteux∗ 1,4 Pierre Orhan2 Yves Boubenec2
Alexandre Gramfort4 Ewan Dunbar2,5 Christophe Pallier6 Jean-Rémi King1,2
∗

1

These authors contributed equally
Meta AI, Paris, France 2 Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL University, Paris, France
3
LPI, Université de Paris cité, Paris, France
4
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, Palaiseau, France
5
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
6
Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, INSERM, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
{jumi,ccaucheteux,jeanremi}@meta.com

Abstract
Several deep neural networks have recently been shown to generate activations
similar to those of the brain in response to the same input. These algorithms, however, remain largely implausible: they require (1) extraordinarily large amounts
of data, (2) unobtainable supervised labels, (3) textual rather than raw sensory input, and / or (4) implausibly large memory (e.g. thousands of contextual words).
These elements highlight the need to identify algorithms that, under these limitations, would suffice to account for both behavioral and brain responses. Focusing
on speech processing, we here hypothesize that self-supervised algorithms trained
on the raw waveform constitute a promising candidate. Specifically, we compare
a recent self-supervised model, wav2vec 2.0, to the brain activity of 412 English,
French, and Mandarin individuals recorded with functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI), while they listened to approximately one hour of audio books.
First, we show that this algorithm learns brain-like representations with as little as 600 hours of unlabelled speech – a quantity comparable to what infants
can be exposed to during language acquisition. Second, its functional hierarchy
aligns with the cortical hierarchy of speech processing. Third, different training
regimes reveal a functional specialization akin to the cortex: wav2vec 2.0 learns
sound-generic, speech-specific and language-specific representations similar to
those of the prefrontal and temporal cortices. Fourth, we confirm the similarity
of this specialization with the behavior of 386 additional participants. These elements, resulting from the largest neuroimaging benchmark to date, show how
self-supervised learning can account for a rich organization of speech processing
in the brain, and thus delineate a path to identify the laws of language acquisition
which shape the human brain.

1

Introduction

The performance of deep neural networks has taken off over the past decade. Algorithms trained
on object classification, text translation, and speech recognition are starting to reach human-level
performance [Xu et al., 2020]. Furthermore, the representations generated by these algorithms have
repeatedly been shown to correlate with those of the brain [Kriegeskorte, 2015, Yamins and DiCarlo,
2016, Kietzmann et al., 2018, Kell and McDermott, 2019, Cichy and Kaiser, 2019, Toneva and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

