Exploring Example Influence in Continual Learning

Qing Sun∗ , Fan Lyu∗ , Fanhua Shang, Wei Feng, Liang Wan†
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{sssunqing, fanlyu, fhshang, wfeng, lwan}@tju.edu.cn
https://github.com/SSSunQing/Example_Influence_CL

Abstract
Continual Learning (CL) sequentially learns new tasks like human beings, with
the goal to achieve better Stability (S, remembering past tasks) and Plasticity (P,
adapting to new tasks). Due to the fact that past training data is not available, it is
valuable to explore the influence difference on S and P among training examples,
which may improve the learning pattern towards better SP. Inspired by Influence
Function (IF), we first study example influence via adding perturbation to example
weight and computing the influence derivation. To avoid the storage and calculation
burden of Hessian inverse in neural networks, we propose a simple yet effective
MetaSP algorithm to simulate the two key steps in the computation of IF and obtain
the S- and P-aware example influence. Moreover, we propose to fuse two kinds of
example influence by solving a dual-objective optimization problem, and obtain
a fused influence towards SP Pareto optimality. The fused influence can be used
to control the update of model and optimize the storage of rehearsal. Empirical
results show that our algorithm significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on both task- and class-incremental benchmark CL datasets.

1

Introduction

By mimicking human-like learning, Continual Learning (CL) aims to enable a model to continuously
learn from novel knowledge (new tasks, new classes, etc.) in a sequential order. The major challenge
in CL is to harness catastrophic forgetting and knowledge transition, namely the Stability-Plasticity
dilemma, with Stability (S) showing the ability to prevent performance drops for old tasks and
Plasticity (P) referring if the new task can be learned rapidly and unimpededly. Intuitively speaking,
a robust CL system should achieve outstanding S and P through sequential learning.
The sequential paradigm means CL does not access past training data. Comparing to traditional
machine learning, the training data in CL is thus more precious. It is valuable to explore the influence
difference on S and P among training examples. Following the accredited influence chain “DataModel-Performance”, exploring this difference is equivalent to tracing from performance back to
example difference. With appropriate control, this may improve the learning pattern towards better
SP. On top of this, the goal of this paper is to explore the reasonable influence from each training
example to SP, and apply the example influence to CL training.
To understand example influence, one classic successful technique is the Influence Function (IF) [20],
which leverages the derivation chain rule from a test objective to training examples. However, directly
applying the chain rule leads to computing the inverse of Hessian with the complexity of O(nq 2 + q 3 )
(n is the number of examples and q is parameter size), which is computationally intensive and may run
out-of-memory in neural networks. In this paper, we propose a novel meta-learning algorithm, called
MetaSP, to compute example influence via simulating IF. We design based on the rehearsal-based
∗
†

Co-first authors.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

