A Geometric Perspective on Variational Autoencoders

Clément Chadebec
Université Paris Cité, INRIA, Inserm, SU
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers
clement.chadebec@inria.fr

Stéphanie Allassonnière
Université Paris Cité, INRIA, Inserm, SU
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers
stephanie.allassonniere@inria.fr

Abstract
This paper introduces a new interpretation of the Variational Autoencoder framework by taking a fully geometric point of view. We argue that vanilla VAE models
unveil naturally a Riemannian structure in their latent space and that taking into
consideration those geometrical aspects can lead to better interpolations and an
improved generation procedure. This new proposed sampling method consists
in sampling from the uniform distribution deriving intrinsically from the learned
Riemannian latent space and we show that using this scheme can make a vanilla
VAE competitive and even better than more advanced versions on several benchmark datasets. Since generative models are known to be sensitive to the number of
training samples we also stress the method’s robustness in the low data regime.

1

Introduction

Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [25, 43] are powerful generative models that map complex input data
in a much lower dimensional space referred to as the latent space while driving the latent variables to
follow a given prior distribution. Their simplicity to use in practice has made them very attractive
models to perform various tasks such as high-fidelity image generation [41], speech modeling [5],
clustering [52] or data augmentation [8].
Nonetheless, when taken in their simplest version, it was noted that these models produce blurry
samples on image generation tasks most of the time. This undesired behavior may be due to several
limitations of the VAE framework. First, the training of a VAE aims at maximizing the Evidence
Lower BOund (ELBO) which is only a lower bound on the true likelihood and so does not ensure that
we are always actually improving the true objective [6, 1, 21, 13, 53]. Second, the prior distribution
may be too simplistic [14] leading to poor data generation and there exists no guarantee that the actual
distribution of the latent code will match a given prior distribution inducing distribution mismatch
[12]. Hence, trying to tackle those limitations through richer posterior distributions [46, 42] or
better priors [50] represents a major part of the proposed improvements over the past few years.
However, the tractability of the ELBO constrains the choice in distributions and so finding a trade-off
between model expressiveness and tractability remains crucial. In this paper, we take a rather different
approach and focus on the geometrical aspects a vanilla VAE is able to capture in its latent space. In
particular, we propose the following contributions:
• We show that VAEs unveil naturally a latent space with a structure that can be modeled as a
Riemannian manifold through the learned covariance matrices in the variational posterior
distributions and that such modeling can lead to better interpolations.
• We propose a natural sampling scheme consisting in sampling from a uniform distribution
defined on the learned manifold and given by the Riemannian metric. We show that
this procedure improves the generation process from a vanilla VAE significantly without
complexifying the model nor the training. The proposed sampling method outperforms
more advanced VAE models in terms of Frechet Inception Distance [20] and Precision and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

