Gradient flow dynamics of shallow ReLU networks for
square loss and orthogonal inputs
Etienne Boursier
TML, EPFL, Switzerland
etienne.boursier@epfl.ch

Loucas Pillaud-Vivien
TML, EPFL, Switzerland
loucas.pillaud-vivien@epfl.ch

Nicolas Flammarion
TML, EPFL, Switzerland
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
The training of neural networks by gradient descent methods is a cornerstone
of the deep learning revolution. Yet, despite some recent progress, a complete
theory explaining its success is still missing. This article presents, for orthogonal
input vectors, a precise description of the gradient flow dynamics of training
one-hidden layer ReLU neural networks for the mean squared error at small
initialisation. In this setting, despite non-convexity, we show that the gradient
flow converges to zero loss and characterise its implicit bias towards minimum
variation norm. Furthermore, some interesting phenomena are highlighted: a
quantitative description of the initial alignment phenomenon and a proof that the
process follows a specific saddle to saddle dynamics.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks are nowadays trained successfully to solve a large variety of learning tasks.
However, a large number of fundamental questions surround their impressive success. Among them,
the convergence to global minima of their non-convex training dynamics and their ability to generalise
well despite fitting perfectly the dataset have challenged traditional machine learning belief. While
a complete theory is still lacking, the machine learning community has recently come up with key
steps that allow to tame the complexity of the problem: proving the convergence of gradient flow
to zero loss [Mei et al., 2018, Chizat and Bach, 2018, Sirignano and Spiliopoulos, 2020, Rotskoff
and Vanden-Eijnden, 2022], investigating the algorithmic selection of a specific global minimum,
often referred as the implicit bias of an algorithm [Neyshabur et al., 2014, Zhang et al., 2021]; while
paying attention to the importance of the initialisation [Woodworth et al., 2020, Chizat et al., 2019].
The aim of this article is to analyse precisely these three points for regression problems. This is done
in a specific setting: for orthogonal inputs, we provide a complete characterisation of the gradient
flows dynamics of training one-hidden layer ReLU neural networks with the square loss at small
initialisation. We show that this non-convex optimisation dynamics captures most of the complexity
mentioned above and thus could be a first step towards analysing more general setups.
Global convergence of training loss for neural networks. Showing convergence of the gradient
flow to a global minimum is an open and important question. Beyond the lazy regime (see next
paragraph), only a few results were proven in the regression setting. The most promising route
might be the link with Wassertein gradient flows for infinite neural networks. In that case, global
convergence happens under mild conditions [Chizat and Bach, 2018, Wojtowytsch, 2020]. Other
works focus on local convergence [Zhou et al., 2021, Safran et al., 2021], or general criteria that
eventually fail to encompass practical setups [Chatterjee, 2022, Chen et al., 2022]. These latter works
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

