SCAMPS: Synthetics for Camera Measurement of
Physiological Signals

Daniel McDuff
Microsoft
Redmond, WA, USA

Miah Wander
Microsoft
Redmond, WA, USA

Javier Hernandez
Microsoft
Redmond, WA, USA

1

Xin Liu
UW
Seattle, WA, USA

Brian L. Hill
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA, USA

Jonathan Lester
Microsoft
Redmond, WA, USA

Sample Synthetic Parameters

2

Physiologically Animated Video

Tadas Baltrusaitis
Microsoft
Cambridge, UK

3

SCAMPS 2000 Video Dataset

Sample Cardiac Pulse

Sample Breathing

+

Head Pose & Facial Actions
Time

Figure 1: SCAMPS: A dataset of synthetic videos with aligned physiological and behavioral signals.

Abstract
The use of cameras and computational algorithms for noninvasive, low-cost and
scalable measurement of physiological (e.g., cardiac and pulmonary) vital signs
is very attractive. However, diverse data representing a range of environments,
body motions, illumination conditions and physiological states is laborious, time
consuming and expensive to obtain. Synthetic data have proven a valuable tool in
several areas of machine learning, yet are not widely available for camera measurement of physiological states. Synthetic data offer “perfect” labels (e.g., without noise and with precise synchronization), labels that may not be possible to
obtain otherwise (e.g., precise pixel level segmentation maps) and provide a high
degree of control over variation and diversity in the dataset. We present SCAMPS,
a dataset of synthetics containing 2,800 videos (1.68M frames) with aligned cardiac and respiratory signals and facial action intensities. The RGB frames are provided alongside segmentation maps and precise descriptive statistics about the underlying waveforms, including inter-beat interval, heart rate variability, and pulse
arrival time. Finally, we present baseline results training on these synthetic data
and testing on real-world datasets to illustrate generalizability.

Project webpage: https://github.com/danmcduff/scampsdataset

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets & Benchmarks.

