Provable Subspace Identification Under
Post-Nonlinear Mixtures
Qi Lyu
School of EECS
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
lyuqi@oregonstate.edu

Xiao Fu
School of EECS
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised mixture learning (UML) aims at identifying linearly or nonlinearly
mixed latent components in a blind manner. UML is known to be challenging:
Even learning linear mixtures requires highly nontrivial analytical tools, e.g., independent component analysis or nonnegative matrix factorization. In this work,
the post-nonlinear (PNL) mixture model—where unknown element-wise nonlinear
functions are imposed onto a linear mixture—is revisited. The PNL model is
widely employed in different fields ranging from brain signal classification, speech
separation, remote sensing, to causal discovery. To identify and remove the unknown nonlinear functions, existing works often assume different properties on the
latent components (e.g., statistical independence or probability-simplex structures).
This work shows that under a carefully designed UML criterion, the existence of
a nontrivial null space associated with the underlying mixing system suffices to
guarantee identification/removal of the unknown nonlinearity. Compared to prior
works, our finding largely relaxes the conditions of attaining PNL identifiability,
and thus may benefit applications where no strong structural information on the
latent components is known. A finite-sample analysis is offered to characterize the
performance of the proposed approach under realistic settings. To implement the
proposed learning criterion, a block coordinate descent algorithm is proposed. A
series of numerical experiments corroborate our theoretical claims.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised mixture learning (UML) has been broadly used in machine learning tasks, e.g., for
recovering mixed latent components or extracting informative data representations. Central to
understanding UML is the concept of identifiability. The identifiability of UML is concerned with
whether the latent components can be identified (up to certain to inconsequential ambiguities) with
guarantees—without using any label or training data. This is a challenging problem due to the
unsupervised nature. To address the identifiability challenge, linear mixture learning problems
were tackled via exploiting properties of the latent components, e.g., statistical independence [1],
nonnegativity [2–4], quasi-stationarity [5, 6], and boundedness [7]. This leads to a cohort of blind
source separation (BSS) methods.
However, linear mixture models (LMMs) oftentimes fail to perform well on real-world data, due
to the unknown nonlinear distortions arising in data generation and acquisition. In the past two
decades, nonlinear mixture models (NMMs) have attracted unprecedentedly more attention [8–14].
Nonetheless, the identifiability of the latent components is much harder to establish under NMMs. It
was shown in [15] that the NMMs are in general not identifiable, even with strong assumptions, e.g.,
statistical independence among the latent components. To establish NMM identifability, a line of
work exploited observable auxiliary variables or specific priors (i.e., extra information about the data
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

