The Role of Baselines in Policy Gradient Optimization

Jincheng Mei 1∗
Wesley Chung 2
Csaba Szepesvári 4, 5, ∗
1

Valentin Thomas 3
Dale Schuurmans 1, 5

Bo Dai 1

Google Research, Brain Team 2 Mila, McGill University 3 Mila, University of Montreal
4
DeepMind 5 Amii, University of Alberta

{jcmei,bodai,szepi,schuurmans}@google.com

{wesley.chung2,vltn.thomas}@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the effect of baselines in on-policy stochastic policy gradient optimization,
and close the gap between the theory and practice of policy optimization methods.
Our first contribution is to show that the state value baseline allows on-policy
stochastic natural policy gradient (NPG) to converge to a globally optimal policy at
an O(1/t) rate, which was not previously known. The analysis relies on two novel
findings: the expected progress of the NPG update satisfies a stochastic version of
the non-uniform Łojasiewicz (NŁ) inequality, and with probability 1 the state value
baseline prevents the optimal action’s probability from vanishing, thus ensuring
sufficient exploration. Importantly, these results provide a new understanding of
the role of baselines in stochastic policy gradient: by showing that the variance of
natural policy gradient estimates remains unbounded with or without a baseline,
we find that variance reduction cannot explain their utility in this setting. Instead,
the analysis reveals that the primary effect of the value baseline is to reduce the
aggressiveness of the updates rather than their variance. That is, we demonstrate
that a finite variance is not necessary for almost sure convergence of stochastic
NPG, while controlling update aggressiveness is both necessary and sufficient.
Additional experimental results verify these theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

The policy gradient (PG) [29] is a key concept in reinforcement learning (RL), lying at the foundation
of policy-based and actor-critic methods, and responsible for some of the most prominent practical
achievements in RL [27, 28, 11]. However, progress in the theoretical understanding of PG methods
is recent, and a number of the techniques used in practice still lack rigorous support, particularly in
the online stochastic regime where an action is sampled from the current policy at each iteration. We
study stochastic policy optimization in more detail to close this gap between theory and practice.
In stochastic policy optimization, the two most common techniques for improving the basic algorithm
are to include on-policy importance sampling (IS) and subtract a baseline. Including on-policy
IS provides unbiased gradient estimates, but introduces high variance when an action’s sampling
probability is close to 0. Meanwhile, subtracting a baseline remains a heuristic [26] that has strong
empirical but limited theoretical support. One possible benefit of a baseline is that it provides variance
reduction [10], which has motivated work on designing alternative baselines that further reduce
variance [30, 4, 20, 31]. However, other work [7] has shown that variance reduction is not necessarily
aligned with policy learning quality. To date, it has remained unclear how a baseline impacts the
quality of the ultimate solution found by policy gradient optimization. We resolve this question in
this work.
∗

Correspondence to: Jincheng Mei and Csaba Szepesvári

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

