Inference and Sampling for Archimax Copulas

Yuting Ng∗
Duke University
yuting.ng@duke.edu

Ali Hasan*
Duke University
ali.hasan@duke.edu

Vahid Tarokh
Duke University
vahid.tarokh@duke.edu

Abstract
Understanding multivariate dependencies in both the bulk and the tails of a distribution is an important problem for many applications, such as ensuring algorithms are
robust to observations that are infrequent but have devastating effects. Archimax
copulas are a family of distributions endowed with a precise representation that
allows simultaneous modeling of the bulk and the tails of a distribution. Rather
than separating the two as is typically done in practice, incorporating additional
information from the bulk may improve inference of the tails, where observations
are limited. Building on the stochastic representation of Archimax copulas, we
develop a non-parametric inference method and sampling algorithm. Our proposed
methods, to the best of our knowledge, are the first that allow for highly flexible
and scalable inference and sampling algorithms, enabling the increased use of
Archimax copulas in practical settings. We experimentally compare to state-ofthe-art density modeling techniques, and the results suggest that the proposed
method effectively extrapolates to the tails while scaling to higher dimensional
data. Our findings suggest that the proposed algorithms can be used in a variety of
applications where understanding the interplay between the bulk and the tails of a
distribution is necessary, such as healthcare and safety.

1

Introduction

Modeling dependencies between random variables is a central task in statistics, and understanding
the dependence between covariates throughout the distribution is important in characterizing a
distribution outside of its areas of highest density. For example, in machine learning contexts, a major
topic of interest lies in enforcing dependencies between covariates, such as spatial dependence in
convolutional neural networks or temporal dependence in recurrent neural networks. Copulas are
functions that model the joint dependence of random variables, and they have been successfully
employed in a variety of practical modeling settings due to their ease of use and intuitive properties.
Moreover, since copulas are used to represent cumulative distribution functions (CDFs), they have
been particularly useful in situations where tail events are important – events that have high impact
but low probability. For example, in computer vision applications, local dependence modeled by
convolutions may be sufficient for the bulk of the data, but for data in the tails of the distribution
non-local dependencies may be present and need to be modeled. Current successful applications of
copulas have largely been limited to a few basic parametric families and low dimensional settings,
∗

Contributed equally. This work was supported in part by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under
award number FA9550-20-1-0397.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

