REVIVE: Regional Visual Representation Matters in
Knowledge-Based Visual Question Answering

Yuanze Lin♣∗
Yujia Xie♠
Dongdong Chen♠
♠
Yichong Xu
Chenguang Zhu♠
Lu Yuan♠
♣
♠
University of Washington
Microsoft
yuanze@uw.edu

{yujiaxie, dochen, yicxu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper revisits visual representation in knowledge-based visual question answering (VQA) and demonstrates that using regional information in a better way
can significantly improve the performance. While visual representation is extensively studied in traditional VQA, it is under-explored in knowledge-based
VQA even though these two tasks share the common spirit, i.e., rely on visual
input to answer the question. Specifically, we observe that in most state-of-the-art
knowledge-based VQA methods: 1) visual features are extracted either from the
whole image or in a sliding window manner for retrieving knowledge, and the
important relationship within/among object regions is neglected; 2) visual features
are not well utilized in the final answering model, which is counter-intuitive to
some extent. Based on these observations, we propose a new knowledge-based
VQA method REVIVE, which tries to utilize the explicit information of object
regions not only in the knowledge retrieval stage but also in the answering model.
The key motivation is that object regions and inherent relationship are important
for knowledge-based VQA. We perform extensive experiments on the standard
OK-VQA dataset and achieve new state-of-the-art performance, i.e., 58.0% accuracy, surpassing previous state-of-the-art method by a large margin (+3.6%).
We also conduct detailed analysis and show the necessity of regional information
in different framework components for knowledge-based VQA. Code is publicly
available at https://github.com/yzleroy/REVIVE.

1

Introduction

Many vision-based decision making processes in our daily life go beyond perception and recognition.
For example, if we see a salad bowl in the deli bar, our decision on whether to buy it does not
only depend on what is in the bowl, but also the calories in each of the item. This motivates the
knowledge-based Visual Question Answering (VQA) task [22], which extends traditional VQA task
[2] to solve more complex problems, i.e., where commonsense knowledge is required to answer the
open-domain questions.
By definition, knowledge-based VQA takes three different information sources to predict the answer:
input visual information (image), input question, and the external knowledge. While existing research
on knowledge-based VQA mainly focuses on improving the incorporation of external knowledge,
this paper focuses on improving the object-centric visual representation and presents a comprehensive
empirical study to demonstrate that visual features matter in this task.
Intuitively, visual information should be well used for both knowledge retrieval and final answering.
However, we find existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods [37, 8] in such domain have not fully
∗

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Redmond.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

