Deconfounded Representation Similarity for
Comparison of Neural Networks

Tianyu Cui
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
tianyu.cui@aalto.fi
Pekka Marttinen
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
pekka.marttinen@aalto.fi

Yogesh Kumar
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
yogesh.kumar@aalto.fi
Samuel Kaski
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University and University of Manchester
samuel.kaski@aalto.fi

Abstract
Similarity metrics such as representational similarity analysis (RSA) and centered
kernel alignment (CKA) have been used to understand neural networks by comparing their layer-wise representations. However, these metrics are confounded by the
population structure of data items in the input space, leading to inconsistent conclusions about the functional similarity between neural networks, such as spuriously
high similarity of completely random neural networks and inconsistent domain
relations in transfer learning. We introduce a simple and generally applicable
fix to adjust for the confounder with covariate adjustment regression, which improves the ability of CKA and RSA to reveal functional similarity and also retains
the intuitive invariance properties of the original similarity measures. We show
that deconfounding the similarity metrics increases the resolution of detecting
functionally similar neural networks across domains. Moreover, in real-world
applications, deconfounding improves the consistency between CKA and domain
similarity in transfer learning, and increases correlation between CKA and model
out-of-distribution accuracy similarity.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (NNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of machine
learning tasks by automatically learning feature representations from data [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However,
these networks do not offer interpretable predictions on most applications and are seen as “black
boxes”. It is thus crucial to understand the intricacies of neural networks before they are deployed
on critical applications. Previous work has made progress in understanding how a single neural
network makes decisions with axiomatic attribution methods [6, 7] and understanding how multiple
neural networks relate to each other with representation similarity measures [8]. Several similarity
measures between representations have been proposed with different principles, including linear
regression [9], canonical correlation analysis (CCA; [10, 11]), statistical shape analysis [12], and
functional behaviors on down-stream tasks [13, 14, 15]. Another main-stream approach is based on
representational similarity analysis (RSA, [8, 16, 17, 18]) and centered kernel alignment (CKA, [19]),
which compute the similarity between (dis)similarity matrices of two neural network representations
on the same dataset.
RSA and CKA have been successfully applied to understand biological [20] and artificial NNs [21] by
studying the similarity of representations of different NNs in a single data domain. However, we find
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

