Sparse Interaction Additive Networks via Feature
Interaction Detection and Sparse Selection

James Enouen
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
enouen@usc.edu

Yan Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
yanliu.cs@usc.edu

Abstract
There is currently a large gap in performance between the statistically rigorous
methods like linear regression or additive splines and the powerful deep methods
using neural networks. Previous works attempting to close this gap have failed
to fully investigate the exponentially growing number of feature combinations
which deep networks consider automatically during training. In this work, we
develop a tractable selection algorithm to efficiently identify the necessary feature combinations by leveraging techniques in feature interaction detection. Our
proposed Sparse Interaction Additive Networks (SIAN) construct a bridge from
these simple and interpretable models to fully connected neural networks. SIAN
achieves competitive performance against state-of-the-art methods across multiple
large-scale tabular datasets and consistently finds an optimal tradeoff between the
modeling capacity of neural networks and the generalizability of simpler methods.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, deep learning has achieved significant success in providing solutions to
challenging AI problems like computer vision, language processing, and game playing [17, 44, 37].
As deep-learning-based AI models increasingly serve as important solutions to applications in our
daily lives, we are confronted with some of their major disadvantages. First, current limitations
in our theoretical understanding of deep learning makes fitting robust neural networks a balancing
act between accurate training fit and low generalization gap. Questions which ask how the test
performance will vary given the choice of architecture, dataset, and training algorithm remain
poorly understood and difficult to answer. Second, infamously known as blackbox models, deep
neural networks greatly lack in interpretability. This continues to lead to a variety of downstream
consequences in applications: unexplainable decisions for stakeholders, the inability to distinguish
causation from correlation, and a misunderstood sensitivity to adversarial examples.
In contrast, simpler machine learning models such as linear regression, splines, and the generalized
additive model (GAM) [16] naturally win in interpretability and robustness. Their smaller number
of parameters often have clear and meaningful interpretations and these methods rarely succumb
to overfitting the training data. The main shortcoming of these simpler methods is their inability to
accurately fit more complex data distributions.
There is a growing strand of literature attempting to merge the interpretability of additive models with
the streamlined differentiable power of deep neural networks (DNNs). Key works in this direction
such as NAM and NODE-GAM have been able to successfully model one-dimensional main effects
and two-dimensional interaction effects using differentiable training procedures [2, 8]. Although
many other works have found similar success in modeling one- and two-dimensional interactions,
few have made practical attempts towards feature interactions of size three or greater, which we will
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

