arXiv:2210.05666v2 [cs.CV] 12 Oct 2022

Point Transformer V2: Grouped Vector Attention
and Partition-based Pooling

Xiaoyang Wu1 Yixing Lao2 Li Jiang3 Xihui Liu1 Hengshuang Zhao1∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Intel Labs 3 Max Planck Institute
{xywu3, hszhao}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
As a pioneering work exploring transformer architecture for 3D point cloud understanding, Point Transformer achieves impressive results on multiple highly competitive benchmarks. In this work, we analyze the limitations of the Point Transformer
and propose our powerful and efficient Point Transformer V2 model with novel
designs that overcome the limitations of previous work. In particular, we first
propose group vector attention, which is more effective than the previous version
of vector attention. Inheriting the advantages of both learnable weight encoding
and multi-head attention, we present a highly effective implementation of grouped
vector attention with a novel grouped weight encoding layer. We also strengthen
the position information for attention by an additional position encoding multiplier.
Furthermore, we design novel and lightweight partition-based pooling methods
which enable better spatial alignment and more efficient sampling. Extensive
experiments show that our model achieves better performance than its predecessor
and achieves state-of-the-art on several challenging 3D point cloud understanding
benchmarks, including 3D point cloud segmentation on ScanNet v2 and S3DIS
and 3D point cloud classification on ModelNet40. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/Gofinge/PointTransformerV2.

1

Introduction

Point Transformer (PTv1) [1] introduces the self-attention networks to 3D point cloud understanding.
Combining the vector attention [2] with a U-Net style encoder-decoder framework, PTv1 achieves
remarkable performance in several 3D point cloud recognition tasks, including shape classification,
object part segmentation, and semantic scene segmentation.
In this work, we analyze the limitations of Point Transformer (PTv1) [1] and propose a new elegant
and powerful backbone named Point Transformer V2 (PTv2). Our PTv2 improves upon PTv1 with
several novel designs, including the advanced grouped vector attention with improved position
encoding, and the efficient partition-based pooling scheme.
The vector attention layers in PTv1 utilize MLPs as the weight encoding to map the subtraction
relation of query and key into an attention weight vector that can modulate the individual channels
of the value vector. However, as the model goes deeper and the number of channels increases, the
number of weight encoding parameters also increases drastically, leading to severe overfitting and
limiting the model depth. To address this problem, we present grouped vector attention with a more
parameter-efficient formulation, where the vector attention is divided into groups with shared vector
attention weights. Meanwhile, we show that the well-known multi-head attention [3] and the vector
attention [2, 1] are degenerate cases of our proposed grouped vector attention. Our proposed grouped
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

