Monte Carlo Tree Descent for Black-Box Optimization

Yaoguang Zhai
UCSD

Sicun Gao
UCSD

Abstract
The key to Black-Box Optimization is to efficiently search through input regions
with potentially widely-varying numerical properties, to achieve low-regret descent
and fast progress toward the optima. Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) methods
have recently been introduced to improve Bayesian optimization by computing
better partitioning of the search space that balances exploration and exploitation.
Extending this promising framework, we study how to further integrate samplebased descent for faster optimization. We design novel ways of expanding Monte
Carlo search trees, with new descent methods at vertices that incorporate stochastic
search and Gaussian Processes. We propose the corresponding rules for balancing
progress and uncertainty, branch selection, tree expansion, and backpropagation.
The designed search process puts more emphasis on sampling for faster descent
and uses localized Gaussian Processes as auxiliary metrics for both exploitation
and exploration. We show empirically that the proposed algorithms can outperform
state-of-the-art methods on many challenging benchmark problems.

1

Introduction

Black-Box Optimization (BBO), also referred to as Derivative-free or Zeroth-order Optimization,
considers objective functions that are not known analytically and can only be evaluated at various
inputs, potentially at a high cost. The generality of the formulation makes BBO broadly applicable to
a wide range of challenging problems in machine learning [1, 2, 3] as well as many scientific and
engineering problems [4, 5, 6]. BBO problems over compact domains are naturally NP-hard: in the
worst case, we need to exhaustively search through the combinatorially-large number of local regions
to find high-quality solutions. Thus, the goal of BBO algorithm design is to accelerate optimization
progress with respect to the number of function evaluations.
Existing work on BBO can be categorized into model-based and model-free approaches. Most modelbased approaches, typically in the framework of Bayesian Optimization [7, 8], involve learning
a surrogate function from samples of the unknown function and optimizing the surrogate rather
than the original function. For highly nonlinear functions with high-dimensional input spaces, such
methods are known to be costly because of the need for global modeling of the objective functions.
Various Bayesian optimization approaches utilize ensembles of local surrogate models [9] to improve
performance. Model-free approaches include simulated annealing [10], cross-entropy methods [11],
search gradient [12], as well as traditional direct search methods such as Nelder-Mead [13, 14]. The
goal is to iteratively propose sampling distributions that can approach the optima. Such methods
typically do not attempt to maintain global information about the objective and are challenged
when the optimization landscape is highly non-convex [15]. In general, the lack of mechanisms
for explicitly managing the search over the combinatorially-large number of local regions, in both
standard model-based and model-free BBO methods, has been a major bottleneck of the field.
Recent advances in stochastic tree search methods [16, 17] offer new opportunities for balancing
local search and modeling with more systematic global exploration in BBO problems. In particular,
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) has recently been introduced for computing good partitioning of
the search space for BBO [3, 18, 19]. These approaches adaptively divide the input space into regions,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

