Neural Stochastic Control
Jingdong Zhang1
Qunxi Zhu2,*
Wei Lin1,2,3,4,5∗
School of Mathematical Sciences, SCMS, SCAM, and CCSB, Fudan University
2
Research Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems
and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University
3
Key Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience
and Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University
4
State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
1

{zhangjd20,qxzhu16,wlin}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Control problems are always challenging since they arise from the real-world
systems where stochasticity and randomness are of ubiquitous presence. This
naturally and urgently calls for developing efficient neural control policies for
stabilizing not only the deterministic equations but the stochastic systems as well.
Here, in order to meet this paramount call, we propose two types of controllers, viz.,
the exponential stabilizer (ES) based on the stochastic Lyapunov theory and the
asymptotic stabilizer (AS) based on the stochastic asymptotic stability theory. The
ES can render the controlled systems exponentially convergent but it requires a long
computational time; conversely, the AS makes the training much faster but it can
only assure the asymptotic (not the exponential) attractiveness of the control targets.
These two stochastic controllers thus are complementary in applications. We
also investigate rigorously the linear controller and the proposed neural stochastic
controllers in both convergence time and energy cost and numerically compare them
in these two indexes. More significantly, we use several representative physical
systems to illustrate the usefulness of the proposed controllers in stabilization of
dynamical systems.

1

Introduction

In the field of controlling dynamical systems, one of the major missions is to find efficient control
policies for stabilizing ordinary differential equations (ODEs) to targeted equilibriums. The policies
for stabilizing linear or polynomial dynamical systems have been fully developed using the standard
Lyapunov stability theory, e.g., the linear quadratic regulator (LQR) Khalil (2002) and the sumof-squares (SOS) polynomials through the semi-definite planning (SDP) Parrilo (2000). As for
stabilizing more general and nonlinear dynamical systems, linearization technique around the targeted
states is often utilized and thus the existing control policies are effective in the vicinity of the
targeted states (Sastry & Isidori, 1989) but likely lose efficacy in the region far away from those
states. Moreover, in real applications, the explicit forms of the controlled nonlinear systems are
often partially or completely unknown, so it is very difficult to directly design controllers only using
the Lyapunov stability theory. To overcome these difficulties, designing the controllers via training
neural networks (NNs) become one of the mainstream approaches in the community of cybernetics
(Polycarpou, 1996). Recent outstanding developments using NNs include enlarging the safe region
∗
To whom correspondence should be addressed: Q.Z. and W.L,
https://faculty.fudan.edu.cn/wlin/zh_CN/index.htm.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

