Exploring evolution-aware & -free protein language
models as protein function predictors
Mingyang Hu⇤
Westlake University
humingyang@westlake.edu.cn
Kevin K. Yang
Microsoft Research New England
yang.kevin@microsoft.com
Hui Wang
Westlake University
wanghui@westlake.edu.cn

Fajie Yuan⇤†
Westlake University
yuanfajie@westlake.edu.cn

Fusong Ju
Microsoft Research Asia
fusongju@microsoft.com

Fei Yang
Zhejiang Lab
yangf@zhejianglab.com

Jin Su
Westlake University
sujin@westlake.edu.cn

Qiuyang Ding
Westlake University
dingqiuyang@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale Protein Language Models (PLMs) have improved performance in
protein prediction tasks, ranging from 3D structure prediction to various function
predictions. In particular, AlphaFold [23], a ground-breaking AI system, could
potentially reshape structural biology. However, the utility of the PLM module in
AlphaFold, Evoformer, has not been explored beyond structure prediction. In this
paper, we investigate the representation ability of three popular PLMs: ESM-1b
(single sequence) [35], MSA-Transformer (multiple sequence alignment) [30] and
Evoformer (structural), with a special focus on Evoformer. Specifically, we aim
to answer the following key questions: (i) Does the Evoformer trained as part of
AlphaFold produce representations amenable to predicting protein function? (ii)
If yes, can Evoformer replace ESM-1b and MSA-Transformer? (iii) How much
do these PLMs rely on evolution-related protein data? In this regard, are they
complementary to each other? We compare these models by empirical study along
with new insights and conclusions. All code and datasets for reproducibility are
available at https://github.com/elttaes/Revisiting-PLMs.

1

Introduction

Proteins perform the majority of biological activities. It is, therefore, crucial to decipher the mechanisms underlying their structural and functional properties. The canonical sequence-structure-function
relationship enables the success of sequence-based machine learning methods that infer protein structure and function from amino acid (AA) sequence. Large-scale protein language models (PLMs) with
self-supervised pretraining on tens of millions to billions of proteins (PLMs) [28, 35, 13, 5] are the
current state-of-the-art in predicting function and fitness from sequences.
Meanwhile, AlphaFold [23], trained on experimental 3D protein structures from the Protein Data
Bank (PDB) [39] can approach the resolution of experimental structures for most protein sequences.
* Equal Contribution

†
Corresponding author. Fajie designed the idea and led the research. Mingyang performed the research and
led all experiments. Kevin provided important guidance for this research and worked on a part of paper writing.
Jin performed experiments for the MSA generation.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

