GBA: A Tuning-free Approach to Switch between
Synchronous and Asynchronous Training for
Recommendation Models
Wenbo Su∗ , Yuanxing Zhang∗, Yufeng Cai, Kaixu Ren, Pengjie Wang, Huimin Yi,
Yue Song, Jing Chen1 , Hongbo Deng, Jian Xu, Lin Qu1 , Bo Zheng†
Alibaba Group
{vincent.swb, yuanxing.zyx, baike.cyf, kaixu.rkx,
pengjie.wpj, huimin.yhm, yue.song, dhb167148,
xiyu.xj, bozheng}@alibaba-inc.com
1
{gongcheng.cj, xide.ql}@taobao.com

Abstract
High-concurrency asynchronous training upon parameter server (PS) architecture
and high-performance synchronous training upon all-reduce (AR) architecture
are the most commonly deployed distributed training modes for recommendation
models. Although synchronous AR training is designed to have higher training
efficiency, asynchronous PS training would be a better choice for training speed
when there are stragglers (slow workers) in the shared cluster, especially under
limited computing resources. An ideal way to take full advantage of these two
training modes is to switch between them upon the cluster status. However, switching training modes often requires tuning hyper-parameters, which is extremely
time- and resource-consuming. We find two obstacles to a tuning-free approach:
the different distribution of the gradient values and the stale gradients from the
stragglers. This paper proposes Global Batch gradients Aggregation (GBA) over
PS, which aggregates and applies gradients with the same global batch size as the
synchronous training. A token-control process is implemented to assemble the
gradients and decay the gradients with severe staleness. We provide the convergence analysis to reveal that GBA has comparable convergence properties with the
synchronous training, and demonstrate the robustness of GBA the recommendation models against the gradient staleness. Experiments on three industrial-scale
recommendation tasks show that GBA is an effective tuning-free approach for
switching. Compared to the state-of-the-art derived asynchronous training, GBA
achieves up to 0.2% improvement on the AUC metric, which is significant for the
recommendation models. Meanwhile, under the strained hardware resource, GBA
speeds up at least 2.4x compared to synchronous training.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, recommendation models with a large volume of parameters and high computational
complexity have become the mainstream in the deep learning communities [13]. Accelerating the
training of these recommendation models is a trending issue, and recently synchronous training upon
high-performance computing (HPC) has dominated the training speed records [18, 16, 31]. The
resource requirements of the synchronous training upon AR are more rigorous than the asynchronous
∗
†

∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

