Class-Dependent Label-Noise Learning with
Cycle-Consistency Regularization

De Cheng1∗, Yixiong Ning1∗, Nannan Wang1†,
Xinbo Gao2 , Heng Yang3 , Yuxuan Du4 , Bo Han5 , Tongliang Liu6
1
Xidian University, 2 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
3
Shenzhen AiMall Tech. Co., Ltd., 4 JD Explore Academy,
5
Hong Kong Baptist University, 6 TML Lab, The University of Sydney.

Abstract
In label-noise learning, estimating the transition matrix plays an important role
in building statistically consistent classifier. Current state-of-the-art consistent
estimator for the transition matrix has been developed under the newly proposed
sufficiently scattered assumption, through incorporating the minimum volume
constraint of the transition matrix T into label-noise learning. To compute the
volume of T , it heavily relies on the estimated noisy class posterior. However, the
estimation error of the noisy class posterior could usually be large as deep learning
methods tend to easily overfit the noisy labels. Then, directly minimizing the
volume of such obtained T could lead the transition matrix to be poorly estimated.
How to reduce the side-effects of the inaccurate noisy class posterior remains
unsolved. In this paper, we creatively propose to estimate the transition matrix
under a forward-backward cycle-consistency regularization, of which we have
greatly reduced the dependency of estimating the transition matrix T on the noisy
class posterior. Extensive experimental results consistently justify the effectiveness
of the proposed method, on reducing the estimation error of the transition matrix
and greatly boosting the classification performance.

1

Introduction

Deep learning based algorithms rely heavily on large-scale annotated training data. However, it is
often extremely costly and sometimes even infeasible to accurately annotate such massive dataset [13].
An usual way to address this issue is to collect large-scale training data using cheap methods, e.g., from
the crowd-sourcing platform [36] or online query search engine [3], which could inevitably yield label
noise. Training deep model with label noise can significantly degrade the performance [13, 1, 28].
Therefore, how to mitigate the side-effects of the label noise automatically becomes very important,
and it has drawn increasing attention recently.
Recent studies show that estimating the transition matrix plays an important role in building statistically consistent classifiers for label-noise learning, since the transition matrix can well model
the noise generation process. These methods guarantee that classifier learned from the noisy data
could approach to the optimal classifier defined on the clean risk asymptotically as the size of the
noisy training data increases [13]. The basic principle is that the clean class posterior P (Y|X = x)1
can be inferred by the noisy class posterior P (Ȳ|X = x) and the transition matrix T (x), where
* Equation contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
We define P (Y|X = x) = [P (Y = 1|X = x), . . . , P (Y = C|X = x)]⊤ where C represents the number
of classes.
1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

