Generalized One-shot Domain Adaptation of
Generative Adversarial Networks
Zicheng Zhang1∗ Yinglu Liu2
1

Congying Han1† Tiande Guo1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

2

Ting Yao2

Tao Mei2

JD AI Research

zhangzicheng19@mails.ucas.ac.cn liuyinglu1@jd.com hancy@ucas.ac.cn
tdguo@ucas.ac.cn tingyao.ustc@gmail.com tmei@live.com
Target
Source

Figure 1: Illustrations of the generalized one-shot GAN adaptation task. Target images with the
corresponding binary entity masks are provided to adapt the pre-trained GAN to the domain of similar
style and entity as target images. The first three masks are all zeros and the others have value 1 in
the areas bounded by green lines. Our adapted model is of strong cross-domain correspondence to
realize both style and entity transfer.

Abstract
The adaptation of a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) aims to transfer a
pre-trained GAN to a target domain with limited training data. In this paper,
we focus on the one-shot case, which is more challenging and rarely explored
in previous works. We consider that the adaptation from a source domain to a
target domain can be decoupled into two parts: the transfer of global style like
texture and color, and the emergence of new entities that do not belong to the
source domain. While previous works mainly focus on style transfer, we propose
a novel and concise framework to address the generalized one-shot adaptation
task for both style and entity transfer, in which a reference image and its binary
entity mask are provided. Our core idea is to constrain the gap between the internal distributions of the reference and syntheses by sliced Wasserstein distance.
To better achieve it, style fixation is used at first to roughly obtain the exemplary style, and an auxiliary network is introduced to the generator to disentangle
entity and style transfer. Besides, to realize cross-domain correspondence, we
propose the variational Laplacian regularization to constrain the smoothness of
the adapted generator. Both quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method in various scenarios. Code is available at https:
//github.com/zhangzc21/Generalized-One-shot-GAN-Adaptation.

1

Introduction

Benefiting from numerous excellent pre-trained GANs (e.g., StyleGAN [16] and BigGAN [6]),
GAN adaptation has become an important research topic, which leverages the knowledge of GANs
∗
†

Work done during an internship at JD AI Research.
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

