An Asymptotically Optimal Batched Algorithm
for the Dueling Bandit Problem
Arpit Agarwal
Columbia University
arpit.agarwal@columbia.edu

Rohan Ghuge
University of Michigan
rghuge@umich.edu

Viswanath Nagarajan
University of Michigan
viswa@umich.edu

Abstract
We study the K-armed dueling bandit problem, a variation of the traditional multiarmed bandit problem in which feedback is obtained in the form of pairwise
comparisons. Previous learning algorithms have focused on the fully adaptive setting, where the algorithm can make updates after every comparison. The “batched”
dueling bandit problem is motivated by large-scale applications like web search
ranking and recommendation systems, where performing sequential updates may
be infeasible. In this work, we ask: is there a solution using only a few adaptive
rounds that matches the asymptotic regret bounds of the best sequential algorithms
for K-armed dueling bandits? We answer this in the affirmative under the Condorcet condition, a standard setting of the K-armed dueling bandit problem. We
obtain asymptotic regret of O(K 2 log2 (K)) + O(K log(T )) in O(log(T )) rounds,
where T is the time horizon. Our regret bounds nearly match the best regret bounds
known in the fully sequential setting under the Condorcet condition. Finally, in
computational experiments over a variety of real-world datasets, we observe that
our algorithm using O(log(T )) rounds achieves almost the same performance as
fully sequential algorithms (that use T rounds).

1

Introduction

The K-armed dueling bandit problem is a variation of the traditional multi-armed bandit problem
in which feedback is obtained in the form of pairwise preferences. This problem has applications
in a wide-variety of domains like search ranking, recommendation systems and sports ranking
where eliciting qualitative feedback is easy while real-valued feedback is not easily interpretable;
thus, it has been a popular topic of research in the machine learning community (see, for example,
[51, 49, 47, 5, 54, 52, 53, 21, 32, 35, 36, 42, 18]).
Previous learning algorithms have focused on a fully adaptive setting; that is, the learning algorithm
can make updates in a sequential fashion. Such updates might be impractical in large systems;
for example, consider web-search ranking where the goal is to provide a list (usually ranked) of
candidate documents to the user of the system in response to a query [41, 33, 50, 31]. Modern day
search engines use hundred of parameters to compute a ranked list in response to a query, and online
learning frameworks (based on user feedback) have been invaluable in automatically tuning these
parameters [38]. However, given the scale of the system, it may be infeasible to adapt after each
interaction: users may make multiple queries in a short time or multiple users may simultaneously
query the system. Hence, we prefer solutions with limited rounds of adaptivity. Concretely, we ask:
is there a solution using only a few adaptive rounds that matches the asymptotic regret bounds of the
best sequential algorithms for K-armed dueling bandits?
This “batched” dueling bandit problem was introduced recently in [2]. Here, the learning algorithm’s
actions are partitioned into a limited number of rounds. In each round/batch, the algorithm commits
to a fixed set of pairwise comparisons, and the feedback for all these comparisons is received
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

