Learning Predictions for Algorithms with Predictions

Mikhail Khodak
Carnegie Mellon University
khodak@cmu.edu

Maria-Florina Balcan
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Ameet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google Research - New York
sergeiv@google.com

Abstract
A burgeoning paradigm in algorithm design is the field of algorithms with predictions, in which algorithms can take advantage of a possibly-imperfect prediction
of some aspect of the problem. While much work has focused on using predictions
to improve competitive ratios, running times, or other performance measures, less
effort has been devoted to the question of how to obtain the predictions themselves,
especially in the critical online setting. We introduce a general design approach
for algorithms that learn predictors: (1) identify a functional dependence of the performance measure on the prediction quality and (2) apply techniques from online
learning to learn predictors, tune robustness-consistency trade-offs, and bound the
sample complexity. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by applying
it to bipartite matching, ski-rental, page migration, and job scheduling. In several
settings we improve upon multiple existing results while utilizing a much simpler
analysis, while in the others we provide the first learning-theoretic guarantees.

1

Introduction

Algorithms with predictions, a subfield of beyond-worst-case analysis of algorithms [36], aims to design methods that make use of machine-learned predictions in order to reduce runtime, error, or some
other performance cost. Mathematically, for some prediction x, algorithms in this field are designed
such that their cost Ct (x) on an instance t is upper-bounded by some measure Ut (x) of the quality of
the prediction on that instance. The canonical example here is that the cost of binary search on a sorted
array of size n can be improved from O(log n) to ≤ Ut (x) = 2 log ηt (x), where ηt (x) is the distance
between the true location of a query t in the array and the location predicted by the predictor x [36].
In recent years, algorithms whose cost depends on the quality of possibly imperfect predictions have
been developed for numerous important problems, including caching [41, 24, 34], scheduling [30, 43],
ski-rental [29, 1, 15], bipartite matching [16], page migration [22], and many more [10, 17, 36].
While there has been a significant effort to develop algorithms that use earned predictions, until very
recently [13, 33] there has been less focus on actually learning to predict. For example, of the works
listed only two on ski-rental [1, 15] and one other [16] show sample complexity guarantees, and none
consider the important online learning setting, in which problem instances may not come from a fixed
distribution. This is in contrast to the related area of data-driven algorithm design [19, 3], which has
established techniques such as dispersion [6] and others [8, 11] for deriving learning-theoretic guarantees, leading to end-to-end results encompassing both learning and computation. It is also despite the
fact that, as we see in this work, learning even simple predictors is in many cases a non-trivial problem.
We bridge this gap and provide a framework for obtaining learning-theoretic guarantees for algorithms
with predictions. In addition to improving sample complexity bounds, we show how to learn
the parameters of interest in an setting with low overall regret. We accomplish this using a two36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

