Optimal Efficiency-Envy Trade-Off via Optimal
Transport
Steven Yin
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
sy2737@columbia.edu
Christian Kroer
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of allocating a distribution of items to n recipients where
each recipient has to be allocated a fixed, prespecified fraction of all items, while
ensuring that each recipient does not experience too much envy. We show that this
problem can be formulated as a variant of the semi-discrete optimal transport (OT)
problem, whose solution structure in this case has a concise representation and a
simple geometric interpretation. Unlike existing literature that treats envy-freeness
as a hard constraint, our formulation allows us to optimally trade off efficiency
and envy continuously. Additionally, we study the statistical properties of the
space of our OT based allocation policies by showing a polynomial bound on
the number of samples needed to approximate the optimal solution from samples.
Our approach is suitable for large-scale fair allocation problems such as the blood
donation matching problem, and we show numerically that it performs well on a
prior realistic data simulator.

1

Introduction

In this work, we focus on the problem of finding an allocation policy that divides a pool of items,
represented by a distribution D, to n recipients, under the constraint that each recipient i must be
allocated a pre-specified fraction p⇤i of the items, where p⇤i 2 (0, 1), 1> p⇤ = 1 is an input to the
problem that characterizes the priority of each recipient. We refer to {p⇤i }ni=1 as the target matching
distribution. In addition to this matching distribution constraint, we also require that the recipient’s
envy, which we will define formally later, be bounded. Unlike the existing resource allocation
literature, where envy-free is either treated as a hard constraint or not considered at all (in divisible
settings), we allow the central planner to specify the level of envy that is tolerated, and find the most
efficient allocation given the amount of envy budget. This allows us to reduce the envy significantly
without paying the full price of fairness with respect to efficiency.
To concretely motivate our model, let us consider the blood donor matching problem that was first
studied in [21]. The Meta platform has a tool called Facebook Blood Donations, where users who
opt in to receive notifications are notified about blood donation opportunities near them. Depending
on the user’s and the blood bank’s specific characteristics (e.g., age, occupation for the user, and
locations, hours for the blood bank), notifications about different donation opportunities have different
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

