Weisfeiler and Leman Go Walking:
Random Walk Kernels Revisited
Nils M. Kriege
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Währinger Straße 29, 1090 Vienna, Austria
Research Network Data Science @ Uni Vienna, Kolingasse 14–16, 1090 Vienna, Austria
nils.kriege@univie.ac.at

Abstract
Random walk kernels have been introduced in seminal work on graph learning and
were later largely superseded by kernels based on the Weisfeiler-Leman test for graph
isomorphism. We give a unified view on both classes of graph kernels. We study
walk-based node refinement methods and formally relate them to several widelyused techniques, including Morgan’s algorithm for molecule canonization and the
Weisfeiler-Leman test. We define corresponding walk-based kernels on nodes that
allow fine-grained parameterized neighborhood comparison, reach Weisfeiler-Leman
expressiveness, and are computed using the kernel trick. From this we show that
classical random walk kernels with only minor modifications regarding definition
and computation are as expressive as the widely-used Weisfeiler-Leman subtree
kernel but support non-strict neighborhood comparison. We verify experimentally
that walk-based kernels reach or even surpass the accuracy of Weisfeiler-Leman
kernels in real-world classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Machine learning with graph-structured data has various applications, from bioinformatics to social
network analysis to drug discovery and has become an established research field. Graph kernels [26, 5]
and graph neural networks (GNNs) [44] are two widely-used techniques for learning with graphs,
the latter of which has recently received significant research interest. Technically, various methods
of both categories exploit the link between graph data and linear algebra by representing graphs
by their (normalized) adjacency matrix. Such methods are often defined or can be interpreted in
terms of walks. On the other hand, the Weisfeiler-Leman heuristic for graph isomorphism testing
has attracted great interest in machine learning [33, 34]. This classical graph algorithm has been
studied extensively in structural graph theory and logic, and its expressive power, i.e., its ability to
distinguish non-isomorphic graphs, is well understood [3]. The Weisfeiler-Leman method turned out
to be suitable to derive powerful and efficient graph kernels [40]. Moreover, it is closely related to
GNNs [45, 31, 14], allowing to establish links, e.g., to results from logic [15].
Several results have paved the way for these insights. The seminal work by Kersting et al. [22] links
algebraic methods and the combinatorial Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm showing that it can be understood
in terms of walks and simulated by iterated matrix products. A comprehensive view of the expressive
power of linear algebra on graphs was recently given by Geerts [13]. GNNs are closely related to
algebraic methods but involve activation functions and learnable weights. Morris et al. [31] has shown
that (i) the expressive power of GNNs is limited by the Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm, and (ii) that GNN
architectures exist that reach this expressive power for suitable weights. Independently, Xu et al. [45]
obtained the same result by using injective set functions computable by multilayer perceptrons [46].
Most recently, Geerts et al. [14] has proven that already the early GCN layer-based architectures [23]
achieve the expressive power of the Weisfeiler-Leman test with only a minor modification already
mentioned in the original publication.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

