Multiclass Learnability Beyond the PAC Framework:
Universal Rates and Partial Concept Classes

Alkis Kalavasis*
National Technical University of Athens
kalavasisalkis@mail.ntua.gr

Grigoris Velegkas*
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Amin Karbasi
Yale University, Google Research
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Abstract
In this paper we study the problem of multiclass classification with a bounded
number of different labels 𝑘, in the realizable setting. We extend the traditional
PAC model to a) distribution-dependent learning rates, and b) learning rates under
data-dependent assumptions. First, we consider the universal learning setting
(Bousquet, Hanneke, Moran, van Handel and Yehudayoff, STOC’21), for which
we provide a complete characterization of the achievable learning rates that holds
for every fixed distribution. In particular, we show the following trichotomy:
for any concept class, the optimal learning rate is either exponential, linear or
arbitrarily slow. Additionally, we provide complexity measures of the underlying
hypothesis class that characterize when these rates occur. Second, we consider
the problem of multiclass classification with structured data (such as data lying
on a low dimensional manifold or satisfying margin conditions), a setting which
is captured by partial concept classes (Alon, Hanneke, Holzman and Moran,
FOCS’21). Partial concepts are functions that can be undefined in certain parts
of the input space. We extend the traditional PAC learnability of total concept
classes to partial concept classes in the multiclass setting and investigate differences
between partial and total concepts.

1

Introduction

Classifying data into multiple different classes is a fundamental problem in machine learning that has
many real-life applications, such as image recognition, web advertisement and text categorization.
Due to its importance, multiclass classification has been an attractive field of research both for
theorists [NT88, BCHL95, RBR09, Nat89, DSBDSS11, DSS14, SSBD14] and for practitioners
[SSKS04, Col04, Aly05]. Essentially, it boils down to learning a classifier ℎ from a domain 𝒳 to a
label space 𝒴, where |𝒴| ≥ 2, and the error is measured by the probability that ℎ(𝑥) is incorrect.
In this work, we focus on the setting where the number of labels is finite and we identify 𝒴 with
[𝑘] := {0, 1, ..., 𝑘} for some constant 𝑘 ∈ N.
Multiclass PAC Learning. The PAC model [Val84] constitutes the gold-standard learning framework.
A seminal result in learning theory [VC71, BEHW89] characterizes PAC learnability of binary classes
(𝑘 = 1) through the Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension and provides a clear algorithmic landscape
with the empirical risk minimization (ERM) principle yielding (almost) optimal statistical learning
algorithms. The picture established for the binary setting extends to the case of multiple labels when
*

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

