Exact Shape Correspondence via 2D Graph
Convolution
Barakeel Fanseu Kamhoua1 , Lin Zhang2∗, Yongqiang Chen1 , Han Yang1 , Kaili Ma1 ,
Bo Han3 , Bo Li2 , James Cheng1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
3
Hong Kong Baptist University

Abstract
For exact 3D shape correspondence (matching or alignment), i.e., the task of
matching each point on a shape to its exact corresponding point on the other shape
(or to be more specific, matching at geodesic error 0), most existing methods do
not perform well due to two main problems. First, on nearly-isometric shapes (i.e.,
low noise levels), most existing methods use the eigen-vectors (eigen-functions)
of the Laplace Beltrami Operator (LBO) or other shape descriptors to update
an initialized correspondence which is not exact, leading to an accumulation of
update errors. Thus, though the final correspondence may generally be smooth,
it is generally inexact. Second, on non-isometric shapes (noisy shapes), existing
methods are generally not robust to noise as they usually assume near-isometry. In
addition, existing methods that attempt to address the non-isometric shape problem
(e.g., GRAMPA) are generally computationally expensive and do not generalise to
nearly-isometric shapes. To address these two problems, we propose a 2D graph
convolution-based framework called 2D-GEM. 2D-GEM is robust to noise on
non-isometric shapes and with a few additional constraints, it also addresses the
errors in the update on nearly-isometric shapes. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of 2D-GEM by achieving a high accuracy of 90.5% at geodesic error 0 on the
non-isometric benchmark SHREC16, i.e., TOPKIDS (while being much faster than
GRAMPA), and on nearly-isometric benchmarks by achieving a high accuracy of
92.5% on TOSCA and 84.9% on SCAPE at geodesic error 0.

1

Introduction

3D shapes can undergo different types of deformations. Deformations can be rigid or non-rigid.
Rigid deformations include rotations, translations, reflections, or any composition of these resulting
in pose changes. They preserve geometric properties of the shape such as segment lengths, angles,
volumes, sizes, geodesic distances and others. Non-rigid deformations do not preserve geometric
properties of the shape, they include dilations, or a composition of dilations and rigid deformations
(e.g., stretching, scaling). In this work we focus on non-rigid shapes that are either nearly-isometric
(i.e., most geometric properties are preserved), or non-isometric (i.e., geometric properties are not
preserved, and contain strong topological noise).
Non-rigid shape matching is a very important task in machine learning, shape analysis and computer
vision. It has important applications such as shape registration, comparison, recognition, and retrieval.
3D shapes are usually represented as 2D manifolds embedded in R3 . Given two three dimensional
shapes M1 and M2 with n vertices each, the goal of non-rigid shape matching is to find a meaningful
correspondence T : M1 → M2 , where T is (a) bijective, (b) continuous in both directions in the
sense that nearby points on M1 should be matched to nearby points on M2 (vice versa), and (c)
∗

Corresponding author: lzhangbv@connect.ust.hk

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

