Multiview Human Body Reconstruction from
Uncalibrated Cameras
Zhixuan Yu
University of Minnesota
yu000064@umn.edu

Linguang Zhang
Meta Reality Labs
linguang@meta.com

Chengcheng Tang
Meta Reality Labs
chengcheng.tang@meta.com
Cem Keskin
Meta Reality Labs
cemkeskin@meta.com

Yuanlu Xu
Meta Reality Labs Research
yuanluxu@meta.com

Luan Tran
Meta Reality Labs
tranluan07@meta.com
Hyun Soo Park
University of Minnesota
hspark@umn.edu

Abstract
We present a new method to reconstruct 3D human body pose and shape by fusing
visual features from multiview images captured by uncalibrated cameras. Existing
multiview approaches often use spatial camera calibration (intrinsic and extrinsic
parameters) to geometrically align and fuse visual features. Despite remarkable
performances, the requirement of camera calibration restricted their applicability
to real-world scenarios, e.g., reconstruction from social videos with wide-baseline
cameras. We address this challenge by leveraging the commonly observed human
body as a semantic calibration target, which eliminates the requirement of camera
calibration. Specifically, we map per-pixel image features to a canonical body
surface coordinate system agnostic to views and poses using dense keypoints
(correspondences). This feature mapping allows us to semantically, instead of
geometrically, align and fuse visual features from multiview images. We learn a
self-attention mechanism to reason about the confidence of visual features across
and within views. With fused visual features, a regressor is learned to predict the
parameters of a body model. We demonstrate that our calibration-free multiview
fusion method reliably reconstructs 3D body pose and shape, outperforming stateof-the-art single view methods with post-hoc multiview fusion, particularly in the
presence of non-trivial occlusion, and showing comparable accuracy to multiview
methods that require calibration.

1

Introduction

Cameras are an integral part of our lives for us to capture and share priceless moments. In particular,
social videos voluntarily captured by multiple viewers watching the same scene, e.g., friends recording
a street busker simultaneously, provide a new form of popular content for visual communication in
social media.
These videos possess two properties. (1) The videos are, by nature, multiview from social members,
which provide redundant yet distinctive visual information to model the 3D body geometry of a target
subject. For instance, the busker’s right elbow is occluded by his torso in one view but visible from
another viewpoint as shown in Figure 1(a) [2]. This self-occlusion can be reasoned by consolidating
multiview information. (2) These videos are, in general, not spatially calibrated (intrinsic and extrinsic
parameters). There exists neither a calibration pattern nor common visual features to register 3D
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

