Benign Overﬁtting in Two-layer
Convolutional Neural Networks
Yuan Cao∗
Department of Statistics & Actuarial Science
Department of Mathematics
The University of Hong Kong
yuancao@hku.hk
Mikhail Belkin
Haliciolu Data Science Institute
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
mbelkin@ucsd.edu

Zixiang Chen∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
chenzx19@cs.ucla.edu
Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Modern neural networks often have great expressive power and can be trained
to overﬁt the training data, while still achieving a good test performance. This
phenomenon is referred to as “benign overﬁtting”. Recently, there emerges a line
of works studying “benign overﬁtting” from the theoretical perspective. However,
they are limited to linear models or kernel/random feature models, and there is still
a lack of theoretical understanding about when and how benign overﬁtting occurs
in neural networks. In this paper, we study the benign overﬁtting phenomenon
in training a two-layer convolutional neural network (CNN). We show that when
the signal-to-noise ratio satisﬁes a certain condition, a two-layer CNN trained by
gradient descent can achieve arbitrarily small training and test loss. On the other
hand, when this condition does not hold, overﬁtting becomes harmful and the obtained CNN can only achieve constant level test loss. These together demonstrate
a sharp phase transition between benign overﬁtting and harmful overﬁtting, driven
by the signal-to-noise ratio. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that
precisely characterizes the conditions under which benign overﬁtting can occur in
training convolutional neural networks.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning models often consist of a huge number of model parameters, which is more
than the number of training data points and therefore over-parameterized. These over-parameterized
models can be trained to overﬁt the training data (achieving a close to 100% training accuracy),
while still making accurate prediction on the unseen test data. This phenomenon has been observed
in a number of prior works (Zhang et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2019), and is often referred to as
benign overﬁtting (Bartlett et al., 2020). It revolutionizes the classical understanding about the biasvariance trade-off in statistical learning theory, and has drawn great attention from the community
(Belkin et al., 2018, 2019a,b; Hastie et al., 2019).
There exist a number of works towards understanding the benign overﬁtting phenomenon. While
they offered important insights into the benign overﬁtting phenomenon, most of them are limited
* Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

