OrdinalCLIP: Learning Rank Prompts for
Language-Guided Ordinal Regression

Wanhua Li∗,1 , Xiaoke Huang∗,1 , Zheng Zhu2 , Yansong Tang1 , Xiu Li1 , Jie Zhou1 , Jiwen Lu†,1
1
Tsinghua University 2 PhiGent Robotics
wanhua016@gmail.com hxk21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zhengzhu@ieee.org {tang.yansong,li.xiu}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
{jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a language-powered paradigm for ordinal regression. Existing
methods usually treat each rank as a category and employ a set of weights to learn
these concepts. These methods are easy to overfit and usually attain unsatisfactory
performance as the learned concepts are mainly derived from the training set.
Recent large pre-trained vision-language models like CLIP have shown impressive
performance on various visual tasks. In this paper, we propose to learn the rank
concepts from the rich semantic CLIP latent space. Specifically, we reformulate this
task as an image-language matching problem with a contrastive objective, which
regards labels as text and obtains a language prototype from a text encoder for each
rank. While prompt engineering for CLIP is extremely time-consuming, we propose
OrdinalCLIP, a differentiable prompting method for adapting CLIP for ordinal
regression. OrdinalCLIP consists of learnable context tokens and learnable rank
embeddings. The learnable rank embeddings are constructed by explicitly modeling
numerical continuity, resulting in well-ordered, compact language prototypes in the
CLIP space. Once learned, we can only save the language prototypes and discard
the huge language model, resulting in zero additional computational overhead
compared with the linear head counterpart. Experimental results show that our
paradigm achieves competitive performance in general ordinal regression tasks, and
gains improvements in few-shot and distribution shift settings for age estimation.
The code is available at https://github.com/xk-huang/OrdinalCLIP.

1

Introduction

Ordinal regression in computer vision aims to predict a rank number [6] or continue value [21] y for
a given data x. For example, age estimation aims to estimate the age of a given face image while
image aesthetic assessment predicts the aesthetic score for an image. As a fundamental problem,
ordinal regression has attracted increasing attention due to its broad applications [18, 28, 25, 15].
A simple solution for ordinal regression is to directly regress a scale value [36]. It is implemented
with a single neuron and optimized with L1 or L2 loss. However, it suffers from limited performance.
Popular approaches [37, 41, 36, 22] usually discretize the continuous target space into different
bins or treat the rank labels as different numbers. Then they regard these discrete values as different
categories and perform the classification using a linear layer. These methods are essentially learning
a set of weights to model the concept of order. There are two main challenges for these methods.
First, treating ranks as independent class categories fails to grasp the ordinal property. Second, as
the learned concepts are mainly derived from the training set, these approaches are prone to overfit
and usually attain unsatisfactory performance.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

