The Surprising Effectiveness of PPO in Cooperative
Multi-Agent Games

Chao Yu1♯∗, Akash Velu2♮∗ , Eugene Vinitsky2♭ , Jiaxuan Gao1 ,
Yu Wang1♭ , Alexandre Bayen2 , Yi Wu13♭
1
Tsinghua University 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
♯
zoeyuchao@gmail.com, ♮ akashvelu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) is a ubiquitous on-policy reinforcement learning algorithm but is significantly less utilized than off-policy learning algorithms
in multi-agent settings. This is often due to the belief that PPO is significantly
less sample efficient than off-policy methods in multi-agent systems. In this work,
we carefully study the performance of PPO in cooperative multi-agent settings.
We show that PPO-based multi-agent algorithms achieve surprisingly strong performance in four popular multi-agent testbeds: the particle-world environments,
the StarCraft multi-agent challenge, Google Research Football, and the Hanabi
challenge, with minimal hyperparameter tuning and without any domain-specific
algorithmic modifications or architectures. Importantly, compared to competitive
off-policy methods, PPO often achieves competitive or superior results in both
final returns and sample efficiency. Finally, through ablation studies, we analyze
implementation and hyperparameter factors that are critical to PPO’s empirical
performance, and give concrete practical suggestions regarding these factors. Our
results show that when using these practices, simple PPO-based methods can be a
strong baseline in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. Source code is
released at https://github.com/marlbenchmark/on-policy.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL) and multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
have led to a great deal of progress in creating artificial agents which can cooperate to solve tasks:
DeepMind’s AlphaStar surpassed professional-level performance in the StarCraft II [35], OpenAI
Five defeated the world-champion in Dota II [4], and OpenAI demonstrated the emergence of
human-like tool-use agent behaviors via multi-agent learning [2]. These notable successes were
driven largely by on-policy RL algorithms such as IMPALA [10] and PPO [30, 4] which were often
coupled with distributed training systems to utilize massive amounts of parallelism and compute.
In the aforementioned works, tens of thousands of CPU cores and hundreds of GPUs were utilized
to collect and train on an extraordinary volume of training samples. This is in contrast to recent
academic progress and literature in MARL which has largely focused developing off-policy learning
frameworks such as MADDPG [22] and value-decomposed Q-learning [32, 27]; methods in these
frameworks have yielded state-of-the-art results on a wide range of multi-agent benchmarks [36, 37].
In this work, we revisit the use of Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) – an on-policy algorithm2
popular in single-agent RL but under-utilized in recent MARL literature – in multi-agent settings. We
hypothesize that the relative lack of PPO in multi-agent settings can be attributed to two related factors:
first, the belief that PPO is less sample-efficient than off-policy methods and is correspondingly
less useful in resource-constrained settings, and second, the fact that common implementation and
∗

Equal Contribution. ♭ Equal Advising.
Technically, PPO adopts off-policy corrections for sample-reuse. However, unlike off-policy methods, PPO
does not utilize a replay buffer to train on samples collected throughout training.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

