Generalized Variational Inference in Function Spaces:
Gaussian Measures meet Bayesian Deep Learning

Veit D. Wild∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
veit.wild@stats.ox.ac.uk

Robert Hu∗ †
Amazon
robyhu@amazon.co.uk

Dino Sejdinovic †
School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences
University of Adelaide
dino.sejdinovic@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
We develop a framework for generalized variational inference in infinitedimensional function spaces and use it to construct a method termed Gaussian
Wasserstein inference (GWI). GWI leverages the Wasserstein distance between
Gaussian measures on the Hilbert space of square-integrable functions in order to
determine a variational posterior using a tractable optimization criterion. It avoids
pathologies arising in standard variational function space inference. An exciting
application of GWI is the ability to use deep neural networks in the variational
parametrization of GWI, combining their superior predictive performance with
the principled uncertainty quantification analogous to that of Gaussian processes.
The proposed method obtains state-of-the-art performance on several benchmark
datasets.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, considerable effort has been invested in developing Bayesian deep learning
approaches [Welling and Teh, 2011, Chen et al., 2014, Blundell et al., 2015, Gal and Ghahramani,
2016, Kendall and Gal, 2017, Ritter et al., 2018, Khan et al., 2018, Maddox et al., 2019]. There are at
least two key advantages to Bayesian models. Firstly, Bayesian model averaging is known to improve
predictive performance [Komaki, 1996] even in misspecified situations [Fushiki, 2005, Ramamoorthi
et al., 2015]. The empirical success of methods such as deep ensembles [Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017] may be interpreted as compelling evidence for this claim [Wilson and Izmailov, 2020]. Secondly, Bayesian models provide the user with a predictive distribution for an unseen data point. This
can be naturally leveraged to quantify posterior uncertainty.
Even though impressive progress has been made, there are problems that remain unresolved. The
prior distribution for the unknown function is typically induced by a prior distribution over deep
neural network weights (and biases). It is hard to interpret the inductive bias in a function space that
is induced by such priors for weights and unclear how one might incorporate prior knowledge about
the unknown function. Additionally, the resulting inference problem is extremely high-dimensional
and requires approximation techniques that are either computationally expensive [Neal, 2012] or so
crude that the approximate posterior may suffer from pathological behavior [Foong et al., 2020]. The
difficulties of performing Bayesian inference for weights have led to the emergence of methods that
∗
†

equal contribution, order decided by coinflip
Work mainly done while the authors were with the Department of Statistics, University of Oxford

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

