Sharpness-Aware Training for Free

Jiawei Du1,2 , Daquan Zhou3 , Jiashi Feng3 , Vincent Y. F. Tan4,2 , Joey Tianyi Zhou1,2
1
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore,
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
3
ByteDance
4
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performances
but are typically over-parameterized. The over-parameterization may result in
undesirably large generalization error in the absence of other customized training
strategies. Recently, a line of research under the name of Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) has shown that minimizing a sharpness measure, which reflects
the geometry of the loss landscape, can significantly reduce the generalization
error. However, SAM-like methods incur a two-fold computational overhead of the
given base optimizer (e.g. SGD) for approximating the sharpness measure. In this
paper, we propose Sharpness-Aware Training for Free, or SAF, which mitigates
the sharp landscape at almost zero additional computational cost over the base
optimizer. Intuitively, SAF achieves this by avoiding sudden drops in the loss in the
sharp local minima throughout the trajectory of the updates of the weights. Specifically, we suggest a novel trajectory loss, based on the KL-divergence between
the outputs of DNNs with the current weights and past weights, as a replacement
of the SAM’s sharpness measure. This loss captures the rate of change of the
training loss along the model’s update trajectory. By minimizing it, SAF ensures
the convergence to a flat minimum with improved generalization capabilities. Extensive empirical results show that SAF minimizes the sharpness in the same way
that SAM does, yielding better results on the ImageNet dataset with essentially
the same computational cost as the base optimizer. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/AngusDujw/SAF.

1

Introduction

Despite achieving remarkable performances in many applications, powerful neural networks [2, 5, 21,
26, 26, 27, 34, 35] are typically over-parameterized. Such over-parameterized deep neural networks
require advanced training strategies to ensure that their generalization errors are appropriately
small [2, 32] and the adverse effects of the overfitting are alleviated. Understanding how deep neural
networks generalize is perhaps the most fundamental and yet perplexing topic in deep learning.
Numerous studies expend significant amounts of efforts to understand the generalization capabilities of
deep neural networks and mitigate this problem from a variety of perspectives, such as the information
perspective [18], the model compression perspective [1, 9], and the Bayesian perspective [22, 24], etc.
The loss surface geometry perspective, in particular, has attracted a lot of attention from researchers
recently [4, 12–14, 28]. These studies connect the generalization gap and the sharpness of the
minimum’s loss landscape, which can be characterized by the largest eigenvalue of the Hessian
matrix ∇2θ fθ [14] where fθ represents the input-output map of the neural network. In other words, a
(local) minimum that is located in a flatter region tends to generalize better than one that is located
in a sharper one [4, 13]. The recent work [8] proposes an effective and generic training algorithm,
named Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM), to encourage the training process to converge to a flat
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

