Pitfalls of Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification
through Loss Minimisation

a

Viktor Bengsa , Eyke Hüllermeiera,b
Institute of Informatics, University of Munich (LMU)
b
Munich Center for Machine Learning
viktor.bengs@lmu.de, eyke@lmu.de

Willem Waegeman
Department of Data Analysis and Mathematical Modeling
Ghent University
Willem.Waegeman@UGent.be

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification has received increasing attention in machine learning
in the recent past. In particular, a distinction between aleatoric and epistemic
uncertainty has been found useful in this regard. The latter refers to the learner’s
(lack of) knowledge and appears to be especially difficult to measure and quantify.
In this paper, we analyse a recent proposal based on the idea of a second-order
learner, which yields predictions in the form of distributions over probability distributions. While standard (first-order) learners can be trained to predict accurate
probabilities, namely by minimising suitable loss functions on sample data, we
show that loss minimisation does not work for second-order predictors: The loss
functions proposed for inducing such predictors do not incentivise the learner to
represent its epistemic uncertainty in a faithful way.

1

Introduction

The notion of uncertainty has received increasing attention in machine learning (ML) research in
the last couple of years, especially due to the steadily increasing relevance of ML for practical
applications. In fact, a trustworthy representation of uncertainty should be considered as a key
feature of any ML method, all the more in safety-critical domains such as medicine [27, 17] or
socio-technical systems [25, 26].
In the literature, two inherently different sources of uncertainty are commonly distinguished, referred to as aleatoric and epistemic [9]. While the former refers to variability due to inherently
random effects, the latter is uncertainty caused by a lack of knowledge and hence relates to the epistemic state of an agent. Thus, epistemic uncertainty can in principle be reduced on the basis of
additional information, while aleatoric uncertainty is non-reducible.
The distinction between different types of uncertainty and their quantification has also been adopted
in the recent ML literature [21, 13], and various methods for quantifying aleatoric and epistemic
uncertainty have been proposed [10]. In the context of supervised learning, the focus is typically
on predictive uncertainty, i.e., the learner’s uncertainty in the outcome y ∈ Y given a query instance x ∈ X for which a prediction is sought. The aleatoric part of this uncertainty is due to the
supposedly stochastic nature of the dependence between instances and outcomes, e.g. due to wrong
class annotations or a lack of informative features. Therefore, the “ground-truth” is a conditional
probability distribution p(· | x) on Y, i.e., each outcome y has a certain probability p(y | x) to occur.
Even with full knowledge about p(· | x), the outcome cannot be predicted with certainty.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

