Graph Scattering beyond Wavelet Shackles

Christian Koke
Technical University of Munich &
Ludwig Maximilian University Munich
christian.koke@tum.de

Gitta Kutyniok
Ludwig Maximilian University Munich &
University of Tromsø
kutyniok@math.lmu.de

Abstract
This work develops a flexible and mathematically sound framework for the design
and analysis of graph scattering networks with variable branching ratios and generic
functional calculus filters. Spectrally-agnostic stability guarantees for node- and
graph-level perturbations are derived; the vertex-set non-preserving case is treated
by utilizing recently developed mathematical-physics based tools. Energy propagation through the network layers is investigated and related to truncation stability.
New methods of graph-level feature aggregation are introduced and stability of
the resulting composite scattering architectures is established. Finally, scattering
transforms are extended to edge- and higher order tensorial input. Theoretical
results are complemented by numerical investigations: Suitably chosen scattering
networks conforming to the developed theory perform better than traditional graphwavelet based scattering approaches in social network graph classification tasks
and significantly outperform other graph-based learning approaches to regression
of quantum-chemical energies on QM7.

1

Introduction

Euclidean wavelet scattering networks [22, 4] are deep convolutional architectures where outputfeatures are generated in each layer. Employed filters are designed rather than learned and derive
from a fixed (tight) wavelet frame, resulting in a tree structured network with constant branching ratio.
Such networks provide state of the art methods in settings with limited data availability and serve
as a mathematically tractable model of standard convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Rigorous
investigations — establishing remarkable invariance- and stability properties of wavelet scattering
networks — were initially carried out in [22]. The extensive mathematical analysis [38] generalized
the term ’scattering network’ to include tree structured networks with varying branching rations and
frames of convolutional filters, thus significantly narrowing the conceptual gap to general CNNs.
With increasing interest in data on graph-structured domains, well performing networks generalizing
Euclidean CNNs to this geometric setting emerged [18, 5, 9]. If efficiently implemented, such graph
convolutional networks (GCNs) replace Euclidean convolutional filters by functional calculus filters;
i.e. scalar functions applied to a suitably chosen graph-shift-oprator capturing the geometry of the
underlying graph [18, 14, 9]. Almost immediately, proposals aimed at extending the success story of
Euclidean scattering networks to the graph convolutional setting began appearing: In [48], the authors
utilize dyadic graph wavelets (see e.g. [14]) based on the non-normalized graph Laplacian resulting
in a norm preserving graph wavelet scattering transform. In [10], diffusion wavelets (see e.g. [8]) are
used to construct a graph scattering transform enjoying spectrum-dependent stability guarantees to
graph level perturbations. For scattering transforms with N layers and K distinct functional calculus
filters, the work [11] derives node-level stability bounds of OpK N {2 q and conducts corresponding
numerical experiments choosing diffusion wavelets, monic cubic wavelets [14] and tight Hann
wavelets [35] as filters. In [12] the authors, following [8], construct so called geometric wavelets and
establish the expressivity of a scattering transform based on such a frame through extensive numerical
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

