Diverse Weight Averaging for Out-of-Distribution
Generalization
Alexandre Ramé1,* , Matthieu Kirchmeyer1,2,*
Thibaud Rahier , Alain Rakotomamonjy2,4 , Patrick Gallinari1,2 , Matthieu Cord1,3
1
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR, F-75005 Paris, France 2 Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
3
Valeo.ai, Paris, France 4 Université de Rouen, LITIS, France
*
Equal contribution
2

Abstract
Standard neural networks struggle to generalize under distribution shifts in computer vision. Fortunately, combining multiple networks can consistently improve
out-of-distribution generalization. In particular, weight averaging (WA) strategies
were shown to perform best on the competitive DomainBed benchmark; they directly average the weights of multiple networks despite their nonlinearities. In this
paper, we propose Diverse Weight Averaging (DiWA), a new WA strategy whose
main motivation is to increase the functional diversity across averaged models.
To this end, DiWA averages weights obtained from several independent training
runs: indeed, models obtained from different runs are more diverse than those
collected along a single run thanks to differences in hyperparameters and training
procedures. We motivate the need for diversity by a new bias-variance-covariancelocality decomposition of the expected error, exploiting similarities between WA
and standard functional ensembling. Moreover, this decomposition highlights that
WA succeeds when the variance term dominates, which we show occurs when
the marginal distribution changes at test time. Experimentally, DiWA consistently
improves the state of the art on DomainBed without inference overhead.

1

Introduction

Learning robust models that generalize well is critical for many real-world applications [1, 2]. Yet,
the classical Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) lacks robustness to distribution shifts [3, 4, 5]. To
improve out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization in classification, several recent works proposed
to train models simultaneously on multiple related but different domains [6]. Though theoretically
appealing, domain-invariant approaches [7] either underperform [8, 9] or only slightly improve [10,
11] ERM on the reference DomainBed benchmark [12]. The state-of-the-art strategy on DomainBed
is currently to average the weights obtained along a training trajectory [13]. [14] argues that this
weight averaging (WA) succeeds in OOD because it finds solutions with flatter loss landscapes.
In this paper, we show the limitations of this flatness-based analysis and provide a new explanation
for the success of WA in OOD. It is based on WA’s similarity with ensembling [15], a well-known
strategy to improve robustness [16, 17], that averages the predictions from various models. Based
on [18], we present a bias-variance-covariance-locality decomposition of WA’s expected error. It
contains four terms: first the bias that we show increases under shift in label posterior distributions
(i.e., correlation shift [19]); second, the variance that we show increases under shift in input marginal
distributions (i.e., diversity shift [19]); third, the covariance that decreases when models are diverse;
finally, a locality condition on the weights of averaged models.
Based on this analysis, we aim at obtaining diverse models whose weights are averageable with our
Diverse Weight Averaging (DiWA) approach. In practice, DiWA averages in weights the models
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

