A Closer Look at Offline RL Agents
Yuwei Fu, Di Wu, Benoit Boulet
McGill University
yuwei.fu@mail.mail.ca, {di.wu5, benoit.boulet}@mcgill.ca

Abstract
Despite recent advances in the field of Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL), less
attention has been paid to understanding the behaviors of learned RL agents. As
a result, there remain some gaps in our understandings, i.e., why is one offline
RL agent more performant than another? In this work, we first introduce a set of
experiments to evaluate offline RL agents, focusing on three fundamental aspects:
representations, value functions and policies. Counterintuitively, we show that a
more performant offline RL agent can learn relatively low-quality representations
and inaccurate value functions. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the proposed
experiment setups can be effectively used to diagnose the bottleneck of offline RL
agents. Inspired by the evaluation results, a novel offline RL algorithm is proposed
by a simple modification of IQL and achieves SOTA performance. Finally, we
investigate when a learned dynamics model is helpful to model-free offline RL
agents, and introduce an uncertainty-based sample selection method to mitigate the
problem of model noises. Code is available at: https://github.com/fuyw/RIQL.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL), also known as batch RL, refers to the problem of learning
effective control policies from a fixed offline dataset [39]. Due to the wide availability of loggeddata and the increasing computing power, offline RL holds the promise for successful real-world
applications [40]. For example, offline RL suits well for scenarios where collecting online data is
time-consuming, dangerous or unethical, i.e., robotics, self-driving cars and medical treatments [21].
While most off-policy RL algorithms are applicable in the offline setting, they usually suffer from
the extrapolation error [18, 35, 11] due to out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. Different solutions
have been proposed to mitigate this problem, i.e., adding constraints [18, 50], behavior cloning (BC)
[7, 57], learning a dynamics model [55, 28, 3], incorporating uncertainties [51], using ensembles [1],
or learning pessimistic value functions [36, 5, 26].
Recently, offline RL algorithms have shown to be effective to solve various challenging tasks [46, 42].
However, most of these works mainly focus on designing new algorithms and less attention has
been paid to understanding the behaviors of the learned offline RL agents. As a result, some basic
questions are still poorly understood. For example:
• Why does one offline RL agent perform better than other baseline agents in a benchmark task,
as illustrated in Fig 1?
• Does the more performant agent learn better representations or more accurate value functions?
• Which of the existing offline policy evaluation/improvement methods is more effective?
• When is a learned dynamics model helpful to a model-free offline RL agent?
• Given a learned dynamics model, how can we use the generated samples more efficiently?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

