A Near-Optimal Best-of-Both-Worlds Algorithm
for Online Learning with Feedback Graphs

Chloé Rouyer
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
chloe@di.ku.dk

Dirk van der Hoeven
Dept. of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy
dirk@dirkvanderhoeven.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Dept. of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Yevgeny Seldin
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen, Denmark
seldin@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We consider online learning with feedback graphs, a sequential decision-making
framework where the learner’s feedback is determined by a directed graph over
the action set. We present a computationally efficient algorithm for learning
in this framework that simultaneously achieves near-optimal regret bounds in
both stochastic√and adversarial environments. The bound against oblivious adversaries is Õ( αT ), where T is the time horizon and α is the independence
number of the feedback graph. The
 bound against stochastic environments is
P
2
O (ln T ) maxS∈I(G) i∈S ∆−1
where I (G) is the family of all independent
i
sets in a suitably defined undirected version of the graph and ∆i are the suboptimality gaps. The algorithm combines ideas from the EXP3++ algorithm for stochastic
and adversarial bandits and the EXP3.G algorithm for feedback graphs with a
novel exploration scheme. The scheme, which exploits the structure of the graph to
reduce exploration, is key to obtain best-of-both-worlds guarantees with feedback
graphs. We also extend our algorithm and results to a setting where the feedback
graphs are allowed to change over time.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a general framework for studying sequential decision-making in unknown environments (see, for example, (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006; Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi, 2012; Orabona,
2019)). We consider a setting where, at each round, the player chooses an action (a.k.a. arm) from
a fixed set of K actions and incurs the loss associated with the chosen action. The performance of
the learner is quantified in terms of regret, which is the difference between the total loss incurred by
the learner over the duration of the game, and the smallest cumulative loss obtained by a player that
would only ever play the same action throughout the game.
The smallest achievable regret is determined by a number of parameters. One of these parameters
is the amount of feedback that the learner receives at each round. There is a whole spectrum of
problems, characterized by the amount of feedback received by the learner. At the one extreme of
this spectrum is the bandit setting, where the learner only observes the loss of the action taken. At the
other extreme is the full information setting, where the learner observes the full loss vector at the end
of each round, irrespective of the action played.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

