Efficient Graph Similarity Computation with
Alignment Regularization

Wei Zhuo
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
zhuow5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Guang Tan
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
tanguang@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider the graph similarity computation (GSC) task based on graph edit
distance (GED) estimation. State-of-the-art methods treat GSC as a learningbased prediction task using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). To capture finegrained interactions between pair-wise graphs, these methods mostly contain a
node-level matching module in the end-to-end learning pipeline, which causes
high computational costs in both the training and inference stages. We show that
the expensive node-to-node matching module is not necessary for GSC, and highquality learning can be attained with a simple yet powerful regularization technique,
which we call the Alignment Regularization (AReg). In the training stage, the
AReg term imposes a node-graph correspondence constraint on the GNN encoder.
In the inference stage, the graph-level representations learned by the GNN encoder
are directly used to compute the similarity score without using AReg again to speed
up inference. We further propose a multi-scale GED discriminator to enhance
the expressive ability of the learned representations. Extensive experiments on
real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness, efficiency and transferability of
our approach.

1

Introduction

Graph similarity computation (GSC) is a fundamental task in graph databases and plays a critical role
in many real-world applications, including drug design [14, 28], program analysis [16], and social
group identification [21, 27]. For example, one can search a drug database for a query chemical
compound, in order to identify drugs with high similarity in structures or attributes and thus similar
curative effects as desired [23]. To measure the similarity between pair-wise graphs, Graph Edit
Distance (GED) [5] has been a major metric due to its generality, and many other graph similarity
measures have been proven to be its special cases [17]. Unfortunately, computing exact GED is an
NP-hard problem in general [12].
With the provably expressive power in distinguishing graph structures [32, 19, 7, 34], Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) have been adopted for GED approximation and shown to achieve superior performance on accuracy. Most state-of-the-art GNN-based GSC models [1, 3, 8, 18, 16] contain two
sequential submodules in the end-to-end learnable pipeline (left of Fig. 1): (1) a GNN encoder, which
is shared across two graphs to embed nodes into representation vectors to capture the intra-graph
structure and feature information; (2) a matching model, which computes cross-graph node-level
similarity, i.e., how a node in one graph relates to all the nodes in the other graph. The model outputs
a summarized vector that fuses the node-level similarities between two graphs. Then, the similarity
score is predicted based on the summarized vector via a regression head. The computational cost of
such a sequential framework mainly comes from the matching model, which requires computational
and memory cost quadratic in the number of nodes and sometimes involves additional parameters such
as attention weights [18, 16], leading to heavy time consumption in both the training and inference
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

