Chartalist: Labeled Graph Datasets for UTXO and
Account-based Blockchains
Kiarash Shamsi
Computer Science
University of Manitoba
shamsik1@myumanitoba.ca
Murat Kantarcioglu
Computer Science
UT Dallas
muratk@utdallas.edu

Friedhelm Victor
Computer Science
TU Berlin
friedhelm.victor@tu-berlin.de

Yulia R. Gel
Statistics
UT Dallas
ygl@utdallas.edu

Cuneyt G. Akcora
Computer Science and Statistics
University of Manitoba
cuneyt.akcora@umanitoba.ca

Abstract
Machine learning on blockchain graphs is an emerging field with many applications
such as ransomware payment tracking, price manipulation analysis, and money
laundering detection. However, analyzing blockchain data requires domain expertise and computational resources, which pose a significant barrier and hinder
advancement in this field. We introduce Chartalist, the first comprehensive platform to methodically access and use machine learning across a large selection of
blockchains to address this challenge.
Chartalist contains ML-ready datasets from unspent transaction output (UTXO)
(e.g., Bitcoin) and account-based blockchains (e.g., Ethereum). We envision that
Chartalist can facilitate data modeling, analysis, and representation of blockchain
data and attract a wider community of scientists to analyze blockchains. Chartalist is a sustainable open-science initiative at https://github.com/cakcora/
Chartalist.

1

Introduction

Blockchain is an emerging technology that has already enabled a wide range of applications, from
cryptocurrencies (e.g., Bitcoin and Ethereum) and digital asset management to accountable data
sharing. Most of the blockchain information can be represented as single and multilayer graphs
composed of different types of nodes or edges. For example, for the Ethereum blockchain, the
transactions that trade a digital token or asset can be seen to create a unique layer between the
involved addresses (i.e., nodes of the transaction graph). Due to the increased popularity, analyzing
the graph data stored on blockchains has emerged as an essential data science and machine learning
(ML) problem. For example, building ML models (e.g., graph neural networks) using cryptocurrency
blockchain graphs has direct applications for ransomware payment tracking, price manipulation
analysis, and money laundering detection.
Analyzing the massive blockchain data today requires significant efforts to extract the underlying
graph by running a Bitcoin client or paying for commercial APIs (e.g., etherscan.io) to download
transaction data. Even when we extract transaction data by any means, we must allocate considerable resources to construct blockchain graphs. For example, a leading open-source Bitcoin parser
BlockSci [19] requires 60GB of memory to build the Bitcoin transaction graph. Ethereum poses
even greater challenges as its data is bigger and requires smart contract analysis to discover internal
transactions. Combined with data size and complexity issues, blockchain research also lacks labeled
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

