Differentially Private Linear Sketches: Efficient
Implementations and Applications
Fuheng Zhao⇤ †
fuheng_zhao@ucsb.edu

Dan Qiao⇤ †
danqiao@ucsb.edu

Rachel Redberg⇤
rredberg@ucsb.edu

Divyakant Agrawal⇤
agrawal@cs.ucsb.edu

Amr El Abbadi⇤
amr@cs.ucsb.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang⇤
yuxiangw@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Linear sketches have been widely adopted to process fast data streams, and they
can be used to accurately answer frequency estimation, approximate top K items,
and summarize data distributions. When data are sensitive, it is desirable to
provide privacy guarantees for linear sketches to preserve private information while
delivering useful results with theoretical bounds. We show that linear sketches
can ensure privacy and maintain their unique properties with a small amount of
noise added at initialization. From the differentially private linear sketches, we
showcase that the state-of-the-art quantile sketch in the turnstile model can also be
private and maintain high performance. Experiments further demonstrate that our
proposed differentially private sketches are quantitatively and qualitatively similar
to noise-free sketches with high utilization on synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Data sketches are fundamental tools for data analysis, statistics, and machine learning [Cormode and
Yi, 2020]. Two of the most widely studied problems in data summaries are frequency estimation and
quantile approximation. Many real world applications need to estimate the frequency of each item
in the database and understand the overall distribution of the database. These applications include
stream processing [Das et al., 2009, Bailis et al., 2017], database management [Misra and Gries, 1982,
Metwally et al., 2005, Zhao et al., 2022], caching [Zakhary et al., 2020], system monitoring [Gupta
et al., 2016, Ivkin et al., 2019, Zhao et al., 2021], federated learning [Rothchild et al., 2020], among
others.
On one hand, the motivation for data sketch algorithms is to efficiently process a large database
and extract useful knowledge, since computing the exact information for a large amount of data is
both time and memory intensive. For instance, Munro and Paterson [1980] proved that to find the
true median of a database with n items using p sequential passes requires at least ⌦(n1/p ) memory.
On the other hand, to protect user-level privacy, privacy-preserving algorithms limit the disclosure
of private information in the database so that an observer cannot infer much about an individual.
Recent works have shown that data sketches can be integrated with privacy-enhancing technologies
to provide insightful information and preserve individual privacy at the same time [Cormode, 2022].
Differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006] is a widely-accepted definition of privacy. Recently, researchers have observed that some data sketches are inherently differentially private [Blocki et al.,
2012, Smith et al., 2020], while many other data sketches need modifications to the algorithm to be
⇤
†

Department of Computer Science, UC Santa Barbara.
The first two authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

