You Only Live Once:
Single-Life Reinforcement Learning

Annie S. Chen1 , Archit Sharma1 , Sergey Levine2 , Chelsea Finn1
Stanford University1 , UC Berkeley2
asc8@stanford.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms are typically designed to learn a performant
policy that can repeatedly and autonomously complete a task, usually starting from
scratch. However, in many real-world situations, the goal might not be to learn a
policy that can do the task repeatedly, but simply to perform a new task successfully
once in a single trial. For example, imagine a disaster relief robot tasked with
retrieving an item from a fallen building, where it cannot get direct supervision
from humans. It must retrieve this object within one test-time trial, and must do
so while tackling unknown obstacles, though it may leverage knowledge it has
of the building before the disaster. We formalize this problem setting, which we
call single-life reinforcement learning (SLRL), where an agent must complete a
task within a single episode without interventions, utilizing its prior experience
while contending with some form of novelty. SLRL provides a natural setting to
study the challenge of autonomously adapting to unfamiliar situations, and we
find that algorithms designed for standard episodic reinforcement learning often
struggle to recover from out-of-distribution states in this setting. Motivated by this
observation, we propose an algorithm, Q-weighted adversarial learning (Q WALE),
which employs a distribution matching strategy that leverages the agent’s prior
experience as guidance in novel situations. Our experiments on several singlelife continuous control problems indicate that methods based on our distribution
matching formulation are 20-60% more successful because they can more quickly
recover from novel states. 1

1

Introduction

Agents operating in the real world must often contend with novel situations that differ from their prior
experience. For example, a search-and-rescue disaster relief robot may encounter novel obstacles
while traversing a building. The vast range of situations that could be encountered at test time cannot
be anticipated in advance during training, and therefore agents that can adapt at test time will be better
equipped to cope with new situations. Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms in principle provide
a suitable paradigm for such adaptation. However, much of the work in RL focuses on learning an
optimal policy that can repeatedly solve a given task, whereas on-the-fly adaptation simply requires
the agent to complete the task once without human interventions or supervision, presenting a different
set of challenges. In this work, we formalize this problem setting as single-life reinforcement learning
(SLRL), where the agent is evaluated on its ability to successfully and autonomously adapt to a novel
scenario within a single trial.
Given some prior experience, SLRL induces the challenge of contending with novelty (e.g., a new
initial state distribution or new dynamics) at test time without episodic resets. A key problem that
makes this difficult is that the agent will need to recover from unfamiliar situations without any
1

Project website: https://sites.google.com/stanford.edu/single-life-rl

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

