Reduction Algorithms for Persistence Diagrams of
Networks: CoralTDA and PrunIT
Cuneyt G. Akcora
Department of Computer Science
University of Manitoba
cuneyt.akcora@umanitoba.ca

Murat Kantarcioglu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Dallas
muratk@utdallas.edu

Yulia R. Gel
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas
National Science Foundation
ygl@utdallas.edu
Baris Coskunuzer
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas
coskunuz@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Topological data analysis (TDA) delivers invaluable and complementary information on the intrinsic properties of data inaccessible to conventional methods.
However, high computational costs remain the primary roadblock hindering the
successful application of TDA in real-world studies, particularly with machine
learning on large complex networks.
Indeed, most modern networks such as citation, blockchain, and online social
networks often have hundreds of thousands of vertices, making the application of
existing TDA methods infeasible. We develop two new, remarkably simple but
effective algorithms to compute the exact persistence diagrams of large graphs to
address this major TDA limitation. First, we prove that (k + 1)-core of a graph G
suffices to compute its k th persistence diagram, P Dk (G). Second, we introduce a
pruning algorithm for graphs to compute their persistence diagrams by removing
the dominated vertices. Our experiments on large networks show that our novel
approach can achieve computational gains up to 95%.
The developed framework provides the first bridge between the graph theory and
TDA, with applications in machine learning of large complex networks. Our implementation is available at github.com/cakcora/PersistentHomologyWithCoralPrunit.

1

Introduction

Topological data analysis (TDA) has emerged as powerful machinery in machine learning (ML),
allowing us to extract complementary information on the observed objects, especially, from graphstructured data. In particular, TDA has become quite popular in various ML tasks, ranging from
bioinformatics [38, 44], finance [39, 2] material science [33], biosurveillance [51, 19], network
analysis [54, 16], as well as insurance and agriculture [56, 34] (see the literature overviews [4, 17]
and the TDA applications library [27]). Recently there has emerged a highly active research area that
combines the PH machinery with geometric deep learning (GDL) methods [30, 57, 31].
Persistent homology (PH) is a key approach in TDA, allowing us to extract the evolution of subtler
patterns in the data shape dynamics at multiple resolution scales, which are not accessible to more
conventional, non-topological methods [15]. The main idea is to construct a nested sequence of
topological spaces (filtration) induced from the data, and record the evolution of topological features
in this sequence. In other words, the extracted patterns, or homological features, along with how
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

