Gaussian Copula Embeddings

Chien Lu
Jaakko Peltonen
Tampere University

Abstract
Learning latent vector representations via embedding models has been shown
promising in machine learning. However, most of the embedding models are still
limited to a single type of observed data. We propose a Gaussian copula embedding
model to learn latent vectorial representations of items in a heterogeneous-data
setting. The proposed model can effectively incorporate different types of observed
data and, at the same time, yield robust embeddings. We demonstrate that the
proposed model can effectively learn in many different scenarios, outperforming
competing models in modeling quality and task performance.

1

Introduction

Representation learning is a prominent machine learning approach for working with originally nonvectorial data. Embedding models learn latent vectorial representations for data items that appear
together with a context, through modeling the interactions between each center item and its context
items. The approach was first introduced as a language model [14] which learns word representations
through modeling the probability of the appearance of a central word given surrounding context
words. The word appearance is modeled as an observation from a multinomial word distribution.
Building on this notion, exponential family embeddings were proposed [19] which further generalized
the original model to a class of models suitable for many observed data types, which have been shown
promising in different domains. However, the ability of such models to incorporate heterogeneous
data is still limited.
Data in many modern domains is heterogeneous, involving simultaneous observation of different data
types such as categorical values, integers and real-valued numbers, and having varied distributions
within each data type, hence it is difficult to model them together as observations in vectorial
embedding; naive unified solutions that ignore the difference of the data types would not yield
good models. In particular, the different data types are often distributed over varied scales and with
various distributional shapes: naive normalization coupled to modeling with a single distributional
assumption would not suffice to yield robust embedding models, and would leave them vulnerable to
extreme values and distributional shapes not corresponding to the assumed ones. An equally pressing
problem is how to flexibly model relationships (dependencies) between the several observed variables
with their differing distributions: naive modeling strategies ignoring the variable dependencies would
again yield poor embedding models.
We solve the mentioned challenges by introducing a novel Gaussian copula based latent representation
learning model. The model learns vectorial embedding representations for items leveraging the centercontext item interactions, but unlike previous embedding models the proposed model is able to learn
embeddings in a setting with multivariate data having heterogeneous data types and distributions.
For computational efficiency, we introduce a set of variational auto-encoder based inference algorithms. In experiments on five different scenarios, the proposed model is shown to be effective,
outperforming competitive methods in task-based evaluations and yielding insights in a social media
analysis task.
Our contributions are:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

