Towards Understanding the Mixture-of-Experts
Layer in Deep Learning

Zixiang Chen
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
chenzx19@cs.ucla.edu

Yihe Deng
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
yihedeng@cs.ucla.edu

Yue Wu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
ywu@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Yuanzhi Li
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
The Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layer, a sparsely-activated model controlled by a
router, has achieved great success in deep learning. However, the understanding of
such architecture remains elusive. In this paper, we formally study how the MoE
layer improves the performance of neural network learning and why the mixture
model will not collapse into a single model. Our empirical results suggest that
the cluster structure of the underlying problem and the non-linearity of the expert
are pivotal to the success of MoE. This motivates us to consider a challenging
classification problem with intrinsic cluster structures. Theoretically, we proved
that this problem is hard to solve by a single expert such as a two-layer convolutional
neural network (CNN). Yet with the MoE layer with each expert being a two-layer
CNN, the problem can be solved successfully. In particular, our theory shows
that the router can learn the cluster-center features, which helps divide the input
complex problem into simpler classification sub-problems that individual experts
can conquer. To our knowledge, this is the first theoretical result toward formally
understanding the mechanism of the MoE layer for deep learning.

1

Introduction

The Mixture-of-Expert (MoE) structure (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan and Jacobs, 1994) is a classic
design that substantially scales up the model capacity and only introduces small computation overhead.
In recent years, the MoE layer (Eigen et al., 2013; Shazeer et al., 2017), which is an extension of the
MoE model to deep neural networks, has achieved remarkable success in deep learning. Generally
speaking, an MoE layer contains many experts that share the same network architecture and are
trained by the same algorithm, with a gating (or routing) function that routes individual inputs to a
few experts among all the candidates. Through the sparse gating function, the router in the MoE layer
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

