Online Frank-Wolfe with Arbitrary Delays

Yuanyu Wan1,2 , Wei-Wei Tu3,4 , Lijun Zhang4,∗
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
2
Zhejiang University-China Southern Power Grid Joint Research Centre on AI, Hangzhou, China
3
4Paradigm Inc., Beijing, China
4
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
wanyy@zju.edu.cn, tuweiwei@4paradigm.com, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The online Frank-Wolfe (OFW) method has gained much popularity for online
convex optimization due to its projection-free property. Previous studies show that
OFW can attain an O(T 3/4 ) regret bound for convex losses and an O(T 2/3 ) regret
bound for strongly convex losses. However, they assume that each gradient queried
by OFW is revealed immediately, which may not hold in practice and limits the
application of OFW. To address this limitation, we propose a delayed variant of
OFW, which allows gradients to be delayed by arbitrary rounds. The main idea is
to perform an update similar to OFW after receiving any delayed gradient, and play
the latest decision for each round. Despite its simplicity, we prove that our delayed
variant of OFW is able to achieve an O(T 3/4 + dT 1/4 ) regret bound for convex
losses and an O(T 2/3 + d log T ) regret bound for strongly convex losses, where
d is the maximum delay. This
√ is quite surprising since under a relatively large
amount of delay (e.g., d = O( T ) for convex losses and d = O(T 2/3 / log T ) for
strongly convex losses), the delayed variant of OFW enjoys the same regret bound
as that of the original OFW.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) has become a leading paradigm for online learning due to its capability to model various problems from diverse domains such as online routing, online collaborative
filtering, and online advertisement [Hazan, 2016]. In general, it is formulated as a structured repeated
game between a player and an adversary. In each round t, the player first chooses a decision xt from
a convex decision set K ⊆ Rn , where n is the dimensionality. Then, the adversary selects a convex
function ft (x) : K 7→ R, and the player suffers a loss ft (xt ). The player aims to choose decisions
PT
PT
such that the regret R(T ) = t=1 ft (xt ) − minx∈K t=1 ft (x) is sublinear in the number of √
total
rounds T . Online gradient descent (OGD) is a standard method for OCO, which enjoys an O( T )
regret bound for convex losses [Zinkevich, 2003] and an O(log T ) regret bound for strongly convex
losses [Hazan et al., 2007]. However, it needs to compute a projection onto the decision set to ensure
the feasibility of each decision, which is computationally expensive for complex decision sets [Hazan
and Kale, 2012].
To tackle this computational issue, Hazan and Kale [2012] propose the online Frank-Wolfe (OFW)
method, which has become one of the most commonly used algorithms for OCO over complex
decision sets. The main advantage of OFW is its projection-free property: instead of performing the
projection operation, it utilizes a linear optimization step to select a feasible decision, which could be
much more efficient. For example, in the problem of online collaborative filtering, the decision set
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

