Explainable Reinforcement Learning via Model
Transforms
Mira Finkelstein1 , Lucy Liu2 , Nitsan Levy Schlot1 , Yoav Kolumbus1 ,
David C. Parkes2,3 , Jeffrey S. Rosenschein1 and Sarah Keren4
1
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Benin School of Computer Science and Engineering
2
Harvard University, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
3
DeepMind
4
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Taub Faculty of Computer Science

Abstract
Understanding emerging behaviors of reinforcement learning (RL) agents may
be difficult since such agents are often trained in complex environments using
highly complex decision making procedures. This has given rise to a variety of
approaches to explainability in RL that aim to reconcile discrepancies that may
arise between the behavior of an agent and the behavior that is anticipated by an
observer. Most recent approaches have relied either on domain knowledge, that
may not always be available, on an analysis of the agent’s policy, or on an analysis
of specific elements of the underlying environment, typically modeled as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP). Our key claim is that even if the underlying model is not
fully known (e.g., the transition probabilities have not been accurately learned) or
is not maintained by the agent (i.e., when using model-free methods), the model
can nevertheless be exploited to automatically generate explanations. For this
purpose, we suggest using formal MDP abstractions and transforms, previously
used in the literature for expediting the search for optimal policies, to automatically
produce explanations. Since such transforms are typically based on a symbolic
representation of the environment, they can provide meaningful explanations for
gaps between the anticipated and actual agent behavior. We formally define
the explainability problem, suggest a class of transforms that can be used for
explaining emergent behaviors, and suggest methods that enable efficient search
for an explanation. We demonstrate the approach on a set of standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The performance-transparency trade-off is a major challenge with many artificial intelligence (AI)
methods: as the inner workings of an agent’s decision making procedure increases in complexity,
it becomes more powerful, but the agent’s decisions become harder to understand. Accordingly,
interest in explainable AI and the development of transparent, interpretable, AI models has increased
rapidly in recent years [1]. This increase in complexity is particularly prevalent in reinforcement
learning (RL) and deep reinforcement learning (DRL), where an agent autonomously learns how
to operate in its environment. While RL has been successfully applied to solve many challenging
tasks, including traffic control [2], robotic motion planning [3], and board games [4], it is increasingly
challenging to explain the behavior of RL agents, especially when they do not operate as anticipated.
To allow humans to collaborate effectively with RL-based AI systems and increase their usability,
it is therefore important to develop automated methods for reasoning about and explaining agent
behaviors.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

