Learning in Congestion Games with Bandit Feedback

Qiwen Cui1∗
qwcui@cs.washington.edu
Maryam Fazel2
mfazel@uw.edu

1

Zhihan Xiong1∗
zhihanx@cs.washington.edu
Simon S. Du1
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate Nash-regret minimization in congestion games, a
class of games with benign theoretical structure and broad real-world applications.
We first propose a centralized algorithm based on the optimism in the face of
uncertainty principle for congestion games with (semi-)bandit feedback, and obtain
finite-sample guarantees. Then we propose a decentralized algorithm via a novel
combination of the Frank-Wolfe method and G-optimal design. By exploiting
the structure of the congestion game, we show the sample complexity of both
algorithms depends only polynomially on the number of players and the number
of facilities, but not the size of the action set, which can be exponentially large in
terms of the number of facilities. We further define a new problem class, Markov
congestion games, which allows us to model the non-stationarity in congestion
games. We propose a centralized algorithm for Markov congestion games, whose
sample complexity again has only polynomial dependence on all relevant problem
parameters, but not the size of the action set.

1

Introduction

Nash equilibrium (NE) is a widely adopted concept in game theory community, used to describe the
behavior of multi-agent systems with selfish players [Roughgarden, 2010]. At the Nash equilibrium,
no player has the incentive to change its own strategy unilaterally, which implies it is a steady state
of the game dynamics. For a general-sum game, computing the Nash equilibrium is PPAD-hard
[Daskalakis, 2013] and the query complexity is exponential in the number of players [Rubinstein,
2016]. To help address these issues, a natural approach is to consider games with special structures.
In this paper, we focus on congestion games.
Congestion games are general-sum games with facilities (resources) shared among noncooperative
players [Rosenthal, 1973]. During the game, each player will decide what combination of facilities
to utilize, and popular facilities will become congested, which results in a possibly higher cost on
each user. One example of congestion game is the routing game [Fotakis et al., 2002], where each
player needs to travel from a given starting point to a destination point through some shared routes.
These routes are represented as a traffic graph and the facilities are the edges. Each player will
decide her path to go, and the more players use the same edge, the longer the edge travel time will be.
Congestion games also have wide applications in electrical grids [Ibars et al., 2010], internet routing
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

