Data augmentation for efficient learning from
parametric experts

Alexandre Galashov
DeepMind
agalashov@deepmind.com

Josh Merel∗
DeepMind
jsmerel@gmail.com

Nicolas Heess
DeepMind
heess@deepmind.com

Abstract
We present a simple, yet effective data-augmentation technique to enable dataefficient learning from parametric experts for reinforcement and imitation learning.
We focus on what we call the policy cloning setting, in which we use online or offline queries of an expert or expert policy to inform the behavior of a student policy.
This setting arises naturally in a number of problems, for instance as variants of
behavior cloning, or as a component of other algorithms such as DAGGER, policy
distillation or KL-regularized RL. Our approach, augmented policy cloning (APC),
uses synthetic states to induce feedback-sensitivity in a region around sampled
trajectories, thus dramatically reducing the environment interactions required for
successful cloning of the expert. We achieve highly data-efficient transfer of behavior from an expert to a student policy for high-degrees-of-freedom control problems.
We demonstrate the benefit of our method in the context of several existing and
widely used algorithms that include policy cloning as a constituent part. Moreover,
we highlight the benefits of our approach in two practically relevant settings (a)
expert compression, i.e. transfer to a student with fewer parameters; and (b) transfer
from privileged experts, i.e. where the expert has a different observation space than
the student, usually including access to privileged information.

1

Introduction

In various control and reinforcement learning settings, there is a need to transfer behavior from an
expert policy to a student policy. Broadly, when only samples from the expert policy are available, the
standard approach is to employ a version of regression from states to actions. This class of approaches
for producing a policy is known as behavioral cloning [Pomerleau, 1989, Michie and Sammut, 1996].
Behavioral cloning is quite flexible and supports the setting where the expert trajectories come from a
human teleoperating the relevant system directly, as well as various settings where the trajectories
are sampled from other controllers, which themselves may have been trained or scripted. However,
for any of the settings where the expert policy is actually available, rather than just samples from
the expert, it is reasonable to suspect that sampling random rollouts from the expert policy followed
by performing behavioral cloning is not the most efficient approach for transferring behavior from
the expert to the student. Once a trajectory has been sampled via an expert rollout, there is actually
additional information available that can be ascertained in the neighborhood of the trajectory, without
having to perform an additional rollout, via the local feedback properties of the expert.
We refer to this setting, where we want to transfer from an expert policy to a student policy, while
assuming the expert policy can be queried, as policy cloning. Naturally, there is still often an incentive
to reduce the total number of rollouts, which may require actually collecting data in an unsafe or costly
fashion, especially for real-world control problems. As such, there is a motivation to characterize any
∗

Work was done while at DeepMind

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

