JAHS-Bench-201: A Foundation For Research On
Joint Architecture And Hyperparameter Search

Archit Bansal1
Danny Stoll1
Maciej Janowski1
Arber Zela1
Frank Hutter1,2
1
2
University of Freiburg
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
{bansala,stolld,janowski,zelaa,fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
The past few years have seen the development of many benchmarks for Neural
Architecture Search (NAS), fueling rapid progress in NAS research. However,
recent work, which shows that good hyperparameter settings can be more important
than using the best architecture, calls for a shift in focus towards Joint Architecture
and Hyperparameter Search (JAHS). Therefore, we present JAHS-Bench-201, the
first collection of surrogate benchmarks for JAHS, built to also facilitate research
on multi-objective, cost-aware and (multi) multi-fidelity optimization algorithms.
To the best of our knowledge, JAHS-Bench-201 is based on the most extensive
dataset of neural network performance data in the public domain. It is composed
of approximately 161 million data points and 20 performance metrics for three
deep learning tasks, while featuring a 14-dimensional search and fidelity space
that extends the popular NAS-Bench-201 space. With JAHS-Bench-201, we hope
to democratize research on JAHS and lower the barrier to entry of an extremely
compute intensive field, e.g., by reducing the compute time to run a JAHS algorithm
from 5 days to only a few seconds.

1

Introduction

In recent years, research on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) [1] has made great strides
in the data-driven design of neural network architectures [2, 3] and training hyperparameters [4].
Arguably, this fast pace of research on AutoML algorithms originates in the availability of several
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) and Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) benchmarks.
Tabular NAS benchmarks, such as NAS-Bench-101 [5] and NAS-Bench-201 [6], pre-evaluate all
configurations in a given architecture search space and provide the results in a large table, which
allows researchers to simulate runs of NAS algorithms in seconds on a single CPU-core that would
have otherwise taken multiple days on a powerful GPU cluster. The availability of these benchmarks
democratized NAS research, enabling small academic labs to work on NAS and allowing scientific
comparisons between methods without confounding factors. The concept of tabular NAS benchmarks
has also been extended to larger spaces by means of surrogate benchmarks, such as NAS-Bench301 [7] and NAS-Bench-x11 [8].
While the availability of these cheap-to-evaluate NAS benchmarks has fueled the development of
NAS algorithms (with more than 1000 papers on NAS in the last two years [9]), this push focused
only on NAS in isolation, despite recent work showing that good hyperparameter settings can be
more important than using the best architecture [10]. It would thus be much more powerful to treat
these problems jointly, in what we thus call Joint Architecture and Hyperparameter Search (JAHS).
In order to facilitate work on JAHS, we build and release JAHS-Bench-201, an extended version of
the popular NAS-Bench-201 architecture space that includes several hyperparameters and supports
multi-fidelity, cost-aware and multi-objective optimization. Our individual contributions are:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

