EPIC-KITCHENS VISOR Benchmark
VIdeo Segmentations and Object Relations
ó∫

óπ

ó∫

ó∫

Ahmad Darkhalil
Dandan Shan
Bin Zhu
Jian Ma
∂
π
∂
π
∫
Amlan Kar
Richard Higgins
Sanja Fidler
David Fouhey
Dima Damen
∫

Uni. of Bristol, UK

π

Uni. of Michigan, US

∂

Uni. of Toronto, CA

ó

: Co-First Authors

Abstract
We introduce VISOR, a new dataset of pixel annotations and a benchmark suite
for segmenting hands and active objects in egocentric video. VISOR annotates
videos from EPIC-KITCHENS, which comes with a new set of challenges not
encountered in current video segmentation datasets. Specifically, we need to ensure
both short- and long-term consistency of pixel-level annotations as objects undergo
transformative interactions, e.g. an onion is peeled, diced and cooked - where we
aim to obtain accurate pixel-level annotations of the peel, onion pieces, chopping
board, knife, pan, as well as the acting hands. VISOR introduces an annotation
pipeline, AI-powered in parts, for scalability and quality. In total, we publicly
release 272K manual semantic masks of 257 object classes, 9.9M interpolated
dense masks, 67K hand-object relations, covering 36 hours of 179 untrimmed
videos. Along with the annotations, we introduce three challenges in video object
segmentation, interaction understanding and long-term reasoning.
For data, code and leaderboards: http://epic-kitchens.github.io/VISOR

1

Introduction

Consider a video capturing the tedious process of preparing bread, from obtaining, measuring and
mixing ingredients to kneading and shaping dough. Despite being a routine task, the discrete nature
of computer vision models, trained mostly from images, expects to recognise objects as either flour
or dough. Capturing the transformation through pixel-level annotations has not been attempted to
date. Building on top of EPIC-KITCHENS egocentric videos [12], VISOR utilises action labels
and provides sparse segmentations, of hands and active objects, with a rate of annotations so as
to represent both short (e.g. ‘add salt’) and long (‘knead dough’) temporal actions. In Fig. 1, we
introduce sample annotations from one video of VISOR.
Rich pixel-level annotations have transformed image understanding [17, 23] and autonomous driving [10, 13], amongst other tasks. By augmenting action labels with semantic segmentations, we hope
to enable complex video understanding capabilities. Previous efforts to incorporate spatio-temporal
annotations and object relations [15, 16, 19, 22] have only featured bounding boxes. A few seminal
video datasets [31, 41, 43] provide pixel labels over time, but are often short-term, and are not
associated with fine-grained action labels. We compare VISOR to other datasets in §2.
We obtain VISOR annotations via a new pipeline consisting of three stages that we describe in §3:
(i) identifying active objects that are of relevance to the current action, as well as their semantic label;
(ii) annotating pixel-level segments with an AI-powered interactive interface iterated with manual
quality-control checks; and (iii) relating objects spatially and temporally for short-term consistency
and hand-object relations.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

