GMMSeg: Gaussian Mixture based
Generative Semantic Segmentation Models

Chen Liang1,3∗† ,
1

CCAI, Zhejiang University

2

Wenguan Wang2∗ ,

Jiaxu Miao1 ,

Yi Yang1

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney

3

Baidu Research

https://github.com/leonnnop/GMMSeg

Abstract
Prevalent semantic segmentation solutions are, in essence, a dense discriminative
classifier of p(class |pixel feature). Though straightforward, this de facto paradigm
neglects the underlying data distribution p(pixel feature |class), and struggles to
identify out-of-distribution data. Going beyond this, we propose GMMSeg, a new
family of segmentation models that rely on a dense generative classifier for the
joint distribution p(pixel feature, class). For each class, GMMSeg builds Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMMs) via Expectation-Maximization (EM), so as to capture
class-conditional densities. Meanwhile, the deep dense representation is end-to-end
trained in a discriminative manner, i.e., maximizing p(class |pixel feature). This
endows GMMSeg with the strengths of both generative and discriminative models.
With a variety of segmentation architectures and backbones, GMMSeg outperforms
the discriminative counterparts on three closed-set datasets. More impressively,
without any modification, GMMSeg even performs well on open-world datasets.
We believe this work brings fundamental insights into the related fields.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation aims to explain visual semantics at the pixel level. It is typically considered as
a problem of pixel-wise classification, i.e., assigning a class label c ∈ {1,· · ·, C} to each pixel data x.
Under this regime, deep-neural solutions are naturally built as a combination of two parts (Fig. 1(a)):
an encoder-decoder, dense feature extractor that maps x to a high-dimensional feature representation
x, and a dense classifier that conducts C-way classification given input pixel feature x. Starting from
the first end-to-end segmentation solution – fully convolutional networks (FCN) [1], researchers leave
the classifier as parametric softmax, and fully devote to improving the dense feature extractor for
learning better representation. As a result, a huge amount of FCN-based solutions [2–5] emerged and
their state-of-the-art was further pushed forward by recent Transformer [6]-style algorithms [7–10].
From a probabilistic perspective, the softmax classifier, supervised by the cross-entropy loss together
with the feature extractor, directly models the class probability given an input, i.e., posterior p(c|x).
This is known as a discriminative classifier, as the conditional probability distribution discriminates
directly between the different values of c [11]. As discriminative classifiers directly find the classification rule with the smallest error rate, they often give excellent performance in downstream tasks, and
hence become the de facto paradigm in segmentation. Yet, due to the discriminative nature, softmaxbased segmentation models suffer from several limitations: First, they only learn the decision boundary
between classes, without modeling the underlying data distribution [11]. Second, as only one weight
vector is learned per class, they assume unimodality for each class [12, 13], bearing no within-class
variation. Third, they learn a prediction space where the model accuracy deteriorates rapidly away
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Work partly done during an internship at Baidu Research.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

