On the Adversarial Robustness of Mixture of Experts

Joan Puigcerver
Google Research

Rodolphe Jenatton
Google Research

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research

Carlos Riquelme
Google Research

Srinadh Bhojanapalli
Google Research

Abstract
Adversarial robustness is a key desirable property of neural networks. It has been
empirically shown to be affected by their sizes, with larger networks being typically
more robust. Recently, Bubeck and Sellke [3] proved a lower bound on the Lipschitz
constant of functions that fit the training data in terms of their number of parameters. This raises an interesting open question, do—and can—functions with more
parameters, but not necessarily more computational cost, have better robustness?
We study this question for sparse Mixture of Expert models (MoEs), that make it
possible to scale up the model size for a roughly constant computational cost. We
theoretically show that under certain conditions on the routing and the structure
of the data, MoEs can have significantly smaller Lipschitz constants than their
dense counterparts. The robustness of MoEs can suffer when the highest weighted
experts for an input implement sufficiently different functions. We next empirically
evaluate the robustness of MoEs on ImageNet using adversarial attacks and show
they are indeed more robust than dense models with the same computational cost.
We make key observations showing the robustness of MoEs to the choice of experts,
highlighting the redundancy of experts in models trained in practice.

1

Introduction

Adversarial robustness refers to prediction robustness of a given machine learning model to adversarial,
but bounded, changes to the input. Neural networks trained with standard classification objectives have
been shown to have poor adversarial robustness [25], a property attributed to their overparametrization.
Conversely, in practice, larger models, that have more parameters and higher computation cost, have
shown better robustness [20, 26, 1, 12].
In a recent work, Bubeck and Sellke [3] studied this phenomenon from a theoretical perspective,
by analyzing the relationship between model size and its Lipschitz constant - which measures the
sensitivity of a function to changes in the input. In particular the authors proved that any function
with P parameters,
that memorizes N input data points in D dimensions, has a Lipschitz constant
q
N ·D
of at least O(
P ). This shows that, on a given dataset, larger models can have better robustness
(smaller Lipschitz constant). Note that as this is only a lower bound, it does not guarantee that larger
models will indeed have a smaller Lipschitz constant. Interestingly, the result is agnostic to other
properties of the function, such as its computation cost, or specific architecture.
Given the above result it is natural to wonder: can one increase the model size, without increasing
the computation cost, and enjoy better robustness? An increasingly popular class of such models are
Mixture of Experts (MoE) [23]. MoE models have multiple expert sub-models, and a routing function
that selects for each input a small subset of the experts and routes the input only to them. Neural
networks with MoE layers, such as Switch Transformer [10] in NLP, and V-MoE [22] in Computer
Vision, have been shown to achieve superior performance in comparison to their dense counterparts,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

