Scalable Distributional Robustness in a Class of Non
Convex Optimization with Guarantees

Avinandan Bose
University of Washington
avibose@cs.washington.edu

Arunesh Sinha
Rutgers University
arunesh.sinha@rutgers.edu

Tien Mai
Singapore Management University
atmai@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) has shown lot of promise in providing
robustness in learning as well as sample based optimization problems. We endeavor
to provide DRO solutions for a class of sum of fractionals, non-convex optimization
which is used for decision making in prominent areas such as facility location and
security games. In contrast to previous work, we find it more tractable to optimize
the equivalent variance regularized form of DRO rather than the minimax form.
We transform the variance regularized form to a mixed-integer second order cone
program (MISOCP), which, while guaranteeing near global optimality, does not
scale enough to solve problems with real world data-sets. We further propose
two abstraction approaches based on clustering and stratified sampling to increase
scalability, which we then use for real world data-sets. Importantly, we provide near
global optimality guarantees for our approach and show experimentally that our
solution quality is better than the locally optimal ones achieved by state-of-the-art
gradient-based methods. We experimentally compare our different approaches and
baselines, and reveal nuanced properties of a DRO solution.

1

Introduction

Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) is a popular approach employed in robust machine
learning. Mostly, if not always, these works have focussed on the task of classification or regression.
However, often in practical applications the end goal of learning is a decision output z, which requires
yet another complex optimization that uses the output b
x1 , . . . , b
xN of a regressor f (·). For example,
in facility location problem the learning of facility values is followed by an optimization using the
values predicted to decide where to locate facilities and in security games adversary behavior model
is learned and then an optimal defense allocation computed based on the learned model. Often the
learning output is provided as public datasets with no access to the underlying private dataset used for
such learning. In this set-up, we aim to provide robustness at the decision making level with access to
only the non-robust learning output b
x1 , . . . , b
xN .
However, often the objective F (z, x) of decision optimization is non-convex in the learning system
output x unlike the convex objective of classification or regression, presenting significant scalability
challenges. In general, for decision making and specifically for the problem domains we consider,
global optimality is important as sub-optimal decisions can lead to large revenue loss or loss of life;
thus, the local optimality provided by gradient based methods is not sufficient. As a consequence, in
this paper, we study the scenario of calculating DRO decisions using the given multi-dimensional
b1 , . . . , b
real valued outputs x
xN of a non-robust learned f . A first result (Theorem 1) characterizes the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

