Branch & Learn for Recursively and Iteratively
Solvable Problems in Predict+Optimize

Xinyi Hu1 , Jasper C.H. Lee2 , Jimmy H.M. Lee1 , Allen Z. Zhong1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
2
Department of Computer Sciences & Institute for Foundations of Data Science
University of Wisconsin–Madison, WI, USA
{xyhu,jlee,zwzhong}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jasper.lee@wisc.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes Branch & Learn, a framework for Predict+Optimize to tackle
optimization problems containing parameters that are unknown at the time of
solving. Given an optimization problem solvable by a recursive algorithm satisfying
simple conditions, we generalize previous work substantially by showing how a
corresponding learning algorithm can be constructed directly and methodically
from the recursive algorithm. Our framework applies also to iterative algorithms by
viewing them as a degenerate form of recursion. Extensive experimentation shows
better performance for our proposal over classical and state of the art approaches.

1

Introduction

In the intersection of machine learning and constrained optimization, the Predict+Optimize framework
tackles optimization problems with parameters that are unknown at solving time. Such uncertainty is
common in daily life and industry. For example, retailers need to pick items to restock for maximizing
profit, yet consumer demand is a-priori unknown.
The task is to i) predict the unknown parameters, then ii) solve the optimization problem using
the predicted parameters, such that the resulting solutions are good even under true parameters.
Traditionally, the parameter prediction uses standard machine learning techniques, with error measures
independent of the optimization problem. Thus, the predicted parameters may in fact lead to a lowquality solution for the (true) optimization problem despite being “high-quality" for the error metric.
The Predict+Optimize framework uses the more effective regret function [3, 6, 9] as the error metric,
capturing the difference in objective (computed under the true parameters) between the estimated
and true optimal solutions. However, the regret function is usually not (sub-)differentiable, and
gradient-based methods do not apply.
Prior works have focused on the regime where the optimization problems contain unknown objective
and known constraints, and proposed ways to overcome the non-differentiability of the regret. They
can be roughly divided into two approaches: approximation and exact. The former tries to compute
the (approximate) gradients of (approximations of) the regret function. Elmachtoub et al. [6] propose
a differentiable surrogate function for the regret function, while Wilder et al. [17] relax the integral
objective in constrained optimization and solve a regularized quadratic programming problem. Mandy
and Guns [12] focus on mixed integer linear programs and propose an interior point based approach.
While novel, approximation approaches are not always reliable. Exact approaches exploit the
structure of optimization problems to train models without computing gradients. Demirović et al. [4]
investigate problems with the ranking property and propose a large neighborhood search method to
learn a linear prediction function. They [5] further extend the method to enable Predict+Optimize for
problems amenable to tabular dynamic programming (DP).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

