Learning Generalizable Models for Vehicle Routing
Problems via Knowledge Distillation

Jieyi Bi1,† , Yining Ma2,† , Jiahai Wang1,∗ , Zhiguang Cao3,∗ , Jinbiao Chen1 ,
Yuan Sun4 , and Yeow Meng Chee2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
National University of Singapore
3
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, A*STAR
4
University of Melbourne
bijy6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yiningma@u.nus.edu
wangjiah@mail.sysu.edu.cn, zhiguangcao@outlook.com
chenjb69@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yuan.sun@unimelb.edu.au,
ymchee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent neural methods for vehicle routing problems always train and test the deep
models on the same instance distribution (i.e., uniform). To tackle the consequent
cross-distribution generalization concerns, we bring the knowledge distillation
to this field and propose an Adaptive Multi-Distribution Knowledge Distillation
(AMDKD) scheme for learning more generalizable deep models. Particularly, our
AMDKD leverages various knowledge from multiple teachers trained on exemplar
distributions to yield a light-weight yet generalist student model. Meanwhile,
we equip AMDKD with an adaptive strategy that allows the student to concentrate on difficult distributions, so as to absorb hard-to-master knowledge more
effectively. Extensive experimental results show that, compared with the baseline
neural methods, our AMDKD is able to achieve competitive results on both unseen
in-distribution and out-of-distribution instances, which are either randomly synthesized or adopted from benchmark datasets (i.e., TSPLIB and CVRPLIB). Notably,
our AMDKD is generic, and consumes less computational resources for inference.

1

Introduction

The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is a class of NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems with
a wide variety of practical applications, such as freight delivery [1], last-mile logistics [2] and ridehailing [3]. For decades, the problem has been studied intensively in computer science and operations
research, with numerous exact and (approximate) heuristic algorithms proposed [4–7]. Although
the heuristic algorithms are usually preferred in practice given their relatively higher computational
efficiency, they heavily rely on hand-crafted rules and domain knowledge, which may still leave
room for improvement. As a promising alternative, deep (reinforcement) learning could be used to
automatically learn a heuristic (or policy) for VRPs in an end-to-end fashion, which has aroused
widespread attention in recent years [8–16]. Compared to the traditional ones, the learned heuristics
based on deep models could further reduce computational costs while ensuring desirable solutions.
However, existing deep models suffer from inferior generalization with respect to distributions of
node coordinates. To be concrete, they often train and test neural networks on instances of the same
†
∗

Equally contributed.
Jiahai Wang and Zhiguang Cao are the corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

