Shape And Structure Preserving Differential Privacy

Carlos Soto
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA
cjs7363@psu.edu

Karthik Bharath
School of Mathematical Sciences
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
Karthik.Bharath@nottingham.ac.uk

Matthew Reimherr
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA
mreimherr@psu.edu

Aleksandra Slavkovic
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA
sesa@psu.edu

Abstract
It is common for data structures such as images and shapes of 2D objects to
be represented as points on a manifold. The utility of a mechanism to produce
sanitized differentially private estimates from such data is intimately linked to
how compatible it is with the underlying structure and geometry of the space. In
particular, as recently shown, utility of the Laplace mechanism on a positively
curved manifold, such as Kendall’s 2D shape space, is significantly influenced
by the curvature. Focusing on the problem of sanitizing the Fréchet mean of a
sample of points on a manifold, we exploit the characterisation of the mean as the
minimizer of an objective function comprised of the sum of squared distances and
develop a K-norm gradient mechanism on Riemannian manifolds that favors values
that produce gradients close to the the zero of the objective function. For the case
of positively curved manifolds, we describe how using the gradient of the squared
distance function offers better control over sensitivity than the Laplace mechanism,
and demonstrate this numerically on a dataset of shapes of corpus callosa. Further
illustrations of the mechanism’s utility on a sphere and the manifold of symmetric
positive definite matrices are also presented.

1

Introduction

The amount of publicly available data has increased exponentially over the past decade and alongside
with it the need for data privacy has emerged. As data gets increasingly more complex from scalar
values to data on nonlinear manifolds, such as images, shapes and covariance matrices, there is
a need for data privacy algorithms to adapt to the nonlinearity in, and preserve the geometric
structure of, the data or parameter space. Intuitively, when the geometry of the manifold significantly
influences sensitivity bounds through curvature-dependent terms, one would expect a structurepreserving privacy mechanism developed directly on manifolds to have better utility than its Euclidean
counterpart on higher-dimensional ambient spaces within which the manifold is embedded. This
was observed in recent work on a Laplace mechanism on manifolds [Reimherr et al., 2021], and
especially for manifolds with positive curvature.
Apart from spherical, or directional, data, an archetypal example of data on a positively curved
manifold arises in statistical shape analysis of planar configurations representing 2D objects; the
Kendall shape space of 2D points [Kendall, 1984] modulo shape-preserving similarity transformations
(e.g., rotations) is a Riemannian manifold with positive curvature. It is evident in this setting that
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

