MoGDE: Boosting Mobile Monocular 3D Object
Detection with Ground Depth Estimation

Yunsong Zhou 1 Quan Liu 1 Hongzi Zhu 1∗ Yunzhe Li 1 Shan Chang 2 Minyi Guo 1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Donghua University
{zhouyunsong,liuquan2017,hongzi,yunzhe.li,guo-my}@sjtu.edu.cn changshan@dhu.edu.cn

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection (Mono3D) in mobile settings (e.g., on a vehicle, a
drone, or a robot) is an important yet challenging task. Due to the near-far disparity
phenomenon of monocular vision and the ever-changing camera pose, it is hard to
acquire high detection accuracy, especially for far objects. Inspired by the insight
that the depth of an object can be well determined according to the depth of the
ground where it stands, in this paper, we propose a novel Mono3D framework,
called MoGDE, which constantly estimates the corresponding ground depth of an
image and then utilizes the estimated ground depth information to guide Mono3D.
To this end, we utilize a pose detection network to estimate the pose of the camera
and then construct a feature map portraying pixel-level ground depth according
to the 3D-to-2D perspective geometry. Moreover, to improve Mono3D with the
estimated ground depth, we design an RGB-D feature fusion network based on the
transformer structure, where the long-range self-attention mechanism is utilized
to effectively identify ground-contacting points and pin the corresponding ground
depth to the image feature map. We conduct extensive experiments on the realworld KITTI dataset. The results demonstrate that MoGDE can effectively improve
the Mono3D accuracy and robustness for both near and far objects. MoGDE yields
the best performance compared with the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin
and is ranked number one on the KITTI 3D benchmark.

1

Introduction

Building on the promising progress achieved in 2D object detection in recent years [41, 40], 3D object
detection, particularly on moving agents, has received increasing attention from both industry and
academia as an important component in many applications, ranging from autonomous vehicles [17]
and drones, to robotic manipulation and augmented reality applications. Compared to LiDAR-based
[12, 36, 42, 43, 23, 63] and stereo-based [10, 11, 21, 35, 38, 54] methods, a much cheaper, more
energy-efficient, and easier-to-deploy alternative, i.e., monocular 3D object detection (Mono3D),
remains an open and challenging research field. A practical Mono3D detector for moving agents
should meet the following two requirements: 1) the 3D bounding box produced by the Mono3D
detector should be accurate enough, not only for near objects but also for very distant objects, to
secure, for instance, high-priority driving safety applications; 2) the Mono3D detector should remain
robust in mobile scenarios, where the camera pose inevitably changes along with the movement of a
mobile agent.
In the literature, recent Mono3D methods with complex network structures [62, 33, 52, 37, 48] have
achieved considerably high accuracy for near objects, but the predicted 3D bounding boxes for far
objects are often ill-posed due to the lack of depth cues. This huge disparity between near and
far objects lies in the nature of monocular vision. Specifically, as depicted in Figure 1 (a), equal
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

