MOMA-LRG: Language-Refined Graphs for
Multi-Object Multi-Actor Activity Parsing

Zelun Luo, Zane Durante∗, Linden Li∗, Wanze Xie,
Ruochen Liu, Emily Jin, Zhuoyi Huang, Lun Yu Li,
Jiajun Wu, Juan Carlos Niebles, Ehsan Adeli, Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University
{alanzluo, durante, lindenli, wanzexie, ruochenl, emilyjin, zhuoyih, tinally}@stanford.edu
{jiajunwu, jniebles, eadeli, feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Website: https://moma.stanford.edu/,
Toolkit: https://github.com/StanfordVL/moma/
Documentation: https://momaapi.readthedocs.io/

Abstract
Video-language models (VLMs), large models pre-trained on numerous but noisy
video-text pairs from the internet, have revolutionized activity recognition through
their remarkable generalization and open-vocabulary capabilities. While complex
human activities are often hierarchical and compositional, most existing tasks
for evaluating VLMs focus only on high-level video understanding, making it
difficult to accurately assess and interpret the ability of VLMs to understand
complex and fine-grained human activities. Inspired by the recently proposed
MOMA framework, we define activity graphs as a single universal representation
of human activities that encompasses video understanding at the activity, subactivity, and atomic action level. We redefine activity parsing as the overarching
task of activity graph generation, requiring understanding human activities across
all three levels. To facilitate the evaluation of models on activity parsing, we
introduce MOMA-LRG (Multi-Object Multi-Actor Language-Refined Graphs),
a large dataset of complex human activities with activity graph annotations that
can be readily transformed into natural language sentences. Lastly, we present a
model-agnostic and lightweight approach to adapting and evaluating VLMs by
incorporating structured knowledge from activity graphs into VLMs, addressing
the individual limitations of language and graphical models. We demonstrate
strong performance on activity parsing and few-shot video classification, and our
framework is intended to foster future research in the joint modeling of videos,
graphs, and language.

1

Introduction

Computer vision is currently undergoing a paradigm shift from models trained on crowd-labeled
data [1, 2] to large-scale base models [3, 4, 5, 6, 7] trained on noisy but readily accessible image-text
pairs. Video understanding is no exception, with the rise of Video-Language Models (VLMs) [8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14] that have shown remarkable generalization capabilities on videos from new domains.
When compared to fixed-set video classification [2, 15, 16], VLMs are able to learn and represent a
wider variety of concepts and demonstrate superior low-shot abilities on many downstream tasks due
to the flexibility and open-vocabulary nature of language. Besides, while annotating videos remains
∗

These authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

