Dynamic pricing and assortment under a contextual
MNL demand
Vineet Goyal
Columbia University
New York, NY
vgoyal@ieor.columbia.edu

Noemie Perivier
Columbia University
New York, NY
np2708@columbia.edu

Abstract
We consider dynamic multi-product pricing and assortment problems under an
unknown demand over T periods, where in each period, the seller decides on the
price for each product or the assortment of products to offer to a customer who
chooses according to an unknown Multinomial Logit Model (MNL). Such problems
arise in many applications, including online retail and advertising. We propose
a randomized dynamic pricing policy based
√ on a variant of the Online Newton
Step algorithm (ONS) that achieves a O(d T log(T )) regret guarantee under an
adversarial arrival model. We also present a new optimistic algorithm for the
adversarial MNL contextual bandits problem, which achieves a better dependency
than the state-of-the-art algorithms in a problem-dependent constant
κ2 (potentially
√
exponentially small). Our regret upper bound scales√as Õ(d κ2 T + log(T )/κ2 ),
which gives a stronger bound than the existing Õ(d T /κ2 ) guarantees.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the contextual dynamic pricing and assortment optimization problems faced
by a seller who sequentially observes a contextual demand under bandit feedback. The goal is to
learn the underlying model parameters in order to maximize the seller’s profit. These problems arise
in numerous applications, including pricing and product recommendation in online retail, as well as
click-through rate predictions for web search results. Sequential learning is especially important in
settings involving short selling seasons or where no historical data is available.
Problem formulation. In both the dynamic pricing and assortment problems, we consider a seller
who sells a set of N products over a time horizon of T periods. A new customer arrives in each
period t and is offered a set of products or prices. In the pricing problem, the customer arrives
with a consideration set and the seller has to decide on the prices of the different products in the
consideration set. In the assortment problem, the seller selects the subset of products to offer to the
customer. In both cases we assume that the customer’s purchase decisions are made according to a
multinomial logit model (MNL)([32], [28]) which is widely used in modeling customer preferences.
In both problems, the objective is to maximize the seller’s expected profit, which is equivalent to
minimizing its cumulative expected regret (i.e., the difference between the optimal value and the
value obtained by following a given policy).
In this paper, we study a feature-based model, where the product utilities are a function of both
products and customers features. In particular, we assume that in each period t, the customer’s utility
∗
∗
for each product j ∈ [N ] can be written under the form x⊤
t,j θ , where θ is an unknown model
d
parameter and xt,j ∈ R is a feature vector, which can be adversarially chosen (see Sections 2.1 and
3.1 for exact definitions of the problems). Furthermore, we allow feature-dependent price sensitivities
∗
in our pricing setting and suppose that the price sensitivities can be expressed as x⊤
t,j α for some
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

