Efficiently Computing Local Lipschitz Constants of
Neural Networks via Bound Propagation

1

Zhouxing Shi1 , Yihan Wang1 , Huan Zhang2 , Zico Kolter2,3 , Cho-Jui Hsieh1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Bosch Center for AI
zshi@cs.ucla.edu, yihanwang@cs.ucla.edu, huan@huan-zhang.com
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu, chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Lipschitz constants are connected to many properties of neural networks, such as
robustness, fairness, and generalization. Existing methods for computing Lipschitz
constants either produce relatively loose upper bounds or are limited to small
networks. In this paper, we develop an efficient framework for computing the `1
local Lipschitz constant of a neural network by tightly upper bounding the norm of
Clarke Jacobian via linear bound propagation. We formulate the computation of
local Lipschitz constants with a linear bound propagation process on a high-order
backward graph induced by the chain rule of Clarke Jacobian. To enable linear
bound propagation, we derive tight linear relaxations for specific nonlinearities
in Clarke Jacobian. This formulate unifies existing ad-hoc approaches such as
RecurJac, which can be seen as a special case of ours with weaker relaxations.
The bound propagation framework also allows us to easily borrow the popular
Branch-and-Bound (BaB) approach from neural network verification to further
tighten Lipschitz constants. Experiments show that on tiny models, our method
produces comparable bounds compared to exact methods that cannot scale to
slightly larger models; on larger models, our method efficiently produces tighter
results than existing relaxed or naive methods, and our method scales to much
larger practical models that previous works could not handle. We also demonstrate
an application on provable monotonicity analysis. Code is available at https:
//github.com/shizhouxing/Local-Lipschitz-Constants.

1

Introduction

Lipschitz constants are important for characterizing many properties of neural networks, including
robustness [44, 19, 45, 59, 21], fairness [12, 25], generalization [3], and explanation [14]. Local
Lipschitz constants, which only need to hold for a small local region, can more precisely characterize
the local behavior of a network. Intuitively they characterize how fast the output of the network
changes between any two input within the region.
It is challenging to exactly and efficiently compute local Lipschitz constants. Naive approaches
such as computing the product of the induced norm for all layers cannot capture local information
and typically produce vacuous bounds. To compute tight and exact local Lipschitz constants,
Jordan & Dimakis [24] considered small ReLU networks (e.g., up to tens of neurons), by solving a
mixed-integer programming (MIP) problem to bound the norm of Clarke’s generalized Jacobian [8].
However, solving MIP is often too costly and cannot scale to slightly larger networks. On the other
hand, RecurJac [59] (an improved version of Fast-Lip [51]) is a specialized recursive algorithm for
bounding the Jacobian and computing local Lipschitz constants, which is also relatively efficient but
the produced bounds are relatively loose. Moreover, most of the existing works on local Lipschitz
constants only used small toy models and cannot feasibly handle larger practical networks.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

