Adversarial Unlearning:
Reducing Confidence Along Adversarial Directions

Amrith Setlur1,∗

Benjamin Eysenbach1
1

Carnegie Mellon University

Virginia Smith1
2

Sergey Levine2

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Supervised learning methods trained with maximum likelihood objectives often
overfit on training data. Most regularizers that prevent overfitting look to increase
confidence on additional examples (e.g., data augmentation, adversarial training),
or reduce it on training data (e.g., label smoothing). In this work we propose a
complementary regularization strategy that reduces confidence on self-generated
examples. The method, which we call RCAD (Reducing Confidence along Adversarial Directions), aims to reduce confidence on out-of-distribution examples
lying along directions adversarially chosen to increase training loss. In contrast to
adversarial training, RCAD does not try to robustify the model to output the original label, but rather regularizes it to have reduced confidence on points generated
using much larger perturbations than in conventional adversarial training. RCAD
can be easily integrated into training pipelines with a few lines of code. Despite its
simplicity, we find on many classification benchmarks that RCAD can be added to
existing techniques (e.g., label smoothing, MixUp training) to increase test accuracy by 1–3% in absolute value, with more significant gains in the low data regime.
We also provide a theoretical analysis that helps to explain these benefits in simplified settings, showing that RCAD can provably help the model unlearn spurious
features in the training data.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning techniques typically consider training models to make accurate predictions on
fresh test examples drawn from the same distribution as training data. Unfortunately, it is well
known that maximizing the likelihood of the training data alone may result in overfitting. Prior work
broadly considers two approaches to combat this issue. Some methods train on additional examples,
e.g., generated via augmentations [53, 10, 66] or adversarial updates [14, 36, 4]. Others modify
the objective by using alternative losses and/or regularization terms (e.g., label smoothing [56, 39],
MixUp [69], robust objectives [65, 22]). In effect, these prior approaches either make the model’s
predictions more certain on new training examples or make the distribution over potential models
less certain.
Existing regularization methods can be seen as providing a certain inductive bias for the model, e.g.,
the model’s weights should be small (i.e., weight decay), the model’s predictions should vary linearly
between training examples (i.e., MixUp). In this paper we identify a different inductive bias: the
model’s predictions should be less confident on out-of-distribution inputs that look nothing like the
training examples. We turn this form of inductive bias into a simple regularizer, whose benefits are
complementary to existing regularization strategies. To instantiate such a method, we must be able to
sample out-of-distribution examples. For this, we propose a simple approach: generating adversarial
examples [38, 14] using very large step sizes (orders-of-magnitude larger than traditional adversarial
∗

Correspondence can be sent to asetlur@cs.cmu.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

