SoLar: Sinkhorn Label Refinery for Imbalanced
Partial-Label Learning

Haobo Wang1 Mingxuan Xia2 Yixuan Li3 Yuren Mao2
Lei Feng45 Gang Chen1 Junbo Zhao1∗
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Computing based Big Data of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
4
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University
5
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN
{wanghaobo,xiamingxuan,yuren.mao,cg,j.zhao}@zju.edu.cn
sharonli@cs.wisc.edu, lfeng@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
Partial-label learning (PLL) is a peculiar weakly-supervised learning task where
the training samples are generally associated with a set of candidate labels instead
of single ground truth. While a variety of label disambiguation methods have
been proposed in this domain, they normally assume a class-balanced scenario
that may not hold in many real-world applications. Empirically, we observe
degenerated performance of the prior methods when facing the combinatorial
challenge from the long-tailed distribution and partial-labeling. In this work, we
first identify the major reasons that the prior work failed. We subsequently propose
SoLar, a novel Optimal Transport-based framework that allows to refine the
disambiguated labels towards matching the marginal class prior distribution. SoLar
additionally incorporates a new and systematic mechanism for estimating the longtailed class prior distribution under the PLL setup. Through extensive experiments,
SoLar exhibits substantially superior results on standardized benchmarks compared
to the previous state-of-the-art PLL methods. Code and data are available at:
https://github.com/hbzju/SoLar.

1

Introduction

The remarkable success of deep learning typically requires collecting massive labeled data, which
is notoriously labor-intensive. Of particular concern, data labeling can suffer from inherent and
pervasive label ambiguity. Take Figure 1 (a) as an example, a Mule can be visually similar to both
Donkeys and Horses, which hinders non-expert annotators from recognizing the true breed. Similar
cases also arise in many real-world applications, such as automatic image annotation [1], bird song
recognition [2], and facial age estimation [3]. To deal with ambiguous supervision, partial-label
learning (PLL) [4, 5], which allows each training example to be annotated by a set of candidate labels,
has attracted significant attention from the community. A plethora of methods have been developed
to tackle this problem, including pseudo-labeling methods [6, 7], graph-based methods [8, 9, 10], etc.
Despite the promise, existing PLL methods have been commonly driven by the assumption that
training data consists of class-balanced distribution, which may not hold in practice. In many realworld scenarios, training data exhibits a long-tailed label distribution [11]. That is, many labels occur
infrequently in the training data. Concerningly, the imbalanced data can exacerbate the fundamental
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

