Better Uncertainty Calibration via Proper Scores for
Classification and Beyond
Sebastian G. Gruber
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Frankfurt, Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
sebastian.gruber@dkfz.de
Florian Buettner
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Frankfurt, Germany
Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
florian.buettner@dkfz.de

Abstract
With model trustworthiness being crucial for sensitive real-world applications,
practitioners are putting more and more focus on improving the uncertainty calibration of deep neural networks. Calibration errors are designed to quantify the
reliability of probabilistic predictions but their estimators are usually biased and
inconsistent. In this work, we introduce the framework of proper calibration errors,
which relates every calibration error to a proper score and provides a respective
upper bound with optimal estimation properties. This relationship can be used
to reliably quantify the model calibration improvement. We theoretically and
empirically demonstrate the shortcomings of commonly used estimators compared
to our approach. Due to the wide applicability of proper scores, this gives a natural
extension of recalibration beyond classification.

1

Introduction

Deep learning became a dominant cornerstone of machine learning research in the last decade and
deep neural networks can surpass human-level predictive performance on a wide range of tasks [17,
19, 47]. However, Guo et al. [14] have shown that for modern neural networks, better classification
accuracy can come at the cost of systematic overconfidence in their predictions. Practitioners in
sensitive forecasting domains, such as cancer diagnostics [17], genotype-based disease prediction
[25] or climate prediction [59], require for models to not only have high predictive power but also
to reliably communicate uncertainty. This raises the need to quantify and improve the quality
of predictive uncertainty, ideally via a dedicated metric. An uncertainty-aware model should give
probabilistic predictions which represent the true likelihood of events depending on the very prediction.
To quantify the extend to which this condition is violated, calibration errors have been introduced.
In general, their estimators are usually biased [46] and inconsistent [53]. This, in turn, is highly
problematic since we cannot quantify how reliable a model is if we do not know how reliable the
metric is. Especially the medical field is a domain that requires high model trustworthiness, but with
low expert availability and/or disease frequency we often encounter a small data regime. Resampling
strategies can be viable options for optimization on small datasets but also reduce the evaluation set
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

