Trimmed Maximum Likelihood Estimation for
Robust Learning in Generalized Linear Models

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research
pranjalawasthi@google.com
Weihao Kong
Google Research
weihaokong@google.com

Abhimanyu Das
Google Research
abhidas@google.com
Rajat Sen
Google Research
senrajat@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of learning generalized linear models under adversarial
corruptions. We analyze a classical heuristic called the iterative trimmed maximum
likelihood estimator which is known to be effective against label corruptions in
practice. Under label corruptions, we prove that this simple estimator achieves
minimax near-optimal risk on a wide range of generalized linear models, including Gaussian regression, Poisson regression and Binomial regression. Finally,
we extend the estimator to the more challenging setting of label and covariate
corruptions and demonstrate its robustness and optimality in that setting as well.

1

Introduction

Generalized linear models (GLMs) are an elegant framework for statistical modeling of data and
are widely used in many applications [NW72, DB18, MN19]. A generalized linear model captures
the relationship of labels (or observations) y to covariates x via the conditional density f (y|β > x) ∝
exp(y · β > x − b(β > x)). Here β is the parameter of the model. Parameter estimation in GLMs is done
via the standard maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) paradigm and has been extensively studied
[NW72]. While GLMs offer a mathematically tractable formulation for statistical modeling, real data
rarely satisfies the generative process of a GLM and as a result there has been considerable interest in
developing robust learning algorithms for GLMs [LW11, NRWY12, PSBR18]. The predominant way
to model misspecification or adversarial corruptions in the data is Huber’s -contamination model
[Hub11] and its recent extensions that allow for stronger adversaries [DKK+ 19]. These models
assume that a small  fraction of the data is corrupted by an adversary. Furthermore, the adversary
can be restricted to either only corrupting the labels y, or be allowed to corrupt both the covariates x
and the labels y for an  fraction of the data.
Various algorithms have been proposed for robust estimation in generalized linear models. One
line of work proposed computationally intractable algorithms that are based on non-convex M
estimators [Hub11, LW11] or by running tournaments over an exponentially large search space
[Yat85]. Another line of work proposes polynomial time algorithms that either achieve sub-optimal
error rates [PSBR18] or only apply to restricted settings such as the noise being heavy tailed [ZZ21].
In practical settings a simple heuristic namely the iterative trimmed estimator has been shown to
work well under settings where only the labels are corrupted [SS19b]. However, from a theoretical
perspective the iterative trimmed MLE estimator has only been analyzed under restrictive settings
such as when the underlying GLM is a Gaussian regression model.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

