Geo-SIC: Learning Deformable Geometric
Shapes in Deep Image Classifiers

Jian Wang
Computer Science
University of Virginia
jw4hv@virginia.edu

Miaomiao Zhang
Computer Science & Electrical Computer Engineering
University of Virginia
mz8rr@virginia.edu

Abstract
Deformable shapes provide important and complex geometric features of objects
presented in images. However, such information is oftentimes missing or underutilized as implicit knowledge in many image analysis tasks. This paper presents
Geo-SIC, the first deep learning model to learn deformable shapes in a deformation
space for an improved performance of image classification. We introduce a newly
designed framework that (i) simultaneously derives features from both image and
latent shape spaces with large intra-class variations; and (ii) gains increased model
interpretability by allowing direct access to the underlying geometric features of
image data. In particular, we develop a boosted classification network, equipped
with an unsupervised learning of geometric shape representations characterized by
diffeomorphic transformations within each class. In contrast to previous approaches
using pre-extracted shapes, our model provides a more fundamental approach by
naturally learning the most relevant shape features jointly with an image classifier.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on both simulated 2D images
and real 3D brain magnetic resonance (MR) images. Experimental results show
that our model substantially improves the image classification accuracy with an
additional benefit of increased model interpretability. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/jw4hv/Geo-SIC

1

Introduction

Deformable shapes have been identified to aid image classification for decades, as they capture
geometric features that describe changes and variability of objects with complex structures from
images (5; 18; 26). Bountiful literature demonstrates that the robustness of shapes to variations
in image intensity and texture (e.g., noisy or corrupted data) makes it a reliable cue for image
analysis tasks (31; 26; 43). For example, abnormal shape changes of anatomical structures are strong
predictors of serious diseases and health problems, e.g., brain shrinkage caused by neurodegenerative
disorders (16; 49), irregular heart motions caused by cardiac arrhythmia (3; 8), and pulmonary edema
caused by infectious lung diseases (42; 44). Existing methods have studied various representations of
geometric shapes, including landmarks (7; 9; 14), point clouds (1), binary segmentations (10; 38),
and medial axes (32). A very recent research area in geometric deep learning (11; 33) has investigated
mathematical representations of shapes in the form of analytic graphs or points and then uses them
to synthesize shapes. These aforementioned techniques often ignore objects’ interior structures;
hence do not capture the intricacies of complex objects in images. In contrast, deformation-based
shape representations (based on elastic deformations or fluid flows) focus on highly detailed shape
information from images (13; 35). With the underlying assumption that objects in many generic
classes can be described as deformed versions of an ideal template, descriptors in this class arise
naturally by matching the template to an input image. This procedure is also known as atlas
building (22; 40; 48). The resulting transformation is then considered a shape that reflects geometric
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

