Semantic Diffusion Network for Semantic
Segmentation
Haoru Tan∗

Sitong Wu∗ †

Jimin Pi

Baidu Research
tanhr2014@163.com, wusitong98@gmail.com
jpi@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Precise and accurate predictions over boundary areas are essential for semantic segmentation. However, the commonly-used convolutional operators tend to smooth
and blur local detail cues, making it difficult for deep models to generate accurate
boundary predictions. In this paper, we introduce an operator-level approach to
enhance semantic boundary awareness, so as to improve the prediction of the deep
semantic segmentation model. Specifically, we first formulate the boundary feature
enhancement as an anisotropic diffusion process. We then propose a novel learnable
approach called semantic diffusion network (SDN) to approximate the diffusion
process, which contains a parameterized semantic difference convolution operator
followed by a feature fusion module. Our SDN aims to construct a differentiable
mapping from the original feature to the inter-class boundary-enhanced feature.
The proposed SDN is an efficient and flexible module that can be easily plugged
into existing encoder-decoder segmentation models. Extensive experiments show
that our approach can achieve consistent improvements over several typical and
state-of-the-art segmentation baseline models on challenging public benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation aims at assigning pixel-wise semantic labels to an image. It plays an important
role in various applications such as autonomous driving [9, 13], medical diagnostics [31] and virtual
reality [4]. A key challenge in semantic segmentation is how to improve the boundary quality of
segmentation results (Figure 1). In general, people have been working on this problem in three
different ways: (i) adopting a post-processing module to refine the boundary [26, 23, 43, 39, 58], (ii)
jointly learned the edge detection and semantic segmentation task for boundary-awareness [60, 7, 30],
and (iii) making training more focused on the boundary by designing a boundary-aware loss with
higher sensitivity to the boundary changes [3, 20, 45].
Nevertheless, all these methods explored the boundary information via either post-processing refinement or additional supervision, rather than directly address the intrinsic reason for fuzzy boundary
and detail degradation, that is, vanilla convolution [24] naturally tends to smooth the feature [41, 53–
56], making it difficult to capture the boundary cues (see Figure 2b). Although traditional gradient
operators [19, 22] and difference convolutions [53–56, 41] have the ability to perceive boundary, they
are sensitive to all the boundaries including intra-class texture edges, which makes it not suitable
for semantic segmentation. This motivates us to explore a segmentation-friendly operator with only
inter-class boundary awareness to improve the boundary ambiguity in semantic segmentation.
∗
†

Contribute equally
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

