Mining Multi-Label Samples from Single Positive
Labels
Youngin Cho*1

Daejin Kim*1,2 Mohammad Azam Khan1
1
KAIST AI 2 NAVER WEBTOON AI

Jaegul Choo1

{choyi0521,kiddj,azamkhan,jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Conditional generative adversarial networks (cGANs) have shown superior results
in class-conditional generation tasks. To simultaneously control multiple conditions, cGANs require multi-label training datasets, where multiple labels can be
assigned to each data instance. Nevertheless, the tremendous annotation cost limits
the accessibility of multi-label datasets in real-world scenarios. Therefore, in this
study we explore the practical setting called the single positive setting, where each
data instance is annotated by only one positive label with no explicit negative
labels. To generate multi-label data in the single positive setting, we propose a
novel sampling approach called single-to-multi-label (S2M) sampling, based on the
Markov chain Monte Carlo method. As a widely applicable “add-on” method, our
proposed S2M sampling method enables existing unconditional and conditional
GANs to draw high-quality multi-label data with a minimal annotation cost. Extensive experiments on real image datasets verify the effectiveness and correctness of
our method, even when compared to a model trained with fully annotated datasets.

1

Introduction

Since being proposed by Goodfellow et al. [1], generative adversarial networks (GANs) have
gained much attention due to their realistic output in a wide range of applications, e.g., image
synthesis [2, 3, 4], image translation [5, 6, 7, 8], and data augmentation [9, 10]. As an advanced
task, generating images from a given condition has been achieved by conditional GANs (cGANs)
and their variants [11, 12]. To reflect the nature of real data where each data instance can belong to
multiple classes, multi-label datasets have been introduced in the applications of cGANs [8, 13]. In a
multi-label dataset, each data instance can be specified with multiple attributes. For example, in a
multi-label facial image dataset, each image is labeled for entire classes such as Black-hair, Smile,
and Male. The label for each class is given as a binary value and indicates the presence or absence of
the corresponding attribute. Despite its usefulness, as claimed in earlier studies [14, 15, 16], access
to multi-label datasets is severely limited in practice due to the difficulty of annotating all attributes.
Under these circumstances, a weakly annotated dataset is used as an alternative for cGANs to reduce
the annotation cost.
In this paper, we introduce the single positive setting [16], originally proposed for classification tasks,
to conditional generation. Each data instance has a label indicating only the presence of one attribute
(i.e., a single positive label) in this setting, and the presence of the rest of the attributes remains
unknown. For instance, in a facial image dataset, all attributes are fully specified in a multi-label
setting (e.g., Smiling black-haired man) whereas only one attribute is specified in the single positive
setting (e.g., Black-hair). The single positive setting allows us not only to reduce the annotation cost,
but also to model the intrinsic relationships among classes.
*

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

