A Causal Analysis of Harm

Sander Beckers
Cluster of Excellence in Machine Learning
University of Tübingen and
Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy, LMU
srekcebrednas@gmail.com

Hana Chockler
causaLens and
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
hana.chockler@kcl.ac.uk

Joseph Y. Halpern
Computer Science Department
Cornell University
halpern@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
As autonomous systems rapidly become ubiquitous, there is a growing need for
a legal and regulatory framework that addresses when and how such a system
harms someone. There have been several attempts within the philosophy literature
to define harm, but none of them has proven capable of dealing with the many
examples that have been presented, leading some to suggest that the notion of
harm should be abandoned and “replaced by more well-behaved notions”. As
harm is generally something that is caused, most of these definitions have involved
causality at some level. Yet surprisingly, none of them makes use of causal models
and the definitions of actual causality that they can express. In this paper we
formally define a qualitative notion of harm that uses causal models and is based on
a well-known definition of actual causality [13]. The key features of our definition
are that it is based on contrastive causation and uses a default utility to which
the utility of actual outcomes is compared. We show that our definition is able to
handle the examples from the literature, and illustrate its importance for reasoning
about situations involving autonomous systems.

1

Introduction

The notion that one should not cause harm is a central tenet in many religions; it is enshrined in the
medical profession’s Hippocratic Oath, which states explicitly “I will do no harm or injustice to [my
patients]” [20] it is also a critical element in the law. Not surprisingly, there have been many attempts
in the philosophy literature to define harm. Motivated by the observation that we speak of “causing
harm”, most of these have involved causality at some level. All these attempts have encountered
difficulties. Indeed, Bradley [4] says:
Unfortunately, when we look at attempts to explain the nature of harm, we find a mess. The most
widely discussed account, the comparative account, faces counterexamples that seem fatal. But
no alternative account has gained any currency. My diagnosis is that the notion of harm is a
Frankensteinian jumble . . . It should be replaced by other more well-behaved notions.
The situation has not improved much since Bradley’s paper (see, e.g., recent accounts like [5, 8]). Yet
the legal and regulatory aspects of harm are becoming particularly important now, as autonomous
systems become increasingly more prevalent. In fact, the new proposal for Europe’s AI act [7]
contains over 25 references to “harm” or “harmful”, saying such things as “. . . it is appropriate to
classify [AI systems] as high-risk if, in the light of their intended purpose, they pose a high risk of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

