Alleviating “Posterior Collapse” in Deep Topic Models
via Policy Gradient

Yewen Li1∗ Chaojie Wang1∗† Zhibin Duan2
Dongsheng Wang2 Bo Chen2 Bo An1 Mingyuan Zhou3
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Xidian University 3 The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Deep topic models have been proven as a promising way to extract hierarchical latent representations from documents represented as high-dimensional bag-of-words
vectors. However, the representation capability of existing deep topic models is
still limited by the phenomenon of “posterior collapse”, which has been widely
criticized in deep generative models, resulting in the higher-level latent representations exhibiting similar or meaningless patterns. To this end, in this paper, we first
develop a novel deep-coupling generative process for existing deep topic models,
which incorporates skip connections into the generation of documents, enforcing
strong links between the document and its multi-layer latent representations. After
that, utilizing data augmentation techniques, we reformulate the deep-coupling
generative process as a Markov decision process and develop a corresponding
Policy Gradient (PG) based training algorithm, which can further alleviate the
information reduction at higher layers. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our developed methods can effectively alleviate “posterior collapse” in deep topic
models, contributing to providing higher-quality latent document representations.

1

Introduction

Topic modeling has become a successful technique for text analysis and been widely applied to various
problems in machine learning (ML) [1, 2, 3] and natural language processing (NLP) [4, 5] over the
past two decades. Representing documents as bag-of-words (BoW) vectors, vanilla probabilistic
topic models (PTMs), with latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [6] being the best known representative,
typically formulate each document as a mixture over latent topics, where each topic is characterized
by a distribution over the terms of the vocabulary and describes an interpretable semantic concept.
Although being widely used, the modeling capability of these shallow topic models is still restricted
by their single-layer structure, and has difficulty in exploring hierarchical thematic structures. To
this end, a series of deep topic models [7, 8, 9] have been developed to extract multi-layer document
representations from a text corpus, providing a more intuitive way for users to understand text data.
Recently, benefiting from the development of deep neural networks (DNNs), there has been an emerging research interest to develop neural topic models (NTMs) to boost the performance, efficiency,
and usability of topic modeling with DNNs. Specifically, following the framework of variational
autoencoder (VAE) [10], most NTMs [11, 12, 13] construct a variational inference network (encoder)
to project each document into its stochastic latent representation, and then reconstruct the corresponding BoW observation with a stochastic/deterministic decoder. By modeling the inference/generative
process with DNNs, these NTMs are more flexible and scalable than traditional Bayesian PTMs,
contributing to performing large-scale downstream tasks, especially in NLP tasks [14, 15].
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding to: Chaojie Wang <chaojie.wang@ntu.edu.sg>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

