Associating Objects and Their Effects
in Video through Coordination Games

Erika Lu1

Forrester Cole1

William T. Freeman1

1

Google Research

2

Weidi Xie2

Andrew Zisserman4

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

3

Tali Dekel1,3
Michael Rubinstein1

Weizmann Institute

4

University of Oxford

Abstract
We explore a feed-forward approach for decomposing a video into layers, where
each layer contains an object of interest along with its associated shadows, reflections, and other visual effects. This problem is challenging since associated
effects vary widely with the 3D geometry and lighting conditions in the scene, and
ground-truth labels for visual effects are difficult (and in some cases impractical) to
collect. We take a self-supervised approach and train a neural network to produce a
foreground image and alpha matte from a rough object segmentation mask under a
reconstruction and sparsity loss. Under reconstruction loss, the layer decomposition
problem is underdetermined: many combinations of layers may reconstruct the
input video. Inspired by the game theory concept of focal points—or Schelling
points—we pose the problem as a coordination game, where each player (network)
predicts the effects for a single object without knowledge of the other players’
choices. The players learn to converge on the “natural” layer decomposition in
order to maximize the likelihood of their choices aligning with the other players’.
We train the network to play this game with itself, and show how to design the
rules of this game so that the focal point lies at the correct layer decomposition. We
demonstrate feed-forward results on a challenging synthetic dataset, then show that
pretraining on this dataset significantly reduces optimization time for real videos.

1

Introduction

Identifying and associating effects such as shadows and reflections with the objects that produce
them is a fundamental and difficult task for visual understanding. A variety of cues such as motion,
appearance, and proximity may be used to match an object and an effect, but these cues may vary
widely depending on the 3D geometry and lighting conditions of the scene, and nearby objects may
produce similar effects (Fig 1). There is no simple heuristic to reliably connect an object and the
visual effects it generates.
The recent Omnimatte approach [11, 12] learns to associate an object with its effects by training a
CNN to decompose the video into layers, where each layer contains the object as well as the effects
associated with that object. The CNN is given a binary segmentation mask of an object, omitting
any associated effects, and learns to output a foreground color and alpha matte for that object and its
effects. Notably, no explicit loss is provided for the association of objects and effects: the correct
association emerges through the structure of the optimization and the inductive bias of the CNN. The
optimization requires hours of processing for each video, however, and is vulnerable to errors when
multiple objects have closely correlated motion (Fig 5).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

