Learning Mixed Multinomial Logits with Provable
Guarantees
Yiqun Hu
MIT
huyiqun@mit.edu

David Simchi-Levi
MIT
dslevi@mit.edu

Zhenzhen Yan
Nanyang Technological University
yanzz@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
A mixture of multinomial logits (MMNL) generalizes the single logit model,
which is commonly used in predicting the probabilities of different outcomes.
While extensive algorithms have been developed in the literature to learn MMNL
models, theoretical results are limited. Built on the Frank-Wolfe (FW) method, we
propose a new algorithm that learns both mixture weights and component-specific
logit parameters with provable convergence guarantees for an arbitrary number
of mixtures. Our algorithm utilizes historical choice data to generate a set of
candidate choice probability vectors, each being close to the ground truth with a
high probability. We further provide a sample complexity analysis to show that only
a polynomial number of samples is required to secure the performance guarantee of
our algorithm. Finally, we conduct simulation studies to evaluate the performance
and demonstrate how to apply our algorithm to real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Multinomial logit models (MNL) are widely used in a variety of settings to predict the probabilities
of different outcomes. It is termed as multinomial logistic regression in statistics and its formula
exp(vj )
for choosing the j-th option, P
, is well known as the softmax function for multi-class
i exp(vi )
classification in machine learning. In choice modeling, it is a type of discrete choice model used to
analyze and predict people’s decisions.
Mixed multinomial logit (MMNL) is a mixture model consisted of multiple individual MNL components and can be adopted when the target data is heterogeneous. For instance, Yang et al. [2018]
demonstrates that using a single softmax does not have enough capacity to model natural language
and claims this as a bottleneck. To alleviate this issue, they proposed a new method called Mixture
of Softmaxes (MoS), which has higher expressiveness and can better incorporate the contextual
information. Later, new techniques are proposed on top of this architecture to further boost the
efficiency, such as the Mixtape from Yang et al. [2019]. On the other hand, McFadden and Train
[2000] shows that MMNL models can lift the restrictive “independence of irrelevant alternatives”
(IIA) assumption present in single MNL models as well as approximate any random utility-based
discrete choice models to arbitrary degree of accuracy under appropriate assumptions.
Despite its importance, the study on the learning theory of MMNL is limited. A common approach
in the literature is to assume a parametric family of the mixing distribution (cf.Train [2009] and
Berry et al. [1995]). But this approach suffers from the model misspecification issue, i.e., there
could be systematical errors in the estimation if the assumed parametric family is different from
the true one. Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm is a widely used non-parametric method
for mixture models. But it does not guarantee the estimators’ convergence to the true value of the
parameters. Recent inspiring work by Jagabathula et al. [2020] creatively applies the Frank-Wolfe
(FW) algorithms to estimate the MMNL model and establish the sub-linear convergence of the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

