Batch Bayesian Optimization on Permutations
using the Acquisition Weighted Kernel

Changyong Oh
QUvA lab, IvI
University of Amsterdam
changyong.oh0224@gmail.com

Roberto Bondesan
Qualcomm AI Research∗
rbondesa@qti.qualcomm.com

Efstratios Gavves
QUvA lab, IvI
University of Amsterdam
egavves@uva.nl

Max Welling
QUvA lab, IvI
University of Amsterdam
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
In this work we propose a batch Bayesian optimization method for combinatorial
problems on permutations, which is well suited for expensive-to-evaluate objectives. We first introduce LAW, an efficient batch acquisition method based on
determinantal point processes using the acquisition weighted kernel. Relying on
multiple parallel evaluations, LAW enables accelerated search on combinatorial
spaces. We then apply the framework to permutation problems, which have so
far received little attention in the Bayesian Optimization literature, despite their
practical importance. We call this method LAW2ORDER. On the theoretical front,
we prove that LAW2ORDER has vanishing simple regret by showing that the batch
cumulative regret is sublinear. Empirically, we assess the method on several standard combinatorial problems involving permutations such as quadratic assignment,
flowshop scheduling and the traveling salesman, as well as on a structure learning
task.

1

Introduction

From the celebrated traveling salesman problem[GP06] to flowshop and jobshop scheduling
problems[GJS76], permutations are ubiquitous representations in combinatorial optimization. Such
combinatorial problems on permutations arise in highly impactful application areas. For example, in chip design, permutations specify relative placements of memories and logical gates on a
chip[AMS08]. As another example, in 3D printing, scheduling is an important factor to determine the
production time[CHHV18, GSE+ 19, SFZ+ 20]. In both cases, as well as in many others, evaluating
the cost associated to a given permutation is expensive.
In situations where the evaluation is expensive, Bayesian optimization (BO) has shown good performance in many problems[SLA12, SRS+ 15]. Recently, BO on combinatorial spaces has made significant progress for categorical variables [BP18, DBDF20, OTGW19, SRDM20, DSR+ 20]. However,
BO on permutations is yet under-explored with a few exceptions [ZSBB14, ZYLW19, BBG+ 20].
In this work we present a framework to deal with BO on permutations where the evaluation of the
objective is expensive. We extend batch Bayesian optimization, which allows one to speed up the
optimization by acquiring a batch of multiple points and evaluating the batch in parallel[AFF10,
GDHL16], to the case of permutations. Then, motivated by the observation that both the diversity of
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

