Constraining Gaussian Processes to Systems of
Linear Ordinary Differential Equations
Andreas Besginow
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
OWL University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Lemgo, Germany
Institute industrial IT Lemgo, Germany
andreas.besginow@th-owl.de
Markus Lange-Hegermann
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
OWL University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Lemgo, Germany
Institute industrial IT Lemgo, Germany
markus.lange-hegermann@th-owl.de

Abstract
Data in many applications follows systems of Ordinary Differential Equations
(ODEs). This paper presents a novel algorithmic and symbolic construction for
covariance functions of Gaussian Processes (GPs) with realizations strictly following a system of linear homogeneous ODEs with constant coefficients, which
we call LODE-GPs. Introducing this strong inductive bias into a GP improves
modelling of such data. Using smith normal form algorithms, a symbolic technique, we overcome two current restrictions in the state of the art: (1) the need
for certain uniqueness conditions in the set of solutions, typically assumed in classical ODE solvers and their probabilistic counterparts, and (2) the restriction to
controllable systems, typically assumed when encoding differential equations in
covariance functions. We show the effectiveness of LODE-GPs in a number of
experiments, for example learning physically interpretable parameters by maximizing the likelihood.

1

Introduction

Many real world tasks have underlying dynamic behavior, for example chemical reactions [23],
systems in bioprocess engineering [27], or population dynamics [70]. One currently widely debated
application are compartmental models in epidemiology [20, 35, 52]. Many such systems are linear or
can be decently linearized, such as in control theory [73], biology [16], process engineering [1, §9],
or engines [7]. Including prior knowledge in the form of differential equations benefits the model
fit and enhances interpretability for a model. Hence, modelling differential equations in Machine
Learning (ML) has therefore been the focus of much research in both Gaussian Processes (GPs) (e.g.
[38, 30, 51, 25, 63]) and Deep Learning (DL) (e.g. [48, 37, 64, 49, 17]).
The class of probabilistic Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) solvers allow to estimate the solution of ODE initial value problems through approximations, often based on e.g. Runge-Kutta methods or Kalman filters [52, 54, 53, 10], and thereby do not strictly guarantee to yield solutions of the
ODE. This class of algorithms is commonly used to solve non-linear ODEs, but typically require
that systems are well-posed, in particular the solution needs to be unique once a finite number of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

