Instance-based Learning for Knowledge Base
Completion

Wanyun Cui1 , Xingran Chen2
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics1
University of Michigan2
cui.wanyun@sufe.edu.cn, chenxran@umich.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new method for knowledge base completion (KBC):
instance-based learning (IBL). For example, to answer (Jill Biden, lived city,? ),
instead of going directly to Washington D.C., our goal is to find Joe Biden, who
has the same lived city as Jill Biden. Through prototype entities, IBL provides
interpretability. We develop theories for modeling prototypes and combining IBL
with translational models. Experiments on various tasks confirmed the IBL model’s
effectiveness and interpretability.
In addition, IBL shed light on the mechanism of rule-based KBC models. Previous
research has generally agreed that rule-based models provide rules with semantically compatible premises and hypotheses. We challenge this view. We begin by
demonstrating that some logical rules represent instance-based equivalence (i.e.
prototypes) rather than semantic compatibility. These are denoted as IBL rules.
Surprisingly, despite occupying only a small portion of the rule space, IBL rules
outperform non-IBL rules in all four benchmarks. We use a variety of experiments
to demonstrate that rule-based models work because they have the ability to represent instance-based equivalence via IBL rules. The findings provide new insights
of how rule-based models work and how to interpret their rules.

1

Introduction

In knowledge base completion (KBC), the learner attempts to infer new facts about the world from
given training facts (head, relation, tail). This problem has intrigued many researchers’ interest
as it’s both a fundamental task of relational data representation learning [16, 33] and a benefit for
downstream KB-based applications [34, 39].
One typical way of KBC is to answer (head, relation, ?) or (?, relation, tail). Knowledge graph
embedding [4, 10] and rule-based reasoning [17, 38] are two typical KBC methods. Knowledge graph
embedding learns low-dimensional vectors for entities and relations. One disadvantage of knowledge
graph embedding is its lack of interpretability. Rule-based reasoning provides interpretability by
transforming queries into human-readable logical rules. However, the predictions are constrained by
the rule length k. As k increases, the rule-based search space expands exponentially, increasing the
difficulty of mining high-quality rules.
In this paper, we explore an alternative method: instance-based learning (IBL) [15, 26]. Instead of
performing explicit generalization, IBL generates predictions by comparing query instances with
instances seen in training. Despite its rich history in machine learning, IBL has not seen applied
in KBC. In terms of KBC, instead of directly finding the target entity to the query, we ask which
alternative entities share the same value with the query entity and relation? For example, for the
query (Jill Biden, lived city, ?), instead of directly finding Washington D.C. from the vector space
or by rules, we first identify the entity Joe Biden, who has the same lived city as Jill Biden. In this
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

