Rapidly Mixing Multiple-try Metropolis Algorithms
for Model Selection Problems
Hyunwoong Chang⇤
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
hwchang@stat.tamu.edu
Zhao Tang Luo
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
ztluo@stat.tamu.edu

Changwoo J. Lee⇤
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
c.lee@stat.tamu.edu

Huiyan Sang
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
huiyan@stat.tamu.edu

Quan Zhou
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
quan@stat.tamu.edu

Abstract
The multiple-try Metropolis (MTM) algorithm is an extension of the MetropolisHastings (MH) algorithm by selecting the proposed state among multiple trials
according to some weight function. Although MTM has gained great popularity
owing to its faster empirical convergence and mixing than the standard MH algorithm, its theoretical mixing property is rarely studied in the literature due to
its complex proposal scheme. We prove that MTM can achieve a mixing time
bound smaller than that of MH by a factor of the number of trials under a general
setting applicable to high-dimensional model selection problems with discrete state
spaces. Our theoretical results motivate a new class of weight functions called
locally balanced weight functions and guide the choice of the number of trials,
which leads to improved performance over standard MTM algorithms. We support
our theoretical results by extensive simulation studies and real data applications
with several Bayesian model selection problems.

1

Introduction

The Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method has become a powerful and standard tool for
Bayesian posterior computation. In particular, the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm is widely
employed in many statistical and machine learning models to sample from posterior distributions
with intractable normalizing constants. A prominent usage example of MH is the vast class of
Bayesian model selection problems with discrete-valued high-dimensional parameters, whose posterior probabilities are infeasible to evaluate because the size of model space potentially grows
(super-)exponentially with the number of parameters. Examples of Bayesian model selection problems and their applications are ubiquitous, including Bayesian variable selection (BVS) [45, and
references therein], stochastic block model (SBM) [20, 34], Bayesian structure learning [10, 15, 29],
change-point detection model [5, 11], spatial clustering models [23, 26, 28], and many others.
Despite the popularity of MCMC algorithms, their convergence rate analysis is often challenging.
Mixing time is a key concept of interest when analyzing the convergence of MCMC, which defines
the number of iterations needed to converge to a stationary distribution within a small total variation
distance [25]. We say a chain is rapidly mixing if the mixing time grows at most polynomially in
some complexity parameters. Mixing time bound has been studied extensively for problems such as
card shuffling [3], random walks on groups [2], graph colorings [21], and the Ising model [14], across
⇤

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

