Consistent Sufficient Explanations and Minimal Local
Rules for explaining any classifier or regressor

Salim I. Amoukou
LaMME
University Paris Saclay
Stellantis Paris

Nicolas J-B. Brunel
LaMME
ENSIIE, University Paris Saclay
Quantmetry Paris

Abstract
To explain the decision of any regression and classification model, we extend
the notion of probabilistic sufficient explanations (P-SE). For each instance, this
approach selects the minimal subset of features that is sufficient to yield the same
prediction with high probability, while removing other features. The crux of PSE is to compute the conditional probability of maintaining the same prediction.
Therefore, we introduce an accurate and fast estimator of this probability via
random Forests for any data (X, Y ) and show its efficiency through a theoretical
analysis of its consistency. As a consequence, we extend the P-SE to regression
problems. In addition, we deal with non-discrete features, without learning the
distribution of X nor having the model for making predictions. Finally, we
introduce local rule-based explanations for regression/classification based on the
P-SE and compare our approaches w.r.t other explainable AI methods. These
methods are available as a Python package1 .

1

Introduction

Many methods have been proposed to explain specific predictions of machine learning models from
different perspectives, such as feature attributions approaches [Lundberg and Lee, 2017, Ribeiro
et al., 2016], decision rules [Ribeiro et al., 2018], counterfactual examples [Wachter et al., 2017] and
logic-based [Shih et al., 2018, Darwiche and Hirth, 2020].
Among these categories, the most popular are feature attributions approaches, in particular SHAP
[Lundberg and Lee, 2017], which is based on Shapley Values (SV) and aims at indicating the
importance of each feature in the decision. One of the main reasons for SHAP’s success is its
scalability, nice representations of the explanations, and mathematical foundations. However, SV
used in SHAP does not guarantee the truthfulness of the important variables involved in a given
decision. Indeed, it is possible to construct simple theoretical models (defined on a partition of
the feature space) for which SV cannot distinguish between local important and non-important
variables (see conclusion in Amoukou et al. [2022]). Similar difficulties have also been highlighted
by Ghalebikesabi et al. [2021] for SHAP and LIME [Ribeiro et al., 2016]. This lack of guarantees
is a major issue since the explanations may be used for high-stakes decisions. Moreover, Additive
Explanations are not suitable when interactions occur in the model [Gosiewska and Biecek, 2019].
An appealing solution to the problem above is to use decision rules [Ribeiro et al., 2018] or logicbased explanations [Darwiche and Hirth, 2020, Shih et al., 2018] which gives local explanations that
take into account interactions while ensuring minimality and guarantee on the outcome. However,
these methods are not currently available in the general case (e.g., regression model, continuous
1

https://github.com/salimamoukou/acv00

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

