Navigating Memory Construction by Global
Pseudo-Task Simulation for Continual Learning

Yejia Liu∗ †
†

Wang Zhu∗ ‡

Shaolei Ren†

University of California Riverside ‡ University of Southern California
{yliu807, shaolei}@ucr.edu wangzhu@usc.edu

Abstract
Continual learning faces a crucial challenge of catastrophic forgetting. To address
this challenge, experience replay (ER) that maintains a tiny subset of samples
from previous tasks has been commonly used. Existing ER works usually focus
on refining the learning objective for each task with a static memory construction
policy. In this paper, we formulate the dynamic memory construction in ER as a
combinatorial optimization problem, which aims at directly minimizing the global
loss across all experienced tasks. We first apply three tactics to solve the problem
in the offline setting as a starting point. To provide an approximate solution
to this problem in the online continual learning setting, we further propose the
Global Pseudo-task Simulation (GPS), which mimics future catastrophic forgetting
of the current task by permutation. Our empirical results and analyses suggest
that the GPS consistently improves accuracy across four commonly used vision
benchmarks. We have also shown that our GPS can serve as the unified framework
for integrating various memory construction policies in existing ER works.

1

Introduction

Data in real world is non-stationary and keeps changing. Adapting new knowledge while maintaining
the old skills learned from previous data is an idealism for intelligent systems. However, deep
artificial neural networks suffer from catastrophic forgetting of old behaviors as the learning of new
tasks keeps overwriting the past [30, 32, 33, 41, 34]. To combat this issue, numerous novel algorithms
have been designed in continual learning in recent years [37, 13, 28, 8, 20, 2, 27]. Amongst them,
the experience replay (ER) methods have been attested as one of the few methods that consistently
achieve strong results across different continual learning setups [6, 11, 46, 21]. In the ER, a slightly
relieved continual learning setting is considered, where a learner stores a subset of old examples from
previous tasks in a fixed-sized memory and jointly trains the memory with the upcoming task.
Most existing ER-based works put rigorous efforts in refining the local learning objective to update
the model parameters on one task at a time. In the methods, they stick to a single static memory
construction policy, which is prone to failing in the long task sequence. For example, selecting
random data examples from experienced tasks for the memory buffer can effect good generalization
at the very beginning, but the forgetting rate would soon climb up when the tasks sequence becomes
longer, as some class representations are totally squeezed out from the memory [11]. This major
drawback has inspired us to explore the optimal memory construction with a dynamic policy.
In this work, we formulate the memory construction problem in ER as a combinatorial optimization
problem. Unlike previous memory construction methods [1, 3, 15], we explicitly optimize the global
objective, i.e., the minimum loss of the final model on all observed tasks, by finding the best memory
∗

Author contributed equally

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

