Hardness in Markov Decision Processes:
Theory and Practice

Michelangelo Conserva
Queen Mary University of London
London, United Kingdom
m.conserva@qmul.ac.uk

Paulo Rauber
Queen Mary University of London
London, United Kingdom
p.rauber@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Meticulously analysing the empirical strengths and weaknesses of reinforcement
learning methods in hard (challenging) environments is essential to inspire innovations and assess progress in the field. In tabular reinforcement learning, there is
no well-established standard selection of environments to conduct such analysis,
which is partially due to the lack of a widespread understanding of the rich theory
of hardness of environments. The goal of this paper is to unlock the practical
usefulness of this theory through four main contributions. First, we present a systematic survey of the theory of hardness, which also identifies promising research
directions. Second, we introduce Colosseum, a pioneering package that enables
empirical hardness analysis and implements a principled benchmark composed
of environments that are diverse with respect to different measures of hardness.
Third, we present an empirical analysis that provides new insights into computable
measures. Finally, we benchmark five tabular agents in our newly proposed benchmark. While advancing the theoretical understanding of hardness in non-tabular
reinforcement learning remains essential, our contributions in the tabular setting are
intended as solid steps towards a principled non-tabular benchmark. Accordingly,
we benchmark four agents in non-tabular versions of Colosseum environments,
obtaining results that demonstrate the generality of tabular hardness measures.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning studies a setting where an agent interacts with an environment by observing
states, receiving rewards, and selecting actions with the objective of optimizing a reward-based criterion. The field has attracted significant interest in recent years after striking performances obtained
in board games [1] and video games [2, 3]. Solving these grand challenges constitutes a pivotal
milestone in the field. However, the corresponding agents require efficient simulators due to their
high sample complexity, i.e., the number of observations that they require to optimize a reward-based
criterion in an unknown environment. Outside of games, many important applications in healthcare,
robotics, logistics, finance, and advertising can also be naturally formulated as reinforcement learning
problems. However, simulators for these scenarios may not be available, reliable, or efficient.
The development of reinforcement learning methods that explore efficiently has long been considered
one of the most crucial efforts to reduce sample complexity. Meticulously evaluating the strengths
and weaknesses of such methods is essential to assess progress and inspire new developments in
the field. Such empirical evaluations are performed through benchmarks composed of a selection of
environments and evaluation criteria. Ideally, this selection should be based on theoretically principled
reasoning that considers the hardness of the environments and the soundness of the evaluation criteria.
In non-tabular reinforcement learning, where the number of states is large (and potentially infinite),
there is no theory of hardness except for a few restricted settings. Consequently, the selection of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

