Dance of SNN and ANN: Solving binding problem by
combining spike timing and reconstructive attention

Hao Zheng† Hui Lin† Rong Zhao Luping Shi∗
Department of Precision Instrument
Center for Brain-Inspired Computing Research
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{zheng-h17,linhui21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{r_zhao,lpshi}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The binding problem is one of the fundamental challenges that prevent the artificial
neural network (ANNs) from a compositional understanding of the world like human perception, because disentangled and distributed representations of generative
factors can interfere and lead to ambiguity when complex data with multiple objects
are presented. In this paper, we propose a brain-inspired hybrid neural network
(HNN) that introduces temporal binding theory originated from neuroscience into
ANNs by integrating spike timing dynamics (via spiking neural networks, SNNs)
with reconstructive attention (by ANNs). Spike timing provides an additional
dimension for grouping, while reconstructive feedback coordinates the spikes into
temporal coherent states. Through iterative interaction of ANN and SNN, the
model continuously binds multiple objects at alternative synchronous firing times
in the SNN coding space. The effectiveness of the model is evaluated on synthetic
datasets of binary images. By visualization and analysis, we demonstrate that the
binding is explainable, soft, flexible, and hierarchical. Notably, the model is trained
on single object datasets without explicit supervision on grouping, but successfully
binds multiple objects on test datasets, showing its compositional generalization
capability. Further results show its binding ability in dynamic situations.

1

Introduction

Learning disentangled and distributed representation of generative factors of the world is believed
to benefit compositional generalization, because those invariant features can be reused as symbols
to build exponentially larger amounts of objects with higher complexity [1, 2, 3, 4]. However,
disentangled representation can suffer from a fundamental difficulty when the inputs are composed of
multiple objects. Since the features are disentangled and invariant to specific objects, multiple coexist
feature representations interfere and lead to superposition catastrophe (Fig.1a). This is conceptualized
as the binding problem by von der Malsburg (1981)[5, 6] and extensively debated in neuroscience and
psychology literature [7]. Recently, the binding problem is also documented as a fundamental reason
behind various inabilities of artificial neural networks (ANNs) like data inefficiency and limited
transfer capability [3].
Segregating and representing symbol-like entities from raw data is challenging and often requires
supervision [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] or task-specific design[14, 15, 16, 17]. Thus, the problem is usually
ignored by assuming there is only a single object of interest or mediated by using static localized
binding [18, 19] at the cost of expensive computational demand. All the above methods in ANNs
cannot fundamentally solve the binding problem. In contrast, slot models[3, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
∗

Corresponding author, † Contribute equally

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

