Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks Learn
Succinct Learning Algorithms
Surbhi Goel
Microsoft Research &
University of Pennsylvania
surbhig@cis.upenn.edu
Adam Tauman Kalai
Microsoft Research
adam@kal.ai

Sham Kakade
Harvard University
sham@seas.harvard.edu

Cyril Zhang
Microsoft Research
cyrilzhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
Neural networks (NNs) struggle to efficiently solve certain problems, such as learning parities, even when there are simple learning algorithms for those problems.
Can NNs discover learning algorithms on their own? We exhibit a NN architecture that, in polynomial time, learns as well as any efficient learning algorithm
describable by a constant-sized program. For example, on parity problems, the NN
learns as well as Gaussian elimination, an efficient algorithm that can be succinctly
described. Our architecture combines both recurrent weight sharing between layers
and convolutional weight sharing to reduce the number of parameters down to
a constant, even though the network itself may have trillions of nodes. While in
practice the constants in our analysis are too large to be directly meaningful, our
work suggests that the synergy of Recurrent and Convolutional NNs (RCNNs)
may be more natural and powerful than either alone, particularly for concisely
parameterizing discrete algorithms.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NNs) can seem magical in what they can learn. Yet, humans have designed simple
learning algorithms, even for binary classification, which they cannot match. A well-known example
is the class of parity functions over the d-dimensional hypercube, i.e., d-bit strings. In that problem,
there is an unknown subset S of the d bits, and the label of each example x is 1 if x has an odd
number of 1’s in S. While gradient-based learning struggles to learn parity functions (Kearns and
Valiant, 1993) even over uniformly random x, row reduction (i.e. Gaussian elimination) can be used
to find S using only O(d) examples and O(d2 ) runtime.
A tantalizing question is whether a NN can discover an efficient learning algorithm itself, thereby
learning classes such as parities. We refer to this as Turing-optimality, since algorithms can be
described by Turing machines. More specifically, we will give an example of a simple NN architecture
that achieves Turing-optimality. In particular, this is the first NN architecture that provably discovers
a efficient parity learning algorithm in polynomial time. The parity learning algorithm is efficient, like
row reduction, requiring O(d) examples and O(d2 ) runtime. Our learning architecture would be quite
simple to describe with a modern library such as PyTorch. However, we do not expect our specific
architecture to be especially good in practice, as the constants in our analysis are much too large to
be practical. Nonetheless, it does suggest that the ingredients used in the architecture, especially
the combination of recurrent weight-sharing across layers and convolutional weight-sharing within
layers, may be useful in designing practical architectures for NNs to learn algorithms.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

