RainNet: A Large-Scale Imagery Dataset and
Benchmark for Spatial Precipitation Downscaling

Xuanhong Chen1∗

Kairui Feng2∗ Naiyuan Liu3 Bingbing Ni1† Yifan Lu1
Zhengyan Tong1 Ziang Liu1‡
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Princeton University 3 University of Technology Sydney
{chen19910528, yifan_lu, 418004}@sjtu.edu.cn
{kairuif}@princeton.edu
{naiyuan.liu}@student.uts.edu.au
{ziang_liu}@brown.edu

Abstract
AI-for-science approaches have been applied to solve scientific problems (e.g., nuclear fusion, ecology, genomics, meteorology) and have achieved highly promising
results. Spatial precipitation downscaling is one of the most important meteorological problem and urgently requires the participation of AI. However, the lack
of a well-organized and annotated large-scale dataset hinders the training and
verification of more effective and advancing deep-learning models for precipitation downscaling. To alleviate these obstacles, we present the first large-scale
spatial precipitation downscaling dataset named RainNet, which contains more
than 62, 400 pairs of high-quality low/high-resolution precipitation maps for over
17 years, ready to help the evolution of deep learning models in precipitation
downscaling. Specifically, the precipitation maps carefully collected in RainNet
cover various meteorological phenomena (e.g., hurricane, squall), which is of great
help to improve the model generalization ability. In addition, the map pairs in
RainNet are organized in the form of image sequences (720 maps per month or 1
map/hour), showing complex physical properties, e.g., temporal misalignment, temporal sparse, and fluid properties. Furthermore, two deep-learning-oriented metrics
are specifically introduced to evaluate or verify the comprehensive performance
of the trained model (e.g., prediction maps reconstruction accuracy). To illustrate
the applications of RainNet, 14 state-of-the-art models, including deep models
and traditional approaches, are evaluated. To fully explore potential downscaling
solutions, we propose an implicit physical estimation benchmark framework to
learn the above characteristics. Extensive experiments demonstrate the value of
RainNet in training and evaluating downscaling models. Our dataset is available
at https://neuralchen.github.io/RainNet/.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has made enormous breakthroughs in the natural sciences (e.g., nuclear fusion [11],
ecology [52], genomics [28], meteorology [3]), which is extremely good at extracting valuable
knowledge from numerous amounts of data. In recent years, with computer science development,
a deluge of earth system data is continuously being obtained, coming from sensors all over the
∗

Equal contribution.
Bingbing Ni is the corresponding author.
‡
Work done during undergraduate student at Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

