LiteTransformerSearch: Training-free Neural
Architecture Search for Efficient Language Models
Mojan Javaheripi1 , Gustavo H. de Rosa2 , Subhabrata Mukherjee2 ,
Shital Shah2 , Tomasz L. Religa3 , Caio C.T. Mendes2 ,
Sebastien Bubeck2 , Farinaz Koushanfar1 , Debadeepta Dey2
1
University of California San Diego, 2 Microsoft Research, 3 Microsoft
mojan@ucsd.edu, dedey@microsoft.com

Abstract
The Transformer architecture is ubiquitously used as the building block of largescale autoregressive language models. However, finding architectures with the
optimal trade-off between task performance (perplexity) and hardware constraints
like peak memory utilization and latency is non-trivial. This is exacerbated by the
proliferation of various hardware. We leverage the somewhat surprising empirical
observation that the number of decoder parameters in autoregressive Transformers
has a high rank correlation with task performance, irrespective of the architecture
topology. This observation organically induces a simple Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) algorithm that uses decoder parameters as a proxy for perplexity without
need for any model training. The search phase of our training-free algorithm,
dubbed Lightweight Transformer Search (LTS)1 , can be run directly on target
devices since it does not require GPUs. Using on-target-device measurements,
LTS extracts the Pareto-frontier of perplexity versus any hardware performance
cost. We evaluate LTS on diverse devices from ARM CPUs to NVIDIA GPUs and
two popular autoregressive Transformer backbones: GPT-2 and Transformer-XL.
Results show that the perplexity of 16-layer GPT-2 and Transformer-XL can be
achieved with up to 1.5⇥, 2.5⇥ faster runtime and 1.2⇥, 2.0⇥ lower peak memory
utilization. When evaluated in zero and one-shot settings, LTS Pareto-frontier models achieve higher average accuracy compared to the 350M parameter OPT across
14 tasks, with up to 1.6⇥ lower latency. LTS extracts the Pareto-frontier in under
3 hours while running on a commodity laptop. We effectively remove the carbon
footprint of hundreds of GPU hours of training during search, offering a strong
simple baseline for future NAS methods in autoregressive language modeling.

1

Introduction

The Transformer architecture [42] has been used as the de-facto building block of most pre-trained
language models like GPT [5]. A common problem arises when one tries to create smaller versions
of Transformer models for edge or real-time applications (e.g. text prediction) with strict memory
and latency constraints: it is not clear what the architectural hyperparameters should be, e.g., number
of attention heads, number of layers, embedding dimension, and the inner dimension of the feed
forward network, etc. This problem is exacerbated if each Transformer layer is allowed the freedom
to have different values for these settings. This results in a combinatorial explosion of architectural
hyperparameter choices and a large heterogeneous search space. For instance, the search space
considered in this paper consists of over 1054 possible architectures.
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is an organic solution due to its ability to automatically search
through candidate models with multiple conflicting objectives like latency vs. task performance. The
central challenge in NAS is the prohibitively expensive function evaluation, i.e., evaluating each
architecture requires training it on the dataset at hand. Thus it is often infeasible to evaluate more
1

code available at https://github.com/microsoft/archai/tree/neurips_lts/archai/nlp

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

