EfficientFormer: Vision Transformers at MobileNet
Speed
Yanyu Li1,2,†

Geng Yuan1,2,† Yang Wen1 Ju Hu1 Georgios Evangelidis1
Sergey Tulyakov1 Yanzhi Wang2 Jian Ren1
1
Snap Inc. 2 Northeastern University

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViT) have shown rapid progress in computer vision tasks,
achieving promising results on various benchmarks. However, due to the massive
number of parameters and model design, e.g., attention mechanism, ViT-based
models are generally times slower than lightweight convolutional networks. Therefore, the deployment of ViT for real-time applications is particularly challenging,
especially on resource-constrained hardware such as mobile devices. Recent efforts
try to reduce the computation complexity of ViT through network architecture
search or hybrid design with MobileNet block, yet the inference speed is still
unsatisfactory. This leads to an important question: can transformers run as fast
as MobileNet while obtaining high performance? To answer this, we first revisit
the network architecture and operators used in ViT-based models and identify
inefficient designs. Then we introduce a dimension-consistent pure transformer
(without MobileNet blocks) as a design paradigm. Finally, we perform latencydriven slimming to get a series of final models dubbed EfficientFormer. Extensive
experiments show the superiority of EfficientFormer in performance and speed on
mobile devices. Our fastest model, EfficientFormer-L1, achieves 79.2% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K with only 1.6 ms inference latency on iPhone 12 (compiled
with CoreML), which runs as fast as MobileNetV2×1.4 (1.6 ms, 74.7% top-1), and
our largest model, EfficientFormer-L7, obtains 83.3% accuracy with only 7.0 ms
latency. Our work proves that properly designed transformers can reach extremely
low latency on mobile devices while maintaining high performance1 .

1

Introduction

The transformer architecture [1], initially designed for Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks,
introduces the Multi-Head Self Attention (MHSA) mechanism that allows the network to model
long-term dependencies and is easy to parallelize. In this context, Dosovitskiy et al. [2] adapt
the attention mechanism to 2D images and propose Vision Transformer (ViT): the input image
is divided into non-overlapping patches, and the inter-patch representations are learned through
MHSA without inductive bias. ViTs demonstrate promising results compared to convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) on computer vision tasks. Following this success, several efforts explore the
potential of ViT by improving training strategies [3, 4, 5], introducing architecture changes [6, 7],
redesigning attention mechanisms [8, 9], and elevating the performance of various vision tasks such
as classification [10, 11, 12], segmentation [13, 14], and detection [15, 16].
On the downside, transformer models are usually times slower than competitive CNNs [17, 18].
There are many factors that limit the inference speed of ViT, including the massive number of
†
1

These authors contributed equally.
Code and models are available at https://github.com/snap-research/EfficientFormer.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

