Peer Prediction for Learning Agents

Shi Feng
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
fengs19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Fang-Yi Yu
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University
Fairfax, VA, USA
fangyiyu@gmu.edu
Yiling Chen
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
yiling@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Peer prediction refers to a collection of mechanisms for eliciting information from
human agents when direct verification of the obtained information is unavailable.
They are designed to have a game-theoretic equilibrium where everyone reveals
their private information truthfully. This result holds under the assumption that
agents are Bayesian and they each adopt a fixed strategy across all tasks. Human
agents however are observed in many domains to exhibit learning behavior in
sequential settings. In this paper, we explore the dynamics of sequential peer
prediction mechanisms when participants are learning agents. We first show that
the notion of no regret alone for the agents’ learning algorithms cannot guarantee convergence to the truthful strategy. We then focus on a family of learning
algorithms where strategy updates only depend on agents’ cumulative rewards and
prove that agents’ strategies in the popular Correlated Agreement (CA) mechanism
converge to truthful reporting when they use algorithms from this family. This family of algorithms is not necessarily no-regret, but includes several familiar no-regret
learning algorithms (e.g multiplicative weight update and Follow the Perturbed
Leader) as special cases. Simulation of several algorithms in this family as well as
the ϵ-greedy algorithm, which is outside of this family, shows convergence to the
truthful strategy in the CA mechanism.

1

Introduction

A fundamental challenge in many domains is to elicit high-quality information from people when
directly verifying the acquired information is not feasible, either because the ground truth is not
available or because it is too costly to obtain. Notable settings include asking people to label data
for machine learning, having students perform peer grading in education, and soliciting customer
feedback for products and services.
The peer prediction literature has made impressive progress on this challenge in the past two decades,
with many mechanisms that have desirable incentive properties developed for this problem [20, 19,
27, 5, 22, 8, 14, 25, 17, 16, 21, 18, 23, 15]. The term peer prediction refers to a collection of reward
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

