DMAP: a Distributed Morphological Attention Policy
for Learning to Locomote with a Changing Body
Alberto Silvio Chiappa

Alessandro Marin Vargas

Alexander Mathis

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
[first name].[surname]@epfl.ch

Abstract
Biological and artificial agents need to deal with constant changes in the real world.
We study this problem in four classical continuous control environments, augmented with morphological perturbations. Learning to locomote when the length
and the thickness of different body parts vary is challenging, as the control policy is
required to adapt to the morphology to successfully balance and advance the agent.
We show that a control policy based on the proprioceptive state performs poorly
with highly variable body configurations, while an (oracle) agent with access to
a learned encoding of the perturbation performs significantly better. We introduce DMAP, a biologically-inspired, attention-based policy network architecture.
DMAP combines independent proprioceptive processing, a distributed policy with
individual controllers for each joint, and an attention mechanism, to dynamically
gate sensory information from different body parts to different controllers. Despite
not having access to the (hidden) morphology information, DMAP can be trained
end-to-end in all the considered environments, overall matching or surpassing
the performance of an oracle agent. Thus DMAP, implementing principles from
biological motor control, provides a strong inductive bias for learning challenging
sensorimotor tasks. Overall, our work corroborates the power of these principles in
challenging locomotion tasks. The code is available at the following link: DMAP

1

Introduction

Animals and humans are highly adaptive to changes in the external environment and in their own
body. For instance, animals can, after an early onset, locomote throughout their development despite
dramatic changes in their body size and weight. Animals can also robustly deal with irregular surfaces,
and load changes [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
Here, we focus on the problem of learning to walk when the body is subject to morphological
perturbations, i.e., changes in the length and thickness of body parts. Remarkably, animals can
rapidly adapt to these kind of perturbations. For example, desert ants with elongated or shortened
legs can immediately locomote, although misjudging the traveled distance [6]. To challenge artificial
agents on such skills, we adapted four different locomotion environments (Ant, Half Cheetah, Walker,
Hopper) from the OpenAI Gym [7], in which robots have to learn to walk as fast as possible. In our
adaptive setting, the agent’s body parameters are sampled from a morphological perturbation space at
the beginning of each episode and we sought to find reinforcement learning policies that could deal
with these varying bodies.
We hypothesize that principles of the sensorimotor system provide a strong inductive bias to robustly
learn such a policy. Specifically, we built on three well-known principles:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

