NeurOLight: A Physics-Agnostic Neural Operator
Enabling Parametric Photonic Device Simulation

Jiaqi Gu1 , Zhengqi Gao2 , Chenghao Feng1 , Hanqing Zhu1 ,
Ray T. Chen1 , Duane S. Boning2 , David Z. Pan1
1
The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{jqgu, fengchenghao1996, hqzhu}@utexas.edu, zhengqi@mit.edu, boning@mtl.mit.edu,
{chen, dpan}@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
Optical computing is an emerging technology for next-generation efficient artificial intelligence (AI) due to its ultra-high speed and efficiency. Electromagnetic
field simulation is critical to the design, optimization, and validation of photonic
devices and circuits. However, costly numerical simulation significantly hinders
the scalability and turn-around time in the photonic circuit design loop. Recently,
physics-informed neural networks have been proposed to predict the optical field
solution of a single instance of a partial differential equation (PDE) with predefined parameters. Their complicated PDE formulation and lack of efficient
parametrization mechanisms limit their flexibility and generalization in practical
simulation scenarios. In this work, for the first time, a physics-agnostic neural
operator-based framework, dubbed NeurOLight, is proposed to learn a family of
frequency-domain Maxwell PDEs for ultra-fast parametric photonic device simulation. We balance the efficiency and generalization of NeurOLight via several
novel techniques. Specifically, we discretize different devices into a unified domain,
represent parametric PDEs with a compact wave prior, and encode the incident
light via masked source modeling. We design our model with parameter-efficient
cross-shaped NeurOLight blocks and adopt superposition-based augmentation for
data-efficient learning. With these synergistic approaches, NeurOLight generalizes
to a large space of unseen simulation settings, demonstrates 2-orders-of-magnitude
faster simulation speed than numerical solvers, and outperforms prior neural network models by ∼54% lower prediction error with ∼44% fewer parameters. Our
code is available at link.

1

Introduction

With recent advances in integrated photonics technology, optical deep learning represents a new
paradigm in next-generation efficient artificial intelligence (AI) [28, 27, 3]. An increasing number
of co-design efforts have been made to enable synergistic light-AI interaction. We see extensive
developments for photonic AI with rapidly evolving optical neural network (ONN) hardware accelerator designs [28, 8, 39, 5, 23, 29, 6] and various circuit-algorithm co-optimization methodologies [8, 9, 7, 30, 10, 14]. However, applying AI for optics is much less explored. Complementary to
prior AI-assisted architectural exploration [19, 11], a natural question is whether AI can assist in the
lower-level device simulation that requires a deep understanding of the physical nature of optics.
AI-assisted photonic device simulation is a critical step to closing the synergistic loop of light-AI
interaction. Besides using standard devices that already have a compact transfer matrix [28, 8, 32],
modern optical AI shows a trend to exploit customized photonic structures for scalable optical
computing [7, 30, 40, 36]. Unfortunately, because customized devices do not have analytical transfer
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

