Learning Physics Constrained Dynamics Using
Autoencoders
Tsung-Yen Yang1 Justinian Rosca2 Karthik Narasimhan1 Peter J. Ramadge1
1
Princeton University 2 Siemens Corporation, Corporate Technology
yangtsungyen@gmail.com justinian.rosca@siemens.com
{karthikn, ramadge}@princeton.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating states (e.g., position and velocity) and
physical parameters (e.g., friction, elasticity) from a sequence of observations
when provided a dynamic equation that describes the behavior of the system. The
dynamic equation can arise from first principles (e.g., Newton’s laws) and provide
useful cues for learning, but its physical parameters are unknown. To address this
problem, we propose a model that estimates states and physical parameters of the
system using two main components. First, an autoencoder compresses a sequence
of observations (e.g., sensor measurements, pixel images) into a sequence for the
state representation that is consistent with physics by including a simulation of the
dynamic equation. Second, an estimator is coupled with the autoencoder to predict
the values of the physical parameters. We also theoretically and empirically show
that using Fourier feature mappings improves the generalization of the estimator
in predicting physical parameters compared to raw state sequences when learning
from high-frequency data. In our experiments on three visual and one sensor
measurement tasks, our model imposes interpretability on latent states and achieves
improved generalization performance for long-term prediction of system dynamics
over state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have become a core computational component in domains such as computer vision
[1], natural language processing [2], and deep reinforcement learning [3]. Recent work has shown
that neural networks can exhibit an inductive bias that is often introduced via designing specific
structures [4]. This bias can be used to encode prior task knowledge that helps the network generalize
to unseen data. For example, convolution neural networks capture the translation invariance of key
image features. In this spirit, we develop a structured neural network model that leverages a dynamic
equation to estimate both the state of a dynamical system (e.g., position and velocity) and its physical
parameters (e.g., friction constants) from a sequence of partial observations. Knowing the state
and parameters of the system aids learning a control policy and tracking parameter value changes
over time. For instance, for a self-driving car, we want to learn a neural network that estimates the
vehicle’s position and velocity from a sequence of egocentric camera images. The estimated state can
then be used in a control policy. In addition, we want to track physical parameters over time, e.g.,
friction coefficients. This is useful for vehicle maintenance and safety. We expect that exploiting a
neural network, regularized to follow a dynamic equation, will streamline the required data-intensive
operations and yield improved performance.
Observations can be direct measurements of some system variables (e.g., accelerations), or take a
more complex form (e.g., images). We group such observations over specified time windows and also
refer to these groupings as observations. We obtain a compact representation for these observations
that permits observation reconstruction using an autoencoder (see Fig. 1(a)). {hs } in Fig. 1(a) is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

