Sobolev Acceleration and Statistical Optimality
for Learning Elliptic Equations via Gradient Descent
Yiping Lu
ICME
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
yplu@stanford.edu

Jose Blanchet
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Lexing Ying
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
lexing@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the statistical limits in terms of Sobolev norms of gradient
descent for solving inverse problems from randomly sampled noisy observations
using a general class of objective functions. Our class of objective functions
includes Sobolev training for kernel regression, Deep Ritz Methods (DRM), and
Physics Informed Neural Networks (PINN) for solving elliptic partial differential
equations (PDEs) as special cases. We consider a potentially infinite-dimensional
parameterization of our model using a suitable Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
and a continuous parameterization of problem hardness through the definition
of kernel integral operators. We prove that gradient descent over this objective
function can also achieve statistical optimality and the optimal number of passes
over the data increases with sample size. Based on our theory, we explain an
implicit acceleration of using a Sobolev norm as the objective function for training,
inferring that the optimal number of epochs of DRM becomes larger than the
number of PINN when both the data size and the hardness of tasks increase,
although both DRM and PINN can achieve statistical optimality.

1

Introduction

Several learning based methods for solving inverse problems have been proposed recently with
state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of tasks, including medical image reconstruction
[1], inverse scattering [2] and 3D reconstruction [3]. In this paper, we study the statistical limit of
machine learning methods for solving inverse problems. To be specific, we consider the problem of
reconstructing a function from random sampled observations with statistical noise in measurements.
We apply gradient descent to a general class of objective functions for the reconstruction. When
the observations are the direct observations of the function, the problem is non-parametric function
estimation [4, 5]. The observations may also come from certain physical laws described by a
partial differential equation (PDE)[6, 7]. Formally, we aim to reconstruct a function f ⇤ based on
independently sampled data set D = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 from an unknown distribution P on X ⇥ Y, where
yi is the noisy measurement of u⇤ though a measurement procedure A. For simplicity, we assume A
is self-adjoint in this paper. The conditional mean function f ⇤ (x) = EP (Y |X = x) is the ground
truth function for observation of u⇤ through the measurement procedure A, i.e. f ⇤ = Au⇤ . To solve
this problem, we consider gradient descending over the following general class of objective function
1
û = arg min EPn (x,y) hu(x), A1 u(x)i hy, A2 u(x)i ,
u2H
2
Pn
where Pn = n1 i=1 (xi , yi ) is the empirical distribution, H is a reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS) and Ai , i = 1, 2 are two self-adjoint operators that satisfy A1 = AA2 . In Section 2, we
show that several algorithms, including kernel regression [4, 8] via Sobolev training [9, 10, 11] and
solving PDEs via machine learning based algorithm, [12, 13, 2, 14] can be considered as special
cases of this formulation.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

