Improving GANs with A Dynamic Discriminator

Ceyuan Yang1,3,†
1

Yujun Shen2,†

CUHK

2

Ant Group

Yinghao Xu1
3

Deli Zhao2

Shanghai AI Laboratory

Bo Dai3
4

Bolei Zhou4

UCLA

Abstract
Discriminator plays a vital role in training generative adversarial networks (GANs)
via distinguishing real and synthesized samples. While the real data distribution
remains the same, the synthesis distribution keeps varying because of the evolving
generator, and thus effects a corresponding change to the bi-classification task for
the discriminator. We argue that a discriminator with an on-the-fly adjustment on
its capacity can better accommodate such a time-varying task. A comprehensive
empirical study confirms that the proposed training strategy, termed as DynamicD,
improves the synthesis performance without incurring any additional computation
cost or training objectives. Two capacity adjusting schemes are developed for
training GANs under different data regimes: i) given a sufficient amount of training
data, the discriminator benefits from a progressively increased learning capacity,
and ii) when the training data is limited, gradually decreasing the layer width
mitigates the over-fitting issue of the discriminator. Experiments on both 2D and
3D-aware image synthesis tasks conducted on a range of datasets substantiate the
generalizability of our DynamicD as well as its substantial improvement over the
baselines. Furthermore, DynamicD is synergistic to other discriminator-improving
approaches (including data augmentation, regularizers, and pre-training), and
brings continuous performance gain when combined for learning GANs. 1

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial network (GAN) [16], which consists of a generator and a discriminator,
significantly advances image generation. In general, these two components compete against each
other during training. The generator aims to emulate the observed data distribution through producing
as realistic images as possible, and the discriminator learns to differentiate fake samples from real
ones and guides the generator towards better synthesis. Despite the great effort of improving GANs
from the generator side [40, 60, 29, 31, 32, 5], it is relatively less explored on the important role of
the discriminator in this two-player game. In fact, discriminator is the one that accesses the training
data, examines how close the real and synthesis distributions are, and derives loss functions to train
both itself and the generator. Therefore, learning an apt discriminator is also essential for GANs.
The discriminator in a GAN is typically learned with a bi-classification task. It aims to categorize
images into two folds depending on whether they come from the training set or are synthesized by the
generator. Existing studies on image classification [19, 20] have pointed out, it is critical to align the
model capacity to the task difficulty, otherwise the issue of either under-fitting or over-fitting occurs.
For instance, ResNet-50 [19] performs worse than ResNet-101 on ImageNet classification [11]
because it is not capable enough to handle the data variations. Nevertheless, ResNet-152 outperforms
ResNet-200 on the same task, where the latter model has too many parameters and thus over-fits the
training set [20]. From this perspective, the capacity of a GAN discriminator as the classifier should
be also aligned with the aforementioned bi-classification task.
† denotes equal contribution.
1
Code and models are available at https://genforce.github.io/dynamicd.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

