Learn what matters: cross-domain imitation
learning with task-relevant embeddings
Tim Franzmeyer
University of Oxford
frtim@robots.ox.ac.uk

Philip H. S. Torr
University of Oxford
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

João F. Henriques
University of Oxford
joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We study how an autonomous agent learns to perform a task from demonstrations
in a different domain, such as a different environment or different agent. Such crossdomain imitation learning is required to, for example, train an artificial agent from
demonstrations of a human expert. We propose a scalable framework that enables
cross-domain imitation learning without access to additional demonstrations or
further domain knowledge. We jointly train the learner agent’s policy and learn
a mapping between the learner and expert domains with adversarial training. We
effect this by using a mutual information criterion to find an embedding of the
expert’s state space that contains task-relevant information and is invariant to
domain specifics. This step significantly simplifies estimating the mapping between
the learner and expert domains and hence facilitates end-to-end learning. We
demonstrate successful transfer of policies between considerably different domains,
without extra supervision such as additional demonstrations, and in situations
where other methods fail.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great success in diverse tasks and distinct domains [43, 2],
however its performance hinges on defining precise reward functions. While rewards are straightforward to define in simple scenarios such as games and simulations, real-world scenarios are
significantly more nuanced, especially when they involve interacting with humans.
One possibility for overcoming the problem of reward misspecification is to learn policies from
observations of expert behaviour, also known as imitation learning. Recent imitation learning
algorithms rely on updating the learner agent’s policy until the state occupancy of the learner matches
that of the expert demonstrator [4], requiring the learner and expert to be in the same domain. Such
a requirement rarely holds true in more realistic scenarios. Consider for example the case where a
robot arm learns to move an apple onto a plate from demonstrations of a human performing this task.
Here, both domains do inherently share structure (the apples and the plates have similar appearances)
but are distinct (the morphologies, dynamics and appearances of the two arms are different).
Enabling a learner agent to successfully perform a task from demonstrations that were generated
by a different expert agent, which we refer to as a different domain even if the tasks are related,
would widely broaden the possibilities to train artificial agents. This cross-domain imitation learning
problem is seen as an important step towards value alignment, as it facilitates transferring behaviour
from humans to artificial agents [32, Chapter 7].
This problem has only been considered by researchers in realistic settings recently. Due to its
difficulty, previous work on cross-domain imitation learning either assumes the expert’s and learner’s
domains to be almost identical [42, 17, 6], requires demonstrations of experts in multiple domains
that are similar to the learner’s [45, 44], or relies on the availability of demonstrations of proxy
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

