GALOIS: Boosting Deep Reinforcement Learning via
Generalizable Logic Synthesis

Yushi Cao2,∗, Zhiming Li2,∗ , Tianpei Yang1,3,† , Hao Zhang1 , Yan Zheng1,†
Yi Li2 , Jianye Hao1 , Yang Liu2
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin university, Tianjin, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 3 University of Alberta, Canada
{yushi002,zhiming001}@e.ntu.edu.sg
{tpyang,3018216216,yanzheng,jianye.hao}@tju.edu.cn
{yi_li,yangliu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Despite achieving superior performance in human-level control problems, unlike
humans, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) lacks high-order intelligence (e.g.,
logic deduction and reuse), thus it behaves ineffectively than humans regarding
learning and generalization in complex problems. Previous works attempt to
directly synthesize a white-box logic program as the DRL policy, manifesting
logic-driven behaviors. However, most synthesis methods are built on imperative
or declarative programming, and each has a distinct limitation, respectively. The
former ignores the cause-effect logic during synthesis, resulting in low generalizability across tasks. The latter is strictly proof-based, thus failing to synthesize
programs with complex hierarchical logic. In this paper, we combine the above two
paradigms together and propose a novel Generalizable Logic Synthesis (GALOIS)
framework to synthesize hierarchical and strict cause-effect logic programs. GALOIS leverages the program sketch and defines a new sketch-based hybrid program
language for guiding the synthesis. Based on that, GALOIS proposes a sketchbased program synthesis method to automatically generate white-box programs
with generalizable and interpretable cause-effect logic. Extensive evaluations on
various decision-making tasks with complex logic demonstrate the superiority
of GALOIS over mainstream baselines regarding the asymptotic performance,
generalizability, and great knowledge reusability across different environments.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved great breakthroughs in various domains like robotics
control [27], video game [24], software testing [48, 51, 5], etc. Despite its sheer success, DRL models
still perform less effective learning and generalization abilities than humans in solving long sequential
decision-making problems, especially those requiring complex logic to solve [16, 40]. For example,
a seemingly simple task for a robot arm to put an object into a drawer is hard to solve due to the
complex intrinsic logic (e.g., open the drawer, pick the object, place the object, close the drawer) [33].
Additionally, DRL policies are also hard to interpret since the result-generating processes of the
neural network remain opaque to humans due to its black-box nature [35, 28].
To mitigate the above challenges, researchers seek the programming language, making the best
of both connectionism [30] and symbolism [43], to generate white-box programs as the policy to
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors: Yan Zheng (yanzheng@tju.edu.cn) and Tianpei Yang (tpyang@tju.edu.cn).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

