DISCO: Adversarial Defense with
Local Implicit Functions

Chih-Hui Ho Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{chh279, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of adversarial defenses for image classification, where the goal is
to robustify a classifier against adversarial examples, is considered. Inspired by
the hypothesis that these examples lie beyond the natural image manifold, a novel
aDversarIal defenSe with local impliCit functiOns (DISCO) is proposed to remove
adversarial perturbations by localized manifold projections. DISCO consumes
an adversarial image and a query pixel location and outputs a clean RGB value
at the location. It is implemented with an encoder and a local implicit module,
where the former produces per-pixel deep features and the latter uses the features
in the neighborhood of query pixel for predicting the clean RGB value. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that both DISCO and its cascade version outperform prior
defenses, regardless of whether the defense is known to the attacker. DISCO is
also shown to be data and parameter efficient and to mount defenses that transfers
across datasets, classifiers and attacks. Code released. 1

1

Introduction

(a) Clean Image

(b) Adversarial Image

(c) DISCO Output

Figure 1: Qualitative performance of DISCO output of a randomly selected ImageNet [23] image.
It has long been hypothesized that vision is only possible because the natural world contains substantial
statistical regularities, which are exploited by the vision system to overcome the difficulty of scene
understanding [7, 36, 91, 29, 114, 30, 44, 100, 105, 79, 8, 110]. Under this hypothesis, natural
images form a low-dimension manifold in image space, denoted as the image manifold, to which
human vision is highly tuned. While deep neural networks (DNNs) [108, 39, 133, 109, 101] aim
to classify natural images with human-like accuracy, they have been shown prone to adversarial
1

Code availabe at https://github.com/chihhuiho/disco.git

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

