Wukong: A 100 Million Large-scale Chinese
Cross-modal Pre-training Benchmark

Jiaxi Gu1∗ , Xiaojun Meng1∗ , Guansong Lu1 , Lu Hou1 , Minzhe Niu1 , Xiaodan Liang2† ,
Lewei Yao1 , Runhui Huang2 , Wei Zhang1 , Xin Jiang1 , Chunjing Xu1 , Hang Xu1†

Abstract
Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) models have shown remarkable performance
on various downstream tasks. Their success heavily relies on the scale of pretrained cross-modal datasets. However, the lack of large-scale datasets and
benchmarks in Chinese hinders the development of Chinese VLP models and
broader multilingual applications. In this work, we release a large-scale Chinese cross-modal dataset named Wukong, which contains 100 million Chinese
image-text pairs collected from the web. Wukong aims to benchmark different
multi-modal pre-training methods to facilitate the VLP research and community
development. Furthermore, we release a group of models pre-trained with various image encoders (ViT-B/ViT-L/SwinT) and also apply advanced pre-training
techniques into VLP such as locked-image text tuning, token-wise similarity in
contrastive learning, and reduced-token interaction. Extensive experiments and
a benchmarking of different downstream tasks including a new largest humanverified image-text test dataset are also provided. Experiments show that Wukong
can serve as a promising Chinese pre-training dataset and benchmark for different cross-modal learning methods. For the zero-shot image classification task
on 10 datasets, WukongViT-L achieves an average accuracy of 73.03%. For the
image-text retrieval task, it achieves a mean recall of 71.6% on AIC-ICC which
is 12.9% higher than WenLan 2.0. Also, our Wukong models are benchmarked
on downstream tasks with other variants on multiple datasets, e.g., Flickr8KCN, Flickr-30K-CN, COCO-CN, et al. More information can be referred to
https://wukong-dataset.github.io/wukong-dataset/.

1

Introduction

Pre-training large-scale models on big data, and fine-tuning them on downstream tasks, has become an
emerging paradigm of artificial intelligence systems. Models such as BERT [5] and GPT [1] grow in
popularity in the natural language processing community as they possess high transferability to a wide
range of downstream tasks, yielding state-of-the-art performance. Recent works such as CLIP [32],
ALIGN [12], and FILIP [50] further extend this paradigm to the joint Vision Language Pre-training
(VLP) domain and show superior results over state-of-the-art methods on various downstream tasks.
Meanwhile, VLP models can be easily adapted to multiple practical applications such as image search
engines, multi-choice visual answering and image labelling. In general, this promising direction draws
significant attention from both industry and academia to consider it as the path to the next-generation
AI models.
Two reasons lead to the success of VLP models. On the one hand, more advanced model architectures
such as ViT [6]/BERT [5] and training objectives like contrastive learning [10], are usually able
1
2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab ∗ These two authors contribute equally.
Sun Yat-sen University † Corresponding authors: xu.hang@huawei.com & xdliang328@gmail.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

