Information bottleneck theory of high-dimensional
regression: relevancy, efficiency and optimality

Vudtiwat Ngampruetikorn,* David J. Schwab
Initiative for the Theoretical Sciences, The Graduate Center, CUNY
* vngampruetikorn@gc.cuny.edu

Abstract
Avoiding overfitting is a central challenge in machine learning, yet many large
neural networks readily achieve zero training loss. This puzzling contradiction
necessitates new approaches to the study of overfitting. Here we quantify overfitting
via residual information, defined as the bits in fitted models that encode noise in
training data. Information efficient learning algorithms minimize residual information while maximizing the relevant bits, which are predictive of the unknown
generative models. We solve this optimization to obtain the information content
of optimal algorithms for a linear regression problem and compare it to that of
randomized ridge regression. Our results demonstrate the fundamental trade-off
between residual and relevant information and characterize the relative information
efficiency of randomized regression with respect to optimal algorithms. Finally,
using results from random matrix theory, we reveal the information complexity of
learning a linear map in high dimensions and unveil information-theoretic analogs
of double and multiple descent phenomena.

1

Information bottleneck

Conventional wisdom identifies overfitting as being detrimental to generalization performance, yet
modern machine learning is dominated by models that perfectly fit training data. Recent attempts to
resolve this dilemma have offered much needed insight into the generalization properties of perfectly
fitted models [1, 2]. However investigations of overfitting beyond generalization error have received
less attention. In this work we present a quantitative analysis of overfitting based on information
theory and, in particular, the information bottleneck (IB) method [3].
The essence of learning is the ability to find useful and generalizable representations of training data.
An example of such a representation is a fitted model which may capture statistical correlations between two variables (regression and pattern recognition) or the relative likelihood of random variables
(density estimation). While what makes a representation useful is problem specific, a good model
generalizes well—that is, it is consistent with test data even though they are not used at training.
Achieving good generalization requires information about the unknown data generating process.
Maximizing this information is an intuitive strategy, yet extracting too many bits from the training data
hurts generalization [4, 5]. This fundamental trade-off underpins the IB principle, which formalizes
the notion of a maximally efficient representation as an optimization problem [3]1
min 𝑄𝑇 |𝑆 𝐼 (𝑆; 𝑇 | 𝑊) − (𝛾 − 1)𝐼 (𝑇; 𝑊).

(1)

Here 𝑊 denotes the data generating process. The conditional distribution 𝑄 𝑇 |𝑆 denotes a learning
algorithm which defines a stochastic mapping from the training data 𝑆 to the hypothesis or fitted
1 Note that this minimization is identical to that of the original IB method since 𝐼 (𝑆; 𝑇 |𝑊) = 𝐼 (𝑆; 𝑇)−𝐼 (𝑇; 𝑊)
under the Markov constraint 𝑇 ↔ 𝑆 ↔𝑊.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

