Learn to Match with No Regret:
Reinforcement Learning in Markov Matching
Markets
Yifei Min
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
yifei.min@yale.edu

Tianhao Wang
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
tianhao.wang@yale.edu

Ruitu Xu
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
ruitu.xu@yale.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Departments of Industrial Engineering
and Management Sciences
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Michael I. Jordan
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
CA 94720
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Zhuoran Yang
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
zhuoran.yang@yale.edu

Abstract
We study a Markov matching market involving a planner and a set of strategic
agents on the two sides of the market. At each step, the agents are presented with a
dynamical context, where the contexts determine the utilities. The planner controls
the transition of the contexts to maximize the cumulative social welfare, while the
agents aim to find a myopic stable matching at each step. Such a setting captures a
range of applications including ridesharing platforms. We formalize the problem
by proposing a reinforcement learning framework that integrates optimistic value
iteration with maximum weight matching. The proposed algorithm addresses
the coupled challenges of sequential exploration, matching stability, and function
approximation. We prove that the algorithm achieves sublinear regret.

1

Introduction

Large-scale digital markets play a crucial role in modern economies, and yet the analysis and
design of such ever-changing markets demand powerful instruments beyond economics. An in-depth
understanding of the dynamically changing market environments requires our methods to be adaptive,
scalable, and incentive compatible in the face of significant nonstationarity. In particular, massive
data streams arising from digital markets provide us with a great opportunity to meet such challenges
through learning-based mechanism design. A recent line of work applies modern machine learning
algorithms to classic problems in adaptive mechanism design (Jagadeesan et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2021; Sankararaman et al., 2021; Basu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022), and among which one especially
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

