Self-Supervised Pretraining for Large-Scale Point
Clouds
Zaiwei Zhang
AWS AI
Santa Clara, CA 95054
zaiweiz@amazon.com

Min Bai
AWS AI
Santa Clara, CA 95054
baimin@amazon.com

Erran Li
AWS AI
Santa Clara, CA 95054
lilimam@amazon.com

Abstract
Pretraining on large unlabeled datasets has been proven to improve the downstream task performance on many computer vision tasks, such as 2D object detection and video classification. However, for large-scale 3D scenes, such as outdoor
LiDAR point clouds, pretraining is not widely used. Due to the special data characteristics of large 3D point clouds, approaches for 2D pretraining frameworks
tend to not generalize well to this domain. In this paper, we propose a new selfsupervised pretraining method that targets large-scale 3D scenes. We pretrain
commonly used point-based and voxel-based model architectures and show the
transfer learning performance on 3D object detection and semantic segmentation.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on both dense 3D indoor point
clouds and sparse outdoor LiDAR point clouds.

1

Introduction

Accurate and reliable perception is core to the capabilities and safety of autonomous and robotic
systems such as self-driving vehicles and indoor robotics. To accurately measure the structure of
their surroundings, such platforms usually rely on LiDARs and depth cameras for outdoor and indoor
scenes, respectively. Given the 3D point clouds, models are built for a variety of perception tasks,
such as object detection, scene segmentation, localization, and mapping.
Modern deep learning models have shown great capabilities when large quantities of annotated data
are given. However, generating the required amount of annotations is a laborious and expensive
manual process [14; 57; 18]. This is especially true for labeled datasets targeting object detection
and semantic segmentation of large real-world scenes, which can contain dozens of independently
moving objects and irregularly shaped background material. Moreover, the 3D data is difficult to
clearly visualize, manipulate, and annotate on a 2D screen. In the case of outdoor LiDAR scans, the
annotation tasks are further complicated by the sparsity of the typical point cloud. However, the cost
of acquiring a large quantity of unlabeled sensor data is usually much lower compared to manual
annotation. Hence, developing algorithms to automatically discover useful patterns and strengthen
the performance of models with few annotated examples is of great value.
Recently, researchers have explored self-supervised learning (SSL) to bootstrap model training in
various domains. In computer vision, [26; 8; 22; 25] make use of datasets such as ImageNet [50]
with carefully designed pretext tasks to learn useful features for downstream tasks such as object
detection and segmentation. These techniques rely on the enormous ImageNet dataset, which depicts
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

