On Infinite Separations Between Simple and Optimal
Mechanisms
Alexandros Psomas ⇤

Ariel Schvartzman †

S. Matthew Weinberg ‡

Abstract
We consider a revenue-maximizing seller with k heterogeneous items for sale to a
single additive buyer, whose values are drawn from a known, possibly correlated
prior D. It is known that there exist priors D such that simple mechanisms —
those with bounded menu complexity — extract an arbitrarily small fraction of the
optimal revenue ([BCKW15, HN19]). This paper considers the opposite direction:
given a correlated distribution D witnessing an infinite separation between simple
and optimal mechanisms, what can be said about D?
[HN19] provides a framework for constructing such D: it takes as input a sequence
of k-dimensional vectors satisfying some geometric property, and produces a D
witnessing an infinite gap. Our first main result establishes that this framework is
without loss: every D witnessing an infinite separation could have resulted from
this framework. An earlier version of their work provided a more streamlined
framework [HN13]. Our second main result establishes that this restrictive framework is not tight. That is, we provide an instance D witnessing an infinite gap, but
which provably could not have resulted from the restrictive framework.
As a corollary, we discover a new kind of mechanism which can witness these
infinite separations on instances where the previous “aligned” mechanisms do not.

1

Introduction

Consider a revenue-maximizing seller with k items for sale to a single additive buyer, whose values
for the k items are drawn from a known distribution D. When k = 1, Myerson’s seminal work
provides a closed-form solution to the revenue-optimal mechanism, and it has a particularly simple
form: simply post a price p := arg maxp {p · Prv D [v p]}, and let the buyer purchase the item
if they please ([Mye81]). For k > 1, however, this multi-dimensional mechanism design problem
remains an active research agenda forty years later.
While simple, constant-factor approximations are known in quite general settings when D is a product
distribution ([CHK07, CHMS10, CMS15, KW12, LY13, BILW14, Yao15, RW15, CDW16, CM16,
CZ17]), there may be an infinite gap between the revenue-optimal auction and any simple counterpart
when values are correlated ([BCKW15, HN19]). More specifically: one simple way to sell k items is
to treat the grand bundle of all items as if it were a single item, and sell it using Myerson’s optimal
⇤

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, apsomas@cs.purdue.edu. Supported in part by an NSF
CAREER award CCF-2144208, a Google Research Scholar Award, and by the Algorand Centres of Excellence
program managed by Algorand Foundation. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of Algorand
Foundation.
†
Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS), schvartman.ariel@gmail.com. Research conducted while at DIMACS, Rutgers University and supported by
the National Science Foundation under grant number CCF-1445755.
‡
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, smweinberg@princeton.edu. Supported by NSF
CCF-1717899
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

