Local-Global MCMC kernels: the best of both worlds
Sergey Samsonov1

Evgeny Lagutin1

Marylou Gabrié2

Alain Durmus3

Alexey Naumov1 Eric Moulines2
HSE University 2 Ecole Polytechnique 3 ENS Paris-Saclay
{svsamsonov,elagutin,anaumov}@hse.ru
{eric.moulines,marylou.gabrie}@polytechnique.edu
alain.durmus@ens-paris-saclay.fr

1

Abstract
Recent works leveraging learning to enhance sampling have shown promising
results, in particular by designing effective non-local moves and global proposals. However, learning accuracy is inevitably limited in regions where little data
is available such as in the tails of distributions as well as in high-dimensional
problems. In the present paper we study an Explore-Exploit Markov chain Monte
Carlo strategy (Ex2 MCMC) that combines local and global samplers showing
that it enjoys the advantages of both approaches. We prove V -uniform geometric
ergodicity of Ex2 MCMC without requiring a uniform adaptation of the global
sampler to the target distribution. We also compute explicit bounds on the mixing
rate of the Explore-Exploit strategy under realistic conditions. Moreover, we also
analyze an adaptive version of the strategy (FlEx2 MCMC) where a normalizing
flow is trained while sampling to serve as a proposal for global moves. We illustrate
the efficiency of Ex2 MCMC and its adaptive version on classical sampling benchmarks as well as in sampling high-dimensional distributions defined by Generative
Adversarial Networks seen as Energy Based Models.

1

Introduction

We consider the setting where a target distribution ⇡ on a measurable space ( , X ) is known up
to a normalizing constant and one tries to estimate the expectations of some function f : ! R
with respect to ⇡. Examples include the extraction of Bayesian statistics from posterior distributions
derived from observations as well as the computation of observables of a physical system x 2 under
the Boltzmann distribution with non-normalized density ⇡(x) = e U (x) for the energy function U
at the inverse temperature .
A common strategy to tackle this estimation is to resort to Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms
(MCMCs). The MCMC approach aims to simulate a realization of a time-homogeneous Markov
chain {Yn , n 2 N}, such that the distribution of the n-th iterate Yn with n ! 1 is arbitrarily close
to ⇡, regardless of the initial distribution of Y0 . In particular, the Metropolis-Hastings kernel (MH) is
the cornerstone of MCMC simulations, with a number of successful variants following the process
of a proposal step followed by an accept/reject step (see e.g. [62]). In large dimensions, proposal
distributions are typically chosen to generate local moves that depend on the last state of the chain in
order to guarantee an admissible acceptance rate. However, local samplers suffer from long mixing
times as exploration is inherently slow, and mode switching, when there is more than one, can be
extremely infrequent.
On the other hand, independent proposals are able to generate more global updates, but they are
difficult to design. Developments in deep generative modelling, in particular versatile autoregressive
and normalising flows [39, 37, 20, 55], spurred efforts to use learned probabilistic models to improve
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

