Multimodal Contrastive Learning with LIMoE:
the Language-Image Mixture of Experts

Basil Mustafa∗, Carlos Riquelme* , Joan Puigcerver* , Rodolphe Jenatton, Neil Houlsby
Google Brain
{basilm, rikel, jpuigcerver, rjenatton, neilhoulsby}@google.com

Abstract
Large sparsely-activated models have obtained excellent performance in multiple
domains. However, such models are typically trained on a single modality at a
time. We present the Language-Image MoE, LIMoE, a sparse mixture of experts
model capable of multimodal learning. LIMoE accepts both images and text
simultaneously, while being trained using a contrastive loss. MoEs are a natural fit
for a multimodal backbone, since expert layers can learn an appropriate partitioning
of modalities. However, new challenges arise; in particular, training stability and
balanced expert utilization, for which we propose an entropy-based regularization
scheme. Across multiple scales, we demonstrate remarkable performance
improvement over dense models of equivalent computational cost. LIMoE-L/16
trained comparably to CLIP-L/14 achieves 78.6% zero-shot ImageNet accuracy (vs.
76.2%), and when further scaled to H/14 (with additional data) it achieves 84.1%,
comparable to state-of-the-art methods which use larger custom per-modality
backbones and pre-training schemes. We analyse the quantitative and qualitative
behavior of LIMoE, and demonstrate phenomena such as differing treatment of
the modalities and the organic emergence of modality-specific experts.

1

Introduction

Sparsely activated mixture of expert (MoE) models have recently been used with great effect to scale
up both vision [1, 2] and text models [3, 4]. The primary motivation for using MoEs is to scale model
parameters while keeping compute costs under control. These models however have other benefits;
for example, the sparsity protects against catastrophic forgetting in continual learning [5] and can
improve performance for multitask learning [6] by offering a convenient inductive bias.
Given success in each individual domain, and the intuition that sparse models may better handle
distinct tasks, we explore the application of MoEs to multimodal modelling. We take the first step in
this direction, and study models that process both images and text. In particular, we train a single
multimodal architecture that aligns image and text representations via contrastive learning [7].
When using a setup proposed in prior unimodal models [8, 1], we find that feeding multiple modalities
to a single architecture leads to new failure modes unique to MoEs. To overcome these, we present
a set of entropy based regularisers which stabilise training and improve performance. We call the
resulting model LIMoE (Language-Image MoE).
We train a range of LIMoE models which significantly outperform compute-matched dense baselines.
We scale this up to a large 5.6B parameter LIMoE-H/14, which applies 675M parameters per token.
When evaluated zero-shot [7] on ImageNet-2012 [9] it achieves an accuracy of 84.1%, competitive
with two-tower models that make use of modality-specific pre-training and feature extractors, and
apply 3-4x more parameters per token.
∗

Authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

