Distributed Online Convex Optimization with
Compressed Communication

Zhipeng Tu1,2 , Xi Wang1,2 , Yiguang Hong∗3 , Lei Wang4 , Deming Yuan5 , Guodong Shi2
1

Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Australian Center for Field Robotics, School of AMME, The University of Sydney, Australia
3
Department of Control Science and Engineering, Tongji University, China
4
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
5
School of Automation, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
tuzhipeng@amss.ac.cn, wangxi14@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yghong@iss.ac.cn
lei.wangzju@zju.edu.cn, dmyuan1012@gmail.com, guodong.shi@sydney.edu.au

2

Abstract
We consider a distributed online convex optimization problem when streaming
data are distributed among computing agents over a connected communication
network. Since the data are high-dimensional or the network is large-scale, communication load can be a bottleneck for the efficiency of distributed algorithms.
To tackle this bottleneck, we apply the state-of-art data compression scheme to
the fundamental GD-based distributed online algorithms. Three algorithms with
difference-compressed communication are proposed for full information feedback
(DC-DOGD), one-point bandit feedback (DC-DOBD), and two-point bandit feedback (DC-DO2BD), respectively. We obtain regret bounds explicitly in terms of
time horizon, compression ratio, decision dimension, agent number, and network
parameters. Our algorithms are proved to be no-regret and match the same regret
bounds, w.r.t. time horizon, with their uncompressed versions for both convex and
strongly convex losses. Numerical experiments are given to validate the theoretical
findings and illustrate that the proposed algorithms can effectively reduce the total
transmitted bits for distributed online training compared with the uncompressed
baseline.

1

Introduction

Online optimization has attracted considerable attention in recent decades, for its remarkable applications in machine learning tasks such as spam filtering, dictionary learning, advertising selection, and
so on [1, 2, 3]. In such online tasks, data are revealed incrementally, and decisions must be made
before all data are available. When the streaming data are collected at multiple agents, the distributed
online optimization over a multi-agent network is considered, where data storage and processing are
performed in the agents [4, 5]. It is often impractical to communicate data among different agents
from multiple concerns such as privacy and bandwidth utilization. Also, there is no central agent
for global coordination. In such settings, each agent relies on its own data to run an algorithm while
communicating decisions with its immediate neighbors.
To be specific, this paper considers the distributed online convex optimization (DOCO) problem over an N -agent network. The objective is to minimize the accumulated system-wide loss
PT PN
minx∈K t=1 i=1 fit (x), where the local convex loss function fit is formed by the data arriving
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

