On the Sample Complexity of Stabilizing
LTI Systems on a Single Trajectory

Yang Hu
SEAS, Harvard University
Massachusetts, USA
yanghu@g.harvard.edu

Adam Wierman
CMS, California Institute of Technology
California, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Guannan Qu
ECE, Carnegie Mellon University
Pennsylvania, USA
gqu@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Stabilizing an unknown dynamical system is one of the central problems in control theory. In this paper, we study the sample complexity of the learn-to-stabilize
problem in Linear Time-Invariant (LTI) systems on a single trajectory. Current
state-of-the-art approaches require a sample complexity linear in n, the state dimension, which incurs a state norm that blows up exponentially in n. We propose
a novel algorithm based on spectral decomposition that only needs to learn “a
small part” of the dynamical matrix acting on its unstable subspace. We show
that, under proper assumptions, our algorithm stabilizes an LTI system on a single
trajectory with O(k log n) samples, where k is the instability index of the system.
This represents the first sub-linear sample complexity result for the stabilization
of LTI systems under the regime when k = o(n).

1

Introduction

Linear Time-Invariant (LTI) systems, namely xt+1 = Axt + But , where xt ∈ Rn is the state and
ut ∈ Rm is the control input, are one of the most fundamental dynamical systems in control theory,
and have wide applications across engineering, economics and societal domains. For systems with
known dynamical matrices (A, B), there is a well-developed theory for designing feedback controllers with guaranteed stability, robustness, and performance [1, 2]. However, these tools cannot
be directly applied when (A, B) is unknown.
Driven by the success of machine learning [3, 4], there has been significant interest in learning-based
(adaptive) control, where the learner does not know the underlying system dynamics and learns to
control the system in an online manner, usually with the goal of achieving low regret [5–13].
Despite the progress, an important limitation in this line of work is a common assumption that the
learner has a priori access to a known stabilizing controller. This assumption simplifies the learning
task, since it ensures a bounded state trajectory in the learning stage, and thus enables the learner to
learn with low regret. However, assuming a known stabilizing controller is not practical, as stabilization itself is nontrivial and considered equally important as any other performance guarantee.
To overcome this limitation, in this paper we consider the learn-to-stabilize problem, i.e., learning
to stabilize an unknown dynamical system without prior knowledge of any stabilizing controller.
†

This work is supported by NSF Grants CNS-2146814, CPS-2136197, CNS-2106403, NGSDI-2105648,
EPCN-2154171, with additional support from Amazon AWS.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

