Why Robust Generalization in Deep Learning is
Difﬁcult: Perspective of Expressive Power

Binghui Li1,6,7,∗ Jikai Jin2,∗ Han Zhong3 John E. Hopcroft4 Liwei Wang3,5,†
1
School of EECS, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Center for Data Science, Peking University 4 Cornell University
5
National Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory 7 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu)
{libinghui,jkjin}@pku.edu.cn, hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn,
jeh17@cornell.edu, wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
It is well-known that modern neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples. To mitigate this problem, a series of robust learning algorithms have been
proposed. However, although the robust training error can be near zero via some
methods, all existing algorithms lead to a high robust generalization error. In this
paper, we provide a theoretical understanding of this puzzling phenomenon from
the perspective of expressive power for deep neural networks. Speciﬁcally, for
binary classiﬁcation problems with well-separated data, we show that, for ReLU
networks, while mild over-parameterization is sufﬁcient for high robust training
accuracy, there exists a constant robust generalization gap unless the size of the
neural network is exponential in the data dimension d. This result holds even
if the data is linear separable (which means achieving standard generalization is
easy), and more generally for any parameterized function classes as long as their
VC dimension is at most polynomial in the number of parameters. Moreover, we
establish an improved upper bound of exp(O(k)) for the network size to achieve
low robust generalization error when the data lies on a manifold with intrinsic
dimension k (k  d). Nonetheless, we also have a lower bound that grows exponentially with respect to k — the curse of dimensionality is inevitable. By
demonstrating an exponential separation between the network size for achieving
low robust training and generalization error, our results reveal that the hardness of
robust generalization may stem from the expressive power of practical models.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in a variety of disciplines including computer vision (Voulodimos et al., 2018), natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018) as well as
scientiﬁc and engineering applications (Jumper et al., 2021). However, it is observed that neural
networks are often sensitive to small adversarial attacks (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2013;
Goodfellow et al., 2014), which potentially gives rise to reliability and security problems in realworld applications.
In light of this pitfall, it is highly desirable to obtain classiﬁers that are robust to small but adversarial
perturbations. A common approach is to design adversarial training algorithms by using adversarial
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

