Model Zoos: A Dataset of Diverse Populations of
Neural Network Models
Konstantin Schürholt1 , Diyar Taskiran1 , Boris Knyazev2 , Xavier Giró-i-Nieto3 , Damian Borth1
1
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science, University of St.Gallen
2
Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal
3
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

Abstract
In the last years, neural networks (NN) have evolved from laboratory environments
to the state-of-the-art for many real-world problems. It was shown that NN models
(i.e., their weights and biases) evolve on unique trajectories in weight space during
training. Following, a population of such neural network models (referred to as
model zoo) would form structures in weight space. We think that the geometry,
curvature and smoothness of these structures contain information about the state
of training and can reveal latent properties of individual models. With such model
zoos, one could investigate novel approaches for (i) model analysis, (ii) discover
unknown learning dynamics, (iii) learn rich representations of such populations,
or (iv) exploit the model zoos for generative modelling of NN weights and biases.
Unfortunately, the lack of standardized model zoos and available benchmarks
significantly increases the friction for further research about populations of NNs.
With this work, we publish a novel dataset of model zoos containing systematically
generated and diverse populations of NN models for further research. In total
the proposed model zoo dataset is based on eight image datasets, consists of 27
model zoos trained with varying hyperparameter combinations and includes 50’360
unique NN models as well as their sparsified twins, resulting in over 3’844’360
collected model states. Additionally, to the model zoo data we provide an in-depth
analysis of the zoos and provide benchmarks for multiple downstream tasks. The
dataset can be found at www.modelzoos.cc.

1

Introduction

The success of Neural Networks (NN) is surprising, considering the hard optimization problem to
be solved during training of NNs. Specifically, NN training is NP-complete [2], the loss surface and
optimization problem are non-convex [9, 17, 31] and the parameter space to fit during training is high
dimensional [3]. Additionally, NN training is sensitive to random initialization and hyperparameter
selection [19, 32]. Together, this leads to an interesting characteristic of NN training: given a dataset
and an architecture, different random initializations or hyperparameters lead to different minima
on the loss surface and therefore result in different model parameters (i.e., weights and biases).
Consequently, multiple training results in different NN models. The resulting population of NN
(referred to as model zoo) is an interesting object to study: Do individual models of the model zoo
have something in common? Do they form structures in weight space? What can we infer from
such structures? Can we learn representations of them? Lastly, can such structures be exploited to
generate new models with controllable properties?
These questions have been partially answered in prior work. Theoretical and empirical work demonstrates increasingly well-behaved loss surfaces for growing number of parameters [17, 8, 32]. The
shape of the loss surface and the starting point is determined by hyperparameters and the initialization,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

