When are Local Queries Useful for Robust Learning?
Pascale Gourdeau
University of Oxford
pascale.gourdeau@cs.ox.ac.uk
Marta Kwiatkowska
University of Oxford
marta.kwiatkowska@cs.ox.ac.uk

Varun Kanade
University of Oxford
varunk@cs.ox.ac.uk
James Worrell
University of Oxford
james.worrell@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Distributional assumptions have been shown to be necessary for the robust learnability of concept classes when considering the exact-in-the-ball robust risk and
access to random examples by Gourdeau et al. (2019). In this paper, we study
learning models where the learner is given more power through the use of local
queries, and give the first distribution-free algorithms that perform robust empirical
risk minimization (ERM) for this notion of robustness. The first learning model
we consider uses local membership queries (LMQ), where the learner can query
the label of points near the training sample. We show that, under the uniform
distribution, LMQs do not increase the robustness threshold of conjunctions and
any superclass, e.g., decision lists and halfspaces. Faced with this negative result,
we introduce the local equivalence query (LEQ) oracle, which returns whether the
hypothesis and target concept agree in the perturbation region around a point in
the training sample, as well as a counterexample if it exists. We show a separation
result: on one hand, if the query radius is strictly smaller than the adversary’s
perturbation budget ⇢, then distribution-free robust learning is impossible for a
wide variety of concept classes; on the other hand, the setting = ⇢ allows us to
develop robust ERM algorithms. We then bound the query complexity of these
algorithms based on online learning guarantees and further improve these bounds
for the special case of conjunctions. We finish by giving robust learning algorithms
n
for halfspaces with margins on both {0, 1} and Rn .

1

Introduction

Adversarial examples have been widely studied since the work of (Dalvi et al., 2004; Lowd and
Meek, 2005a,b), and later (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2013), the latter having coined the term.
As presented in Biggio and Roli (2017), two main settings exist for adversarial machine learning:
evasion attacks, where an adversary perturbs data at test time, and poisoning attacks, where the data
is modified at training time.
The majority of the guarantees and impossibility results for evasion attacks are based on the existence
of adversarial examples, potentially crafted by an all-powerful adversary. However, what is considered
to be an adversarial example has been defined in two different, and in some respects contradictory,
ways in the literature. The exact-in-the-ball notion of robustness (also known as error region risk in
Diochnos et al. (2018)) requires that the hypothesis and the ground truth agree in the perturbation
region around each test point; the ground truth must thus be specified on all input points in the
perturbation region. On the other hand, the constant-in-the-ball notion of robustness (which is
also known as corrupted input robustness from the work of Feige et al. (2015)) requires that the
unperturbed point be correctly classified and that the points in the perturbation region share its label,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

