BackdoorBench: A Comprehensive Benchmark of
Backdoor Learning

Baoyuan Wu1∗ Hongrui Chen1 Mingda Zhang1 Zihao Zhu1
Shaokui Wei1 Danni Yuan1 Chao Shen2
1
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University

Abstract
Backdoor learning is an emerging and vital topic for studying deep neural networks’
vulnerability (DNNs). Many pioneering backdoor attack and defense methods are
being proposed, successively or concurrently, in the status of a rapid arms race.
However, we find that the evaluations of new methods are often unthorough to
verify their claims and accurate performance, mainly due to the rapid development, diverse settings, and the difficulties of implementation and reproducibility.
Without thorough evaluations and comparisons, it is not easy to track the current
progress and design the future development roadmap of the literature. To alleviate
this dilemma, we build a comprehensive benchmark of backdoor learning called
BackdoorBench. It consists of an extensible modular-based codebase (currently including implementations of 8 state-of-the-art (SOTA) attacks and 9 SOTA defense
algorithms) and a standardized protocol of complete backdoor learning. We also
provide comprehensive evaluations of every pair of 8 attacks against 9 defenses,
with 5 poisoning ratios, based on 5 models and 4 datasets, thus 8,000 pairs of
evaluations in total. We present abundant analysis from different perspectives
about these 8,000 evaluations, studying the effects of different factors in backdoor
learning. All codes and evaluations of BackdoorBench are publicly available at
https://backdoorbench.github.io.

1

Introduction

With the widespread application of deep neural networks (DNNs) in many mission-critical scenarios,
the security issues of DNNs have attracted more attentions. One of the typical security issue is
backdoor learning, which could insert an imperceptible backdoor into the model through maliciously
manipulating the training data or controlling the training process. It brings in severe threat to the
widely adopted paradigm that people often download a unverified dataset/checkpoint to train/fine-tune
their models, or even outsource the training process to the third-party training platform.
Although backdoor learning is a young topic in the machine learning community, its development
speed is remarkable and has shown the state of a rapid arms race. When a new backdoor attack or
defense method is developed based on an assumption or observation, it will be quickly defeated or
evaded by more advanced adaptive defense or attack methods which break previous assumptions
or observations. However, we find that the evaluations of new methods are often insufficient, with
comparisons with limited previous methods, based on limited models and datasets. The possible
reasons include the rapid development of new methods, diverse settings (e.g., different threat models),
as well as the difficulties of implementing or reproducing previous methods. Without thorough
∗

Corresponds to Baoyuan Wu (wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

