Learning Efficient Vision Transformers via
Fine-Grained Manifold Distillation
Zhiwei Hao1,2 , Jianyuan Guo2 , Ding Jia2,3 , Kai Han2 , Yehui Tang2,3 ,
Chao Zhang3 , Han Hu1∗ , Yunhe Wang2∗
1
School of information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology.
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE),
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University.
{haozhw, hhu}@bit.edu.cn, {jianyuan.guo, kai.han, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com,
jiading@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yhtang, c.zhang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In the past few years, transformers have achieved promising performance on
various computer vision tasks. Unfortunately, the immense inference overhead
of most existing vision transformers withholds them from being deployed on
edge devices such as cell phones and smart watches. Knowledge distillation is a
widely used paradigm for compressing cumbersome architectures into compact
students via transferring information. However, most of them are designed for
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which do not fully investigate the character
of vision transformers. In this paper, we fully utilize the patch-level information
and propose a fine-grained manifold distillation method for transformer-based
networks. Specifically, we train a tiny student model to match a pre-trained teacher
model in the patch-level manifold space. Then, we decouple the manifold matching
loss into three terms with careful design to further reduce the computational costs
for the patch relationship. Equipped with the proposed method, a DeiT-Tiny model
containing 5M parameters achieves 76.5% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1k, which
is +2.0% higher than previous distillation approaches. Transfer learning results on
other classification benchmarks and downstream vision tasks also demonstrate the
superiority of our method over the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed the rise of attention-based models in the field of natural language
processing (NLP) [1, 2]. Such models belonging to the transformer family [3] can effortlessly build
long-range dependencies and have achieved remarkable performance. Inspired by the success in
NLP, researchers have made great efforts introducing the transformer-based architectures to vision
domain and achieved promising results. In an early attempt, Dosovitskiy et al. [4] proposed a
transformer-based vision model termed ViT, which takes split image patches as the input. ViT
obtains comparable performance when compared to the state-of-the-art convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), demonstrating the immense potential of applying transformers to vision tasks. Inspired by
the design of splitting the whole image into patches as input, various vision transformers have been
proposed, including Swin [5], T2T [6], Twins [7], and TNT [8].
Although transformers have shown the excellent capability for various vision tasks, they require large
amounts of parameters, resulting in heavy computational burden. For example, ViT-B [4] with 86M
parameters pretrained on JFT-300M can only achieve comparable performance with CNN-based
EfficientNet [9], while the latter is trained on ImageNet and contains only 5M parameters.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

