Accelerated Training of Physics-Informed Neural
Networks (PINNs) using Meshless Discretizations

Ramansh Sharma
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, India
rs7146@srmist.edu.in
Varun Shankar
School of Computing, University of Utah, UT, USA
shankar@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) are neural networks trained by using
physical laws in the form of partial differential equations (PDEs) as soft constraints.
We present a new technique for the accelerated training of PINNs that combines
modern scientific computing techniques with machine learning: discretely-trained
PINNs (DT-PINNs). The repeated computation of the partial derivative terms in
the PINN loss functions via automatic differentiation during training is known to
be computationally expensive, especially for higher-order derivatives. DT-PINNs
are trained by replacing these exact spatial derivatives with high-order accurate
numerical discretizations computed using meshless radial basis function-finite
differences (RBF-FD) and applied via sparse-matrix vector multiplication. While
in principle any high-order discretization may be used, the use of RBF-FD allows
for DT-PINNs to be trained even on point cloud samples placed on irregular
domain geometries. Additionally, though traditional PINNs (vanilla-PINNs) are
typically stored and trained in 32-bit floating-point (fp32) on the GPU, we show
that for DT-PINNs, using fp64 on the GPU leads to significantly faster training
times than fp32 vanilla-PINNs with comparable accuracy. We demonstrate the
efficiency and accuracy of DT-PINNs via a series of experiments. First, we explore
the effect of network depth on both numerical and automatic differentiation of a
neural network with random weights and show that RBF-FD approximations of
third-order accuracy and above are more efficient while being sufficiently accurate.
We then compare the DT-PINNs to vanilla-PINNs on both linear and nonlinear
Poisson equations and show that DT-PINNs achieve similar losses with 2-4x faster
training times on a consumer GPU. Finally, we also demonstrate that similar
results can be obtained for the PINN solution to the heat equation (a space-time
problem) by discretizing the spatial derivatives using RBF-FD and using automatic
differentiation for the temporal derivative. Our results show that fp64 DT-PINNs
offer a superior cost-accuracy profile to fp32 vanilla-PINNs, opening the door to a
new paradigm of leveraging scientific computing techniques to support machine
learning.

1

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) provide a convenient framework to model a large number of
phenomena across science and engineering. In real-world scenarios, PDEs are typically challenging
or impossible to solve using analytical techniques, and must instead be approximately solved using a
numerical method. A variety of numerical methods to solve these PDEs have been developed including
but not limited to finite difference (FD) methods (19) (which work primarily on rectangular domains
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

