Video PreTraining (VPT): Learning to Act by
Watching Unlabeled Online Videos
Bowen Baker⇤†
bowen@openai.com

Ilge Akkaya⇤†
ilge@openai.com

Peter Zhokhov⇤†
peterz@openai.com

Joost Huizinga⇤†
joost@openai.com

Jie Tang⇤†
jietang@openai.com

Adrien Ecoffet⇤†
adrien@openai.com

Brandon Houghton⇤†
brandon@openai.com

Raul Sampedro⇤†
raulsamg@gmail.com

Jeff Clune⇤†‡
jclune@gmail.com

Abstract
Pretraining on noisy, internet-scale datasets has been heavily studied as a technique
for training models with broad, general capabilities for text, images, and other
modalities. 1–6 However, for many sequential decision domains such as robotics,
video games, and computer use, publicly available data does not contain the labels
required to train behavioral priors in the same way. We extend the internet-scale
pretraining paradigm to sequential decision domains through semi-supervised
imitation learning wherein agents learn to act by watching online unlabeled videos.
Specifically, we show that with a small amount of labeled data we can train an
inverse dynamics model accurate enough to label a huge unlabeled source of online
data – here, online videos of people playing Minecraft – from which we can then
train a general behavioral prior. Despite using the native human interface (mouse
and keyboard at 20Hz), we show that this behavioral prior has nontrivial zeroshot capabilities and that it can be fine-tuned, with both imitation learning and
reinforcement learning, to hard-exploration tasks that are impossible to learn from
scratch via reinforcement learning. For many tasks our models exhibit humanlevel performance, and we are the first to report computer agents that can craft
diamond tools, which can take proficient humans upwards of 20 minutes (24,000
environment actions) of gameplay to accomplish.

1

Introduction

Work in recent years has demonstrated the efficacy of pretraining large and general foundation
models 7 on noisy internet-scale datasets for use in downstream tasks in natural language 1–4 , computer
vision, 5,6,8 and multi-task models. 9 For sequential decision domains (e.g. robotics, game playing,
and computer usage) where agents must repeatedly act within an environment, a wealth of data also
exists on the web; however, most of this data is in the form of unlabeled video (i.e. without the
actions taken at each frame), making it much less straightforward to train a behavioral prior in these
⇤

This was a large effort by a dedicated team. Each author made huge contributions on many fronts over long
time periods. All members were full time on the project for over six months. BB, IA, PZ, and JC were on the
original VPT project team and were thus involved for even longer (over a year). Aside from those original team
members, author order is random. It was also randomized between IA and PZ.
†
OpenAI
‡
University of British Columbia
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

