Smoothed Online Convex Optimization Based on
Discounted-Normal-Predictor
Lijun Zhang1,2 , Wei Jiang1 , Jinfeng Yi3 , Tianbao Yang4
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
3
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA
{zhanglj, jiangw}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, yijinfeng@jd.com, tianbao-yang@tamu.edu
1

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate an online prediction strategy named as DiscountedNormal-Predictor [Kapralov and Panigrahy, 2010] for smoothed online convex
optimization (SOCO), in which the learner needs to minimize not only the hitting
cost but also the switching cost. In the setting of learning with expert advice,
Daniely and Mansour [2019] demonstrate that Discounted-Normal-Predictor can
be utilized to yield nearly optimal regret bounds over any interval, even in the
presence of switching costs. Inspired by their results, we develop a simple algorithm
for SOCO: Combining online gradient descent (OGD) with different step sizes
sequentially by Discounted-Normal-Predictor. Despite its simplicity, we prove that
it is able to minimize the adaptive regret with switching cost, i.e., attaining nearly
optimal regret with switching cost on every interval. By exploiting the theoretical
guarantee of OGD for dynamic regret, we further show that the proposed algorithm
can minimize the dynamic regret with switching cost in every interval.

1

Introduction

Recently, a variant of online convex optimization (OCO), named as smoothed OCO (SOCO) has
received lots of attention in the machine learning community [Goel et al., 2019, Li and Li, 2020]. In
each round t, the learner chooses an action wt from a convex domain W, and a convex loss function
ft (·) : W 7→ R is selected by an adversary. While in the traditional OCO, the learner only suffers
a hitting cost ft (wt ), in SOCO, it further pays a switching cost m(wt , wt−1 ), which penalizes the
learner for changing its actions between rounds. SOCO has found wide applications in real-world
problems where the change of states brings additional costs [Lin et al., 2012, Kim and Giannakis,
2014, Goel et al., 2017], such as the wear-and-tear cost of switching servers [Lin et al., 2011].
For general convex functions, a natural choice of the switching cost is the distance between successive
actions, i.e., m(wt , wt−1 ) = kwt − wt−1 k. Then, the total loss in the t-th round becomes
ft (wt ) + λGkwt − wt−1 k

(1)

where λ ≥ 0 is the trade-off parameter, and G is the upper bound of the norm of gradients. Here,
G is introduced to ensure that the two terms weighted by λ are on the same order. Following the
convention of online learning [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006], we choose regret to measure the
performance, and meanwhile take into account the switching cost. Let T be the total number of
iterations. The standard metric would be regret with switching cost:
T
X
t=1

T
X

ft (wt ) + λGkwt − wt−1 k − min
ft (w)
w∈W

t=1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(2)

