AttCAT: Explaining Transformers via Attentive Class
Activation Tokens
Yao Qiang

Deng Pan Chengyin Li Xin Li Rhongho Jang Dongxiao Zhu
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University
{yao,pan.deng,cyli,xinlee,r.jang,dzhu}@wayne.edu

Abstract
Transformers have improved the state-of-the-art in various natural language processing and computer vision tasks. However, the success of the Transformer model
has not yet been duly explained. Current explanation techniques, which dissect
either the self-attention mechanism or gradient-based attribution, do not necessarily
provide a faithful explanation of the inner workings of Transformers due to the following reasons: first, attention weights alone without considering the magnitudes
of feature values are not adequate to reveal the self-attention mechanism; second,
whereas most Transformer explanation techniques utilize self-attention module,
the skip-connection module, contributing a significant portion of information flows
in Transformers, has not yet been sufficiently exploited in explanation; third, the
gradient-based attribution of individual feature does not incorporate interaction
among features in explaining the model’s output. In order to tackle the above
problems, we propose a novel Transformer explanation technique via attentive
class activation tokens, aka, AttCAT, leveraging encoded features, their gradients,
and their attention weights to generate a faithful and confident explanation for
Transformer’s output. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the
superior performance of AttCAT, which generalizes well to different Transformer
architectures, evaluation metrics, datasets, and tasks, to the baseline methods. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/qiangyao1988/AttCAT.

1

Introduction

Transformers have advanced the state-of-the-art on a variety of natural language processing tasks
[1, 2] and see increasing popularity in the field of computer vision [3, 4]. The main innovation behind
the Transformer models is the stacking of multi-head self-attention layers to extract global features
from sequential tokenized inputs. However, the lack of understanding of their mechanism increases
the risk of deploying them in real-world applications [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. This has motivated new research
on explaining Transformers output to assist trustworthy human decision-making [10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17].
The self-attention mechanism [18] in Transformers assigns a pairwise score capturing the relative
importance between every two tokens or image patches as attention weights. Thus, a common
practice is to use these attention weights to explain the Transformer model’s output by exhibiting the
importance distribution over the input tokens [6]. The baseline method, shown as RawAtt in Figure
2, utilizes the raw attention weights from a single layer or a combination of multiple layers [10].
However, recent studies [11, 12, 13] question whether highly attentive inputs significantly impact
the model outputs. Serrano et al. [11] demonstrate that erasing the representations accorded high
attention weights do not necessarily lead to a performance decrease. Jain et al. [12] suggest that
“attention is not explanation” by observing that attention scores are frequently inconsistent with other
feature importance indicators like gradient-based measures. Abnar et al. [13] argue that the contextual
information from tokens gets more similar as going deeper into the model, leading to unreliable
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

