An ↵-No-Regret Algorithm For Graphical Bilinear
Bandits
Geovani Rizk
PSL - Université Paris Dauphine,
CNRS, LAMSADE, Paris, France
geovani.rizk@dauphine.psl.eu
Albert Thomas
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
Paris, France
albert.thomas@huawei.com

Igor Colin
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
Paris, France
igor.colin@huawei.com
Rida Laraki
PSL - Université Paris Dauphine,
CNRS, LAMSADE, Paris, France
rida.laraki@lamsade.dauphine.fr

Yann Chevaleyre
PSL - Université Paris Dauphine,
CNRS, LAMSADE, Paris, France
yann.chevaleyre@lamsade.dauphine.fr

Abstract
We propose the first regret-based approach to the Graphical Bilinear Bandits
problem, where n agents in a graph play a stochastic bilinear bandit game with
each of their neighbors. This setting reveals a combinatorial NP-hard problem
that prevents the use of any existing regret-based algorithm in the (bi-)linear
bandit literature. In this paper, we fill this gap and present the first regret-based
algorithm for graphical bilinear bandits using the principle of optimism in the face
of uncertainty.
Theoretical analysis of this new method yields an upper bound of
p
Õ( T ) on the ↵-regret and evidences the impact of the graph structure on the rate
of convergence. Finally, we show through various experiments the validity of our
approach.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we are interested in solving centralized multi-agent problems that involve interactions
between agents. For instance, consider the problem of the configuration of antennas in a wireless
cellular network [Siomina et al., 2006] or the adjustment of turbine blades in a wind farm [van Dijk
et al., 2016, Bargiacchi et al., 2018]. Choosing a parameter for an antenna (respectively adjusting a
turbine blade) has an impact on its signal quality (respectively its energy collection efficiency) but
also on the one of its neighboring antennas due to signal interference (respectively its neighboring
turbine blade due to wind turbulence). By considering each antenna or turbine blade as an agent,
these problems can be modeled as a multi-agent multi-armed bandit problem [Bargiacchi et al., 2018]
with the knowledge of a coordination graph [Guestrin et al., 2002] where each node represents an
agent and each edge represents an interaction between two agents. As a natural extension of the
well-studied linear bandit to this multi-agent setting we focus on the graphical bilinear bandit setting
introduced in Rizk et al. [2021]: at each round, a central entity chooses an action for each agent and
observes a bilinear reward for each couple of neighbors in the graph that is function of the actions
chosen by the two neighboring agents.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

