M4Singer: A Multi-Style, Multi-Singer and Musical
Score Provided Mandarin Singing Corpus

Lichao Zhang1 , Ruiqi Li1 , Shoutong Wang1 , Liqun Deng2 , Jinglin Liu1 , Yi Ren1
Jinzheng He1 , Rongjie Huang1 , Jieming Zhu2 , Xiao Chen2 , Zhou Zhao1∗
1
Zhejiang University
{zju_zlc,ruiqili,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{dengliqun.deng,jamie.zhu}@huawei.com

Abstract
The lack of publicly available high-quality and accurately labeled datasets has long
been a major bottleneck for singing voice synthesis (SVS). To tackle this problem,
we present M4Singer, a free-to-use Multi-style, Multi-singer Mandarin singing
collection with elaborately annotated Musical scores as well as its benchmarks.
Specifically, 1) we construct and release a large high-quality Chinese singing voice
corpus, which is recorded by 20 professional singers, covering 700 Chinese pop
songs as well as all the four SATB types (i.e., soprano, alto, tenor, and bass);
2) we take extensive efforts to manually compose the musical scores for each
recorded song, which is necessary to the study of the prosody modeling for SVS.
3) To facilitate the use and demonstrate the quality of M4Singer, we conduct four
different benchmark experiments: score-based SVS, controllable singing voice
(CSV), singing voice conversion (SVC) and automatic music transcription (AMT).
Audio samples can be found at http://m4singer.github.io.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep learning-based singing voice synthesis (SVS) has attracted a lot of attention from
both industry and academic communities [4; 29; 21; 7; 5; 11; 9; 57; 26; 54; 41; 50]. However, due to
high cost of data acquisition, the lack of large and high-quality singing voice corpus for public use
has always existed, which heavily hinders the development of the SVS research. Taking the Chinese
SVS corpus as the focus, existing open resources suffer from either low quality [38], limited amount
[26; 48], or lack of necessary musical score annotation [17]. As a result, it is difficult for researchers
to dive into SVS and work out comparable results as the text-to-speech (TTS) community does. To
fully facilitate SVS-related studies, for example, score-based SVS, controllable singing voice (CSV),
singing voice conversion (SVC), etc., a desirable SVS corpus is supposed to satisfy the following
goals:
• High-quality: The vocal recordings should be clean enough with high fidelity and professional
singing techniques, to guarantee the SVS models generate expressive and assessable synthesized
results.
• Multi-singer: It is crucial to provide a large size of singing voices from multiple singers, as different
sources help enrich the acoustic features to be modeled, which promises the SVC research or
zero-shot SVS.
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

