ADBench: Anomaly Detection Benchmark

Songqiao Han1,∗ , Xiyang Hu2,∗ , Hailiang Huang1,∗† , Minqi Jiang1,∗ , Yue Zhao2,∗†
1
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{han.songqiao,hlhuang}@shufe.edu.cn, {2020310191}@live.sufe.edu.cn,
{xiyanghu,zhaoy}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Given a long list of anomaly detection algorithms developed in the last few decades,
how do they perform with regard to (i) varying levels of supervision, (ii) different
types of anomalies, and (iii) noisy and corrupted data? In this work, we answer
these key questions by conducting (to our best knowledge) the most comprehensive anomaly detection benchmark with 30 algorithms on 57 benchmark datasets,
named ADBench. Our extensive experiments (98,436 in total) identify meaningful
insights into the role of supervision and anomaly types, and unlock future directions
for researchers in algorithm selection and design. With ADBench, researchers
can efficiently conduct comprehensive and fair evaluations for newly proposed
methods on the datasets (including our contributed ones from natural language and
computer vision domains) against the existing baselines. To foster accessibility and
reproducibility, we fully open-source ADBench and the corresponding results.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection (AD), which is also known as outlier detection, is a key machine learning (ML)
task with numerous applications, including anti-money laundering [94], rare disease detection [196],
social media analysis [186, 193], and intrusion detection [88]. AD algorithms aim to identify data
instances that deviate significantly from the majority of data objects [59, 139, 146, 160], and numerous
methods have been developed in the last few decades [3, 85, 102, 103, 129, 156, 172, 198]. Among
them, the majority are designed for tabular data (i.e., no time dependency and graph structure). Thus,
we focus on the tabular AD algorithms and datasets in this work.
Although there are already some benchmark and evaluation works for tabular AD [25, 38, 42, 53, 166],
they generally have the limitations as follows: (i) primary emphasis on unsupervised methods only
without including emerging (semi-)supervised AD methods; (ii) limited analysis of the algorithm
performance concerning anomaly types (e.g., local vs. global); (iii) the lack of analysis on model
robustness (e.g., noisy labels and irrelevant features); (iv) the absence of using statistical tests for
algorithm comparison; and (v) no coverage of more complex CV and NLP datasets, which have
attracted extensive attention nowadays.
To address these limitations, we design (to our best knowledge) the most comprehensive tabular
anomaly detection benchmark called ADBench. By analyzing both research needs and deployment
requirements in the industry, we design the experiments with three major angles in anomaly detection
(see §3.3): (i) the availability of supervision (e.g., ground truth labels) by including 14 unsupervised,
7 semi-supervised, and 9 supervised methods; (ii) algorithm performance under different types of
anomalies by simulating the environments with four types of anomalies; and (iii) algorithm robustness
and stability under three settings of data corruptions. Fig. 1 provides an overview of ADBench.
Key takeaways: Through extensive experiments, we find (i) surprisingly none of the benchmarked
unsupervised algorithms is statistically better than others, emphasizing the importance of algorithm
∗
†

All authors contribute equally. Names are listed in alphabetical ordering by the last name.
Corresponding authors. Direct technical questions to Minqi Jiang and Yue Zhao.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

