Active Exploration for
Inverse Reinforcement Learning

David Lindner
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
david.lindner@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Giorgia Ramponi
ETH AI Center
giorgia.ramponi@ai.ethz.ch

Abstract
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) is a powerful paradigm for inferring a reward function from expert demonstrations. Many IRL algorithms require a known
transition model and sometimes even a known expert policy, or they at least require
access to a generative model. However, these assumptions are too strong for many
real-world applications, where the environment can be accessed only through sequential interaction. We propose a novel IRL algorithm: Active exploration for
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (AceIRL), which actively explores an unknown
environment and expert policy to quickly learn the expert’s reward function and
identify a good policy. AceIRL uses previous observations to construct confidence
intervals that capture plausible reward functions and find exploration policies that
focus on the most informative regions of the environment. AceIRL is the first
approach to active IRL with sample-complexity bounds that does not require a
generative model of the environment. AceIRL matches the sample complexity of
active IRL with a generative model in the worst case. Additionally, we establish
a problem-dependent bound that relates the sample complexity of AceIRL to the
suboptimality gap of a given IRL problem. We empirically evaluate AceIRL in simulations and find that it significantly outperforms more naive exploration strategies.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL; Sutton and Barto, 2018) has achieved impressive results, from playing
video games (Mnih et al., 2015) to solving robotic control problems (Haarnoja et al., 2019). However,
in many applications, it is challenging to design a reward function that robustly describes the desired
task (Amodei et al., 2016; Hendrycks et al., 2021). Instead of using an explicit reward function,
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL; Ng et al., 2000) seeks to recover the reward by observing
an expert, e.g., an human who already knows how to perform a task. However, most existing IRL
algorithms assume that the transition model, and in some cases, the expert’s policy, are known.
In many real-world applications, this is not given, and the agent needs to estimate the transition
dynamics and the expert policy from samples. Figure 1 shows an illustrative example where the agent
can choose between different paths that have different properties, e.g., walking speeds, and lead to
different goals. The agent has to explore the environment and query the expert policy in order to infer
the expert’s reward function.
IRL with sample-based estimation was only recently analyzed formally by Metelli et al. (2021). They
decompose the error on the reward into a contribution from estimating the transition model and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

