Distributional Convergence of the Sliced Wasserstein
Process
Jiaqi Xi1 and Jonathan Niles-Weed1,2
1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, NY 10012
2
Center for Data Science, New York University, NY 10011

Abstract
Motivated by the statistical and computational challenges of computing Wasserstein distances in high-dimensional contexts, machine learning researchers have
defined modified Wasserstein distances based on computing distances between
one-dimensional projections of the measures. Different choices of how to aggregate
these projected distances (averaging, random sampling, maximizing) give rise to
different distances, requiring different statistical analyses. We define the Sliced
Wasserstein Process, a stochastic process defined by the empirical Wasserstein distance between projections of empirical probability measures to all one-dimensional
subspaces, and prove a uniform distributional limit theorem for this process. As a
result, we obtain a unified framework in which to prove sample complexity and
distributional limit results for all Wasserstein distances based on one-dimensional
projections. We illustrate these results on a number of examples where no distributional limits were previously known.

1

Introduction

The Wasserstein distances have become useful tools in machine learning and data science, with
applications in transfer learning [6, 33], generative modeling [4, 19], statistics [8, 20], and various
scientific domains [36, 44]. Despite the popularity of these distances, they suffer from serious
drawbacks in high dimensions. From a statistical standpoint, estimating the Wasserstein distances
from data suffers from the curse of dimensionality, with convergence rates degrading sharply as the
dimension increases [16, 29, 37, 43]. From a computational standpoint, despite recent algorithmic
advances [1, 7], the best algorithms for approximately computing general Wasserstein distances
between distributions supported on n points in Rd for d ≥ 2 have running times scaling quadratically
in n, which is prohibitive on very large data sets. These deficiencies have motivated the development
of modifications of the Wasserstein distances which reduce the high-dimensional case to a series of
one-dimensional problems.
Given two compactly supported probability distributions P and Q in Rd , we write Pu and Qu for
the projections of P and Q onto the one-dimensional subspace spanned by u, for any u ∈ Sd−1 .
Explicitly, if X ∼ P , we let Pu denote the law of u> X. The measures Pu and Qu are probability
distributions on R obtained by collapsing P and Q to the one-dimensional “slice” in the direction
of u. Crucially, no matter how large d is, the Wasserstein distance Wpp (Pu , Qu ) between the one
dimensional measures is always easy to work with: it can be estimated from data at the rate that is
independent of the dimension, and if Pu and Qu are supported on n points, then Wpp (Pu , Qu ) can be
computed in nearly linear time by a simple sorting procedure.
This observation has given rise to a number of different proposals for defining a distance between
P and Q by aggregating the one-dimensional distances, the most prominent of which is the sliced
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

