Efficient Spatially Sparse Inference for
Conditional GANs and Diffusion Models

1

Muyang Li1 Ji Lin2 Chenlin Meng3 Stefano Ermon3 Song Han2 Jun-Yan Zhu1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 Stanford University

Abstract
During image editing, existing deep generative models tend to re-synthesize the
entire output from scratch, including the unedited regions. This leads to a significant waste of computation, especially for minor editing operations. In this
work, we present Spatially Sparse Inference (SSI), a general-purpose technique
that selectively performs computation for edited regions and accelerates various
generative models, including both conditional GANs and diffusion models. Our
key observation is that users tend to make gradual changes to the input image. This
motivates us to cache and reuse the feature maps of the original image. Given
an edited image, we sparsely apply the convolutional filters to the edited regions
while reusing the cached features for the unedited regions. Based on our algorithm,
we further propose Sparse Incremental Generative Engine (SIGE) to convert the
computation reduction to latency reduction on off-the-shelf hardware. With 1.2%area edited regions, our method reduces the computation of DDIM by 7.5⇥ and
GauGAN by 18⇥ while preserving the visual fidelity. With SIGE, we accelerate
the inference time of DDIM by 3.0⇥ on RTX 3090 and 6.6⇥ on Apple M1 Pro
CPU, and GauGAN by 4.2⇥ on RTX 3090 and 14⇥ on Apple M1 Pro CPU.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models, such as GANs [1, 2] and diffusion models [3, 4, 5], excel at synthesizing
photo-realistic images, enabling many image synthesis and editing applications. For example, users
can edit an image by drawing sketches [6, 7], semantic maps [6, 8], or strokes [9]. All of these
applications require users to interact with generative models frequently and therefore demand fast
inference time.
In practice, content creators often edit images gradually and only update a small image region each
time. However, even for a minor edit, recent generative models often synthesize the entire image,
including the unchanged regions, which leads to a significant waste of computation. As a concrete
example shown in Figure 2(a), the result of the previous editing has already been computed, and
the user further edits 9.4% area. However, the vanilla DDIM [5] needs to generate the entire image
to obtain the newly edited regions, wasting 80% computation on the unchanged regions. A naive
approach to address this issue would be to first segment the newly edited regions, synthesize the
corresponding output regions, and blend the outputs back into the previous output. Unfortunately,
this method often creates visible seams between the newly edited and unedited regions. How could
we save the computation by only updating the edited regions without losing global coherence?
In this work, we propose Spatially Sparse Inference (SSI), a general method to accelerate deep
generative models, including conditional GANs and diffusion models, by utilizing the spatial sparsity
of edited regions. Our method is motivated by the observation that feature maps at the unedited regions
remain mostly the same during user editing. As shown in Figure 2(b), our key idea is to reuse the
cached feature maps of the previous editing and sparsely update the newly edited regions. Specifically,
given user input, we first compute the difference mask to locate the newly edited regions. For each
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

