Efficient Dataset Distillation
using Random Feature Approximation

Noel Loo, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, Daniela Rus
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab (CSAIL)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
{loo, rhasani, amini, rus} @mit.edu

Abstract
Dataset distillation compresses large datasets into smaller synthetic coresets which
retain performance with the aim of reducing the storage and computational burden
of processing the entire dataset. Today’s best-performing algorithm, Kernel Inducing Points (KIP), which makes use of the correspondence between infinite-width
neural networks and kernel-ridge regression, is prohibitively slow due to the exact
computation of the neural tangent kernel matrix, scaling O(|S|2 ), with |S| being
the coreset size. To improve this, we propose a novel algorithm that uses a random
feature approximation (RFA) of the Neural Network Gaussian Process (NNGP)
kernel, which reduces the kernel matrix computation to O(|S|). Our algorithm
provides at least a 100-fold speedup over KIP and can run on a single GPU. Our
new method, termed an RFA Distillation (RFAD), performs competitively with KIP
and other dataset condensation algorithms in accuracy over a range of large-scale
datasets, both in kernel regression and finite-width network training. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on tasks involving model interpretability
and privacy preservation.1

1

Introduction

Time per iteration
460s

Accuracy
n

Example Distilled
Dataset from CelebA

6 tim
191.

ai
Coreset algorithms aim to summarize large
%g
+6.1
73.1%
datasets into significantly smaller datasets that
67%
still accurately represent the full dataset on
Class Male
downstream tasks [Jubran et al., 2019]. There
are myriad applications of these smaller datasets
2.4s
including speeding up model training [Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020], reducing catastrophic forClass Female
KIP
RFAD
KIP
RFAD
getting [Aljundi et al., 2019, Rebuffi et al., 2017,
(ours)
(ours) Train on this 2 images,
get 92% classification acc
Borsos et al., 2020], and enhancing interpretability [Kim et al., 2016, Bien and Tibshirani, 2011].
Figure 1: RFAD provides over 100-fold speedup
While most coreset selection techniques aim to
over the state-of-the-art algorithm Kernel-Inducing
select representative data points from the dataset,
Points (KIP) [Nguyen et al., 2021a], while exceedrecent work has looked at generating synthetic
ing its performance on CIFAR-10. (right) Example
data points instead, a process known as dataset
distilled synthetic sets one image per class
distillation [Wang et al., 2018, Bohdal et al.,
2020, Sucholutsky and Schonlau, 2019, Zhao et al., 2021, Zhao and Bilen, 2021b, Nguyen et al.,
2021b]. These synthetic datasets have the benefit of using continuous gradient-based optimization
techniques rather than combinatorial methods and are not limited to the set of images and labels given
by the dataset, providing added flexibility and performance.

ster
es fa

1

Code is available at https://github.com/yolky/RFAD

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

