Forecasting Future World Events
with Neural Networks
Andy Zou
UC Berkeley

Tristan Xiao
UC Berkeley

Mantas Mazeika
UIUC

Richard Li
UC Berkeley

Ryan Jia
UC Berkeley
Dawn Song
UC Berkeley

Owain Evans
University of Oxford

Joe Kwon
MIT
Jacob Steinhardt
UC Berkeley

Dan Hendrycks
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Forecasting future world events is a challenging but valuable task. Forecasts of
climate, geopolitical conflict, pandemics and economic indicators help shape policy
and decision making. In these domains, the judgment of expert humans contributes
to the best forecasts. Given advances in language modeling, can these forecasts be
automated? To this end, we introduce Autocast, a dataset containing thousands of
forecasting questions and an accompanying news corpus. Questions are taken from
forecasting tournaments, ensuring high quality, real-world importance, and diversity. The news corpus is organized by date, allowing us to precisely simulate the conditions under which humans made past forecasts (avoiding leakage from the future).
Motivated by the difficulty of forecasting numbers across orders of magnitude (e.g.
global cases of COVID-19 in 2022), we also curate IntervalQA, a dataset of numerical questions and metrics for calibration. We test language models on our forecasting task and find that performance is far below a human expert baseline. However,
performance improves with increased model size and incorporation of relevant information from the news corpus. In sum, Autocast poses a novel challenge for large
language models and improved performance could bring large practical benefits.

1

Introduction

Forecasting plays a crucial role in the modern world. Climate forecasts shape the policies of
governments and companies (Gillingham et al., 2018). Economic forecasts influence investment
and employment (Christensen et al., 2018). In 2020, forecasts about the spread of COVID-19 led to
national lockdowns and border closures (Adam, 2020), slowing the spread of the virus. Consequently,
machine learning (ML) models that make accurate forecasts across a broad range of topics could
enable more informed decision making at scale and improve ML safety (Hendrycks et al., 2021c).
Two main approaches to forecasting are described in the forecasting literature: statistical and judgmental forecasting (Webby and O’Connor, 1996; Armstrong, 2001). In statistical forecasting, forecasts
are made by traditional statistical models for time-series prediction such as autoregression (Makridakis et al., 2008) or by ML time-series models (Makridakis et al., 2020; Triebe et al., 2021). Humans
create and tune the models but do not tweak individual forecasts. This works well when there are
many past observations of the variable being forecast and minimal distribution shift. By contrast,
in judgmental forecasting human forecasters use their own judgment to determine forecasts. The
forecasters may use statistical models, but often integrate information from various sources including
news, accumulated knowledge, and a priori reasoning. This enables forecasting for questions where
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

