One Positive Label is Sufficient:
Single-Positive Multi-Label Learning with Label
Enhancement

1

Ning Xu1 , Congyu Qiao1 , Jiaqi Lv2 , Xin Geng1∗, Min-Ling Zhang1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan
{xning, qiaocy}@seu.edu.cn, is.jiaqi.lv@gmail.com,
{xgeng, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-label learning (MLL) learns from the examples each associated with multiple
labels simultaneously, where the high cost of annotating all relevant labels for
each training example is challenging for real-world applications. To cope with
the challenge, we investigate single-positive multi-label learning (SPMLL) where
each example is annotated with only one relevant label and show that one can
successfully learn a theoretically grounded multi-label classifier on SPMLL training
examples. In this paper, a novel SPMLL method named S MILE, i.e., Singlepositive MultI-label learning with Label Enhancement, is proposed. Specifically,
an unbiased risk estimator is derived, which could be guaranteed to approximately
converge to the optimal risk minimizer in fully supervised learning and shows
that one positive label of each instance is sufficient to train a model. Then, the
corresponding empirical risk estimator is established via recovering the latent soft
label as a label enhancement process, where the posterior density of the latent soft
labels is approximate to the variational Beta density parameterized by an inference
model. Experiments on twelve corrupted MLL datasets show the effectiveness
of S MILE over several existing SPMLL approaches. Source code is available at
https://github.com/palm-ml/smile.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning (MLL) aims to build a predictive model to assign a set of relevant labels for
the unseen instance via learning from the training examples associated with multiple class labels
simultaneously [30, 46]. During the past decade, MLL has been widely applied to learn from the
data containing rich semantics, such as multimedia content annotation [40, 33], text categorization
[29, 27], music emotion analysis [21, 35], and bioinformatics analysis [3], etc.
However, in practice, obtaining ground-truth multiple labels for MLL training datasets is costly due to
the expensive and time-consuming manual annotations. Comparing with multi-class learning where
an example is associated with only one positive label, multi-label learning requires the complete
positive label set for each example. On this account, the annotation cost of multi-label learning is
significantly higher than multi-class classification, which limits its application especially when the
number of categories is large.
To mitigate this problem, the setting of single-positive multi-label learning (SPMLL) [5] allows
for significantly reduced annotations costs for the datasets, where each example is annotated with
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

