Autoinverse: Uncertainty Aware Inversion of Neural
Networks
Navid Ansari
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
nansari@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Hans-Peter Seidel
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
hpseidel@mpi-sb.mpg.de

Nima Vahidi Ferdowsi
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
nvahidi@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Vahid Babaei
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
vbabaei@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Neural networks are powerful surrogates for numerous forward processes.
The inversion of such surrogates is extremely valuable in science and engineering. The most important property of a successful neural inverse method
is the performance of its solutions when deployed in the real world, i.e., on
the native forward process (and not only the learned surrogate). We propose
Autoinverse, a highly automated approach for inverting neural network
surrogates. Our main insight is to seek inverse solutions in the vicinity of
reliable data which have been sampled form the forward process and used for
training the surrogate model. Autoinverse finds such solutions by taking
into account the predictive uncertainty of the surrogate and minimizing it
during the inversion. Apart from high accuracy, Autoinverse enforces the
feasibility of solutions, comes with embedded regularization, and is initialization free. We verify our proposed method through addressing a set of
real-world problems in control, fabrication, and design. Our code and data are
available at: https://gitlab.mpi-klsb.mpg.de/nansari/autoinverse

1

Introduction

“... optimizing for the wrong thing — offering prayers to the bronze snake of data rather the larger
force behind it.” [6]
With the deep learning breakthrough during the last decade, data-driven modeling using neural
network based surrogates is now a standard practice in science and engineering. These surrogates
strive to imitate the behavior of a native forward process (NFP), such as a physics simulation, which
maps a design into its performance1 . While forward processes are essential for troubleshooting
and analysis, oftentimes their ultimate application lies in their inversion, i.e., the reverse process
of mapping performances into designs. Despite the recent progress in inversion of neural networks
within multiple disciplines [35, 16, 13, 37], a fundamental unaddressed question is still standing
out. Inversion of a surrogate model, fitted to the data sampled from the NFP, is ultimately different
than the inversion of the NFP itself. The source of this gap could be explicit, such as the noise in
1

In the applications showcased in this paper (fabrication-oriented design and robotics), the term design refers
to the space where the input to the forward process is characterized and parameterized and performance refers to
the parameterized space of desired properties. Commonly, hidden state or parameters, and measurement or goal
are used interchangeably with design and performance, respectively
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

