ZeroQuant: Efficient and Affordable Post-Training
Quantization for Large-Scale Transformers
Zhewei Yao⇤, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Minjia Zhang, Xiaoxia Wu, Conglong Li, Yuxiong He
Microsoft
{zheweiyao, yazdani.reza, minjiaz, xiaoxiawu, conglong.li, yuxhe}@microsoft.com

Abstract
How to efficiently serve ever-larger trained natural language models in practice
has become exceptionally challenging even for powerful cloud servers due to
their prohibitive memory/computation requirements. In this work, we present
an efficient and affordable post-training quantization approach to compress large
Transformer-based models, termed as ZeroQuant. ZeroQuant is an end-to-end
quantization and inference pipeline with three main components: (1) a fine-grained
hardware-friendly quantization scheme for both weight and activations; (2) a novel
affordable layer-by-layer knowledge distillation algorithm (LKD) even without
the access to the original training data; (3) a highly-optimized quantization system
backend support to remove the quantization/dequantization overhead. As such,
we are able to show that: (1) ZeroQuant can reduce the precision for weights and
activations to INT8 in a cost-free way for both BERT and GPT-3-style models
with minimal accuracy impact, which leads to up to 5.19x/4.16x speedup on those
models compared to FP16 inference; (2) ZeroQuant plus LKD affordably quantize
the weights in the fully-connected module to INT4 along with INT8 weights in the
attention module and INT8 activations, resulting in 3x memory footprint reduction
compared to the FP16 model; (3) ZeroQuant can be directly applied to two of the
largest open-sourced language models, including GPT-J6B and GPT-NeoX20B , for
which our INT8 model achieves similar accuracy as the FP16 model but achieves
up to 5.2x better efficiency.

1

Introduction

Large-scale natural language models have been widely adopted in different applications, e.g., natural
language understanding using BERT [64] and generation tasks using GPT-style models [49]. Although
those models have achieved cutting-edge accuracy results, as the model size keeps increasing
dramatically, the requirements of memory footprint and the computational cost to deploy them
become a major bottleneck, even on cloud servers with powerful GPU devices.
One promising way to alleviate this challenge is quantization, which can reduce the bit precision for
both weight and activations for lower memory footprint and faster compute (e.g., INT8 Tensor cores
on T4/A100). However, quantization usually requires retraining (also known as quantization aware
training, or QAT in short) to recover the accuracy degradation from representation loss of weight and
activations. To enable QAT, the full training pipeline is usually required, including the training data
and compute resources, to finetune the model. Access to those components is now oftentimes not
available, and QAT is also a time-consuming process, particularly for those large-scale models.
Recently, zero-shot quantization [10, 47] and post-training quantization (PTQ) [46, 39] are proposed
to address the training-data access and compute requirement challenges since PTQ generally requires
⇤

Code is released as a part of https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

