Understanding Square Loss in Training
Overparameterized Neural Network Classifiers
Tianyang Hu⇤
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
hutianyang1@huawei.com

Jun Wang⇤
HKUST
jwangfx@connect.ust.hk

Wenjia Wang⇤
HKUST (GZ) and HKUST
wenjiawang@ust.hk

Zhenguo Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
li.zhenguo@huawei.com

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved many breakthroughs in modern classification tasks.
Numerous architectures have been proposed for different data structures but when
it comes to the loss function, the cross-entropy loss is the predominant choice.
Recently, several alternative losses have seen revived interests for deep classifiers.
In particular, empirical evidence seems to promote square loss but a theoretical
justification is still lacking. In this work, we contribute to the theoretical understanding of square loss in classification by systematically investigating how
it performs for overparameterized neural networks in the neural tangent kernel
(NTK) regime. Interesting properties regarding the generalization error, robustness, and calibration error are revealed. We consider two cases, according to
whether classes are separable or not. In the general non-separable case, fast convergence rate is established for both misclassification rate and calibration error.
When classes are separable, the misclassification rate improves to be exponentially
fast. Further, the resulting margin is proven to be lower bounded away from zero,
providing theoretical guarantees for robustness. We expect our findings to hold
beyond the NTK regime and translate to practical settings. To this end, we conduct
extensive empirical studies on practical neural networks, demonstrating the effectiveness of square loss in both synthetic low-dimensional data and real image data.
Comparing to cross-entropy, square loss has comparable generalization error but
noticeable advantages in robustness and model calibration. Code will be available
at https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/sl_classification.

1

Introduction

The pursuit of better classifiers has fueled the progress of machine learning and deep learning research.
The abundance of benchmark image datasets, e.g., MNIST, CIFAR, ImageNet, etc., provide test fields
for all kinds of new classification models, especially those based on deep neural networks (DNN).
With the introduction of CNN, ResNets, and transformers, DNN classifiers are constantly improving
and catching up to the human-level performance. In contrast to the active innovations in model
architecture, the training objective remains largely stagnant, with cross-entropy loss being the default
choice. Despite its popularity, cross-entropy has been shown to be problematic in some applications.
Among others, [1] argued that features learned from cross-entropy lack interpretability and proposed a
new loss aiming for maximum coding rate reduction. [2] linked the use of cross-entropy to adversarial
⇤

These authors contributed equally to this work. Corresponding author: Wenjia Wang.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

