Supported Policy Optimization for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Jialong Wu1 , Haixu Wu1 , Zihan Qiu2 , Jianmin Wang1 , Mingsheng Long1
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China
{wujialong0229,qzh11628}@gmail.com, whx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Policy constraint methods to offline reinforcement learning (RL) typically utilize
parameterization or regularization that constrains the policy to perform actions
within the support set of the behavior policy. The elaborative designs of parameterization methods usually intrude into the policy networks, which may bring extra
inference cost and cannot take full advantage of well-established online methods.
Regularization methods reduce the divergence between the learned policy and
the behavior policy, which may mismatch the inherent density-based definition of
support set thereby failing to avoid the out-of-distribution actions effectively. This
paper presents Supported Policy OpTimization (SPOT), which is directly derived
from the theoretical formalization of the density-based support constraint. SPOT
adopts a VAE-based density estimator to explicitly model the support set of behavior policy and presents a simple but effective density-based regularization term,
which can be plugged non-intrusively into off-the-shelf off-policy RL algorithms.
SPOT achieves the state-of-the-art performance on standard benchmarks for offline
RL. Benefiting from the pluggable design, offline pretrained models from SPOT
can also be applied to perform online fine-tuning seamlessly.

1

Introduction

Offline RL [28, 29], where the agent learns from a fixed dataset, collected by arbitrary process,
not only provides a bridge between RL and the data-driven paradigm but also eliminates the need
to interact with the live environment, which is always expensive or risky in practical scenarios
[16, 31, 18]. Unfortunately, the absence of environment interaction also raises a number of challenges.
Previous work has shown that the extrapolation error of the Q-function queried by out-of-distribution
actions significantly degrades the performance of off-policy algorithms [9].
Avoiding out-of-distribution actions, namely to constrain the learned policy to perform actions within
the support set of the behavior policy, is essential to mitigate extrapolation error. To meet this support
constraint, policy constraint methods [29] to offline RL utilize either parameterization [9, 50, 11] or
regularization [15, 24, 47] techniques. However, there are still several drawbacks in previous methods
of policy constraint, limiting their performance and applications. Firstly, parameterization methods
involve elaborate designs of the policy parameterization, typically coupled to generative models of
the behavior policy, to directly constrain actions taken by the learned policy. But these designs intrude
into the architecture of policy networks, which may bring extra inference cost and supplementary
difficulties to implement and tune offline RL algorithms. Furthermore, as criticized by Fujimoto and
Gu [7], these intrusive designs complicate causal attribution of performance gains and transfer of
techniques between offline RL algorithms or from well-established online RL algorithms. In contrast,
for the second category, regularization methods are designed with a non-intrusive or pluggable
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

