Emergent Graphical Conventions in
a Visual Communication Game
Shuwen Qiu⋆,1 , Sirui Xie⋆,1 , Lifeng Fan2 ,
Tao Gao , Jungseock Joo3 , Song-Chun Zhu1,2,4,5 , Yixin Zhu5
3,4

1

Department of Computer Science, UCLA
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
3
Department of Communication, UCLA 4 Department of Statistics, UCLA
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2

https://sites.google.com/view/emergent-graphical-conventions

Abstract
Humans communicate with graphical sketches apart from symbolic languages (Fay
et al., 2014). Primarily focusing on the latter, recent studies of emergent communication (Lazaridou and Baroni, 2020) overlook the sketches; they do not account for
the evolution process through which symbolic sign systems emerge in the trade-off
between iconicity and symbolicity. In this work, we take the very first step to
model and simulate this process via two neural agents playing a visual communication game; the sender communicates with the receiver by sketching on a canvas.
We devise a novel reinforcement learning method such that agents are evolved
jointly towards successful communication and abstract graphical conventions. To inspect the emerged conventions, we define three fundamental properties—iconicity,
symbolicity, and semanticity—and design evaluation methods accordingly. Our
experimental results under different controls are consistent with the observation in
studies of human graphical conventions (Hawkins et al., 2019; Fay et al., 2010).
Of note, we find that evolved sketches can preserve the continuum of semantics
(Mikolov et al., 2013) under proper environmental pressures. More interestingly,
co-evolved agents can switch between conventionalized and iconic communication
based on their familiarity with referents. We hope the present research can pave the
path for studying emergent communication with the modality of sketches.

1

Introduction

Communication problem naturally arises when traveling in a foreign country where you do not speak
the native language, which necessitates exploring non-linguistic means of communication, such
as drawings. Due to its iconic nature (i.e., perceptual resemblance to or natural association with
the referent), drawings serve as a powerful tool to communicate concepts transcending language
barriers (Fay et al., 2014). In fact, we humans started to use drawings to convey messages dating
back to 40,000–60,000 years ago (Hoffmann et al., 2018; Hawkins et al., 2019). Some cognitive
science studies hypothesize a transition from sketch-based communication before the formation of
sign systems and provide evidence that iconic signs can gradually become symbolic through repeated
communication (Fay et al., 2014). In contrast to icons, symbols are special forms bearing arbitrary
relations to the referents. Fig. 1 describes a typical scenario of such phenomena: Alice (in green)
uses a sketch to communicate the concept “rooster” to Bob (in yellow). Initially, they need to ground
the sketch to the referent. Later, details of the visual concept, such as strokes of the head and body,
are gradually abstracted away, leaving only the most salient part, the crown. The iconicity in the
communicated sketch drops while the symbolicity rises.
⋆

indicates equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

