Revisiting Injective Attacks on
Recommender Systems

1

Haoyang LI1 , Shimin DI1⇤, Lei CHEN2
Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST, Hong Kong, China
2
Data Science and Analytics, HKUST(GZ), Guangzhou, China
{hlicg,sdiaa,leichen}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated that recommender systems (RecSys) are vulnerable to injective attacks. Given a limited fake user budget, attackers can inject fake
users with carefully designed behaviors into the open platforms, making RecSys
recommend a target item to more real users for profits. In this paper, we first
revisit existing attackers and reveal that they suffer from the difficulty-agnostic and
diversity-deficit issues. Existing attackers concentrate their efforts on difficult users
who have low tendencies toward the target item, thus reducing their effectiveness.
Moreover, they are incapable of affecting the target RecSys to recommend the
target item to real users in a diverse manner, because their generated fake user
behaviors are dominated by large communities. To alleviate these two issues, we
propose a difficulty and diversity aware attacker, namely DADA. We design the
difficulty-aware and diversity-aware objectives to enable easy users from various
communities to contribute more weights when optimizing attackers. By incorporating these two objectives, the proposed attacker DADA can concentrate on easy
users while also affecting a broader range of real users simultaneously, thereby
boosting the effectiveness. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed attacker.

1

introduction

In the era of big data, recommender systems (RecSys) [8, 28, 36, 39, 53] are a key component to
help users locate items that they may be interested in. Generally, given the user behaviors, such as
item purchase history and movie viewing history, RecSys learn the latent tendency of users regarding
each item, and then recommend the top-N matched items for each user. Over the past decade,
various RecSys have been proposed to provide services for users. Recent studies [17, 24, 33, 45, 51]
demonstrate that RecSys are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, e.g., fake user behaviors. It is because
the training of RecSys relies on user behaviors and attackers can easily inject fake users into openworld web platforms. Specifically, attackers want to promote an item to real users, which can increase
the opportunity that users purchase this target item and thus bring economic profits. To achieve such
goals, attackers generally inject a limited number of fake users with designed behaviors, i.e., injective
attacks. Then, the target RecSys may be affected with these injected fake users, and then recommends
the target item into the top-N item list of real users.
Based on the techniques that are employed to design the behaviors of injected fake users, existing
attackers [4, 6, 10, 11, 12, 20, 30, 38, 41, 45, 49, 51, 52] can be classified into three types: heuristicsbased [4, 30, 49], neural network-based [10, 38, 45, 52], and gradient-based attackers [6, 11, 12,
20, 41, 51]. Heuristics-based attackers [4, 30, 49] sample popular items together with the target
item as the behaviors of each fake user to increase the co-occurrence between popular items and the
target item, i.e., trying to increase the popularity of the target item. Then, RecSys can be affected,
⇤

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

