WeightedSHAP: analyzing and improving Shapley
based feature attributions
Yongchan Kwon
Columbia University
New York, NY, 10027
yk3012@columbia.edu

James Zou
Stanford University and Amazon AWS
Stanford, CA, 94305
jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
Shapley value is a popular approach for measuring the influence of individual features. While Shapley feature attribution is built upon desiderata from game theory,
some of its constraints may be less natural in certain machine learning settings,
leading to unintuitive model interpretation. In particular, the Shapley value uses
the same weight for all marginal contributions—i.e. it gives the same importance
when a large number of other features are given versus when a small number of
other features are given. This property can be problematic if larger feature sets are
more or less informative than smaller feature sets. Our work performs a rigorous
analysis of the potential limitations of Shapley feature attribution. We identify
simple settings where the Shapley value is mathematically suboptimal by assigning
larger attributions for less influential features. Motivated by this observation, we
propose WeightedSHAP, which generalizes the Shapley value and learns which
marginal contributions to focus directly from data. On several real-world datasets,
we demonstrate that the influential features identified by WeightedSHAP are better
able to recapitulate the model’s predictions compared to the features identified by
the Shapley value.

1

Introduction

Explaining how a feature impacts a model prediction is a crucial question in machine learning
(ML) as it provides a deeper understanding of how the model behaves and what insights have
been extracted from data. In many real-world applications, it has been increasingly common to
deploy complicated models such as a deep neural network model or a random forest to achieve high
predictability. However, it often comes with a cost of unintuitive interpretations, and it naturally calls
for a principled and practical attribution method. The goal of this work is to quantify the contribution
of individual features to a particular prediction, also known as the attribution problem.
Lundberg and Lee [2017] proposed a model-agnostic attribution method, SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP), based on the Shapley value from economics. Supported by theoretical properties that
the Shapley value satisfies, SHAP has been a popular method in the attribution literature [Janzing
et al., 2020, Sundararajan and Najmi, 2020]. For instance, Frye et al. [2020] and Aas et al. [2021]
developed the SHAP algorithms for dependent features, and Heskes et al. [2020] and Wang et al.
[2021] proposed a rigorous framework in causal inference settings. One of the practical problems to
use SHAP is the heavy computational costs, and there have been works on improving computational
efficiency [Covert and Lee, 2021, Lundberg et al., 2020, Jethani et al., 2021a]. In addition, SHAP has
been deployed to various applied scientific research [Lundberg et al., 2018, Janizek et al., 2021, Qiu
et al., 2022].
The Shapley value, a mathematical basis of SHAP, is a simple average of the marginal contributions
that quantify the average change in a coalition function when a feature of interest is added from a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

