Kantorovich Strikes Back!
Wasserstein GANs are not Optimal Transport?

Alexander Korotin∗
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
a.korotin@skoltech.ru

Alexander Kolesov*
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia
a.kolesov@skoltech.ru

Evgeny Burnaev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
Moscow, Russia
e.burnaev@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks (WGANs) are the popular generative
models built on the theory of Optimal Transport (OT) and the Kantorovich duality.
Despite the success of WGANs, it is still unclear how well the underlying OT
dual solvers approximate the OT cost (Wasserstein-1 distance, W1 ) and the OT
gradient needed to update the generator. In this paper, we address these questions.
We construct 1-Lipschitz functions and use them to build ray monotone transport
plans. This strategy yields pairs of continuous benchmark distributions with the
analytically known OT plan, OT cost and OT gradient in high-dimensional spaces
such as spaces of images. We thoroughly evaluate popular WGAN dual form
solvers (gradient penalty, spectral normalization, entropic regularization, etc.) using
these benchmark pairs. Even though these solvers perform well in WGANs, none
of them faithfully compute W1 in high dimensions. Nevertheless, many provide
a meaningful approximation of the OT gradient. These observations suggest that
these solvers should not be treated as good estimators of W1 , but to some extent
they indeed can be used in variational problems requiring the minimization of W1 .
The Wasserstein-1 distance [3] (W1 ) is a popular loss function to learn generative models. It has
numerous advantages compared to the vanilla GAN loss [15]. For example, W1 is correctly defined if
the distributions’ supports differ [2]. Besides, it correlates with the sample quality, provides improved
stability of the optimization process and does not suffer from the vanishing gradients issue [3, M4].

Generative models which employ W1 as the loss to update the generator are called the Wasserstein
GANs (WGANs). To compute W1 , they use its variational approximation based on the Kantorovich
duality [20] and the Optimal Transport (OT) theory [52, 47]. Since the introduction of the original
WGANs with the weight clipping method [3], a lot of alternative techniques (neural dual OT solvers)
to compute W1 have been proposed: gradient penalties [17, 39, 54], entropic regularization [46],
architectural constraints [35, 1], batch-based methods [31, 29], maximin methods [38, 23], etc.
Despite the popularity of WGANs, it still remains unclear to what extent their success is connected to
OT and W1 rather than, e.g., to a good choice of regularization [49, M7]. Due to the limited amount
of pairs of distributions with known W1 , it is challenging to evaluate existing dual OT solvers.
Contributions. We develop a generic methodology based on the transport rays (M3.1) to evaluate
dual OT solvers for the Wasserstein-1 distance (W1 ). Our main contributions are as follows:
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

