Independence Testing-Based Approach to Causal
Discovery under Measurement Error and
Linear Non-Gaussian Models
Haoyue Dai1,2 Peter Spirtes1 Kun Zhang1,2
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
hyda@cmu.edu
ps7z@andrew.cmu.edu
kunz1@cmu.edu
1

Abstract

Causal discovery aims to recover causal structures generating the observational data.
Despite its success in certain problems, in many real-world scenarios the observed
variables are not the target variables of interest, but the imperfect measures of
the target variables. Causal discovery under measurement error aims to recover
the causal graph among unobserved target variables from observations made with
measurement error. We consider a specific formulation of the problem, where
the unobserved target variables follow a linear non-Gaussian acyclic model, and
the measurement process follows the random measurement error model. Existing
methods on this formulation rely on non-scalable over-complete independent
component analysis (OICA). In this work, we propose the Transformed Independent
Noise (TIN) condition, which checks for independence between a specific linear
transformation of some measured variables and certain other measured variables.
By leveraging the non-Gaussianity and higher-order statistics of data, TIN is
informative about the graph structure among the unobserved target variables. By
utilizing TIN, the ordered group decomposition of the causal model is identifiable.
In other words, we could achieve what once required OICA to achieve by only
conducting independence tests. Experimental results on both synthetic and realworld data demonstrate the effectiveness and reliability of our method.1

1

Introduction

Discovery of causal relations is a fundamental goal of science. To identify
causal relations from observational data, known as causal discovery,
has thus drawn much attention in various scientific fields, including
economics, biology, and social science [45, 27, 11]. Methods for causal
discovery can be roughly categorized into constraint-based ones (e.g.,
PC [43]), score-based ones (e.g., Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) [8]),
PM2.5
and ones based on structural equation models (SEM) [38, 17, 51]. Almost
all these methods assume that the recorded values are values of the
variables of interest, which however, is usually not the case in real-world Figure 1: Example of
scenarios. Some variables may be impossible to observe or quantify, so measurement error. Gray
recorded values are actually a proxy of them (e.g., measure one’s mental nodes are latent underlystatus by survey questionnaire), and some variables, though quantifiable, ing variables and white
may subject to error introduced by instruments (e.g., measure brain signals nodes are observed ones.
using functional magnetic resonance (fMRI)). The difference between
quantities of interest and their measured value is termed as measurement error [12].
1

An online demo and codes are available at https://cmu.edu/dietrich/causality/tin.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

