StrokeRehab: A Benchmark Dataset for
Sub-second Action Identification
Aakash Kaku∗1 , Kangning Liu∗1 , Avinash Parnandi∗2 , Haresh Rengaraj Rajamohan1 ,
Kannan Venkataramanan1 , Anita Venkatesan2 , Audre Wirtanen2 , Natasha Pandit2 ,
Heidi Schambra†2 ,Carlos Fernandez-Granda†1,3
1
NYU Center for Data Science 2 NYU School of Medicine
3
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences

Abstract
Automatic action identification from video and kinematic data is an important
machine learning problem with applications ranging from robotics to smart health.
Most existing works focus on identifying coarse actions such as running, climbing,
or cutting vegetables, which have relatively long durations and a complex series of
motions. This is an important limitation for applications that require identification
of more elemental motions at high temporal resolution. For example, in the
rehabilitation of arm impairment after stroke, quantifying the training dose (number
of repetitions) requires differentiating motions with sub-second durations. Our goal
is to bridge this gap. To this end, we introduce a large-scale, multimodal dataset,
StrokeRehab, as a new action-recognition benchmark that includes elemental shortduration actions labeled at a high temporal resolution. StrokeRehab consists of
high-quality inertial measurement unit sensor and video data of 51 stroke-impaired
patients and 20 healthy subjects performing activities of daily living like feeding,
brushing teeth, etc. Because it contains data from both healthy and impaired
individuals, StrokeRehab can be used to study the influence of distribution shift in
action-recognition tasks. When evaluated on StrokeRehab, current state-of-the-art
models for action segmentation produce noisy predictions, which reduces their
accuracy in identifying the corresponding sequence of actions. To address this,
we propose a novel approach for high-resolution action identification, inspired by
speech-recognition techniques, which is based on a sequence-to-sequence model
that directly predicts the sequence of actions. This approach outperforms current
state-of-the-art methods on StrokeRehab, as well as on the standard benchmark
datasets 50Salads, Breakfast, and Jigsaws.

1

Introduction

In domains ranging from robotics to smart health, automatically identifying action from video
and kinematic data is an important machine learning problem. In some of these applications it
is critical to identify motions at high temporal resolution. This is the case in data-driven stroke
rehabilitation, which requires classifying and counting sub-second single-goal motions. In order to
advance methodology for high-resolution action identification, it is crucial to establish appropriate
benchmark datasets. Existing benchmarks, such as 50Salads [52], Breakfast [32], Jigsaws [18], or
Kinetics [28] contain very few short-duration actions (see Figure 3). To address this, we introduce a
large-scale, multimodal dataset, StrokeRehab, as a new action-recognition benchmark that includes
elemental short-duration actions labeled at a high temporal resolution. The dataset consists of
high-quality wearable sensor and video data of 51 stroke patients and 20 healthy subjects. These
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Joint Last Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

