PeRFception: Perception using Radiance Fields

Yoonwoo Jeong1†

Seungjoo Shin1†

Animashree Anandkumar2,3
POSTECH1

Junha Lee1†
Minsu Cho1

NVIDIA2

Christopher Choy2
Jaesik Park1

Caltech3

Abstract
The recent progress in implicit 3D representation, i.e., Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs), has made accurate and photorealistic 3D reconstruction possible in a differentiable manner. This new representation can effectively convey the information
of hundreds of high-resolution images in one compact format and allows photorealistic synthesis of novel views. In this work, using the variant of NeRF called
Plenoxels, we create the first large-scale radiance fields datasets for perception
tasks, called the PeRFception dataset, which consists of two parts that incorporate
both object-centric and scene-centric scans for classification and segmentation. It
shows a significant memory compression rate (96.4%) from the original dataset,
while containing both 2D and 3D information in a unified form. We construct
the classification and segmentation models that directly take this radiance fields
format as input and also propose a novel augmentation technique to avoid overfitting on backgrounds of images. The code and data are publicly available in
https://postech-cvlab.github.io/PeRFception/.

1

Introduction

Over the last few years, advances in implicit representations have demonstrated great accuracy,
versatility, and robustness in representing 3D scenes by mapping low dimensional coordinates to
the local properties of the scene, such as occupancy [1, 2], signed distance fields [3, 4], or radiance
fields [5, 6, 7]. They offer several benefits that explicit representations (e.g., voxels, meshes, and
point clouds) could not represent: smoother geometry, less memory space for storage, novel view
synthesis with high visual fidelity, to name a few. Thus, implicit representations have been used
for 3D reconstruction [1, 2, 8, 9], novel view synthesis [5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], pose
estimation [16, 17, 18, 19], image generation [20, 21], and many more.
In particular, Neural Radiance Fields [5] (NeRF) and many follow-up works [10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 22]
have shown that implicit networks can capture accurate geometry and render photorealistic images by
representing a static scene as an implicit 5D function which outputs view-dependent radiance fields.
They use differentiable volumetric rendering, a scene geometry, and the view-dependent radiance
that can be encoded into an implicit network using only image supervisions. These components
allow the networks to capture high fidelity photometric features, such as reflection and refraction in a
differentiable manner unlike the conventional explicit 3D representations.
Given the success of the radiance fields, it is only natural to consider the radiance fields as one of
the standard data representations for 3D and for perception. However, these novel representations,
which can capture a scene with high fidelity, have not yet been used for perception tasks such as
classification and segmentation. One of the main reasons is that there is no large-scale dataset that
† Authors contributed equally to this work.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

