Provably Efficient Offline Multi-agent Reinforcement
Learning via Strategy-wise Bonus
Qiwen Cui
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
Engineering
University of Washington
qwcui@cs.washington.edu

Simon S. Du
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
Engineering
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abstract

1

This paper considers offline multi-agent reinforcement learning. We propose the
strategy-wise concentration principle which directly builds a confidence interval
for the joint strategy, in contrast to the point-wise concentration principle that
builds a confidence interval for each point in the joint action space. For two-player
zero-sum Markov games, by exploiting the convexity of the strategy-wise bonus,
we propose a computationally efficient algorithm whose sample complexity enjoys
a better dependency on the number of actions than the prior methods based on
the point-wise bonus. Furthermore, for offline multi-agent general-sum Markov
games, based on the strategy-wise bonus and a novel surrogate
Pm function, we give
the first algorithm whose sample complexity only scales i=1 Ai where Ai is the
action size of the i-th player and m is the number of players. In sharp contrast, the
sample complexity of methods based on the point-wise bonus would scale with the
size of the joint action space ⇧m
i=1 Ai due to the curse of multiagents. Lastly, all
of our algorithms can naturally take a pre-specified strategy class ⇧ as input and
output a strategy that is close to the best strategy
in ⇧. In this setting, the sample
Pm
complexity only scales with log |⇧| instead of i=1 Ai .

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is about decision making in a multi-agent system under
uncertainty, which has achieved significant success in solving a wide range of tasks such as GO
[Silver et al., 2017], Poker [Brown and Sandholm, 2019] and autonomous deriving [Shalev-Shwartz
et al., 2016]. One standard setting in MARL is multi-player general-sum Markov games where each
player deploys a policy to maximize its own total reward while the evolution of the environment
depends on the policies of all the players [Zhang et al., 2021a]. During the learning process, each
player needs to identify the environment dynamics as well as compete/cooperate with other agents.
One emerging subarea is offline MARL, where plenty of empirical works have been done while the
theoretical understanding is still largely missing [Pan et al., 2021, Jiang and Lu, 2021, Meng et al.,
2021]. Offline RL has received tremendous attention because in various practical scenarios, it is
expensive to acquire online data while offline log data is accessible.
The offline single-agent RL is well studied in the literature. Researchers have identified the minimal
dataset coverage assumption, single policy coverage (the dataset only needs to cover an optimal
policy), under which one can learn a near-optimal policy efficiently. Furthermore, they have developed
algorithms with minimax sample complexity [Xie et al., 2021b, Li et al., 2022]. For offline MARL,
recent works showed that single policy coverage is not sufficient and unilateral coverage is necessary
for learning a Nash equilibrium (NE) strategy, i.e., the dataset covers all the joint strategies that
only differ from an NE at one player [Cui and Du, 2022, Zhong et al., 2022]. This condition is also
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

