What is a Good Metric to Study Generalization of
Minimax Learners?
Asuman Ozdaglar†
Sarath Pattathil†
Jiawei Zhang†∗
Kaiqing Zhang†‡
†
‡
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
University of Maryland, College Park
{asuman,sarathp,jwzhang,kaiqing}@mit.edu

Abstract
Minimax optimization has served as the backbone of many machine learning
problems. Although the convergence behavior of optimization algorithms has been
extensively studied in minimax settings, their generalization guarantees in the
stochastic setting, i.e., how the solution trained on empirical data performs on the
unseen testing data, have been relatively underexplored. A fundamental question
remains elusive: What is a good metric to study generalization of minimax learners?
In this paper, we aim to answer this question by first showing that primal risk, a
universal metric to study generalization in minimization, fails in simple examples
of minimax problems. Furthermore, another popular metric, the primal-dual risk,
also fails to characterize the generalization behavior for minimax problems with
nonconvexity, due to non-existence of saddle points. We thus propose a new metric
to study generalization of minimax learners: the primal gap, to circumvent these
issues. Next, we derive generalization bounds for the primal gap in nonconvexconcave settings. As byproducts of our analysis, we also solve two open questions:
establishing generalization bounds for primal risk and primal-dual risk in the
strong sense, i.e., without strong concavity or assuming that the maximization and
expectation can be interchanged, while either of these assumptions was needed in
the literature. Finally, we leverage this new metric to compare the generalization
behavior of two popular algorithms – gradient descent-ascent (GDA) and gradient
descent-max (GDMax) in stochastic minimax optimization.

1

Introduction

Stochastic minimax optimization, a classical and fundamental problem in operations research and
game theory, involves solving the following problem:
min max Ez∼Pz [f (w, θ; z)].

w∈W θ∈Θ

More recently, such a minimax formulation has received increasing attention in machine learning,
with significant applications in generative adversarial networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014],
adversarial learning [Madry et al., 2017], and reinforcement learning [Chen and Wang, 2016, Dai et al.,
2018]. Most existing works have focused on the optimization aspect of the problem, i.e., studying the
rates of convergence, robustness, and optimality of algorithms for solving an empirical version of
the problem where it approximates the expectation by an average over a sampled dataset, in various
minimax settings including convex-concave [Nemirovski et al., 2009, Monteiro and Svaiter, 2010],
nonconvex-concave [Lin et al., 2020, Rafique et al., 2018], and certain special nonconvex-nonconcave
[Nouiehed et al., 2019, Yang et al., 2020] problems.
However, the optimization aspect is not sufficient to achieve the success of stochastic minimax
optimization in machine learning. In particular, as in classical supervised learning, which is usually
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

