Compositional Generalization in Unsupervised
Compositional Representation Learning:
A Study on Disentanglement and Emergent Language

Zhenlin Xu Marc Niethammer Colin Raffel
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{zhenlinx, mn, craffel}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Deep learning models struggle with compositional generalization, i.e. the ability
to recognize or generate novel combinations of observed elementary concepts. In
hopes of enabling compositional generalization, various unsupervised learning algorithms have been proposed with inductive biases that aim to induce compositional
structure in learned representations (e.g. disentangled representation and emergent
language learning). In this work, we evaluate these unsupervised learning algorithms in terms of how well they enable compositional generalization. Specifically,
our evaluation protocol focuses on whether or not it is easy to train a simple model
on top of the learned representation that generalizes to new combinations of compositional factors. We systematically study three unsupervised representation learning
algorithms – β-VAE, β-TCVAE, and emergent language (EL) autoencoders – on
two datasets that allow directly testing compositional generalization. We find that
directly using the bottleneck representation with simple models and few labels may
lead to worse generalization than using representations from layers before or after
the learned representation itself. In addition, we find that the previously proposed
metrics for evaluating the levels of compositionality are not correlated with the
actual compositional generalization in our framework. Surprisingly, we find that
increasing pressure to produce a disentangled representation (e.g. increasing β
in the β-VAE) produces representations with worse generalization, while representations from EL models show strong compositional generalization. Motivated
by this observation, we further investigate the advantages of using EL to induce
compositional structure in unsupervised representation learning, finding that it
shows consistently stronger generalization than disentanglement models, especially
when using less unlabeled data for unsupervised learning and fewer labels for
downstream tasks. Taken together, our results shed new light onto the compositional generalization behavior of different unsupervised learning algorithms with a
new setting to rigorously test this behavior, and suggest the potential benefits of
developing EL learning algorithms for more generalizable representations.

1

Introduction

A human’s ability to recognize or generate novel combinations of seen elementary concepts, also
known as compositional generalization, is desirable for building general artificial ingelligence (AI)
systems [22, 16, 3]. The Recognition-By-Components theory by Biederman [3] influenced the
early development of computer vision models that are inherently compositional, e.g., hierarchical
features [13, 14] and part-based models [37, 38]. However, modern deep learning systems still
struggle with this key capability of human intelligence [33]. A few works studied specific spatial and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

