Learning Optical Flow from Continuous
Spike Streams

Rui Zhao1,2 Ruiqin Xiong1,2∗ Jing Zhao3 Zhaofei Yu1,2,4 Xiaopeng Fan5 Tiejun Huang1,2
1

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology (NERCVT), Peking University
2
Institute of Digital Media, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
ruizhao@stu.pku.edu.cn, {rqxiong, yuzf12, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn,
zhaojing@cert.org.cn, fxp@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Spike camera is an emerging bio-inspired vision sensor with ultra-high temporal
resolution. It records scenes by accumulating photons and outputting continuous
binary spike streams. Optical flow is a key task for spike cameras and their
applications. A previous attempt has been made for spike-based optical flow.
However, the previous work only focuses on motion between two moments, and it
uses graphics-based data for training, whose generalization is limited. In this paper,
we propose a tailored network, Spike2Flow that extracts information from binary
spikes with temporal-spatial representation based on the differential of spike firing
time and spatial information aggregation. The network utilizes continuous motion
clues through joint correlation decoding. Besides, a new dataset with real-world
scenes is proposed for better generalization. Experimental results show that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on existing synthetic datasets and
real data captured by spike cameras. The source code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/ruizhao26/Spike2Flow.

1

Introduction

Neuromorphic camera (NeurCam) is a kind of emerging vision sensor [35; 43; 46; 18; 11; 19] inspired
by retina. Using asynchronous sampling models, NeurCams can record the natural scene continuously
by firing sparse spike streams with an ultra-high temporal resolution. Besides, NeurCams have high
dynamic range, low latency, and low energy consumption. Compared with traditional cameras with
single-exposure imaging, NeurCams are more suitable for high-speed imaging in application scenarios
such as unmanned aerial vehicles and chemical particle observation. One kind of NeurCams is the
event camera [35; 43; 46; 18] inspired by the peripheral retina. It asynchronously fires spikes when
the brightness change exceeds a certain threshold in the logarithmic domain. However, event cameras
can hardly recover textures due to their differential sampling model, especially for static regions.
Another kind of emerging NeurCam is the spike camera [11; 19] inspired by the fovea of retina.
Spike cameras also record the scene by firing spikes asynchronously in each pixel, but different from
event cameras that record the relative brightness changes, each pixel in spike cameras encodes the
scene by accumulating photons and firing a spike once the accumulation exceeds a certain threshold
independently. With such an integral sampling model, spike cameras can record fine textures of the
scene, which makes it more appropriate for pixel-level tasks than event cameras. Since spike cameras
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

