DataMUX: Data Multiplexing for Neural Networks
Vishvak Murahari
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
murahari@princeton.edu

Carlos E. Jimenez
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
carlosej@princeton.edu

Runzhe Yang
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
runzhey@princeton.edu

Karthik Narasimhan
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
karthikn@princeton.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce data multiplexing (DataMUX), a technique that enables
deep neural networks to process multiple inputs simultaneously using a single
compact representation. DataMUX demonstrates that neural networks are capable
of generating accurate predictions over mixtures of inputs, resulting in increased
inference throughput with minimal extra memory requirements. Our approach
uses two key components – 1) a multiplexing layer that performs a fixed linear
transformation to each input before combining them to create a ‘mixed’ representation of the same size as a single input, which is then processed by the base
network, and 2) a demultiplexing layer that converts the base network’s output back
into independent representations before producing predictions for each input. We
show the viability of DataMUX for different architectures (Transformers, and to a
much lesser extent MLPs and CNNs) across six different tasks spanning sentence
classification, named entity recognition and image classification. For instance,
DataMUX for Transformers can multiplex up to 20x/40x inputs, achieving up
to 11x/18x increase in inference throughput with absolute performance drops of
< 2% and < 4% respectively compared to a vanilla Transformer on MNLI, a
natural language inference task. We also provide a theoretical construction for
multiplexing in self-attention networks and analyze the effect of various design
elements in DataMUX. 1

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are very effective at modeling complex functions from real-valued vector
inputs to vector outputs. However, recent studies have hinted that modern networks are vastly
overparameterized Kaplan et al. (2020); Allen-Zhu et al. (2019a) and only require a fraction of their
parameters for capturing many functions Frankle and Carbin (2018); Frankle et al. (2020). This
raises a natural question: if networks contain greater processing capacity than necessary, could it
be possible for them to model a function over multiple inputs simultaneously, similar to how radio
channels share bandwidth to carry multiple information streams at once? Such a capability could
enable significant improvements in efficiency and inference throughput without requiring substantial
increases in model size or computation.
In this paper, we propose Data Multiplexing (DataMUX), a technique that enables neural networks
to process multiple inputs simultaneously as a single “mixed” representation of the same size as a
1

Code is available at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/DataMUX

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

