VER: Scaling On-Policy RL Leads to the
Emergence of Navigation in Embodied Rearrangement

1

Erik Wijmans1,2 Irfan Essa1,3 Dhruv Batra2,1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Meta AI 3 Google Atlanta
{etw,irfan,dbatra}@gatech.edu

Abstract
We present Variable Experience Rollout (VER), a technique for efficiently scaling
batched on-policy reinforcement learning in heterogenous environments (where
different environments take vastly different times to generate rollouts) to many
GPUs residing on, potentially, many machines. VER combines the strengths of
and blurs the line between synchronous and asynchronous on-policy RL methods
(SyncOnRL and AsyncOnRL, respectively). Specifically, it learns from on-policy
experience (like SyncOnRL) and has no synchronization points (like AsyncOnRL)
enabling high throughput.
We find that VER leads to significant and consistent speed-ups across a broad
range of embodied navigation and mobile manipulation tasks in photorealistic 3D
simulation environments. Specifically, for PointGoal navigation and ObjectGoal
navigation in Habitat 1.0, VER is 60-100% faster (1.6-2x speedup) than DD-PPO,
the current state of art for distributed SyncOnRL, with similar sample efficiency.
For mobile manipulation tasks (open fridge/cabinet, pick/place objects) in Habitat
2.0 VER is 150% faster (2.5x speedup) on 1 GPU and 170% faster (2.7x speedup)
on 8 GPUs than DD-PPO. Compared to SampleFactory (the current state-of-the-art
AsyncOnRL), VER matches its speed on 1 GPU, and is 70% faster (1.7x speedup)
on 8 GPUs with better sample efficiency.
We leverage these speed-ups to train chained skills for GeometricGoal rearrangement tasks in the Home Assistant Benchmark (HAB). We find a surprising
emergence of navigation in skills that do not ostensible require any navigation.
Specifically, the Pick skill involves a robot picking an object from a table. During
training the robot was always spawned close to the table and never needed to
navigate. However, we find that if base movement is part of the action space, the
robot learns to navigate then pick an object in new environments with 50% success,
demonstrating surprisingly high out-of-distribution generalization.
Code: github.com/facebookresearch/habitat-lab

1

Introduction

Scaling matters. Progress towards building embodied intelligent agents that are capable of performing
goal driven tasks has been driven, in part, by training large neural networks in photo-realistic 3D environments with deep reinforcement learning (RL) for (up to) billions of steps of experience [Wijmans
et al., 2020, Maksymets et al., 2021, Mezghani et al., 2021, Ramakrishnan et al., 2021, Miki et al.,
2022]. To enable this scale, RL systems must be able to efficiently utilize the available resources (e.g.
GPUs), and scale to multiple machines all while maintaining sample-efficient learning.
One promising class of techniques to achieve this scale is batched on-policy RL. These methods
collect experience from many (N ) environments simultaneously using the policy and update it with
this cumulative experience. They are broadly divided into two classes: synchronous (SyncOnRL)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

