Network change point localisation under local
differential privacy

Mengchu Li
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
mengchu.li@warwick.ac.uk

Thomas B. Berrett
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
tom.berrett@warwick.ac.uk

Yi Yu
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
yi.yu.2@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Network data are ubiquitous in our daily life, containing rich but often sensitive
information. In this paper, we expand the current static analysis of privatised
networks to a dynamic framework by considering a sequence of networks with
potential change points. We investigate the fundamental limits in consistently localising change points under both node and edge privacy constraints, demonstrating
interesting phase transition in terms of the signal-to-noise ratio condition, accompanied by polynomial-time algorithms. The private signal-to-noise ratio conditions
quantify the costs of the privacy for change point localisation problems and exhibit
a different scaling in the sparsity parameter compared to the non-private counterparts. Our algorithms are shown to be optimal under the edge LDP constraint up to
log factors. Under node LDP constraint, a gap exists between our upper bound and
lower bound and we leave it as an interesting open problem, echoing the challenges
in high-dimensional statistical inference under LDP constraints.

1

Introduction

Numerous application areas and everyday life routinely generate network data, which contain valuable
but often sensitive information [e.g. 33, 31]. Understanding the underlying patterns of network data
while preserving individuals’ privacy is crucial in modern data analysis. Several attempts have been
made, but mostly focus on studying single snapshots of networks (a.k.a. static networks) and/or
subject to central differential privacy constraint, where a central data curator is allowed to handle
raw information from all individuals [e.g. 21, 22, 23, 9, 30]. In this paper, we are instead concerned
with understanding the dynamics of a sequence of networks (a.k.a. dynamic networks), under local
privacy constraints (LDP), where no one is allowed to handle the raw data of other individuals [e.g.
13, 17, 26, 40, 34].
Dynamic networks are usually in the form of a sequence of static networks, along a linear ordering,
say time. In the dynamic networks studies, it is vital to capture the ever changing nature. A handy
and useful way to model the changes is to assume that there exists a sequence of unknown time
points, where the underlying distributions change abruptly [e.g. 37, 38]. These unknown time points
are referred to as change points. Identifying change points helps to pinpoint important events, and
more accurately estimate underlying distributions, which can be regarded as stationary between two
consecutive change points. Dynamic networks change point analysis has demonstrated its success in
climatology [e.g. 28], crime science[e.g. 6] and neuroscience [e.g. 10, 29], to name but a few.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

