Training Subset Selection for Weak Supervision

Hunter Lang
MIT CSAIL
hjl@mit.edu

Aravindan Vijayaraghavan
Northwestern University
aravindv@northwestern.edu

David Sontag
MIT CSAIL
dsontag@mit.edu

Abstract
Existing weak supervision approaches use all the data covered by weak signals to
train a classifier. We show both theoretically and empirically that this is not always
optimal. Intuitively, there is a tradeoff between the amount of weakly-labeled
data and the precision of the weak labels. We explore this tradeoff by combining
pretrained data representations with the cut statistic [23] to select (hopefully) highquality subsets of the weakly-labeled training data. Subset selection applies to any
label model and classifier and is very simple to plug in to existing weak supervision
pipelines, requiring just a few lines of code. We show our subset selection method
improves the performance of weak supervision for a wide range of label models,
classifiers, and datasets. Using less weakly-labeled data improves the accuracy of
weak supervision pipelines by up to 19% (absolute) on benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Due to the difficulty of hand-labeling large amounts of training data, an increasing share of models are
trained with weak supervision [30, 28]. Weak supervision uses expert-defined “labeling functions” to
programatically label a large amount of training data with minimal human effort. This pseudo-labeled
training data is used to train a classifier (e.g., a deep neural network) as if it were hand-labeled data.
Labeling functions are often simple, coarse rules, so the pseudolabels derived from them are not
always correct. There is an intuitive tradeoff between the coverage of the pseudolabels (how much
pseudolabeled data do we use for training?) and the precision on the covered set (how accurate are
the pseudolabels that we do use?). Using all the pseudolabeled training data ensures the best possible
generalization to the population pseudolabeling function Ŷ pXq. On the other hand, if we can select a
high-quality subset of the pseudolabeled data, then our training labels Ŷ pXq are closer to the true
label Y , but the smaller training set may hurt generalization. However, existing weak supervision
approaches such as Snorkel [28], MeTaL [29], FlyingSquid [10], and Adversarial Label Learning [3]
use all of the pseudolabeled data to train the classifier, and do not explore this tradeoff.
We present numerical experiments demonstrating that the status quo of using all the pseudolabeled
data is nearly always suboptimal. Combining good pretrained representations with the cut statistic
[23] for subset selection, we obtain subsets of the weakly-labeled training data where the weak
labels are very accurate. By choosing examples with the same pseudolabel as many of their nearest
neighbors in the representation, the cut statistic uses the representation’s geometry to identify these
accurate subsets without using any ground-truth labels. Using the smaller but higher-quality training
sets selected by the cut statistic improves the accuracy of weak supervision pipelines by up to
19% accuracy (absolute). Subset selection applies to any “label model” (Snorkel, FlyingSquid,
majority vote, etc.) and any classifier, since it is a modular, intermediate step between creation of the
pseudolabeled training set and training. We conclude with a theoretical analysis of a special case of
weak supervision where the precision/coverage tradeoff can be made precise.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

