Efficient Adversarial Training without Attacking:
Worst-Case-Aware Robust Reinforcement Learning
Yongyuan Liang†⇤
Yanchao Sun‡⇤
Ruijie Zheng‡
Furong Huang‡
†
‡
Shanghai AI Lab,
University of Maryland, College Park
†
cheryllLiang@outlook.com ‡ {ycs,rzheng12,furongh}@umd.edu

Abstract
Recent studies reveal that a well-trained deep reinforcement learning (RL) policy
can be particularly vulnerable to adversarial perturbations on input observations.
Therefore, it is crucial to train RL agents that are robust against any attacks
with a bounded budget. Existing robust training methods in deep RL either treat
correlated steps separately, ignoring the robustness of long-term rewards, or train
the agents and RL-based attacker together, doubling the computational burden and
sample complexity of the training process. In this work, we propose a strong and
efficient robust training framework for RL, named Worst-case-aware Robust RL
(WocaR-RL), that directly estimates and optimizes the worst-case reward of a policy
under bounded `p attacks without requiring extra samples for learning an attacker.
Experiments on multiple environments show that WocaR-RL achieves state-ofthe-art performance under various strong attacks, and obtains significantly higher
training efficiency than prior state-of-the-art robust training methods. The code of
this work is available at https://github.com/umd-huang-lab/WocaR-RL.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved impressive results by using deep neural networks
(DNN) to learn complex policies in large-scale tasks. However, well-trained DNNs may drastically
fail under adversarial perturbations of the input [1, 6]. Therefore, before deploying DRL policies
to real-life applications, it is crucial to improve the robustness of deep policies against adversarial
attacks, especially worst-case attacks that maximally depraves the performance of trained agents [42].
A line of regularization-based robust methods [54, 33, 40] focuses on improving the robustness of the DNN itself and regularizes the policy network
to output similar actions under bounded state perturbations. However, different from supervised learning problems, the vulnerability of a deep policy
comes not only from the DNN approximator, but also from the dynamics
of the RL environment [52]. These regularization-based methods neglect
the intrinsic vulnerability of policies under the environment dynamics, and
thus may still fail under strong attacks [42]. For example, in the go-home
task shown in Figure 1, both the green policy and the red policy arrive
home without rock collision, when there is no attack. However, although
regularization-based methods may ensure a minor action change under a Figure 1: Policies have
state perturbation, the red policy may still be susceptible to a low reward different vulnerabilities.
under attacks, as a very small divergence can lead it to the bomb. On the contrary, the green policy is
more robust to adversarial attacks since it stays away from the bomb. Therefore, besides promoting
the robustness of DNN approximators (such as the policy network), it is also important to learn a
policy with stronger intrinsic robustness.
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

