Non-monotonic Resource Utilization in the Bandits
with Knapsacks Problem

Raunak Kumar
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
raunak@cs.cornell.edu

Robert D. Kleinberg
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
rdk@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Bandits with knapsacks (BwK) [6] is an influential model of sequential decisionmaking under uncertainty that incorporates resource consumption constraints. In
each round, the decision-maker observes an outcome consisting of a reward and a
vector of nonnegative resource consumptions, and the budget of each resource is
decremented by its consumption. In this paper we introduce a natural generalization
of the stochastic BwK problem that allows non-monotonic resource utilization. In
each round, the decision-maker observes an outcome consisting of a reward and
a vector of resource drifts that can be positive, negative or zero, and the budget
of each resource is incremented by its drift. Our main result is a Markov decision
process (MDP) policy that has constant regret against a linear programming (LP)
relaxation when the decision-maker knows the true outcome distributions. We
build upon this to develop a learning algorithm that has logarithmic regret against
the same LP relaxation when the decision-maker does not know the true outcome
distributions. We also present a reduction from BwK to our model that shows our
regret bound matches existing results [14].

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandits are the quintessential model of sequential decision-making under uncertainty
in which the decision-maker must trade-off between exploration and exploitation. They have been
studied extensively and have numerous applications, such as clinical trials, ad placements, and
dynamic pricing to name a few. We refer the reader to Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi [7], Slivkins
[17], Lattimore and Szepesvári [13] for an introduction to bandits. An important shortcoming of the
basic stochastic bandits model is that it does not take into account resource consumption constraints
that are present in many of the motivating applications. For example, in a dynamic pricing application
the seller may be constrained by a limited inventory of items that can run out well before the end of
the time horizon. The bandits with knapsacks (BwK) model [18, 19, 5, 6] remedies this by endowing
the decision-maker with some initial budget for each of m resources. In each round, the outcome
is a reward and a vector of nonnegative resource consumptions, and the budget of each resource
is decremented by its consumption. The process ends when the budget of any resource becomes
nonpositive. However, even this formulation fails to model that in many applications resources can
get replenished or renewed over time. For example, in a dynamic pricing application a seller may
receive shipments that increase their inventory level.
Contributions In this paper we introduce a natural generalization of BwK by allowing nonmonotonic resource utilization. The decision-maker starts with some initial budget for each of m
resources. In each round, the outcome is a reward and a vector of resource drifts that can be positive,
negative or zero, and the budget of each resource is incremented by its drift. A negative drift has
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

