Generalization Bounds for Stochastic Gradient
Descent via Localized ε-Covers
Sejun Park
Korea University
sejun.park000@gmail.com
Umut Şimşekli
DI ENS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Université PSL, CNRS, INRIA
umut.simsekli@inria.fr
Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new covering technique localized for the trajectories
of SGD. This localization provides an algorithm-specific complexity measured by
the covering number, which can have dimension-independent cardinality in contrast to standard uniform covering arguments that result in exponential dimension
dependency. Based on this localized construction, we show that if the objective
function is a finite perturbation of a piecewise strongly convex and smooth function
with P pieces, i.e. non-convex p
and non-smooth in general, the generalization error
can be upper bounded by O( (log n log(nP ))/n), where n is the number of
data samples. In particular, this rate is independent of dimension and does not
require early stopping and decaying step size. Finally, we employ these results in
various contexts and derive generalization bounds for multi-index linear models,
multi-class support vector machines, and K-means clustering for both hard and
soft label setups, improving the known state-of-the-art rates.

1

Introduction

We consider the following stochastic optimization problem
n
o
min F (θ) := EZ [f (θ; Z)] ,
θ∈Θ

(1.1)

where θ represents the optimization parameter, Θ ⊂ Rd is a convex parameter domain, f ( · ; z) is a
possibly non-convex loss incurred by a single data point z ∈ Z, and Z is a random variable on Z
following the data distribution. Since the distribution of Z is unknown in general, the following proxy
based on independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples z1 , . . . , zn of Z is optimized instead
n
n
o
1X
min F̂ (θ) :=
f (θ; zi ) .
(1.2)
θ∈Θ
n i=1
Given a learning algorithm A( · ) mapping samples z1 , . . . , zn to an approximate solution of (1.2),
bounding the generalization error1 F̂ (A(z1 , . . . , zn )) − F (A(z1 , . . . , zn )) is a fundamental problem
1

This quantity is also referred to as the generalization gap or the estimation error in the literature.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

