Global Normalization for Streaming Speech
Recognition in a Modular Framework

Ehsan Variani, Ke Wu, Michael Riley, David Rybach, Matt Shannon, Cyril Allauzen
Google Research
{variani,wuke,riley,rybach,mattshannon,allauzen}@google.com

Abstract
We introduce the Globally Normalized Autoregressive Transducer (GNAT) for
addressing the label bias problem in streaming speech recognition. Our solution
admits a tractable exact computation of the denominator for the sequence-level
normalization. Through theoretical and empirical results, we demonstrate that
by switching to a globally normalized model, the word error rate gap between
streaming and non-streaming speech-recognition models can be greatly reduced (by
more than 50% on the Librispeech dataset). This model is developed in a modular
framework which encompasses all the common neural speech recognition models.
The modularity of this framework enables controlled comparison of modelling
choices and creation of new models. A JAX implementation of our models has
been open sourced.1

1

Introduction

Deep neural network models have been tremendously successful in the field of automatic speech
recognition (ASR). Several different models have been proposed over the years: cross-entropy (CE)
models with a deep feed-forward architecture [19], connectionist temporal classification (CTC)
models [14] with recurrent architectures such as long short-term memory (LSTM) [20], and more
recently sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) models like listen, attend and spell (LAS) [8], recurrent
neural network transducer (RNN-T) [13], and hybrid autoregressive transducer (HAT) [40]. When
configured in non-streaming mode, these neural ASR models have reached state-of-the-art word error
rate (WER) on many tasks. However, the WER significantly worsens when they are operating in
streaming mode. In this paper, we argue that one main cause of this WER gap is that all the existing
models are constrained to be locally normalized which makes them susceptible to the label bias
problem [36, 2, 24, 4]. To address this problem, we introduce new category of globally normalized
models called Globally Normalized Autoregressive Transducer (GNAT). Our contributions are:
(1) Addressing the label bias problem in streaming ASR through global normalization that
significantly closes more than 50% of the WER gap between streaming and non-streaming ASR.
(2) Efficient, accelerator-friendly algorithms for the exact computation of the global normalization under the finite context assumption.
(3) A modular framework for neural ASR which encompasses all the common models (CE, CTC,
LAS, RNN-T, HAT), allowing creation of new ones, and extension to their globally normalized
counterparts.
1

https://github.com/google-research/last

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

