Exploration via Planning for Information about the
Optimal Trajectory
Viraj Mehta1 , Ian Char2 , Joseph Abbate4 , Rory Conlin4 , Mark D. Boyer3 , Stefano Ermon5 ,
Jeff Schneider1 , Willie Neiswanger5
1

Robotics Institute, 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, 4 Princeton University
5
Computer Science Department, Stanford University

{virajm,ichar,schneide}@cs.cmu.edu, {jabbate,wconlin}@princeton.edu,
mboyer@pppl.gov, {ermon,neiswanger}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Many potential applications of reinforcement learning (RL) are stymied by the large
numbers of samples required to learn an effective policy. This is especially true
when applying RL to real-world control tasks, e.g. in the sciences or robotics, where
executing a policy in the environment is costly. In popular RL algorithms, agents
typically explore either by adding stochasticity to a reward-maximizing policy or
by attempting to gather maximal information about environment dynamics without
taking the given task into account. In this work, we develop a method that allows us
to plan for exploration while taking both the task and the current knowledge about
the dynamics into account. The key insight to our approach is to plan an action
sequence that maximizes the expected information gain about the optimal trajectory
for the task at hand. We demonstrate that our method learns strong policies with
2x fewer samples than strong exploration baselines and 200x fewer samples than
model free methods on a diverse set of low-to-medium dimensional control tasks
in both the open-loop and closed-loop control settings.1

1

Introduction

The potential of reinforcement learning (RL) as a general-purpose method of learning solutions to
sequential decision making problems is difficult to overstate. Ideally, RL could allow for agents
that learn to accomplish all manner of tasks solely through a given reward function and the agent’s
experience; however, RL has so far broadly fallen short of this. Chief among the difficulties in
realizing this potential is the fact that typical RL methods in continuous problems require very large
numbers of samples to achieve a near-optimal policy. For many interesting applications of RL this
problem is exacerbated by the fact that collecting samples from the true environment can incur huge
costs. For example, expensive scientific experiments are needed for tokamak control [31, 13, 20] and
design of molecules [70], and collecting experience on the road is both costly and runs the risk of car
accidents for autonomous vehicles [66].
Though model-based methods like Deisenroth and Rasmussen [21], Chua et al. [15], and Curi et al.
[16] are much more efficient than typical model-free methods, they do not explicitly reason about
the prospective task-relevant information content of future observations. Moreover, these methods
typically require thousands of timesteps of environment dynamics data to solve reasonably simple
Markov decision processes (MDPs). Though progress has been made in using Thompson sampling
[46], entropy bonuses [27], and upper confidence bounds (UCB) [16, 5] to more intelligently explore
1

Code is available at: https://github.com/fusion-ml/trajectory-information-rl

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

