Remember the Past: Distilling Datasets
into Addressable Memories for Neural Networks
Zhiwei Deng Olga Russakovsky
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
{zhiweid, olgarus}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We propose an algorithm that compresses the critical information of a large dataset
into compact addressable memories. These memories can then be recalled to
quickly re-train a neural network and recover the performance (instead of storing
and re-training on the full original dataset). Building upon the dataset distillation
framework, we make a key observation that a shared common representation allows
for more efficient and effective distillation. Concretely, we learn a set of bases
(aka “memories”) which are shared between classes and combined through learned
flexible addressing functions to generate a diverse set of training examples. This
leads to several benefits: 1) the size of compressed data does not necessarily grow
linearly with the number of classes; 2) an overall higher compression rate with
more effective distillation is achieved; and 3) more generalized queries are allowed
beyond recalling the original classes. We demonstrate state-of-the-art results on
the dataset distillation task across six benchmarks, including up to 16.5% and 9.7%
in retained accuracy improvement when distilling CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 respectively. We then leverage our framework to perform continual learning, achieving
state-of-the-art results on four benchmarks, with 23.2% accuracy improvement on
MANY. The code is released on our project webpage1 .

1

Introduction

Compressing a large amount of information into a small memory storage space is one of the key
components of human intelligence [1–3] – a person can retrieve memories from the past and quickly
recover the corresponding skills. Deep learning methods have made large strides in building taskspecific models, but are shown to easily forget past knowledge when learning new tasks [4, 5].
To equip neural network learners with memorizing ability, dataset distillation [6] is proposed as a
potential solution. Concretely, a compressed set of examples (memories) is learned to summarize the
key information in a dataset that affects model training; these examples can then be used to quickly
retrain models and recover the corresponding skills. This differs from the standard reconstructionbased compression algorithms [7–9] and shows strong performance [10–13].
A critical question in building powerful compressed memories is: what structures and representations
should we use to build the memories? An effective structure and organization of memories can lead
to different fundamental assumptions about data and affect the compression and learning behaviours.
Existing works [10, 11, 14, 12, 15, 13, 6] follow a simple representation, where a set of learnable
examples is assigned for each class. However, under this assumption, the size of the memories can
linearly grow with the number of classes, making the distillation of datasets with a large number of
classes challenging. Naturally, this can potentially lead to redundancies in the learned memories,
1

https://github.com/princetonvisualai/RememberThePast-DatasetDistillation

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

