Transformers from an Optimization Perspective

Yongyi Yang∗
University of Michigan
yongyi@umich.edu

Zengfeng Huang
Fudan University
huangzf@fudan.edu.cn

David Wipf
Amazon Web Services
davidwipf@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep learning models such as the Transformer are often constructed by heuristics
and experience. To provide a complementary foundation, in this work we study
the following problem: Is it possible to find an energy function underlying the
Transformer model, such that descent steps along this energy correspond with the
Transformer forward pass? By finding such a function, we can view Transformers
as the unfolding of an interpretable optimization process across iterations. This
unfolding perspective has been frequently adopted in the past to elucidate more
straightforward deep models such as MLPs and CNNs; however, it has thus far
remained elusive obtaining a similar equivalence for more complex models with
self-attention mechanisms like the Transformer. To this end, we first outline several
major obstacles before providing companion techniques to at least partially address
them, demonstrating for the first time a close association between energy function
minimization and deep layers with self-attention. This interpretation contributes
to our intuition and understanding of Transformers, while potentially laying the
ground-work for new model designs.

1

Introduction

Although deep learning has achieved extensive practical success [21, 22], model architectures are
often motivated by heuristics and at times remain difficult to understand. As such, significant effort has
recently be devoted to various ways of analyzing and reinterpreting popular deep network structures.
Of particular note for our purposes here are assorted attempts to create a one-to-one association
between deep model layers and the unfolded iterations of some optimization process designed to
minimize an interpretable energy function [10, 11, 47, 49, 35]. In this way the forward pass can be
viewed as computing, at least approximately, a representation with minimal energy, where model
parameters dictate the form of this energy and can be trained via the backward pass for a downstream
goal of interest, e.g., classification or regression, etc.
This so-called unfolded optimization perspective can provide insights into the nature of the inductive
biases introduced by different architectures, while potentially serving as a guide for bespoke design
choices instantiated through properties of the underlying energy function involved. In fact, modifications of the latter can lead to predictable model behaviors, which have in the past been tailored
to incorporate useful regularization factors [53], avoid subtle degenerate solutions [49], or design
effective new models altogether [1, 10].
Despite these successes, the majority of prior work in this area has either addressed relatively simple
network structures such as MLPs [47], or else restricted consideration to a single model component
in isolation from a larger system [35]. Consequently, complex models such as the widely-used
Transformer [43] have been mostly ignored, in large part because of the difficulty involved in
simultaneously mapping both the self-attention and feed-forward network (FFN) modules to an
integrated optimization process that minimizes a single, unified energy function.
∗

Work completed during an internship at the AWS Shanghai AI Lab.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

