Physics-Embedded Neural Networks: Graph Neural
PDE Solvers with Mixed Boundary Conditions
Masanobu Horie
RICOS Co. Ltd.
University of Tsukuba
horie@ricos.co.jp

Naoto Mitsume
University of Tsukuba
mitsume@kz.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract
Graph neural network (GNN) is a promising approach to learning and predicting
physical phenomena described in boundary value problems, such as partial differential equations (PDEs) with boundary conditions. However, existing models
inadequately treat boundary conditions essential for the reliable prediction of such
problems. In addition, because of the locally connected nature of GNNs, it is
difficult to accurately predict the state after a long time, where interaction between
vertices tends to be global. We present our approach termed physics-embedded
neural networks that considers boundary conditions and predicts the state after
a long time using an implicit method. It is built based on an E(n)-equivariant
GNN, resulting in high generalization performance on various shapes. We demonstrate that our model learns flow phenomena in complex shapes and outperforms
a well-optimized classical solver and a state-of-the-art machine learning model
in speed-accuracy trade-off. Therefore, our model can be a useful standard for
realizing reliable, fast, and accurate GNN-based PDE solvers. The code is available
at https://github.com/yellowshippo/penn-neurips2022.

1

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are of interest to many scientists because of their application in
various fields such as mathematics, physics, and engineering. Numerical analysis is used to solve
PDEs because most PDE problems in real life cannot be solved analytically. For example, predicting
fluid behavior in complex shapes is an essential topic because it is helpful for product design, disaster
reduction, weather forecasting, and many others; however, it is a difficult problem and takes time to
solve using classical solvers. Machine learning is a promising approach to predicting such phenomena
because it can utilize data similar to the state to be predicted, while classical solvers cannot.
However, the main challenge in dealing with complex phenomena such as fluids is to guarantee
generalization performance because possible states in complex systems can be huge and may not be
covered using a purely data-driven approach. Therefore, we must apply appropriate inductive biases
to machine learning models. Many approaches successfully introduced various inductive biases
such as local connectedness using graph neural networks (GNNs) and symmetry under coordinate
transformations using equivariance.
While these methods have made great progress in solving PDEs using machine learning, there is still
room for improvement. First, there is need for an efficient and provable way to respect boundary
conditions like Dirichlet and Neumann, i.e., mixed boundary conditions. Rigorous fulfillment
of Dirichlet boundary conditions is indispensable because they are hard constraints and different
Dirichlet conditions correspond to different problems users would like to solve. Second, there is need
to reinforce the treatment of global interaction to predict the state after a long time, where interactions
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

