A Continuous Time Framework for Discrete Denoising
Models
Andrew Campbell1
Tom Rainforth1
1

Joe Benton1

Valentin De Bortoli2

George Deligiannidis1

Arnaud Doucet1

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK 2 CNRS ENS Ulm, Paris, France
{campbell, benton, rainforth, deligian, doucet}@stats.ox.ac.uk
valentin.debortoli@gmail.com

Abstract
We provide the first complete continuous time framework for denoising diffusion
models of discrete data. This is achieved by formulating the forward noising process
and corresponding reverse time generative process as Continuous Time Markov
Chains (CTMCs). The model can be efficiently trained using a continuous time
version of the ELBO. We simulate the high dimensional CTMC using techniques
developed in chemical physics and exploit our continuous time framework to derive
high performance samplers that we show can outperform discrete time methods
for discrete data. The continuous time treatment also enables us to derive a novel
theoretical result bounding the error between the generated sample distribution and
the true data distribution.

1

Introduction

Diffusion/score-based/denoising models [1, 2, 3, 4] are a popular class of generative models that
achieve state-of-the-art sample quality with good coverage of the data distribution [5] all whilst using
a stable, non-adversarial, simple to implement training objective. The general framework is to define
a forward noising process that takes in data and gradually corrupts it until the data distribution is
transformed into a simple distribution that is easy to sample. The model then learns to reverse this
process by learning the logarithmic gradient of the noised marginal distributions known as the score.
Most previous work on denoising models operates on a continuous state space. However, there are
many problems for which the data we would like to model is discrete. This occurs, for example, in
text, segmentation maps, categorical features, discrete latent spaces, and the direct 8-bit representation
of images. Previous work has tried to realize the benefits of the denoising framework on discrete data
problems, with promising initial results [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
All of these previous approaches train and sample the model in discrete time. Unfortunately, working
in discrete time has notable drawbacks. It generally forces the user to pick a partition of the process at
training time and the model only learns to denoise at these fixed time points. Due to the fixed partition,
we are then limited to a simple ancestral sampling strategy. In continuous time, the model instead
learns to denoise for any arbitrary time point in the process. This complete specification of the reverse
process enables much greater flexibility in defining the reverse sampling scheme. For example, in
continuous state spaces, continuous time samplers that greatly reduce the sampling time have been
devised [14, 15, 16, 17] as well as ones that improve sample quality [4, 18]. The continuous time
interpretation has also enabled the derivation of interesting theoretical properties such as error bounds
[19] in continuous state spaces.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

