Beyond neural scaling laws:
beating power law scaling via data pruning

Ben Sorscher∗1

Robert Geirhos∗2

Surya Ganguli1,3§

Shashank Shekhar3
Ari S. Morcos3§

∗

1

equal contribution
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University
2
University of Tübingen
3
Meta AI (FAIR)
§
Joint senior authors

Abstract
Widely observed neural scaling laws, in which error falls off as a power of the
training set size, model size, or both, have driven substantial performance improvements in deep learning. However, these improvements through scaling alone
require considerable costs in compute and energy. Here we focus on the scaling of
error with dataset size and show how in theory we can break beyond power law
scaling and potentially even reduce it to exponential scaling instead if we have
access to a high-quality data pruning metric that ranks the order in which training
examples should be discarded to achieve any pruned dataset size. We then test
this improved scaling prediction with pruned dataset size empirically, and indeed
observe better than power law scaling in practice on ResNets trained on CIFAR-10,
SVHN, and ImageNet. Next, given the importance of finding high-quality pruning
metrics, we perform the first large-scale benchmarking study of ten different data
pruning metrics on ImageNet. We find most existing high performing metrics
scale poorly to ImageNet, while the best are computationally intensive and require
labels for every image. We therefore developed a new simple, cheap and scalable
self-supervised pruning metric that demonstrates comparable performance to the
best supervised metrics. Overall, our work suggests that the discovery of good
data-pruning metrics may provide a viable path forward to substantially improved
neural scaling laws, thereby reducing the resource costs of modern deep learning.

1

Introduction

Empirically observed neural scaling laws [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] in many domains of machine learning,
including vision, language, and speech, demonstrate that test error often falls off as a power law with
either the amount of training data, model size, or compute. Such power law scaling has motivated
significant societal investments in data collection, compute, and associated energy consumption.
However, power law scaling is extremely weak and unsustainable. For example, a drop in error
∗

work done during an internship at Meta AI (FAIR)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

