Moderate-fitting as a Natural Backdoor Defender
for Pre-trained Language Models

Biru Zhu1∗, Yujia Qin2∗ , Ganqu Cui2 , Yangyi Chen3 , Weilin Zhao2 , Chong Fu4 ,
Yangdong Deng1†, Zhiyuan Liu2† , Jingang Wang5 , Wei Wu5 , Maosong Sun2 , Ming Gu1
1
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
4
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
5
Meituan, Beijing, China
{zbr19, qyj20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{dengyd, liuzy}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the great success of pre-trained language models (PLMs) in a large set of
natural language processing (NLP) tasks, there has been a growing concern about
their security in real-world applications. Backdoor attack, which poisons a small
number of training samples by inserting backdoor triggers, is a typical threat to
security. Trained on the poisoned dataset, a victim model would perform normally
on benign samples but predict the attacker-chosen label on samples containing
pre-defined triggers. The vulnerability of PLMs under backdoor attacks has been
proved with increasing evidence in the literature. In this paper, we present several
simple yet effective training strategies that could effectively defend against such
attacks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to explore the possibility
of backdoor-free adaptation for PLMs. Our motivation is based on the observation
that, when trained on the poisoned dataset, the PLM’s adaptation follows a strict
order of two stages: (1) a moderate-fitting stage, where the model mainly learns
the major features corresponding to the original task instead of subsidiary features
of backdoor triggers, and (2) an overfitting stage, where both features are learned
adequately. Therefore, if we could properly restrict the PLM’s adaptation to
the moderate-fitting stage, the model would neglect the backdoor triggers but
still achieve satisfying performance on the original task. To this end, we design
three methods to defend against backdoor attacks by reducing the model capacity,
training epochs, and learning rate, respectively. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our methods in defending against several representative NLP
backdoor attacks. We also perform visualization-based analysis to attain a deeper
understanding of how the model learns different features, and explore the effect of
the poisoning ratio. Finally, we explore whether our methods could defend against
backdoor attacks for the pre-trained CV model. The codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/thunlp/Moderate-fitting.

1

Introduction

Despite the rapid development and great success of pre-trained language models (PLMs) (Han et al.,
2021), there have been increasing security concerns on deploying them in real-world applications.
∗
†

Indicates equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

