Supervised Training of Conditional Monge Maps
Charlotte Bunne⇤
ETH Zurich
bunnec@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Marco Cuturi
Apple
cuturi@apple.com

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) theory describes general principles to define and select,
among many possible choices, the most efficient way to map a probability measure
onto another. That theory has been mostly used to estimate, given a pair of source
and target probability measures (µ, ⌫), a parameterized map T✓ that can efficiently
map µ onto ⌫. In many applications, such as predicting cell responses to treatments,
pairs of input/output data measures (µ, ⌫) that define optimal transport problems
do not arise in isolation but are associated with a context c, as for instance a
treatment when comparing populations of untreated and treated cells. To account
for that context in OT estimation, we introduce C OND OT, a multi-task approach
to estimate a family of OT maps conditioned on a context variable, using several
pairs of measures (µi , ⌫i ) tagged with a context label ci . C OND OT learns a global
map T✓ conditioned on context that is not only expected to fit all labeled pairs
in the dataset {(ci , (µi , ⌫i ))}, i.e., T✓ (ci )]µi ⇡ ⌫i , but should also generalize to
produce meaningful maps T✓ (cnew ) when conditioned on unseen contexts cnew . Our
approach harnesses and provides a novel usage for partially input convex neural networks, for which we introduce a robust and efficient initialization strategy inspired
by Gaussian approximations. We demonstrate the ability of C OND OT to infer the
effect of an arbitrary combination of genetic or therapeutic perturbations on single
cells, using only observations of the effects of said perturbations separately.

1

Introduction

A key challenge in the treatment of cancer is to predict the effect of drugs, or a combination thereof,
on cells of a particular patient. To achieve that goal, single-cell sequencing can now provide
measurements for individual cells, in treated and untreated conditions, but these are, however, not
in correspondence. Given such examples of untreated and treated cells under different drugs, can
we predict the effect of new drug combinations? We develop a general approach motivated by this
and related problems, through the lens of optimal transport (OT) theory, and, in that process, develop
tools that might be of interest for other application domains of OT. Given a collection of N pairs
of measures (µi , ⌫i ) over Rd (cell measurements), tagged with a context ci (encoding the treatment),
we seek to learn a context-dependent, parameterized transport map T✓ such that, on training data, that
map T✓ (ci ) : Rd ! Rd fits the dataset, in the sense that T✓ (ci )]µi ⇡ ⌫i . Additionally, we expect that
this parameterized map can generalize to unseen contexts and patients, to predict, given a patient’s
cells described in µnew , the effect of applying context cnew on these cells as T✓ (cnew )]µ.
Learning Mappings Between Measures From generative adversarial networks, to normalizing
flows and diffusion models, the problem of learning maps that move points from a source to a
target distribution is central to machine learning. OT theory (Santambrogio, 2015) has emerged as a
principled approach to carry out that task: For a pair of measures µ, ⌫ supported on Rd , OT suggests
that, among all maps T such that ⌫ can be reconstructed by applying T to every point in the support
⇤

Work done during an internship at Apple.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

