Decoupling Features in Hierarchical Propagation
for Video Object Segmentation

Zongxin Yang1,2 , Yi Yang1†
1

CCAI, College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University 2 Baidu Research
{yangzongxin, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper focuses on developing a more effective method of hierarchical propagation for semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation (VOS). Based on vision
transformers, the recently-developed Associating Objects with Transformers (AOT)
approach introduces hierarchical propagation into VOS and has shown promising results. The hierarchical propagation can gradually propagate information
from past frames to the current frame and transfer the current frame feature from
object-agnostic to object-specific. However, the increase of object-specific information will inevitably lead to the loss of object-agnostic visual information in deep
propagation layers. To solve such a problem and further facilitate the learning
of visual embeddings, this paper proposes a Decoupling Features in Hierarchical
Propagation (DeAOT) approach. Firstly, DeAOT decouples the hierarchical propagation of object-agnostic and object-specific embeddings by handling them in two
independent branches. Secondly, to compensate for the additional computation
from dual-branch propagation, we propose an efficient module for constructing hierarchical propagation, i.e., Gated Propagation Module, which is carefully designed
with single-head attention. Extensive experiments show that DeAOT significantly
outperforms AOT in both accuracy and efficiency. On YouTube-VOS, DeAOT can
achieve 86.0% at 22.4fps and 82.0% at 53.4fps. Without test-time augmentations,
we achieve new state-of-the-art performance on four benchmarks, i.e., YouTubeVOS (86.2%), DAVIS 2017 (86.2%), DAVIS 2016 (92.9%), and VOT 2020 (0.622).
Project page: https://github.com/z-x-yang/AOT.

1

Introduction

Video Object Segmentation (VOS), which aims at recognizing and segmenting one or multiple objects
of interest in a given video, has attracted much attention as a fundamental task of video understanding.
This paper focuses on semi-supervised VOS, which requires algorithms to track and segment objects
throughout a video sequence given objects’ annotated masks at one or several frames.
Early VOS methods are mainly based on finetuning segmentation networks on the annotated frames [7,
32, 51] or constructing pixel-wise matching maps [10, 50]. Based on the advance of attention
mechanisms [5,48,53], many attention-based VOS algorithms have been proposed in recent years and
achieved significant improvement. STM [34] and the following works [11, 43, 44] leverage a memory
network to store and read the target features of predicted past frames and apply a non-local attention
mechanism to match the target in the current frame. Furthermore, AOT [61, 63, 65] introduces
hierarchical propagation into VOS based on transformers [8, 48] and can associate multiple objects
†: the corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

