The Gyro-Structure of Some Matrix Manifolds

Xuan Son Nguyen
ETIS, UMR 8051, CY Cergy Paris Université, ENSEA, CNRS, Cergy, France
xuan-son.nguyen@ensea.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we study the gyrovector space structure (gyro-structure) of matrix
manifolds. Our work is motivated by the success of hyperbolic neural networks
(HNNs) that have demonstrated impressive performance in a variety of applications.
At the heart of HNNs is the theory of gyrovector spaces that provides a powerful
tool for studying hyperbolic geometry. Here we focus on two matrix manifolds,
i.e., Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) and Grassmann manifolds, and consider
connecting the Riemannian geometry of these manifolds with the basic operations,
i.e., the binary operation and scalar multiplication on gyrovector spaces. Our
work reveals some interesting facts about SPD and Grassmann manifolds. First,
SPD matrices with the Affine-Invariant (AI) and Log-Euclidean (LE) geometries
have rich structure with strong connection to hyperbolic geometry. Second, linear
subspaces, when equipped with our proposed basic operations, form what we
call gyrocommutative and gyrononreductive gyrogroups. Furthermore, they share
remarkable analogies with gyrovector spaces. We demonstrate the applicability of
our approach for human activity understanding and question answering.

1

Introduction

Data lying on matrix manifolds are commonly encountered in various applied areas such as medical
imaging [3, 37], shape analysis [41], drone classification [6], image recognition [11], and human
behavior analysis [10, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22, 31, 40]. These data arise from constraint sets of the problem,
for which there is a natural representation of elements in the form of matrix arrays [2]. Due to the
non-Euclidean nature of these data, traditional optimization algorithms usually fail to obtain good
results in the matrix manifold setting. While a large body of works [6, 7, 8, 10, 20, 21, 22, 31, 33, 48]
has been developed to generalize traditional optimization algorithms to this setting, there is still
a lack of works that translate the language of differential geometry to basic operations on matrix
manifolds so that they can be used in computational building blocks of neural network models
on these manifolds just as basic operations on Euclidean spaces, e.g., matrix-matrix addition and
scalar-matrix multiplication are used in deep neural networks (DNNs).
To address the above issue, we propose a novel framework based on the theory of gyrovector
spaces [44, 45, 46] that has been successfully applied in the context of HNNs [12, 39]. Our aim is to
uncover hidden analogies between the target manifolds and Euclidean spaces in the same way that we
uncover hidden analogies between hyperbolic and Euclidean spaces [12, 39, 44, 45, 46]. Although
there are some works [1, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29] showing the gyro-structure of SPD manifolds with the
AI geometry, none of them provides a rigorous mathematical formulation for the connection between
the basic operations of [1, 17, 18, 24, 25, 26, 27] and the AI geometry of SPD manifolds. In this
paper, we show how the basic operations can be constructed from the Riemannian geometry of matrix
manifolds, and derive their compact expressions for SPD and Grassmann manifolds. In the case of
SPD manifolds with the LE geometry [3], one recovers precisely the operations of [3] that give these
manifolds a vector space structure. In the case of Grassmann manifolds, we obtain gyrocommutative
and gyrononreductive gyrogroups that share remarkable analogies with gyrovector spaces. To the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

