TGEA 2.0: A Large-Scale Diagnostically Annotated
Dataset with Benchmark Tasks for Text Generation of
Pretrained Language Models

Huibin Ge†, Xiaohu Zhao†, Chuang Liu†,
Yulong Zeng§, Qun Liu§, and Deyi Xiong†
† College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
§ Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong, China
{gehuibin, zhaoxiaohu, liuc_09, dyxiong}@tju.edu.cn
{zengyulong, qun.liu}@huawei.com

Abstract
In order to diagnostically analyze and improve the capability of pretrained language
models (PLMs) in text generation, we propose TGEA 2.0, to date the largest dataset
built on machine-authored texts by PLMs with fine-grained semantic annotations
on a wide variety of pathological generation errors. We collect 170K nominal,
phrasal and sentential prompts from 6M natural sentences in 3 domains. These
prompts are fed into 4 generative PLMs with their best decoding strategy to generate
paragraphs. 195,629 sentences are extracted from these generated paragraphs for
manual annotation, where 36K erroneous sentences are detected, 42K erroneous
spans are located and categorized into an error type defined in a two-level error
taxonomy. We define a Minimal Set of Error-related Words (MiSEW) for each
erroneous span, which not only provides error-associated words but also rationalizes
the reasoning behind the error. Quality control with a pre-annotation and feedback
loop is performed before and during the entire annotation process. With the
diagnostically annotated dataset, we propose 5 diagnosis benchmark tasks (i.e.,
erroneous text detection, MiSEW extraction, erroneous span location and correction
together with error type classification) and 2 pathology mitigation benchmark tasks
(pairwise comparison and word prediction). Experiment results on these benchmark
tasks demonstrate that TGEA 2.0 is a challenging dataset that could facilitate further
research on automatic diagnosis and pathology mitigation over machine texts. The
dataset is publicly available at https://github.com/tjunlp-lab/TGEA/.

1

Introduction

Pretrained language models [30, 37, 33, 33, 5], which learn general knowledge from enormous
amounts of data, achieve impressive results in text generation [1, 33, 14]. Given a textual prompt (e.g.,
a word, phrase or an utterance, instruction), generative PLMs are capable of producing subsequent
texts that either cohere with the prompt or complete the task indicated in the prompt. Despite the
substantial success on this aspect, a variety of issues have been found in PLM-authored texts, with
respect to privacy [3], toxicity [24], quality, etc. The key interest in this paper is the quality (e.g.,
grammatical correctness, semantic coherence) of machine texts generated by PLMs.
A series of datasets and benchmarks have been curated for human-written texts [22, 23, 2, 21, 9]. In
contrast, resources related to PLM-authored texts are quite limited although plenty of holistic/taskspecific manual/automatic evaluations have been done in text generation [4]. To the best of our
Corresponding author: Deyi Xiong (dyxiong@tju.edu.cn).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

