Spherical Channels for Modeling Atomic Interactions

C. Lawrence Zitnick1 , Abhishek Das1 , Adeesh Kolluru2 , Janice Lan1 , Muhammed Shuaibi2 ,
Anuroop Sriram1 , Zachary Ulissi2 , Brandon Wood1
1
Fundamental AI Research at Meta AI
2
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Modeling the energy and forces of atomic systems is a fundamental problem in
computational chemistry with the potential to help address many of the world’s most
pressing problems, including those related to energy scarcity and climate change.
These calculations are traditionally performed using Density Functional Theory,
which is computationally very expensive. Machine learning has the potential to
dramatically improve the efficiency of these calculations from days or hours to
seconds.
We propose the Spherical Channel Network (SCN) to model atomic energies
and forces. The SCN is a graph neural network where nodes represent atoms
and edges their neighboring atoms. The atom embeddings are a set of spherical
functions, called spherical channels, represented using spherical harmonics. We
demonstrate, that by rotating the embeddings based on the 3D edge orientation,
more information may be utilized while maintaining the rotational equivariance of
the messages. While equivariance is a desirable property, we find that by relaxing
this constraint in both message passing and aggregation, improved accuracy may be
achieved. We demonstrate state-of-the-art results on the large-scale Open Catalyst
2020 dataset in both energy and force prediction for numerous tasks and metrics.

1

Introduction

Modeling the properties of atomic systems is a foundational challenge in computational chemistry
and critical to advancing technologies across numerous application domains. Notable applications
include drug discovery [32, 39] and the design of new catalysts for renewable energy storage to
help in addressing climate change [48, 33]. For catalyst discovery, new materials are currently
evaluated using Density Functional Theory (DFT) that can estimate atomic energies and forces but is
computationally very expensive; taking hours or days to evaluate a single material. Machine Learning
(ML) has the potential to approximate DFT and dramatically speed up these calculations, allowing
for high throughput screening of new materials to help address some of the world’s most pressing
challenges.
Our goal is to approximate DFT calculations using ML. An ML model takes as input a set of atom
positions and their atomic numbers. As outputs, a model calculates the structure’s energy (or other
properties) and the per-atom forces, i.e., the forces exerted on each atom by the other atoms. A
common approach to this problem is to use Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [19, 47] where each
node represents an atom and the set of nearby atoms as edges [37, 17, 24, 35, 38, 45, 31, 13].
A key challenge in network design is balancing the use of model constraints. When modeling atomic
systems, a common constraint is SO(3) rotation equivariance [43, 3, 1, 42, 34, 36], i.e., if the atomic
system is rotated, the energies should remain constant and the atomic forces should similarly rotate.
While this provides strong priors on the model to help in generalization, especially for smaller
datasets[7, 32], it can result in limiting the expressiveness of the network due to restrictions on
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

