Augmenting Online Algorithms
with ε-Accurate Predictions
Anupam Gupta
Carnegie Mellon University
anupamg@cs.cmu.edu

Debmalya Panigrahi
Duke University
debmalya@cs.duke.edu

Bernardo Subercaseaux
Carnegie Mellon University
bsuberca@cs.cmu.edu

Kevin Sun
Duke University
ksun@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
A growing body of work in learning-augmented online algorithms studies how
online algorithms can be improved when given access to ML predictions about the
future. Motivated by ML models that give a confidence parameter for their predictions, we study online algorithms with predictions that are ε-accurate: namely, each
prediction is correct with probability (at least) ε, but can be arbitrarily inaccurate
with the remaining probability. We show that even with predictions that are accurate
with a small probability and arbitrarily inaccurate otherwise, we can dramatically
outperform worst-case bounds for a range of classical online problems including
caching, online set cover, and online facility location. Our main results are an
O(log(1/ε))-competitive algorithm for caching, and a simple O(1/ε)-competitive
algorithm for a large family of covering problems, including set cover, network
design, and facility location, with ε-accurate predictions.

1

Introduction

The study of online algorithms with ML predictions has gained significant traction in the ML and
algorithms research communities in recent years. The basic premise is that by having access to
predictions about the future, one can design online algorithms that significantly outperform worst-case
bounds. In practice, ML models producing such predictions often come with a confidence estimate
which can be roughly interpreted as a probability ε of the prediction being accurate—we call these
ε-accurate predictions. Thus, it is natural to ask: can we design online algorithms whose performance
is a function of the confidence parameter ε of ML predictions? If ε = 1 and all predictions are correct,
we would like the algorithm to approach optimal offline performance (consistency). If ε = 0, then
the predictions have no guarantees and we would like to ensure that the algorithm is not much worse
than an online algorithm without predictions (robustness). Between these two extremes, we would
like the performance of the algorithm to gracefully degrade with the value of ε. In this paper, we
present online algorithms augmented with ε-accurate predictions for fundamental problems such as
caching, online set cover, online facility location, and online network design.
ε-accurate predictions. We consider ML predictions that are (independently) correct with probability
at least ε. Note that ε represents only a minimum guarantee on the probability of a prediction being
accurate; individual predictions are allowed to have higher confidence values. Moreover, we do not
restrict what an incorrect prediction constitutes since this will depend on specific problem settings.
But morally, a correct prediction reveals information about the future while an incorrect prediction
does not. The design of online algorithms augmented with ε-accurate predictions has two main
challenges: (i) that information (correct predictions) is provided to the algorithm at a slow rate, about
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

