Quark: Controllable Text Generation
with Reinforced [Un]learning

Ximing Lu♠♡ Sean Welleck♠♡∗ Jack Hessel♡∗ Liwei Jiang♠♡
Lianhui Qin♠ Peter West♠ Prithviraj Ammanabrolu♡ Yejin Choi♠♡
♡
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
♠
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington
{ximinglu, jackh, raja}@allenai.org
{wellecks, lwjiang, lianhuiq, pawest, yejin}@cs.washington.edu
https://github.com/GXimingLu/Quark

Abstract
Large-scale language models often learn behaviors that are misaligned with user
expectations. Generated text may contain offensive or toxic language, contain
significant repetition, or be of a different sentiment than desired by the user. We
consider the task of unlearning these misalignments by fine-tuning the language
model on signals of what not to do. We introduce Quantized Reward Konditioning
(Quark), an algorithm for optimizing a reward function that quantifies an (un)wanted
property, while not straying too far from the original model. Quark alternates
between (i) collecting samples with the current language model, (ii) sorting them
into quantiles based on reward, with each quantile identified by a reward token
prepended to the language model’s input, and (iii) using a standard language
modeling loss on samples from each quantile conditioned on its reward token,
while remaining nearby the original language model via a KL-divergence penalty.
By conditioning on a high-reward token at generation time, the model generates
text that exhibits less of the unwanted property. For unlearning toxicity, negative
sentiment, and repetition, our experiments show that Quark outperforms both strong
baselines and state-of-the-art reinforcement learning methods like PPO [66], while
relying only on standard language modeling primitives.

1

Introduction

Large neural language models trained on an enormous amount of web text have excelled at numerous
tasks [58, 87, 10]. They provide an effective interface for few-shot learning [8], show impressive
natural-language understanding capabilities [47], and, in some contexts, their generations can be
indistinguishable from human-authored text [11].
However, these same language models often exhibit undesirable behaviors, as they are usually trained
to simply maximize the likelihood of their raw pre-training data. For example, models sometimes
generate toxic text that reflects pernicious social biases [18, 69], or generate repetitive and dull
language [79, 38, 25]. Undesirable behaviors are diverse and hard to avoid, control, or even specify a
priori; we thus argue that it is critical to investigate ways to unlearn undesirable behaviors post hoc,
while maintaining capacity for generating coherent and fluent language.
Supervised approaches for unlearning pose challenges. One option is to curate and train on a corpus
that encodes desirable behavior, with the hope that additional maximum likelihood training will shape
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

