Robust Reinforcement Learning using Offline Data

Kishan Panaganti1 , Zaiyan Xu1 , Dileep Kalathil1 , Mohammad Ghavamzadeh2
1
Texas A&M University, 2 Google Research.
Emails: {kpb, zxu43, dileep.kalathil}@tamu.edu, ghavamza@google.com

Abstract
The goal of robust reinforcement learning (RL) is to learn a policy that is robust
against the uncertainty in model parameters. Parameter uncertainty commonly
occurs in many real-world RL applications due to simulator modeling errors,
changes in the real-world system dynamics over time, and adversarial disturbances.
Robust RL is typically formulated as a max-min problem, where the objective is to
learn the policy that maximizes the value against the worst possible models that lie
in an uncertainty set. In this work, we propose a robust RL algorithm called Robust
Fitted Q-Iteration (RFQI), which uses only an offline dataset to learn the optimal
robust policy. Robust RL with offline data is significantly more challenging than
its non-robust counterpart because of the minimization over all models present
in the robust Bellman operator. This poses challenges in offline data collection,
optimization over the models, and unbiased estimation. In this work, we propose a
systematic approach to overcome these challenges, resulting in our RFQI algorithm.
We prove that RFQI learns a near-optimal robust policy under standard assumptions
and demonstrate its superior performance on standard benchmark problems.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms often require a large number of data samples to learn
a control policy. As a result, training them directly on the real-world systems is expensive and
potentially dangerous. This problem is typically overcome by training them on a simulator (online
RL) or using a pre-collected offline dataset (offline RL). The offline dataset is usually collected either
from a sophisticated simulator of the real-world system or from the historical measurements. The
trained RL policy is then deployed assuming that the training environment, the simulator or the offline
data, faithfully represents the model of the real-world system. This assumption is often incorrect
due to multiple factors such as the approximation errors incurred while modeling, changes in the
real-world parameters over time and possible adversarial disturbances in the real-world. For example,
the standard simulator settings of the sensor noise, action delay, friction, and mass of a mobile robot
can be different from that of the actual real-world robot, in addition to changes in the terrain, weather
conditions, lighting, and obstacle densities of the testing environment. Unfortunately, the current RL
control policies can fail dramatically when faced with even mild changes in the training and testing
environments (Sünderhauf et al., 2018; Tobin et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2018).
The goal in robust RL is to learn a policy that is robust against the model parameter mismatches
between the training and testing environments. The robust planning problem is formalized using
the framework of Robust Markov Decision Process (RMDP) (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim and El Ghaoui,
2005). Unlike the standard MDP which considers a single model (transition probability function), the
RMDP formulation considers a set of models which is called the uncertainty set. The goal is to find
an optimal robust policy that performs the best under the worst possible model in this uncertainty
set. The minimization over the uncertainty set makes the robust MDP and robust RL problems
significantly more challenging than their non-robust counterparts.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

