Decentralized, Communication- and Coordination-free
Learning in Structured Matching Markets

Chinmay Maheshwari
EECS
University of California Berkeley
chinmay_maheshwari@berkeley.edu

Shankar Sastry
EECS
University of California Berkeley
sastry@eecs.berkeley.edu

Eric Mazumdar
CMS and Economics
Caltech
mazumdar@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of online learning in competitive settings in the context
of two-sided matching markets. In particular, one side of the market, the agents,
must learn about their preferences over the other side, the firms, through repeated
interaction while competing with other agents for successful matches. We propose
a class of decentralized, communication- and coordination-free algorithms that
agents can use to reach to their stable match in structured matching markets. In
contrast to prior works, the proposed algorithms make decisions based solely on an
agent’s own history of play and requires no foreknowledge of the firms’ preferences.
Our algorithms are constructed by splitting up the statistical problem of learning
one’s preferences, from noisy observations, from the problem of competing for
firms. We show that under realistic structural assumptions on the underlying
preferences of the agents and firms, the proposed algorithms incur a regret which
grows at most logarithmically in the time horizon. However, we note that in the
worst case, it may grow exponentially in the size of the market.

1

Introduction

Online decision-making under uncertainty is one of the central problems in modern machine learning,
reflecting the need for efficient and high performing algorithms for real-time learning in real-world
settings. Despite being such a well-researched area, there is a broad lack of understanding of how
to deploy online learning algorithms into settings in which they must compete with each other for
resources or information. Indeed, while classic problems of online learning deal with trading off
the exploration of possible choices and the exploitation of current knowledge (i.e., the explorationexploitation tradeoff Lattimore and Szepesvári (2020); Slivkins (2019)), the addition of competition
adds a new axis upon which algorithms must operate Mansour et al. (2017); Aridor et al. (2020)—
namely that of competing (perhaps unsuccessfully) for highly desired outcomes or settling for less
desired (but also less competitive) outcomes. Broadly, speaking, the dominant approach to dealing
with competition in machine learning remains to treat opponents as adversarialCesa-Bianchi and
Lugosi (2006), despite a long literature in economics and game theory Littman (1994); Fudenberg et al.
(1998) showing how agents who understand the competitive structure of problems can sometimes
vastly outperform solutions based upon worst-case modeling.
In this paper, we address the problem of online learning in competitive settings in the context of
two-sided matching markets. Two-sided matching markets match users on one side of the market
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

