Ontologue: Declarative Benchmark Construction for
Hierarchical Multi-Label Classification
Sean T. Yang
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
tyyang38@uw.edu

Bernease Herman
Information School
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
bernease@uw.edu

Bill Howe
Information School
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
billhowe@uw.edu

Abstract
We describe a customizable benchmark for hierarchical and ontological multilabel classification, a task where labels are equipped with a graph structure and
data items can be assigned multiple labels. We find that current benchmarks do
not adequately represent the problem space, casting doubt on the generalizability
of current results. We consider three dimensions of the problem space: context
(availability of rich features on the data and labels), distribution of labels over
data, and graph structure. For context, the lack of complex features on the labels
(and in some cases, the data) artificially prevent the use of modern representation
learning techniques as an appropriate baseline. For distribution, we find the long
tail of labels over data constitute a few-shot learning problem that artificially
confounds the results: for most common benchmarks, over 40% of the labels
have fewer than 5 data points in the training set. For structure, we find that the
correlation between performance and the height of the tree can explain some
of the variation in performance, informing practical utility. In this paper, we
demonstrate how the lack of diversity in benchmarks can confound performance
analysis, then present a declarative query system called Ontologue for generating
custom benchmarks with specific properties, then use this system to design 4 new
benchmarks extracted from DBPedia that better represent the problem space. We
evaluate state-of-the-art algorithms on both existing and new benchmarks and
show that the performance conclusions can vary significantly depending on the
dimensions we consider. We intend the system and derived benchmarks to improve
the analysis of generalizability for these problems.

1

Introduction

In high-expertise domains, ontologies are used to capture expert knowledge and model a universe
of discourse. For example, the Gene Ontology 1 [1] offers a logical structure describing complexity
of the biological systems, from the molecular level to larger pathways, cellular and organism-level
systems. It provides a computational representation of the current knowledge of genes from organisms.
DBPedia 2 [2] hosts an open knowledge graph (OKG) modeling all concepts in various Wikimedia
projects through a crowd-sourced community effort. WordNet [34] and ImageNet [13] are other
examples of hierarchical- and graph-structured knowledge systems for natural language processing
and computer vision research, respectively. Although broadly used, these ontological relationships are
often ignored in machine learning settings. For example, AlexNet [24], ResNet [18], and VGG [40],
popular benchmarks for computer vision applications, disregard the structure among labels.
1
2

http://www.geneontology.org
https://www.dbpedia.org/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

