Robust Model Selection and Nearly-Proper Learning
for GMMs
Allen Liu
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
cliu568@mit.edu

Jerry Li
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052
jerrl@microsoft.com

Ankur Moitra
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
moitra@mit.edu

Abstract
In learning theory, a standard assumption is that the data is generated from a finite
mixture model. But what happens when the number of components is not known in
advance? The problem of estimating the number of components, also called model
selection, is important in its own right but there are essentially no known efficient
algorithms with provable guarantees let alone ones that can tolerate adversarial
corruptions. In this work, we study the problem of robust model selection for
univariate Gaussian mixture models (GMMs). Given poly(k/ϵ) samples from a
distribution that is ϵ-close in TV distance to a GMM with k components, we can
e
construct a GMM with O(k)
components that approximates the distribution to
within e
O(ϵ) in poly(k/ϵ) time. Thus we are able to approximately determine the
minimum number of components needed to fit the distribution within a logarithmic
factor. Prior to our work, the only known algorithms for learning arbitrary univariate
GMMs either output significantly more than k components (e.g. k/ϵ2 components
for kernel density estimates) or run in time exponential in k. Moreover, by adapting
our techniques we obtain similar results for reconstructing Fourier-sparse signals.

1

Introduction

Many works in learning theory operate under the assumption that the data is generated from a finite
mixture model, and furthermore that the number of components is known in advance. But what
happens when the number of components is not known in advance? The problem of estimating the
number of components is called model selection and has been intensively studied in statistics for over
fifty years [Neyman and Scott, 1966]. Indeed, in many scientific applications, it is the central issue.
Consider the motivation given by Chen et al. [2004]: In genetics, we might have a continuous-valued
trait, like height, that can be measured across a population and we want to understand its genetic
basis. But is the underlying genetic mechanism simple or complex? Is it controlled by just a few
genes or are there many more genes waiting to be discovered that each have a small effect on it?
From a statistical perspective, what makes model selection challenging is that the standard analysis
of the likelihood ratio test breaks down because of lack of regularity and non-identifiability [Hartigan,
1985]. Despite many attempts [Ghosh and Sen, 1984, Lo et al., 2001, Huang et al., 2017] and
rejoinders [Jeffries, 2003], even understanding the asymptotic distribution of the likelihood ratio
statistics has remained a long-standing challenge in the field [Kasahara and Shimotsu, 2015]. From
an algorithmic standpoint, the problem is even more difficult.
In this work, we study the problem of robust model selection for one-dimensional Gaussian mixture
models with k components (k-GMMs for short). A natural approach for this problem is via agnostic
proper learning, where the task is to, given samples from an unknown distribution, output the best
k-GMM approximation to this distribution in TV distance. An efficient agnostic proper learning
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

