RényiCL: Contrastive Representation Learning
with Skew Rényi Divergence
Kyungmin Lee
Jinwoo Shin
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{kyungmnlee, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Contrastive representation learning seeks to acquire useful representations by estimating the shared information between multiple views of data. Here, the choice of
data augmentation is sensitive to the quality of learned representations: as harder
the data augmentations are applied, the views share more task-relevant information,
but also task-irrelevant one that can hinder the generalization capability of representation. Motivated by this, we present a new robust contrastive learning scheme,
coined RényiCL, which can effectively manage harder augmentations by utilizing
Rényi divergence. Our method is built upon the variational lower bound of Rényi
divergence, but a naïve usage of a variational method is impractical due to the
large variance. To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel contrastive objective
that conducts variational estimation of a skew Rényi divergence and provide a
theoretical guarantee on how variational estimation of skew divergence leads to
stable training. We show that Rényi contrastive learning objectives perform innate
hard negative sampling and easy positive sampling simultaneously so that it can
selectively learn useful features and ignore nuisance features. Through experiments
on ImageNet, we show that Rényi contrastive learning with stronger augmentations
outperforms other self-supervised methods without extra regularization or computational overhead. Moreover, we also validate our method on other domains such
as graph and tabular, showing empirical gain over other contrastive methods. The
implementation and pre-trained models are available at 1 .

1

Introduction

Recently, many AI studies are enamored by the power of contrastive methods in learning useful
representations without any human supervision, e.g., image [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], text [7, 8], audio [9, 10]
and multimodal video [11, 12, 13]. The key components of contrastive learning can be summarized
into two-fold: data augmentation and contrastive objectives. The data augmentation generates
different views of data where the views share information that is relevant to the downstream tasks.
The contrastive objective then enforces the representation to capture the shared information between
the views by bringing the views from the same data together and pushing the views from different data
away in the representation space. Therefore, the choice of data augmentation is critical in contrastive
learning, cf., see [3, 14, 15]. If the views share insufficient information, the representations cannot
learn sufficient features for downstream tasks. On the other hand, if there is too much information
between the views, the views might share nuisance features that hamper the generalization.
In this paper, we propose a new contrastive learning objective using Rényi divergence [16], coined
RényiCL, which can effectively handle the case when the views share excessive information. The
Rényi divergence is a generalization of KL divergence that is defined with an additional parameter
1

https://github.com/kyungmnlee/RenyiCL

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

