Meta-DMoE: Adapting to Domain Shift by
Meta-Distillation from Mixture-of-Experts

Tao Zhong∗1 , Zhixiang Chi∗2 , Li Gu∗ 2 , Yang Wang2,3 , Yuanhao Yu2 , Jin Tang2
1

University of Toronto, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 Concordia University
tao.zhong@mail.utoronto.ca yang.wang@concordia.ca
{zhixiang.chi, li.gu, yuanhao.yu, tangjin}@huawei.com

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of domain shift. Most existing methods
perform training on multiple source domains using a single model, and the same
trained model is used on all unseen target domains. Such solutions are sub-optimal
as each target domain exhibits its own specialty, which is not adapted. Furthermore, expecting single-model training to learn extensive knowledge from multiple
source domains is counterintuitive. The model is more biased toward learning
only domain-invariant features and may result in negative knowledge transfer.
In this work, we propose a novel framework for unsupervised test-time adaptation, which is formulated as a knowledge distillation process to address domain
shift. Specifically, we incorporate Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) as teachers, where
each expert is separately trained on different source domains to maximize their
specialty. Given a test-time target domain, a small set of unlabeled data is sampled to query the knowledge from MoE. As the source domains are correlated
to the target domains, a transformer-based aggregator then combines the domain
knowledge by examining the interconnection among them. The output is treated
as a supervision signal to adapt a student prediction network toward the target
domain. We further employ meta-learning to enforce the aggregator to distill
positive knowledge and the student network to achieve fast adaptation. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art
and validates the effectiveness of each proposed component. Our code is available
at https://github.com/n3il666/Meta-DMoE.

1

Introduction

The emergence of deep models has achieved superior performance [32, 40, 47]. Such unprecedented
success is built on the strong assumption that the training and testing data are highly correlated
(i.e., they are both sampled from the same data distribution). However, the assumption typically
does not hold in real-world settings as the training data is infeasible to cover all the ever-changing
deployment environments [39]. Reducing such distribution correlation is known as distribution shift,
which significantly hampers the performance of deep models. Humans are more robust against the
distribution shift, but artificial learning-based systems suffer more from performance degradation.
One line of research aims to mitigate the distribution shift by exploiting some unlabeled data from
a target domain, which is known as unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [24, 51, 26]. The
unlabeled data is an estimation of the target distribution [86]. Therefore, UDA normally adapts
to the target domain by transferring the source knowledge via a common feature space with less
effect from domain discrepancy [79, 50]. However, UDA is less applicable for real-world scenarios
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

