Make Sharpness-Aware Minimization Stronger:
A Sparsified Perturbation Approach

Peng Mi1∗ Li Shen2† Tianhe Ren1 Yiyi Zhou1
Xiaoshuai Sun1 Rongrong Ji1 Dacheng Tao2,3
1
Media Analytics and Computing Laboratory, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2
JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China 3 The University of Sydney, Australia
mipeng@stu.xmu.edu.cn, mathshenli@gmail.com, rentianhe@stu.xmu.edu.cn
zhouyiyi@xmu.edu.cn, xssun@xmu.edu.cn
rrji@xmu.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks often suffer from poor generalization caused by complex and
non-convex loss landscapes. One of the popular solutions is Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM), which smooths the loss landscape via minimizing the maximized
change of training loss when adding a perturbation to the weight. However, we find
the indiscriminate perturbation of SAM on all parameters is suboptimal, which also
results in excessive computation, i.e., double the overhead of common optimizers
like Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). In this paper, we propose an efficient
and effective training scheme coined as Sparse SAM (SSAM), which achieves
sparse perturbation by a binary mask. To obtain the sparse mask, we provide
two solutions which are based onFisher information and dynamic sparse training,
respectively. In addition, we theoretically
prove that SSAM can converge at the
√
same rate as SAM, i.e., O(log T / T ). Sparse SAM not only has the potential
for training acceleration but also smooths the loss landscape effectively. Extensive experimental results on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and ImageNet-1K confirm the
superior efficiency of our method to SAM, and the performance is preserved or
even better with a perturbation of merely 50% sparsity. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Mi-Peng/Sparse-Sharpness-Aware-Minimization.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade or so, the great success of deep learning has been due in great part to ever-larger
model parameter sizes [13, 56, 52, 10, 40, 5]. However, the excessive parameters also make the model
inclined to poor generalization. To overcome this problem, numerous efforts have been devoted to
training algorithm [24, 42, 50], data augmentation [11, 57, 55], and network design [26, 28].
One important finding in recent research is the connection between the geometry of loss landscape
and model generalization [31, 17, 27, 44, 53]. In general, the loss landscape of the model is complex
and non-convex, which makes model tend to converge to sharp minima. Recent endeavors [31, 27, 44]
show that the flatter the minima of convergence, the better the model generalization. This discovery
reveals the nature of previous approaches [24, 26, 11, 55, 57, 28] to improve generalization, i.e.,
smoothing the loss landscape.
∗
†

This work was done during an internship at JD Explore Academy.
Li Shen is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

