Lifelong Neural Predictive Coding: Learning
Cumulatively Online without Forgetting

Alexander G. Ororbia
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623, USA
ago@cs.rit.edu
C. Lee Giles
The Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16801, USA
clg20@psu.edu

Ankur Mali
University of South Florida
Tampa, FL 33620, USA
ankurarjunmali@usf.edu
Daniel Kifer
The Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16801, USA
duk17@psu.edu

Abstract
In lifelong learning systems based on artificial neural networks, one of the biggest
obstacles is the inability to retain old knowledge as new information is encountered.
This phenomenon is known as catastrophic forgetting. In this paper, we propose
a new kind of connectionist architecture, the Sequential Neural Coding Network,
that is robust to forgetting when learning from streams of data points and, unlike
networks of today, does not learn via the popular back-propagation of errors.
Grounded in the neurocognitive theory of predictive coding, our model adapts its
synapses in a biologically-plausible fashion while another neural system learns to
direct and control this cortex-like structure, mimicking some of the task-executive
control functionality of the basal ganglia. In our experiments, we demonstrate that
our self-organizing system experiences significantly less forgetting compared to
standard neural models, outperforming a swath of previously proposed methods,
including rehearsal/data buffer-based methods, on both standard (SplitMNIST,
Split Fashion MNIST, etc.) and custom benchmarks even though it is trained in a
stream-like fashion. Our work offers evidence that emulating mechanisms in real
neuronal systems, e.g., local learning, lateral competition, can yield new directions
and possibilities for tackling the grand challenge of lifelong machine learning.

1

Introduction

Lifelong learning is a part of machine learning and artificial intelligence research with the goal of
developing a computational agent that can learn over time and continually accumulate new knowledge
while retaining its previously learned experiences [1, 2]. For example, suppose an agent needs to
learn to classify digits, then types of clothing, and then sketches of objects. As each new task arrives
the agent is expected to process the accompanying data and learn the new task but still remember
how to complete the old tasks, at least without significant degradation in performance or loss of
generalization. Modern-day connectionist systems are typically trained on a fixed pool of data
samples, collected in controlled environments, in isolation and random order, and then evaluated on a
separate validation data pool. This is a far cry from what we really desire from learning machines.
When we look to humans or other animals, we see that they are more than capable of learning in a
continual manner, making decisions based on sensorimotor input throughout their lifespans [3]. This
ability to incrementally acquire and refine knowledge over long periods of time is driven by cognitive
processes that come together to create the experience-driven specialization of motor and perceptual
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

