Learning Distributions Generated by Single-Layer
ReLU Networks in the Presence of Arbitrary Outliers

Saikiran Bulusu∗
Department of EECS
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
sabulusu@syr.edu

Geethu Joseph∗
Faculty of EEMCS
Delft University of Technology
2628 XE Delft, The Netherlands
g.joseph@tudelft.nl

M. Cenk Gursoy
Department of EECS
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
mcgursoy@syr.edu

Pramod K. Varshney
Department of EECS
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
varshney@syr.edu ∗

Abstract
We consider a set of data samples such that a fraction of the samples are arbitrary
outliers, and the rest are the output samples of a single-layer neural network with
rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation. Our goal is to estimate the parameters
(weight matrix and bias vector) of the neural network, assuming the bias vector to
be non-negative. We estimate the network parameters using the gradient descent
algorithm combined with either the median- or trimmed mean-based
 filters to

mitigate the effect of the arbitrary outliers. We then prove that Õ p12 + ϵ21p
 2

2
samples and Õ dp2 + ϵd2 p time are sufficient for our algorithm to estimate the
neural network parameters within an error of ϵ when the outlier probability is 1 − p,
where 2/3 < p ≤ 1 and the problem dimension is d (with log factors being ignored
here). Our theoretical and simulation results provide insights into the training
complexity of ReLU neural networks in terms of the probability of outliers and
problem dimension.

1

Introduction

Probability densities based on generative models are used in various applications such as image
inpainting, deblurring, and generating new images. In particular, generative models representing the
distribution over natural images are used for image inpainting and to generate new images Van Oord
et al. (2016). A critical obstacle in generative modeling is building complex and expressive models
that are tractable and scalable. Hence, a fundamental challenge in machine learning, as well as
in statistics, is to estimate a high dimensional distribution using a set of observed data samples
generated by the distribution. One solution technique is the deep generative method that models
the unknown distribution as the output distribution of a neural network when the input of the neural
network is drawn from a known distribution (for example, standard Gaussian in image generation by
generative adversarial networks (GANs)) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017; Radford
et al., 2015; Kingma, Welling, 2013; Van Oord et al., 2016). Here, the unknown distribution is
estimated by learning the neural network parameters from the data samples. Several deep generative
∗

First two authors have equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022), New Orleans, USA.

