A Fourier Approach to Mixture Learning
Mingda Qiao⇤
Stanford University
mqiao@stanford.edu

Guru Guruganesh
Google Research
gurug@google.com

Avinava Dubey
Google Research
avinavadubey@google.com

Ankit Singh Rawat
Google Research
ankitsrawat@google.com

Manzil Zaheer
Google DeepMind
manzilzaheer@google.com

Abstract
We revisit the problem of learning mixtures of spherical Gaussians. Given
Pk
samples from mixture k1 j=1 N (µj , Id ), the goal is to estimate the means
µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µk 2 Rd up to a small error. The hardness of this learning problem can
be measured by the separation defined as the minimum distance between p
all pairs
of means. Regev and Vijayaraghavan [2017] showed that with = ⌦( log k)
separation, the means can be learned using poly(k, d)
p samples, whereas superpolynomially many samples are required if
= o( log k) and d = ⌦(log k).
This leaves open the low-dimensional regime where d = o(log k).
In this work, we give an algorithm that efficiently
p learns the means in d =
O(log k/ log log k) dimensions under separation d/ log
p k (modulo doubly logarithmic factors). This separation is strictly smaller than log k, and is also shown
to be necessary. Along with the results of Regev and Vijayaraghavan [2017], our
work almost pins down the critical separation threshold at which efficient parameter
learning becomes possible for spherical Gaussian mixtures. More generally, our
algorithm runs in time poly(k) · f (d, , ✏), and is thus fixed-parameter tractable
in parameters d, and ✏.
Our approach is based on estimating the Fourier transform of the mixture at
carefully chosen frequencies, and both the algorithm and its analysis are simple
and elementary. Our positive results can be easily extended to learning mixtures of
non-Gaussian distributions, under a mild condition on the Fourier spectrum of the
distribution.

1

Introduction

Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) are one of the most well studied models for a population with
different components. A GMM defines a distribution over the d-dimensional Euclidean space as
Pk
the weighted sum of normal distributions i=1 wi · N (µi , ⌃i ), which are specified by following
quantities: the number of components k 2 N, the component means µi 2 Rd , the component
covariances ⌃i 2 Rd⇥d , which are positive definite matrices, and the weights wi 0 that sum up to
1. In this work, we consider the uniform spherical case, where the weights wi are uniform wi = k1
and the covariance matrix ⌃i = Id is the identity matrix. The central problem in this setup is to
efficiently estimate the means µ1 , . . . , µk . To avoid degenerate cases such as when some of the means
are the same, it is common to parameterize the problem by the separation of the means , which
guarantees that kµi µj k2
for all i 6= j.
⇤

Part of this work was done while working as an intern at Google Research.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

