Detecting Abrupt Changes in Sequential Pairwise
Comparison Data

Wanshan Li
Department of Statistics & Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
wanshanl@andrew.cmu.edu

Daren Wang
Department of ACMS
University of Notre Dame
dwang24@nd.edu

Alessandro Rinaldo
Department of Statistics & Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
arinaldo@cmu.edu

Abstract
The Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model is a classic and very popular statistical
approach for eliciting a global ranking among a collection of items using pairwise
comparison data. In applications in which the comparison outcomes are observed
as a time series, it is often the case that data are non-stationary, in the sense that
the true underlying ranking changes over time. In this paper we are concerned
with localizing the change points in a high-dimensional BTL model with piecewise constant parameters. We propose novel and practicable algorithms based on
dynamic programming that can consistently estimate the unknown locations of
the change points. We provide consistency rates for our methodology that depend
explicitly on the model parameters, the temporal spacing between two consecutive
change points and the magnitude of the change. We corroborate our findings with
extensive numerical experiments and a real-life example.

1

Introduction

Pairwise comparison data are among the most common types of data collected for the purpose of
eliciting a global ranking among a collection of items or teams. The Bradley-Terry-Luce model
(Bradley and Terry, 1952; Luce, 1959) is a classical and popular parametric approach to model
pairwise comparison data and to obtain an estimate of the underlying ranking. The Bradley-TerryLuce model and its variants have been proven to be powerful approaches in many applications,
including sports analytics (Fahrmeir and Tutz, 1994; Masarotto and Varin, 2012; Cattelan et al., 2013),
bibliometrics (Stigler, 1994; Varin et al., 2016), search analytics (Radlinski and Joachims, 2007;
Agresti, 2013), and much more.
To introduce the BTL model, suppose that we are interested in ranking n distinct items, each with a
(fixed but unobserved) positive preference score wi , i ∈ [n], quantifying its propensity to beat other
items in a pairwise comparison. The BTL model assumes that the outcomes of the comparisons
between different pairs are independent Bernoulli random variables such that, for a given pair of
items, say i and j in [n] := {1, . . . , n}, the probability that i is preferred to (or beats) j is
w∗
(1.1)
Pij = P (i beats j) = ∗ i ∗ , ∀ i, j ∈ [n].
wi + wj
∗
∗
∗
∗ ⊤
n
A common reparametrization is to set wi∗ = exp(θ
Pi ) for each i, where θ := (θ1 , . . . , θn ) ∈ R .
To ensure identifiability it is further assumed that i∈[n] θi∗ = 0.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

