Continual Learning In Environments With
Polynomial Mixing Times

Matthew Riemer∗1, 2 , Sharath Chandra Raparthy*2 , Ignacio Cases3 , Gopeshh Subbaraj2 ,
Maximilian Puelma Touzel2 , Irina Rish2

Abstract
The mixing time of the Markov chain induced by a policy limits performance in
real-world continual learning scenarios. Yet, the effect of mixing times on learning
in continual reinforcement learning (RL) remains underexplored. In this paper,
we characterize problems that are of long-term interest to the development of
continual RL, which we call scalable MDPs, through the lens of mixing times. In
particular, we theoretically establish that scalable MDPs have mixing times that
scale polynomially with the size of the problem. We go on to demonstrate that
polynomial mixing times present significant difficulties for existing approaches,
which suffer from myopic bias and stale bootstrapped estimates. To validate our
theory, we study the empirical scaling behavior of mixing times with respect to the
number of tasks and task duration for high performing policies deployed across
multiple Atari games. Our analysis demonstrates both that polynomial mixing
times do emerge in practice and how their existence may lead to unstable learning
behavior like catastrophic forgetting in continual learning settings.

1

Introduction

Continual reinforcement learning (RL) [1] is an aspirational field of research confronting the difficulties of long-term, real-world applications by studying problems of increasing scale, diversity,
and non-stationarity. The practical requirement for researchers to work on problems of reasonable
complexity in the short-term presents a meta-challenge: choosing the right small-scale problems
so that the approaches we develop scale up to the use cases of the future. Here, we address this
meta-challenge by formalizing RL problems that vary in size and by analyzing the scaling behavior
of popular RL algorithms. In particular, we analyze on the often ignored mixing time that expresses
the amount of time until the agent-environment dynamics converge to some stationary behaviour.
Towards this end, we specifically make the following contributions in this work:
1. Scalable MDPs: We propose the formalism of scalable MDPs in Definition 1 to characterize
an abstract class of MDPs where the MDPs within the class are differentiated based on a
changing scale parameter. Understanding the influence of this scale parameter on learning
can promote better understanding of the meta-challenge of extrapolating our results on small
scale problems to large scale problems of the same class.
2. Polynomial Mixing Times: Theorem 1 establishes the key result of this paper that as any
scalable MDP is scaled, its mixing time must grow polynomially as a function of the growing
state space. This has major implications for regret analysis in these MDPs.
3. Myopic Bias During Scaling: We demonstrate in Corollaries 2, 3, and 4 that Theorem
1 implies traditional approaches to RL cannot efficiently scale to problems of large size
without experiencing myopic bias in optimization that slows down learning.
∗

1

Equal Contribution
IBM Research; 2 Mila, Université de Montréal; 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

