Invariance Learning in Deep Neural Networks with
Differentiable Laplace Approximations
Alexander Immer∗,1,2
Tycho F.A. van der Ouderaa∗,3
1
Gunnar Rätsch
Vincent Fortuin1,4
Mark van der Wilk3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
4
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK

Abstract
Data augmentation is commonly applied to improve performance of deep learning
by enforcing the knowledge that certain transformations on the input preserve
the output. Currently, the data augmentation parameters are chosen by human
effort and costly cross-validation, which makes it cumbersome to apply to new
datasets. We develop a convenient gradient-based method for selecting the data
augmentation without validation data during training of a deep neural network.
Our approach relies on phrasing data augmentation as an invariance in the prior
distribution on the functions of a neural network, which allows us to learn it using
Bayesian model selection. This has been shown to work in Gaussian processes, but
not yet for deep neural networks. We propose a differentiable Kronecker-factored
Laplace approximation to the marginal likelihood as our objective, which can be
optimised without human supervision or validation data. We show that our method
can successfully recover invariances present in the data, and that this improves
generalisation and data efficiency on image datasets.

1

Introduction

Data augmentation is a commonly used machine learning technique that is essential to highperforming deep learning and computer vision systems. It aims to obtain a model that is invariant
to a set or distribution of transformations, by fitting a model with inputs that are transformed in a
way that is known to leave the output class unchanged. This procedure can be regarded as artificially
creating more data and is well known to increase generalisation performance and data efficiency. Yet,
choosing the right transformations is an expensive and task-specific process that relies on domain
knowledge and human effort, as well as trial-and-error through cross-validation. This can quickly
become intractable when many parameters are considered, particularly if they are continuous, because
each setting requires training a model to convergence.
We aim to make selecting suitable transformations easier, by learning them via gradient descent.
Our approach is inspired by the procedure of van der Wilk et al. (2018), which casts learning
invariances and data augmentations as a Bayesian model selection problem. This view suggests
selecting invariances by maximising the marginal likelihood with gradient-based optimisation. While
this approach was successful in Gaussian process models, it has not yet been demonstrated in deep
neural networks, where the marginal likelihood is harder to approximate.
∗
Equal contribution, order decided by coin flip. Correspondence to: alexander.immer@inf.ethz.ch,
tycho.vanderouderaa@imperial.ac.uk
The code is available at https://github.com/tychovdo/lila

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

