When Does Group Invariant Learning Survive
Spurious Correlations?

1

Yimeng Chen1,2∗, Ruibin Xiong3 , Zhiming Ma1,2 , Yanyan Lan4,5†
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Baidu Inc.
4
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
5
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
chenyimeng14@mails.ucas.ac.cn,xiongruibin@baidu.com,
mazm@amt.ac.cn,lanyanyan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
By inferring latent groups in the training data, recent works introduce invariant
learning to the case where environment annotations are unavailable. Typically,
learning group invariance under a majority/minority split is empirically shown
to be effective in improving out-of-distribution generalization on many datasets.
However, theoretical guarantee for these methods on learning invariant mechanisms
is lacking. In this paper, we reveal the insufficiency of existing group invariant
learning methods in preventing classifiers from depending on spurious correlations
in the training set. Specifically, we propose two criteria on judging such sufficiency.
Theoretically and empirically, we show that existing methods can violate both
criteria and thus fail in generalizing to spurious correlation shifts. Motivated by
this, we design a new group invariant learning method, which constructs groups
with statistical independence tests, and reweights samples by group label proportion
to meet the criteria. Experiments on both synthetic and real data demonstrate that
the new method significantly outperforms existing group invariant learning methods
in generalizing to spurious correlation shifts1 .

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, machine learning models inevitably encounter data that are rarely
presented in the training environment, i.e. being out-of-distribution (OOD). For example, data
collected under new weather [36], locations [6], or light conditions [9] in vision tasks. However,
machine learning models often fail in generalizing to OOD data, which blocks their deployment
to critical applications [12; 38]. The dependence on spurious correlations that are prone to change
across environments has been recognized as a major cause of such failure [4; 12; 37]. For example, it
has been shown that models trained on MNLI [39] usually classify sentence pairs with high word
overlap as the label ‘entailment’, regardless of their semantics [25]. On a new dataset where such
relation no longer holds, the performance drops over 25% [25; 7].
A notable line of research on improving the robustness of models to distribution shifts is learning
features with invariant conditioned label distribution across training environments [28; 4; 15], which
has been termed invariant learning (IL). These methods are based on the assumption that the causal
mechanism keeps invariant across environments [28], while the spurious correlation varies. By
∗

Work done during Yimeng Chen’s internship at AIR, Tsinghua University.
Corresponding author.
1
Code is availiable at https://github.com/Beastlyprime/group-invariant-learning.

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

