Weakly-Supervised Multi-Granularity Map Learning
for Vision-and-Language Navigation

Peihao Chen1,6∗ Dongyu Ji1∗ Kunyang Lin1,2 Runhao Zeng5
Thomas H. Li6 Mingkui Tan1,7† Chuang Gan3,4
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Pazhou Laboratory,
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 4 UMass Amherst, 5 Shenzhen University,
6
Information Technology R&D Innovation Center of Peking University,
7
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education,
{phchencs, dongyuji.jdy}@gmail.com, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
We address a practical yet challenging problem of training robot agents to navigate
in an environment following a path described by some language instructions. The
instructions often contain descriptions of objects in the environment. To achieve
accurate and efficient navigation, it is critical to build a map that accurately represents both spatial location and the semantic information of the environment objects.
However, enabling a robot to build a map that well represents the environment is extremely challenging as the environment often involves diverse objects with various
attributes. In this paper, we propose a multi-granularity map, which contains both
object fine-grained details (e.g., color, texture) and semantic classes, to represent
objects more comprehensively. Moreover, we propose a weakly-supervised auxiliary task, which requires the agent to localize instruction-relevant objects on the
map. Through this task, the agent not only learns to localize the instruction-relevant
objects for navigation but also is encouraged to learn a better map representation
that reveals object information. We then feed the learned map and instruction to
a waypoint predictor to determine the next navigation goal. Experimental results
show our method outperforms the state-of-the-art by 4.0% and 4.6% w.r.t. success
rate both in seen and unseen environments, respectively on VLN-CE dataset. Code
is available at https://github.com/PeihaoChen/WS-MGMap.

1

Introduction

Developing a robot that is able to cooperate with humans is one of the goals for embodied artificial
intelligence. An important ability for such a robot is to understand human instructions (e.g., “stop
between the gray sofa and wooden table”) and navigate to the corresponding location. Toward this
goal, Anderson et al. [1] propose a vision-and-language navigation (VLN) task, which requires an
agent to follow human language instructions to navigate in unseen environments. In this paper, we
focus on its variant task VLN-CE [32], where the agent navigates in a continuous environment. The
agent could only perform low-level actions and perceive RGB-D with a limited field of view.
Current dominant methods for this task are designed in an end-to-end manner [26, 32, 40]. They
perceive the environment implicitly from raw RGB-D images and predict a sequence of actions using
a recurrent model. These methods attempt to learn mapping, instruction-vision correspondence, and
path planning implicitly, which increases the learning difficulty. To reduce the learning difficulty,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

