Meta-Learning with
Self-Improving Momentum Target
Jihoon Tack1 , Jongjin Park1 , Hankook Lee1 , Jaeho Lee2 , Jinwoo Shin1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
{jihoontack,jongjin.park,hankook.lee,jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
jaeho.lee@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
The idea of using a separately trained target model (or teacher) to improve the
performance of the student model has been increasingly popular in various machine
learning domains, and meta-learning is no exception; a recent discovery shows
that utilizing task-wise target models can significantly boost the generalization
performance. However, obtaining a target model for each task can be highly expensive, especially when the number of tasks for meta-learning is large. To tackle this
issue, we propose a simple yet effective method, coined Self-improving Momentum
Target (SiMT). SiMT generates the target model by adapting from the temporal ensemble of the meta-learner, i.e., the momentum network. This momentum
network and its task-specific adaptations enjoy a favorable generalization performance, enabling self-improving of the meta-learner through knowledge distillation.
Moreover, we found that perturbing parameters of the meta-learner, e.g., dropout,
further stabilize this self-improving process by preventing fast convergence of the
distillation loss during meta-training. Our experimental results demonstrate that
SiMT brings a significant performance gain when combined with a wide range
of meta-learning methods under various applications, including few-shot regression, few-shot classification, and meta-reinforcement learning. Code is available at
https://github.com/jihoontack/SiMT.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning [51] is the art of extracting and utilizing the knowledge from the distribution of tasks
to better solve a relevant task. This problem is typically approached by training a meta-model that can
transfer its knowledge to a task-specific solver, where the performance of the meta-model is evaluated
on the basis of how well each solver performs on the corresponding task. To learn such meta-model,
one should be able to (a) train an appropriate solver for each task utilizing the knowledge transferred
from the meta-model, and (b) accurately evaluate the performance of the solver. A standard way to do
this is the so-called S/Q (support/query) protocol [55, 34]: for (a), use a set of support set samples to
train the solver; for (b), use another set of samples, called query set samples to evaluate the solver1 .
Recently, however, an alternative paradigm—called S/T (support/target) protocol—has received
much attention [58, 62, 32]. The approach assumes that the meta-learner has an access to task-specific
target models, i.e., an expert model for each given task, and uses these models to evaluate task-specific
solvers by measuring the discrepancy of the solvers from the target models. Intriguingly, it has been
observed that such knowledge distillation procedure [43, 21] helps to improve the meta-generalization
performance [62], in a similar way that such teacher-student framework helps to avoid overfitting
under non-meta-learning contexts [30, 24].
1

We give an overview of terminologies used in the paper to guide readers new to this field (see Appendix A).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

