Flexible Neural Image Compression via Code Editing

1

Chenjian Gao∗1 , Tongda Xu∗1,2 , Dailan He1 , Hongwei Qin1 , Yan Wang1,2 †
SenseTime Research, 2 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
{xutongda, wangyan}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{gaochenjian, hedailan, qinhongwei}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Neural image compression (NIC) has outperformed traditional image codecs in ratedistortion (R-D) performance. However, it usually requires a dedicated encoderdecoder pair for each point on R-D curve, which greatly hinders its practical
deployment. While some recent works have enabled bitrate control via conditional
coding, they impose strong prior during training and provide limited flexibility.
In this paper we propose Code Editing, a highly flexible coding method for NIC
based on semi-amortized inference and adaptive quantization. Our work is a new
paradigm for variable bitrate NIC, and experimental results show that our method
surpasses existing variable-rate methods. Furthermore, our approach is so flexible
that it can also achieves ROI coding and multi-distortion trade-off with a single
decoder. Our approach is compatible to all NIC methods with differentiable decoder
NIC, and it can be even directly adopted on existing pre-trained models.

1

Introduction

Lossy image compression is a fundamental problem of computer vision. In a simplified setting,
the aim of lossy compression is to minimize rate-distortion cost R + λD, with λ as the Lagrange
multiplier controlling R-D trade-off. Traditional compression algorithms (e.g. JPEG, JPEG2000 and
BPG [Bellard, 2018]) first perform a linear transformation (e.g. DCT, wavelet transform) and then
quantize the transformed coefficients for compression. Their bitrate control is achieved by controlling
quantization stepsize. On the other hand, lossy neural image compression (NIC) methods have
outperformed traditional codecs in recent years [Xie et al., 2021, He et al., 2022]. These methods
implement powerful non-linear transformation with a neural network, and therefore achieve better
R-D performance. However, in order to realize R-D trade-offs, we need to optimize multiple networks
towards different losses with different λs, which means that we cannot achieve flexible bitrate control.
To enable NIC models with bitrate control ability, several works adopt conditional networks [Choi
et al., 2019, Cui et al., 2021, Sun et al., 2021] . They use λ as condition and feed it into the encoder
and decoder. During training, they sample λ from a pre-defined prior and optimize the Ep(λ) [R + λD]
via Monte Carlo. Due to the capacity of conditional networks, most of them use simple prior and
limited sets of λ, such as a uniform distribution over only 5 − 10 discrete λs [Choi et al., 2019, Cui
et al., 2021]. And additional effort is required to interpolate the discrete λs to achieve continuous
R-D curve [Choi et al., 2019, Cui et al., 2021, Sun et al., 2021], which limits the flexibility of variable
bitrate model. On the other hand, traditional image codecs achieve flexible R-D trade-off naturally by
controlling the quantization step. This control is fine grain (e.g. 100 levels for JPEG). Moreover, they
support flexible spatial bits-allocation for ROI-based (region of interest) coding. And the user need
only one decoder for all those flexibility.
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

