SparCL: Sparse Continual Learning on the Edge
Zifeng Wang1,⇤ , Zheng Zhan1,⇤ , Yifan Gong1 , Geng Yuan1 , Wei Niu2 , Tong Jian1 ,
Bin Ren2 , Stratis Ioannidis1 , Yanzhi Wang1 , Jennifer Dy1
1
Northeastern University, 2 College of William and Mary
{zhan.zhe, gong.yifa, geng.yuan, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu,
{zifengwang, jian, ioannidis, jdy}@ece.neu.edu,
wniu@email.wm.edu, bren@cs.wm.edu

Abstract
Existing work in continual learning (CL) focuses on mitigating catastrophic forgetting, i.e., model performance deterioration on past tasks when learning a new
task. However, the training efficiency of a CL system is under-investigated, which
limits the real-world application of CL systems under resource-limited scenarios.
In this work, we propose a novel framework called Sparse Continual Learning
(SparCL), which is the first study that leverages sparsity to enable cost-effective
continual learning on edge devices. SparCL achieves both training acceleration
and accuracy preservation through the synergy of three aspects: weight sparsity,
data efficiency, and gradient sparsity. Specifically, we propose task-aware dynamic
masking (TDM) to learn a sparse network throughout the entire CL process, dynamic data removal (DDR) to remove less informative training data, and dynamic
gradient masking (DGM) to sparsify the gradient updates. Each of them not only
improves efficiency, but also further mitigates catastrophic forgetting. SparCL
consistently improves the training efficiency of existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) CL
methods by at most 23⇥ less training FLOPs, and, surprisingly, further improves
the SOTA accuracy by at most 1.7%. SparCL also outperforms competitive baselines obtained from adapting SOTA sparse training methods to the CL setting in
both efficiency and accuracy. We also evaluate the effectiveness of SparCL on a
real mobile phone, further indicating the practical potential of our method.

1

Introduction

The objective of Continual Learning (CL) is to enable an intelligent system to accumulate knowledge
from a sequence of tasks, such that it exhibits satisfying performance on both old and new tasks [32].
Recent methods mostly focus on addressing the catastrophic forgetting [43] problem – learning model
tends to suffer performance deterioration on previously seen tasks. However, in the real world, when
CL applications are deployed in resource-limited platforms [48] such as edge devices, the learning
efficiency, w.r.t. both training speed and memory footprint, are also crucial metrics of interest, yet
they are rarely explored in prior CL works.
Existing CL methods can be categorized into regularization-based [2, 32, 37, 68], rehearsal-based [8,
12, 50, 61], and architecture-based [31, 42, 52, 58, 59, 70]. Both regularization- and rehearsal-based
methods directly train a dense model, which might be over-parameterized even for the union of all
tasks [19, 39]. Though several architecture-based methods [51, 57, 64] start with a sparse sub-network
from the dense model, they still grow the model size progressively to learn emerging tasks. The
aforementioned methods, although striving for greater performance with less forgetting, still introduce
significant memory and computation overhead during the whole CL process.
⇤

Both authors contributed equally to this work

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

