Joint Entropy Search
for Maximally-Informed Bayesian Optimization

Carl Hvarfner
carl.hvarfner@cs.lth.se
Lund University

Frank Hutter
fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de
University of Freiburg
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

Luigi Nardi
luigi.nardi@cs.lth.se
Lund University
Stanford University
DBtune

Abstract
Information-theoretic Bayesian optimization techniques have become popular for
optimizing expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions due to their non-myopic qualities. Entropy Search and Predictive Entropy Search both consider the entropy over
the optimum in the input space, while the recent Max-value Entropy Search considers the entropy over the optimal value in the output space. We propose Joint Entropy
Search (JES), a novel information-theoretic acquisition function that considers an
entirely new quantity, namely the entropy over the joint optimal probability density
over both input and output space. To incorporate this information, we consider the
reduction in entropy from conditioning on fantasized optimal input/output pairs.
The resulting approach primarily relies on standard GP machinery and removes
complex approximations typically associated with information-theoretic methods.
With minimal computational overhead, JES shows superior decision-making, and
yields state-of-the-art performance for information-theoretic approaches across a
wide suite of tasks. As a light-weight approach with superior results, JES provides
a new go-to acquisition function for Bayesian optimization.

1

Introduction

The optimization of expensive black-box functions is a prominent task, arising across a wide range
of applications. Bayesian optimization (BO) [25, 35] is a sample-efficient approach, and has been
successfully applied to various problems, including machine learning hyperparameter optimization [2,
20, 33, 37], robotics [3, 6, 23, 24], hardware design [11, 27], and tuning reinforcement learning
agents like AlphaGo [7]. In BO, a probabilistic surrogate model is used for modeling the (unknown)
objective. The selection policy employed by the BO algorithm is dictated by an acquisition function,
which draws on the uncertainty of the surrogate to guide the selection of the next query.
The choice of acquisition function is significant for the success of the BO algorithm. A popular line
of acquisition functions takes an information-theoretic angle, and considers the expected information
gain regarding the location of the optimum that is obtained from an upcoming query. Entropy Search
(ES) [15], Predictive Entropy Search (PES) [16] and the earlier work of IAGO [46] select queries
by maximizing this quantity. While ES and PES are efficient in the number of queries to optimize
the objective, they both require significant computational effort and complex approximations of the
expected information gain, which impacts their performance and practical use [16, 47].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

