INRAS: Implicit Neural Representation for Audio
Scenes
Kun Su ∗†

Mingfei Chen ∗†

Eli Shlizerman ‡†§

Emitter
Source Sound

*

Listener

INRAS
Surface
Points

Spatial Sound

Binaural
Impulse Response

Figure 1: INRAS learns an implicit neural representation for audio scenes such that given the
geometry of a scene, emitter and listener positions, INRAS renders the sound perceived by the
listener. See supplementary video of demonstration examples of spatial sound rendering.

Abstract
The spatial acoustic information of a scene, i.e., how sounds emitted from a particular location in the scene are perceived in another location, is key for immersive
scene modeling. Robust representation of scene’s acoustics can be formulated
through a continuous field formulation along with impulse responses varied by
emitter-listener locations. The impulse responses are then used to render sounds
perceived by the listener. While such representation is advantageous, parameterization of impulse responses for generic scenes presents itself as a challenge. Indeed,
traditional pre-computation methods have only implemented parameterization at
discrete probe points and require large storage, while other existing methods such
as geometry-based sound simulations still suffer from inability to simulate all
wave-based sound effects. In this work, we introduce a novel neural network for
light-weight Implicit Neural Representation for Audio Scenes (INRAS), which
can render a high fidelity time-domain impulse responses at any arbitrary emitterlistener positions by learning a continuous implicit function. INRAS disentangles
scene’s geometry features with three modules to generate independent features for
the emitter, the geometry of the scene, and the listener respectively. These lead to
an efficient reuse of scene-dependent features and support effective multi-condition
training for multiple scenes. Our experimental results show that INRAS outperforms existing approaches for representation and rendering of sounds for varying
emitter-listener locations in all aspects, including the impulse response quality,
inference speed, and storage requirements.
∗

These authors contributed equally.
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
‡
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
§
Corresponding author: shlizee@uw.edu
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

