Variance Reduced ProxSkip: Algorithm, Theory
and Application to Federated Learning

Grigory Malinovsky
Kai Yi
KAUST
KAUST
grigory.malinovsky@kaust.edu.sa
kai.yi@kaust.edu.sa
Peter Richtárik
KAUST
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We study distributed optimization methods based on the local training (LT)
paradigm: achieving communication efficiency by performing richer local gradientbased training on the clients before parameter averaging. Looking back at the
progress of the field, we identify 5 generations of LT methods: 1) heuristic, 2)
homogeneous, 3) sublinear, 4) linear, and 5) accelerated. The 5th generation,
initiated by the ProxSkip method of Mishchenko et al. [2022] and its analysis,
is characterized by the first theoretical confirmation that LT is a communication
acceleration mechanism. Inspired by this recent progress, we contribute to the 5th
generation of LT methods by showing that it is possible to enhance them further
using variance reduction. While all previous theoretical results for LT methods
ignore the cost of local work altogether, and are framed purely in terms of the
number of communication rounds, we show that our methods can be substantially
faster in terms of the total training cost than the state-of-the-art method ProxSkip in
theory and practice in the regime when local computation is sufficiently expensive.
We characterize this threshold theoretically, and confirm our theoretical predictions
with empirical results.

1

Introduction

Announced in April 2017 in a Google AI blog [McMahan and Ramage, 2017], and citing four
foundational papers [Konečný et al., 2016b,a, McMahan et al., 2017, Bonawitz et al., 2017] of
what was to become a new and rapidly growing interdisciplinary field, federated learning (FL)
constitutes a novel paradigm for training supervised machine learning models. The key idea is the
acknowledgement that increasing amounts of data are being captured and stored on edge devices,
such as mobile phones, sensors and hospital workstations, and that moving the data to a datacenter
for centralized processing may be infeasible or undesirable for various reasons, including high energy
costs and data privacy concerns [Kairouz et al., 2019, Li et al., 2020a]. FL faces a multitude of
challenges which are being actively addressed by the research community.
1.1

Formalism

We study the standard optimization formulation of federated learning [Konečný et al., 2016a, McMahan et al., 2017, Kairouz et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2021] given by
min0 φ(x),

x∈Rd

φ(x) :=

M
X
ni
i=1

n

n

φi (x),

φi (x) :=

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

i
1 X
φij (x),
ni j=1

(1)

