Recipe for a General, Powerful, Scalable
Graph Transformer
Ladislav Rampášek⇤
Mila, Université de Montréal

Mikhail Galkin
Mila, McGill University

Vijay Prakash Dwivedi
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Guy Wolf
Mila, Université de Montréal

Anh Tuan Luu
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Dominique Beaini
Valence Discovery, Mila, Université de Montréal

Abstract
We propose a recipe on how to build a general, powerful, scalable (GPS) graph
Transformer with linear complexity and state-of-the-art results on a diverse set
of benchmarks. Graph Transformers (GTs) have gained popularity in the field of
graph representation learning with a variety of recent publications but they lack a
common foundation about what constitutes a good positional or structural encoding,
and what differentiates them. In this paper, we summarize the different types of
encodings with a clearer definition and categorize them as being local, global
or relative. The prior GTs are constrained to small graphs with a few hundred
nodes, here we propose the first architecture with a complexity linear in the number
of nodes and edges O(N + E) by decoupling the local real-edge aggregation
from the fully-connected Transformer. We argue that this decoupling does not
negatively affect the expressivity, with our architecture being a universal function
approximator on graphs. Our GPS recipe consists of choosing 3 main ingredients:
(i) positional/structural encoding, (ii) local message-passing mechanism, and (iii)
global attention mechanism. We provide a modular framework G RAPH GPS1 that
supports multiple types of encodings and that provides efficiency and scalability
both in small and large graphs. We test our architecture on 16 benchmarks and
show highly competitive results in all of them, show-casing the empirical benefits
gained by the modularity and the combination of different strategies.

1

Introduction

Graph Transformers (GTs) alleviate fundamental limitations pertaining to the sparse message passing
mechanism, e.g., over-smoothing [47], over-squashing [1], and expressiveness bounds [61, 45],
by allowing nodes to attend to all other nodes in a graph (global attention). This benefits several
real-world applications, such as modeling chemical interactions beyond the covalent bonds [63], or
graph-based robotic control [37]. Global attention, however, requires nodes to be better identifiable
within the graph and its substructures [14]. This has led to a flurry of recently proposed fullyconnected graph transformer models [14, 36, 63, 44, 31] as well as various positional encoding
schemes leveraging spectral features [14, 36, 39] and graph features [16, 9]. Furthermore, standard
⇤

1

To whom correspondence should be addressed: ladislav.rampasek@mila.quebec
The source code of G RAPH GPS is available at: https://github.com/rampasek/GraphGPS.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

