Nocturne: a scalable driving benchmark for bringing
multi-agent learning one step closer to the real world
Eugene Vinitsky⇤†
Meta AI, UC Berkeley
vinitsky.eugene@gmail.com

Brandon Amos
Meta AI
bda@fb.com

Nathan Lichtlé⇤
UC Berkeley
École des Ponts ParisTech
nathan.lichtle@gmail.com

Xiaomeng Yang⇤
Meta AI
yangxm@fb.com

Jakob Foerster
Univeristy of Oxford
jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce Nocturne, a new 2D driving simulator for investigating multi-agent
coordination under partial observability. The focus of Nocturne is to enable research
into inference and theory of mind in real-world multi-agent settings without the
computational overhead of computer vision and feature extraction from images.
Agents in this simulator only observe an obstructed view of the scene, mimicking
human visual sensing constraints. Unlike existing benchmarks that are bottlenecked
by rendering human-like observations directly using a camera input, Nocturne
uses efficient intersection methods to compute a vectorized set of visible features
in a C++ back-end, allowing the simulator to run at 2000+ steps-per-second.
Using open-source trajectory and map data, we construct a simulator to load and
replay arbitrary trajectories and scenes from real-world driving data. Using this
environment, we benchmark reinforcement-learning and imitation-learning agents
and demonstrate that the agents are quite far from human-level coordination ability
and deviate significantly from the expert trajectories. Code for Nocturne is available
at https://github.com/facebookresearch/nocturne.

1

Introduction

This paper presents Nocturne, a new simulator and benchmark for multi-agent driving under humanlike sensor uncertainty that is intended to aid the process of studying real-world multi-agent coordination and learning. Instead of combining the challenges of coordination with feature extraction from
images, Nocturne is a 2D simulator that generates vector representations of the set of objects and road
points that would be visible to an idealized human driver (see Fig. 1 for an example) and supports
head-tilt to acquire additional information about blind spots. In contrast to driving benchmarks that
achieve partial-observability by using a camera input, Nocturne uses efficient visibility-checking
methods and a C++ back-end to enable us to construct observations and step the dynamics of a single
agent at thousands of steps-per-second (see Appendix Sec. F for an exact analysis). This speed is
key to its use in multi-agent learning settings where frequently billions of environment interactions
are needed to learn performant agents [3, 20]. In contrast to many existing multi-agent learning
benchmarks, Nocturne is neither zero-sum nor fully-cooperative but mixed-motive, combining the
challenges of coordination and cooperation.
⇤
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

