A Non-Asymptotic Moreau Envelope Theory for
High-Dimensional Generalized Linear Models
Lijia Zhou⇤
University of Chicago
zlj@uchicago.edu

Frederic Koehler⇤
Stanford University
fkoehler@stanford.edu

Pragya Sur
Harvard University
pragya@fas.harvard.edu

Danica J. Sutherland
Nathan Srebro
University of British Columbia & Amii
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca
nati@ttic.edu
Collaboration on the Theoretical Foundations of Deep Learning (deepfoundations.ai)

Abstract
We prove a new generalization bound that shows for any class of linear predictors
in Gaussian space, the Rademacher complexity of the class and the training error
under any continuous loss ` can control the test error under all Moreau envelopes of
the loss `. We use our finite-sample bound to directly recover the “optimistic rate”
of Zhou et al. (2021) for linear regression with the square loss, which is known to be
tight for minimal `2 -norm interpolation, but we also handle more general settings
where the label is generated by a potentially misspecified multi-index model. The
same argument can analyze noisy interpolation of max-margin classifiers through
the squared hinge loss, and establishes consistency results in spiked-covariance
settings. More generally, when the loss is only assumed to be Lipschitz, our bound
effectively improves Talagrand’s well-known contraction lemma by a factor of
two, and we prove uniform convergence of interpolators (Koehler et al. 2021)
for all smooth, non-negative losses. Finally, we show that application of our
generalization bound using localized Gaussian width will generally be sharp for
empirical risk minimizers, establishing a non-asymptotic Moreau envelope theory
for generalization that applies outside of proportional scaling regimes, handles
model misspecification, and complements existing asymptotic Moreau envelope
theories for M-estimation.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models often contain more parameters than the number of training samples. Despite the capacity to overfit, training these models without explicit regularization has been
empirically shown to achieve good generalization performance (Neyshabur et al. 2015; C. Zhang
et al. 2017; Belkin et al. 2019). On the theoretical side, the study of minimal-norm interpolation has
revealed fascinating phenomena that challenge traditional understandings of machine learning.
We now have a better understanding of how properties of the data distribution and algorithmic bias
can affect generalization in high-dimensional linear regression. For example, data with a spiked
covariance structure can ensure that the test error of ridge regression will be approximately constant
once the regularization strength is small enough for the model to fit the signal (Zhou et al. 2021;
Tsigler and Bartlett 2020), contradicting the classical U-shaped curve expected from arguments about
the bias-variance tradeoff. Surprisingly, even when the signal is sparse, the risk of the minimal-`1
norm interpolator can be shown to converge much slower to the Bayes risk than the minimal-`2
⇤

These authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

