Deep Bidirectional Language-Knowledge Graph
Pretraining
Michihiro Yasunaga,1 Antoine Bosselut,2 Hongyu Ren,1 Xikun Zhang1
Christopher D Manning,1 Percy Liang,1⇤ Jure Leskovec1⇤
1
Stanford University 2 EPFL ⇤ Equal senior authorship
{myasu,antoineb,hyren,xikunz2,manning,pliang,jure}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Pretraining a language model (LM) on text has been shown to help various downstream NLP tasks. Recent works show that a knowledge graph (KG) can complement text data, offering structured background knowledge that provides a useful
scaffold for reasoning. However, these works are not pretrained to learn a deep
fusion of the two modalities at scale, limiting the potential to acquire fully joint
representations of text and KG. Here we propose D RAGON (Deep Bidirectional
Language-Knowledge Graph Pretraining), a self-supervised method to pretrain
a deeply joint language-knowledge foundation model from text and KG at scale.
Specifically, our model takes pairs of text segments and relevant KG subgraphs
as input and bidirectionally fuses information from both modalities. We pretrain
this model by unifying two self-supervised reasoning tasks, masked language modeling and KG link prediction. D RAGON outperforms existing LM and LM+KG
models on diverse downstream tasks including question answering across general and biomedical domains, with +5% absolute gain on average. In particular,
D RAGON achieves strong performance on complex reasoning about language and
knowledge (+10% on questions involving long contexts or multi-step reasoning)
and low-resource QA (+8% on OBQA and RiddleSense), and new state-of-the-art
results on various BioNLP tasks. Our code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/michiyasunaga/dragon.

1

Introduction

Pretraining learns self-supervised representations from massive raw data to help various downstream
tasks [1]. Language models (LMs) pretrained on large amounts of text data, such as BERT [2] and
GPTs [3], have shown strong performance on many natural language processing (NLP) tasks. The
success of these models comes from deeply interactive (contextualized) representations of input
tokens learned at scale via self-supervision [2, 4]. Meanwhile, large knowledge graphs (KGs), such
as Freebase [5], Wikidata [6] and ConceptNet [7], can provide complementary information to text
data. KGs offer structured background knowledge by representing entities as nodes and relations
between them as edges, and also offer scaffolds for structured, multi-step reasoning about entities
[8, 9, 10, 11] (§3.4.1). The dual strengths of text data and KGs motivate research in pretraining
deeply interactive representations of the two modalities at scale.
How to effectively combine text and KGs for pretraining is an open problem and presents challenges.
Given text and KG, we need both (i) a deeply bidirectional model for the two modalities to interact,
and (ii) a self-supervised objective to learn joint reasoning over text and KG at scale. Several existing
works [12, 13, 14, 15, 16] propose methods for self-supervised pretraining, but they fuse text and KG
in a shallow or uni-directional manner. Another line of work [8, 9] proposes bidirectional models for
text and KG, but these models focus on finetuning on labeled downstream tasks and do not perform
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

