Fast Instrument Learning with Faster Rates
Ziyu Wang, Yuhao Zhou, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, Tsinghua University
{wzy196,yuhaoz.cs}@gmail.com, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We investigate nonlinear instrumental variable (IV) regression given highdimensional instruments. We propose a simple algorithm which combines kernelized IV methods and an arbitrary, adaptive regression algorithm, accessed as
a black box. Our algorithm enjoys faster-rate convergence and adapts to the dimensionality of informative latent features, while avoiding an expensive minimax
optimization procedure, which has been necessary to establish similar guarantees.
It further brings the benefit of flexible machine learning models to quasi-Bayesian
uncertainty quantification, likelihood-based model selection, and model averaging.
Simulation studies demonstrate the competitive performance of our method.

1

Introduction

Instrumental variable (IV) analysis is widely used for causal inference [1–3]. Given confounded
observational data, IV analysis identifies the causal effect through the use of instruments. Nonlinear
IV regression is typically defined by the following conditional moment restrictions (CMRs):
E(y − f0 (x) | z) = 0

a.s. [P (dz)]

(1)

where f0 is the causal effect function of interest, and x, y, z denote the observed treatment, response
and instrument, respectively. Similar CMR problems also appear in other applications of causal
statistics and machine learning [see, e.g., 4, 5, for examples].
Starting from [6], recent works have demonstrated great promise in applying flexible machine learning
(ML) methods to IV regression. Modern ML methods are appealing due to their adaptivity to the
informative latent structure in data [7]: they may adapt to the low dimensionality of the informative
latent features even if the observed input is high-dimensional and its signal-to-noise ratio is low.
Sample complexity gaps have been established in such settings, between deep models based on neural
networks (NNs) or trees, and linear models such as fixed-form kernels [8–10]. In IV regression, such
adaptivity will be highly desirable when the observed instruments are high-dimensional, which is
prevalent in applications such as genomics [11], and may also arise from the general desire to use
structured data as instrument. Following previous work in the parametric setting [12, 13], we refer to
this problem of learning informative latents in instruments as instrument learning. It generalizes the
classical problem of instrument selection [14–16].
Comparing with standard supervised learning, IV regression is more challenging, due to the need to
estimate a conditional expectation operator which defines (1). Consequently, establishing adaptivity
guarantees becomes more difficult. While many recent works have demonstrated promising empirical
results using deep models, they are often used as heuristics [e.g., 6], or justified with crude slow-rate
analyses, which establish convergence rates that saturate at Ω(n−1/4 ) [e.g., 17]. This is in contrast
to faster rates which approach n−1/2 as the regularity of model improves. The only exception is
∗

JZ is the corresponding author. Code available at https://github.com/meta-inf/fil.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

