ElasticMVS: Learning elastic part representation for
self-supervised multi-view stereopsis

Jinzhi Zhang1,2∗ , Ruofan Tang1,3 , Zheng Cao4 , Jing Xiao5 , Ruqi Huang2§ and Lu Fang1§
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School
3
Dept. of Automation, Tsinghua University, 4 BirenTech Research, 5 Pingan Group
∗

zjz22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised multi-view stereopsis (MVS) attracts increasing attention for learning dense surface predictions from only a set of images without onerous groundtruth 3D training data for supervision. However, existing methods highly rely on
the local photometric consistency, which fail to identify accurately dense correspondence in broad textureless or reflectant areas. In this paper, we show that geometric
proximity such as surface connectedness and occlusion boundaries implicitly inferred from images could serve as reliable guidance for pixel-wise multi-view
correspondences. With this insight, we present a novel elastic part representation,
which encodes physically-connected part segmentations with elastically-varying
scales, shapes and boundaries. Meanwhile, a self-supervised MVS framework
namely ElasticMVS is proposed to learn the representation and estimate per-view
depth following a part-aware propagation and evaluation scheme. Specifically, the
pixel-wise part representation is trained by a contrastive learning-based strategy,
which increases the representation compactness in geometrically concentrated areas
and contrasts otherwise. ElasticMVS iteratively optimizes a part-level consistency
loss and a surface smoothness loss, based on a set of depth hypotheses propagated from the geometrically concentrated parts. Extensive evaluations convey the
superiority of ElasticMVS in the reconstruction completeness and accuracy, as
well as the efficiency and scalability. Particularly, for the challenging large-scale
reconstruction benchmark, ElasticMVS demonstrates significant performance gain
over both the supervised and self-supervised approaches. Code is avaliable at
https://thu-luvision.github.io.

1

Introduction

Given a set of images with known camera parameters, multi-view stereopsis (MVS) aims to reconstruct the dense and accurate geometry of the scene. Existing learning-based approaches [47],
typically being cast as an end-to-end depth regression task, outperform the traditional geometry-based
ones [34]. However, their generalization ability in open environments is severely hindered by the
availability of the onerous laser-scanned 3D training data. Self-supervised MVS [24, 11] lifts such
limitation by leveraging the multi-view photometric consistency in place of the supervisory signals.
Unfortunately, the pixel-level photometric regularization is susceptible to textureless patterns and
illumination variations, leading to incomplete and inaccurate reconstructions, especially in outdoor
environments.
§

Corresponding Author: ruqihuang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn, luvision.net

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

