Asymptotic Behaviors of Projected Stochastic
Approximation: A Jump Diffusion Perspective

Jiadong Liang
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
jdliang@pku.edu.cn

Yuze Han
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
hanyuze97@pku.edu.cn

Xiang Li
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
lx10077@pku.edu.cn

Zhihua Zhang
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper we consider linearly constrained stochastic approximation problems with federated learning as a special case. We propose a loopless projection
stochastic approximation algorithm (LPSA) to ensure feasibility by performing the
projection with probability pn at the n-th iteration. Considering a specific family of
the probability pn and step size ηn , we analyze our algorithm from an asymptotic
and continuous perspective. Using a novel jump diffusion approximation, we
show that the trajectories connecting those properly rescaled last iterates weakly
converge to the solution of specific stochastic differential equations (SDEs). By analyzing SDEs, we identify the asymptotic behaviors of LPSA for different choices
of (pn , ηn ). We find the algorithm presents an intriguing asymptotic bias-variance
trade-off according to the relative magnitude of pn w.r.t. ηn . It brings insights on
how to choose appropriate {(pn , ηn )}n≥1 to minimize the projection complexity.

1

Introduction

Recently, a novel distributed computing paradigm that called Federated Learning (FL) has been
proposed for collaboratively training a global model from data that remote clients hold [31]. As a
standard optimization algorithm in FL, Local SGD alternates between running stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) independently in parallel on different clients and averaging the sequences only once
in a while. Put simply, it learns a shared global model via infrequent communication. Empirical
investigation finds its superior performance in communication efficiency [30] and theoretical analysis
toward it has already provided a complete picture [26, 1, 15, 42, 43, 15]. Among them, Li et al. [27]
establishes a functional CLT that Local SGD with Polyak-Ruppert averaging simultaneously achieves
the optimal asymptotic variance and diminishing average communication frequency. However, they
are all derived from a discrete perspective.
The use of a continuous-time stochastic process to characterize the entire trajectory of a discrete
stochastic algorithm has been witnessed progresses in recent years, and we call it diffusion approximation. The continuous approach has advantages in its rich toolbox and can provide intuitive
explanation for uncanny phenomena that are intractable to analyze in discrete cases. It can also
motivate new optimization algorithms and statistical inference methods. Current works applying
diffusion approximation to stochastic optimization algorithms can be roughly divided into two classes.
The first one is to interest the optimization algorithm as a numerical discretization of a specific
stochastic differential equation (SDE) [14] in a finite time interval [0, T ]. When the step size η is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

