AnoShift: A Distribution Shift Benchmark for
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Marius Dragoi„∗1 , Elena Burceanu„∗1,2 , Emanuela Haller„∗1,3 , Andrei Manolache1 , and Florin Brad1
1

Bitdefender, Romania
University of Bucharest
3
Politehnica University of Bucharest
2

{mdragoi,eburceanu,ehaller,amanolache,fbrad}@bitdefender.com

Abstract
Analyzing the distribution shift of data is a growing research direction in nowadays
Machine Learning (ML), leading to emerging new benchmarks that focus on
providing a suitable scenario for studying the generalization properties of ML
models. The existing benchmarks are focused on supervised learning, and to the
best of our knowledge, there is none for unsupervised learning. Therefore, we
introduce an unsupervised anomaly detection benchmark with data that shifts over
time, built over Kyoto-2006+, a traffic dataset for network intrusion detection.
This type of data meets the premise of shifting the input distribution: it covers a
large time span (10 years), with naturally occurring changes over time (e.g. users
modifying their behavior patterns, and software updates). We first highlight the
non-stationary nature of the data, using a basic per-feature analysis, t-SNE, and
an Optimal Transport approach for measuring the overall distribution distances
between years. Next, we propose AnoShift, a protocol splitting the data in IID,
NEAR, and FAR testing splits. We validate the performance degradation over
time with diverse models, ranging from classical approaches to deep learning.
Finally, we show that by acknowledging the distribution shift problem and properly
addressing it, the performance can be improved compared to the classical training
which assumes independent and identically distributed data (on average, by up to
3% for our approach). Dataset and code are available at https://github.com/
bit-ml/AnoShift/.

1

Introduction

Analyzing and developing Machine Learning algorithms under gradual distribution shifts is a problem
of high interest in the research community. There is a growing enthusiasm for building benchmarks
over existing or new datasets [26, 22, 44, 6, 20], that formulate a setup for isolating the shifting aspect
and create a better ground for this research field. A better understanding of the distribution shift
problem might lead to findings of underlying fundamental aspects, shedding new light on robustness
and generalization problems. We argue that the distribution shift occurs naturally and gradually
in a continuous data stream (e.g. monitoring network traffic), allowing an in-depth analysis of the
problem. On the other side, artificially generated scenarios usually exhibit sudden changes that do
not simulate the natural shift problem. Yet, the annotation process for streaming data is quite difficult
and expensive, considering the massive amount of data.
∗

Equal contribution. 1 Bitdefender Theoretical Research Team: https://bit-ml.github.io/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

