MAgNet: Mesh Agnostic Neural PDE Solver

Oussama Boussif
Mila - Québec AI Institute
DIRO, Université de Montréal
oussama.boussif@mila.quebec

Dan Assouline
Mila - Québec AI Institute
DIRO, Université de Montréal
dan.assouline@mila.quebec

Loubna Benabbou
Université du Québec à Rimouski
Loubna_Benabbou@uqar.ca

Yoshua Bengio∗
Mila - Québec AI Institute
DIRO, Université de Montréal
yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec

Abstract
The computational complexity of classical numerical methods for solving Partial
Differential Equations (PDE) scales significantly as the resolution increases. As
an important example, climate predictions require fine spatio-temporal resolutions
to resolve all turbulent scales in the fluid simulations. This makes the task of
accurately resolving these scales computationally out of reach even with modern
supercomputers. As a result, current numerical modelers solve PDEs on grids
that are too coarse (3km to 200km on each side), which hinders the accuracy and
usefulness of the predictions. In this paper, we leverage the recent advances in
Implicit Neural Representations (INR) to design a novel architecture that predicts
the spatially continuous solution of a PDE given a spatial position query. By
augmenting coordinate-based architectures with Graph Neural Networks (GNN),
we enable zero-shot generalization to new non-uniform meshes and long-term
predictions up to 250 frames ahead that are physically consistent. Our Mesh
Agnostic Neural PDE Solver (MAgNet) is able to make accurate predictions across
a variety of PDE simulation datasets and compares favorably with existing baselines.
Moreover, MAgNet generalizes well to different meshes and resolutions up to four
times those trained on2 .

1

Introduction

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) describe the continuous evolution of multiple variables, e.g.
over time and/or space. They arise everywhere in physics, from quantum mechanics to heat transfer
and have several engineering applications in fluid and solid mechanics. However, most PDEs can’t
be solved analytically, so it is necessary to resort to numerical methods. Since the introduction of
computers, many numerical approximations were implemented, and new fields emerged such as
Computational Fluid Mechanics (CFD) (Richardson and Lynch, 2007). The most famous numerical
approximation scheme is the Finite Element Method (FEM) (Courant, 1943; Hrennikoff, 1941). In the
FEM, the PDE is discretized along with its domain, and the problem is transformed into solving a set
of matrix equations. However, the computational complexity scales significantly with the resolution.
For climate predictions, this number can be quite significant if the desired error is to be reached,
which renders its use impractical.
∗
2

CIFAR Senior Fellow
Code and dataset can be found on: https://github.com/jaggbow/magnet

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

