Posted Pricing and Dynamic Prior-independent
Mechanisms with Value Maximizers
Yuan Deng
Google Research
dengyuan@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Hanrui Zhang
Carnegie Mellon University
hanruiz1@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study posted price auctions and dynamic prior-independent mechanisms for
(ROI-constrained) value maximizers. In contrast to classic (quasi-linear) utility
maximizers, these agents aim to maximize their total value subject to a minimum
ratio of value per unit of payment made. When personalized posted prices are
allowed, posted price auctions for value maximizers can be reduced to posted
price auctions for utility maximizers. However, for anonymous posted prices, the
well-known 12 approximation for utility maximizers is impossible for value maximizers and we provide a posted price mechanism with 12 (1 − 1/e) approximation.
Moreover, we demonstrate how to apply our results to design prior-independent
mechanisms in a dynamic environment; and to the best of our knowledge, this gives
the first constant revenue approximation with multiple value maximizers. Finally,
we provide an extension to combinatorial auctions with submodular / XOS agents.

1

Introduction

In online advertising, the growing adoption of autobidding witnesses the emergence of value maximizing bidding, which has become the prevalent behavior model for bidding agents in recent years
[Aggarwal et al., 2019, Deng et al., 2021a]. Instead of specifying their bids per auction opportunities,
the advertisers only need to report their high-level objectives and/or constraints to the bidding agents
and the bidding agents bid on behalf of the advertisers to maximizes their objectives subject to the
constraints. A common type of value maximizing bidding is return on investment (ROI)-constrained
value-maximizers a.k.a., target CPA (cost per acquisition) and target ROAS (return on ad spend)
auto-bidding. For ROI-constrained value-maximizers, their objective is to maximize their total value
subject to a constraint specifying a minimum ratio of value per unit of payment made.
In theory, there is already a fairly complete understanding of mechanism design with ROI-constrained
value-maximizers. With single-parameter buyers and publicly known target ROI ratios, Balseiro et al.
[2021b] show that the VCG auction with properly scaled payments extracts the full optimal welfare
as revenue, which is arguably the strongest guarantee one can think of. In order to apply this result,
however, there are two major issues:
Firstly, the incentive-compatibility of this optimal mechanism is quite sensitive to the payment
scalars, which in turn require prior knowledge to compute. Moreover, when incentive-compatibility
is compromised because of (even slightly) inaccurate or misaligned prior beliefs, there is no known
way to predict the buyers’ behavior, so any guarantee of the mechanism is completely lost. In order to
tackle this issue, Balseiro et al. [2021a] propose robust auction formats that are approximately optimal
given “signals” that are close enough to the buyers’ true values. But what can we do when there is no
such signal available? Another recent attempt addresses the prior dependence issues by designing
prior-independent dynamic auction mechanism with a single ROI-constrained value-maximizer
[Deng and Zhang, 2021]. Such a mechanism is useful when the buyer’ value distribution is unknown
to the seller, and must be learned over time — which is the case in many important application
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

