Neural Surface Reconstruction of Dynamic Scenes
with Monocular RGB-D Camera
Hongrui Cai† , Wanquan Feng† , Xuetao Feng‡ , Yan Wang‡ , Juyong Zhang†∗
†

University of Science and Technology of China ‡ Alibaba Group
https://ustc3dv.github.io/ndr

Abstract
We propose Neural-DynamicReconstruction (NDR), a template-free method to
recover high-fidelity geometry and motions of a dynamic scene from a monocular
RGB-D camera. In NDR, we adopt the neural implicit function for surface representation and rendering such that the captured color and depth can be fully utilized
to jointly optimize the surface and deformations. To represent and constrain the
non-rigid deformations, we propose a novel neural invertible deforming network
such that the cycle consistency between arbitrary two frames is automatically
satisfied. Considering that the surface topology of dynamic scene might change
over time, we employ a topology-aware strategy to construct the topology-variant
correspondence for the fused frames. NDR also further refines the camera poses
in a global optimization manner. Experiments on public datasets and our collected dataset demonstrate that NDR outperforms existing monocular dynamic
reconstruction methods.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing 3D geometry shape, texture and motions of the dynamic scene from a monocular video
is a classical and challenging problem in computer vision. It has broad applications in many areas
like virtual and augmented reality. Although existing methods [63, 65] have demonstrated impressive
reconstruction results for dynamic scenes only with 2D images, they are still difficult to recover
high-fidelity geometry shapes, especially for some casually captured data as abundant potential
solutions exist without depth constraints. Only with 2D measurements, dynamic reconstruction
methods require that motions of interested object hold in a nearby z-plane. Meanwhile, it is difficult
to construct reliable correspondences in areas with weak texture, which causes error accumulation in
the canonical space.
To solve this under-constrained problem, some methods propose to utilize shape priors for some
special object types. For example, category-specific parametric shape models like 3DMM [6],
SMPL [41] and SMAL [72] are first constructed and then used to help the reconstruction. However,
templated-based methods could not generalize to unknown object types. On the other hand, some
methods utilize annotations, like keypoints and optical flow, obtained from manual annotators
or off-the-shelf tools [31, 33, 63, 65]. The motion trajectories of sparse or dense 2D points can
effectively help recover the exact motion of the whole structure. However, it needs human labeling
for supervision or highly depends on the quality of learned priors from a large-scale dataset.
One straightforward solution to this under-constrained problem is to reconstruct the interested object
based on observations from RGB-D cameras like Microsoft Kinect [69] and Apple iPhone X. Existing
fusion-based methods [44, 27, 54] utilize a dense non-rigid warp field and a canonical truncated signed
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

