A Multi-Task Benchmark for Korean Legal Language
Understanding and Judgement Prediction
Wonseok Hwanga

Dongjun Leea

Kyoungyeon Choa Hanuhl Leea Minjoon Seoa,b
a
LBox
b
KAIST
{wonseok.hwang, dongjun.lee, kycho, leehanuhl}@lbox.kr
minjoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The recent advances of deep learning have dramatically changed how machine
learning, especially in the domain of natural language processing, can be applied to
legal domain. However, this shift to the data-driven approaches calls for larger and
more diverse datasets, which are nevertheless still small in number, especially in
non-English languages. Here we present the first large-scale benchmark of Korean
legal AI datasets, LB OX O PEN, that consists of one legal corpus, two classification
tasks, two legal judgement prediction (LJP) tasks, and one summarization task.
The legal corpus consists of 147k Korean precedents (259M tokens), of which 63k
are sentenced in last 4 years and 96k are from the first and the second level courts
in which factual issues are reviewed. The two classification tasks are case names
(11.3k) and statutes (2.8k) prediction from the factual description of individual
cases. The LJP tasks consist of (1) 10.5k criminal examples where the model is
asked to predict fine amount, imprisonment with labor, and imprisonment without
labor ranges for the given facts, and (2) 4.7k civil examples where the inputs are
facts and claim for relief and outputs are the degrees of claim acceptance. The
summarization task consists of the Supreme Court precedents and the corresponding
summaries (20k). We also release realistic variants of the datasets by extending the
domain (1) to infrequent case categories in case name (31k examples) and statute
(17.7k) classification tasks, and (2) to long input sequences in the summarization
task (51k). Finally, we release LC UBE, the first Korean legal language model
trained on the legal corpus from this study. Given the uniqueness of the Law of
South Korea and the diversity of the legal tasks covered in this work, we believe
that LB OX O PEN contributes to the multilinguality of global legal research. LB OX
O PEN and LC UBE will be publicly available1 .

1

Introduction

The application of artificial intelligence in a legal domain has a long history, dating back to 1980s
(Ashley, 2017). Although previous legal expert systems based on rules and domain knowledges
showed some useful results on certain legal areas such as settlement decisions of product liability
disputes (Waterman and Peterson, 1981), such system could not be easily extended beyond narrow
domains. More recently, the advances in deep learning are fundamentally changing how and where
machine learning can be applied in legal domain, such as legal judgement prediction (Chalkidis et al.,
2019; Ma et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2020a; Xiao et al., 2018), legal content generation (Wu et al.,
2020; Tonguz et al., 2021), legal text classification (Chalkidis et al., 2021; Chalkidis and Søgaard,
2022; Hendrycks et al., 2021), legal event detection (Yao et al., 2022), legal information extraction
1

https://github.com/lbox-kr/lbox-open

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

