Generalization Gap in Amortized Inference

Mingtian Zhang

Peter Hayes

David Barber

Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University College London
{m.zhang,p.hayes,d.barber}@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
The ability of likelihood-based probabilistic models to generalize to unseen data
is central to many machine learning applications such as lossless compression. In
this work, we study the generalization of a popular class of probabilistic model the Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE). We discuss the two generalization gaps that
affect VAEs and show that overfitting is usually dominated by amortized inference.
Based on this observation, we propose a new training objective that improves
the generalization of amortized inference. We demonstrate how our method can
improve performance in the context of image modeling and lossless compression.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic models have achieved great success in many machine learning applications [5, 3]. Given
a set of training data that are sampled from an underlying data distribution Xtrain = {x1 , · · · , xN } ∼
pd (x), the goal of probabilistic modelling is to approximate pd (x) with a model pθ (x). A principled
method to learn θ is to minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
KL(pd (x)||pθ (x)) = ⟨log pd (x)⟩pd (x) − ⟨log pθ (x)⟩pd (x) ,
(1)
R
where we use ⟨·⟩ to denote integration: ⟨f (x)⟩p(x) ≡ f (x)p(x)dx. The first term represents the
negative entropy of the data distribution −H(pd ) ≡ ⟨log pd (x)⟩pd (x) , which is a constant. The
second cross entropy term involves the integration over the unkown data distribution pd (x), which
can be approximated by the Monte-Carlo approximation using the training dataset Xtrain
N

1 X
⟨log pθ (x)⟩pd (x) ≈
log pθ (xn ).
N n=1

(2)

Therefore, estimating θ by minimizing the KL divergence is equivalent to Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (MLE) when N → ∞.
For a finite dataset, a common concern in both supervised and unsupervised learning is that the
probabilistic model may overfit to the training dataset Xtrain , degrading generalization performance [32]. The generalization performance in the unsupervised setting can be measured by the test
PM
1
′
′
′
likelihood [49]: M
n=1 log pθ (xm ), where Xtest = {x1 , . . . , xM } ∼ pd (x) is the test dataset. A
model that has overfit to the training dataset Xtrain generally results in a high training likelihood but
a low test likelihood. Although the test likelihood is a common evaluation criterion [36], the factors
that affect the generalization of unsupervised probabilistic models are less well studied in comparison
to supervised learning. We posit that this is because for common tasks, like sample generation
or representation learning, good generalization in terms of the test likelihood is not a sufficient
measure of performance. For example implicit models can generate sharp samples without having a
likelihood function [16, 2, 46] and representations learned by latent variable models can be arbitrarily
transformed without changing the likelihood [25]. However, in recent applications that use deep
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

