Instance-Dependent Near-Optimal Policy
Identification in Linear MDPs via Online Experiment
Design
Andrew Wagenmaker⇤ & Kevin Jamieson†
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

Abstract
While much progress has been made in understanding the minimax sample complexity of reinforcement learning (RL)—the complexity of learning on the “worstcase” instance—such measures of complexity often do not capture the true difficulty
of learning. In practice, on an “easy” instance, we might hope to achieve a complexity far better than that achievable on the worst-case instance. In this work we
seek to understand the “instance-dependent” complexity of learning near-optimal
policies (PAC RL) in the setting of RL with linear function approximation. We
propose an algorithm, P EDEL, which achieves a fine-grained instance-dependent
measure of complexity, the first of its kind in the RL with function approximation
setting, thereby capturing the difficulty of learning on each particular problem
instance. Through an explicit example, we show that P EDEL yields provable gains
over low-regret, minimax-optimal algorithms and that such algorithms are unable
to hit the instance-optimal rate. Our approach relies on a novel online experiment
design-based procedure which focuses the exploration budget on the “directions”
most relevant to learning a near-optimal policy, and may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

In the PAC (Probably Approximately Correct) reinforcement learning (RL) setting, an agent is tasked
with exploring an unknown environment in order to learn a policy which maximizes the amount of
reward collected. In general, we are interested in learning such a policy using as few interactions
with the environment (as small sample complexity) as possible. We might hope that the number of
samples needed would scale with the difficulty of identifying a near-optimal policy in our particular
environment. For example, in a “hard” environment, we would expect that more samples might be
required, while in an “easy” environment, fewer samples may be needed.
The RL community has tended to focus on developing algorithms which have near-optimal worstcase sample complexity—sample complexities that are only guaranteed to be optimal on “hard” instances. Such algorithms typically have complexities which scale, for example, as O(poly(d, H)/✏2 ),
for d the dimensionality of the environment, H the horizon, and ✏ the desired level of optimality.
While we may be able to show this complexity is optimal on a hard instance, it is unable to distinguish
between “hard” and “easy” problems. The scaling is identical for two environments as long as the
dimensionality and horizon of each are the same—no consideration is given to the actual difficulty
of the problem—and we therefore have no guarantee that our algorithm is solving the problem with
complexity scaling as the actual difficulty. Indeed, as recent work has shown (Wagenmaker et al.,
⇤
†

ajwagen@cs.washington.edu
jamieson@cs.washington.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

