ProtoX: Explaining a Reinforcement Learning Agent
via Prototyping

Ronilo J. Ragodos
Department of Business Analytics
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
ronilo-ragodos@uiowa.edu

Tong Wang ∗
Department of Business Analytics
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
tong-wang@uiowa.edu

Qihang Lin
Department of Business Analytics
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
qihang-lin@uiowa.edu

Xun Zhou
Department of Business Analytics
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
xun-zhou@uiowa.edu

Abstract
While deep reinforcement learning has proven to be successful in solving control
tasks, the “black-box” nature of an agent has received increasing concerns. We
propose a prototype-based post-hoc policy explainer, ProtoX, that explains a blackbox agent by prototyping the agent’s behaviors into scenarios, each represented
by a prototypical state. When learning prototypes, ProtoX considers both visual
similarity and scenario similarity. The latter is unique to the reinforcement learning
context, since it explains why the same action is taken in visually different states.
To teach ProtoX about visual similarity, we pre-train an encoder using contrastive
learning via self-supervised learning to recognize states as similar if they occur
close together in time and receive the same action from the black-box agent. We
then add an isometry layer to allow ProtoX to adapt scenario similarity to the
downstream task. ProtoX is trained via imitation learning using behavior cloning,
and thus requires no access to the environment or agent. In addition to explanation
fidelity, we design different prototype shaping terms in the objective function to
encourage better interpretability. We conduct various experiments to test ProtoX.
Results show that ProtoX achieved high fidelity to the original black-box agent
while providing meaningful and understandable explanations.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been widely used to solve various control problems such
as autonomous driving [1], gaming [2], etc. Despite superior performance, DRL agents are often
criticized for being “black-boxes” in nature and unable to provide human-understandable explanations
for their actions. Popular solutions to interpreting a black-box agent include attention-based methods
[3] and saliency maps [4, 5, 6]. These explanations, however, only inform users of where the agent
“looks”, but do not provide a more specific explanation for why an agent takes an action in a given
state. Some recent methods answer this question by formulating a classification problem and building
a decision tree from state information to predict an action [7]. However, tree-based models face the
limitation of feature representation, that they can only work with meaningful features in order to
∗

corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

