Asynchronous SGD Beats Minibatch SGD
Under Arbitrary Delays

Konstantin Mishchenko

Francis Bach

Mathieu Even

Blake Woodworth

DI ENS, Ecole normale supérieure,
Université PSL, CNRS, INRIA
75005 Paris, France

Abstract
The existing analysis of asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (SGD) degrades
dramatically when any delay is large, giving the impression that performance
depends primarily on the delay. On the contrary, we prove much better guarantees
for the same asynchronous SGD algorithm regardless of the delays in the gradients,
depending instead just on the number of parallel devices used to implement the
algorithm. Our guarantees are strictly better than the existing analyses, and we
also argue that asynchronous SGD outperforms synchronous minibatch SGD in the
settings we consider. For our analysis, we introduce a novel recursion based on
“virtual iterates” and delay-adaptive stepsizes, which allow us to derive state-of-theart guarantees for both convex and non-convex objectives.

1

Introduction

We consider solving stochastic optimization problems of the form
minx∈Rd {F (x) := Eξ∼D f (x; ξ)},

(1)

which includes machine learning (ML) training objectives, where f (x; ξ) represents the loss of a
model parameterized by x on the datum ξ. Depending on the application, D could represent a
finite dataset of size n or a population distribution. In recent years, such stochastic optimization
problems have continued to grow rapidly in size, both in terms of the dimension d of the optimization
variable—i.e., the number of model parameters in ML—and in terms of the quantity of data—i.e., the
number of samples ξ1 , . . . , ξn ∼ D being used. With d and n regularly reaching the tens or hundreds
of billions, it is increasingly necessary to use parallel optimization algorithms to handle the large
scale and to benefit from data stored on different machines.
There are many ways of employing parallelism to solve (1), but the most popular approaches in
practice are first-order methods based on stochastic gradient descent (SGD). At each iteration, SGD
employs stochastic estimates of ∇F to update the parameters as xk = xk−1 − γk ∇f (xk−1 ; ξk−1 )
for an i.i.d. sample ξk−1 ∼ D. Given M machines capable of computing these stochastic gradient
estimates ∇f (x; ξ) in parallel, one approach to parallelizing SGD is what we call “Minibatch SGD.”
This refers to a synchronous, parallel algorithm that dispatches the current parameters xk−1 to
each of the M machines, waits while they compute and communicate back their gradient estimates
PM
1
1
M
m
gk−1
, . . . , gk−1
, and then takes a minibatch SGD step xk = xk−1 − γk · M
m=1 gk−1 . This is a
natural idea with long history [16, 18, 55] and it is a commonly used in practice [e.g., 22]. However,
since Minibatch SGD waits for all M of the machines to finish computing their gradient estimates
before updating, it proceeds only at the speed of the slowest machine.
There are several possible sources of delays: nodes may have heterogeneous hardware with different
computational throughputs [23, 25], network latency can slow the communication of gradients, and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

