Towards Out-of-Distribution Sequential Event
Prediction: A Causal Treatment
Chenxiao Yang1 , Qitian Wu1 , Qingsong Wen2 , Zhiqiang Zhou2 , Liang Sun2 , Junchi Yan1⇤
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{chr26195,echo740,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{qingsong.wen,zhouzhiqiang.zzq,liang.sun}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
The goal of sequential event prediction is to estimate the next event based on a
sequence of historical events, with applications to sequential recommendation, user
behavior analysis and clinical treatment. In practice, the next-event prediction
models are trained with sequential data collected at one time and need to generalize
to newly arrived sequences in remote future, which requires models to handle
temporal distribution shift from training to testing. In this paper, we first take a
data-generating perspective to reveal a negative result that existing approaches
with maximum likelihood estimation would fail for distribution shift due to the
latent context confounder, i.e., the common cause for the historical events and the
next event. Then we devise a new learning objective based on backdoor adjustment and further harness variational inference to make it tractable for sequence
learning problems. On top of that, we propose a framework with hierarchical
branching structures for learning context-specific representations. Comprehensive
experiments on diverse tasks (e.g., sequential recommendation) demonstrate the
effectiveness, applicability and scalability of our method with various off-the-shelf
models as backbones.

1

Introduction

Real-world problem scenarios are flooded with sequential event data consisting of chronologically
arrived events which reflect certain behaviors, activities or responses. A typical example is user
activity prediction [56; 12; 62; 20; 44; 64] that aims to harness user’s recent activities to estimate
future ones, which could help downstream target advertisement in online platforms (e.g., e-commerce
or social networks). Predicting future events also plays a central role in some real situations such as
clinical treatment [3] for promoting social welfare.
A common nature of (sequential) event prediction lies in the different time intervals within which
training and testing data are generated. Namely, models trained with data collected at one time
are supposed to predict next event in the future [59; 36; 41] where the underlying data-generating
distributions may have gone through variation due to environmental changes. However, most existing
approaches [20; 14; 37; 24; 44; 39; 19; 18] overlook this issue in both problem formulation and
empirical evaluation, which may leave the real problems under-resolved with model mis-specification,
and result in over-estimation for model performance on real data.
As a concrete example in sequential recommenders [11], the data-generating distribution for user
clicking behaviors over items is highly dependent on user preferences that are normally correlated
⇤
The SJTU authors are also with MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, SJTU. Junchi Yan is the correspondence author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

