High-dimensional Asymptotics of Feature Learning:
How One Gradient Step Improves the Representation
Jimmy Ba1 , Murat A. Erdogdu1 , Taiji Suzuki2 , Zhichao Wang3 , Denny Wu1 , Greg Yang4
1

University of Toronto and Vector Institute, 2 University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP,
3
University of California, San Diego, 4 Microsoft Research AI
{jba,erdogdu,dennywu}@cs.toronto.edu, taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
zhw036@ucsd.edu, gregyang@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study the first gradient descent step on the first-layer parameters W in a twolayer neural network: f (x) = √1N a⊤ σ(W ⊤ x), where W ∈ Rd×N , a ∈ RN
arePrandomly initialized, and the training objective is the empirical MSE loss:
n
1
2
i=1 (f (xi ) − yi ) . In the proportional asymptotic limit where n, d, N → ∞
n
at the same rate, and an idealized student-teacher setting where the teacher f ∗ is
a single-index model, we compute the prediction risk of ridge regression on the
conjugate kernel after one gradient step on W with learning rate η. We consider
two scalings of the first step learning rate η. For small η, we establish a Gaussian
equivalence property for the trained feature map, and prove that the learned kernel
improves upon the initial random feature model, but cannot defeat the best linear
model on the input. Whereas for sufficiently large η, we prove that for certain f ∗ ,
the same ridge estimator on trained features can go beyond this “linear regime”
and outperform a wide range of (fixed) kernels. Our results demonstrate that even
one gradient step can lead to a considerable advantage over random features, and
highlight the role of learning rate scaling in the initial phase of training.

1

Introduction

We consider the training of a fully-connected two-layer neural network (NN) with N neurons,
N

1 X
1
fNN (x) = √
ai σ(⟨x, wi ⟩) = √ a⊤ σ(W ⊤ x),
N i=1
N

(1.1)

where x ∈ Rd , W ∈ Rd×N , a ∈ RN , σ is the nonlinear activation function applied entry-wise, and
the training objective is to minimize the empirical risk. Our analysis will be made in the proportional
asymptotic limit, i.e., the number of training data n, the input dimensionality d, and the number of
neurons N jointly tend to infinity. Intuitively, this regime reflects the setting where the network
width and data size are comparable, which is consistent with practical choices of model scaling.
When the first layer W is fixed and the second layer a is optimized, we arrive at a kernel model,
where the kernel defined by features x 7→ σ(W ⊤ x) (often called the hidden representation) is
referred to as the conjugate kernel (CK) [Nea95]. When W is randomly initialized, this model is an
example of the random features (RF) model [RR08], the training and test performance of which has
been extensively studied in the proportional limit [LLC18, MM22]. These precise characterizations
reveal interesting phenomena also present in practical deep learning [BHMM19].
However, RF models do not fully explain the empirical success of NNs: one crucial advantage of
deep learning is the ability to learn useful features [GDDM14, DCLT18] that “adapt” to the learning
problem [Suz18]. In fact, recent works have shown that such adaptivity enables NNs optimized by
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

