Identification, Amplification and Measurement: A
bridge to Gaussian Differential Privacy

Yi Liu
Department of Mathematical
and Statistical Sciences
University of Alberta
yliu16@ualberta.ca

Ke Sun
Department of Mathematical
and Statistical Sciences
University of Alberta
ksun6@ualberta.ca

Bei Jiang
Department of Mathematical
and Statistical Sciences
University of Alberta
bei1@ualberta.ca

Linglong Kong
Department of Mathematical
and Statistical Sciences
University of Alberta
lkong@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Gaussian differential privacy (GDP) is a single-parameter family of privacy notions
that provides coherent guarantees to avoid the exposure of sensitive individual
information. Despite the extra interpretability and tighter bounds under composition GDP provides, many widely used mechanisms (e.g., the Laplace mechanism)
inherently provide GDP guarantees but often fail to take advantage of this new
framework because their privacy guarantees were derived under a different background. In this paper, we study the asymptotic properties of privacy profiles and
develop a simple criterion to identify algorithms with GDP properties. We propose
an efficient method for GDP algorithms to narrow down possible values of an
optimal privacy measurement, µ with an arbitrarily small and quantifiable margin
of error. For non GDP algorithms, we provide a post-processing procedure that can
amplify existing privacy guarantees to meet the GDP condition. As applications,
we compare two single-parameter families of privacy notions, ϵ-DP, and µ-GDP,
and show that all ϵ-DP algorithms are intrinsically also GDP. Lastly, we show
that the combination of our measurement process and the composition theorem of
GDP is a powerful and convenient tool to handle compositions compared to the
traditional standard and advanced composition theorems.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen explosive growth in the research and application of data-driven machine
learning. While data fuels advancement in this unprecedented age of “big data”, concern for individual
privacy has deepened with the continued mining, transportation, and exchange of this new resource.
While expressions of privacy concerns can be traced back as early as 1969 [27], the concept of privacy
is often perceived as “vague and difficult to get into a right perspective” [34]. Through its alluring
convenience and promise of societal prosperity, the use of aggregated data has long outstripped the
capabilities of privacy protection measures. Indeed, early privacy protection protocols relied on the
ad hoc enforcement of anonymization and offered little to no protection against the exposure of
individual data, as evidenced by the AOL search log and Netflix Challenge dataset controversies
[30, 31, 6].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

