Boosting Barely Robust Learners:
A New Perspective on Adversarial Robustness
Avrim Blum

Omar Montasser

Greg Shakhnarovich

TTI Chicago

TTI Chicago

TTI Chicago

avrim@ttic.edu

omar@ttic.edu

greg@ttic.edu

Hongyang Zhang

first.last@uwaterloo.ca

University of Waterloo

Abstract
We present an oracle-efficient algorithm for boosting the adversarial robustness
of barely robust learners. Barely robust learning algorithms learn predictors that
are adversarially robust only on a small fraction ⌧ 1 of the data distribution.
Our proposed notion of barely robust learning requires robustness with respect to a
“larger” perturbation set; which we show is necessary for strongly robust learning,
and that weaker relaxations are not sufficient for strongly robust learning. Our
results reveal a qualitative and quantitative equivalence between two seemingly
unrelated problems: strongly robust learning and barely robust learning.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of learning predictors that are robust to adversarial examples at test time.
That is, we would like to be robust against a perturbation set U : X ! 2X , where U (x) ✓ X is the
set of allowed perturbations that an adversary might replace x with, e.g., U could be perturbations of
bounded `p -norms [10]. The goal is to learn a predictor h with small robust risk:
RU (h; D) ,

Pr

(x,y)⇠D

[9z 2 U(x) : h(z) 6= y] .

(1)

Adversarially robust learning has proven to be quite challenging in practice, where current adversarial
learning methods typically learn predictors with low natural error but robust only on a small fraction
of the data. For example, according to the RobustBench leaderboard [7], the highest achieved robust
accuracy with respect to `1 perturbations on CIFAR10 is ⇡ 66% and on ImageNet is ⇡ 38%. Can
we leverage existing methods and go beyond their limits? This motivates us to pursue the idea of
boosting robustness, and study the following theoretical question:
Can we boost barely robust learning algorithms to learn predictors with high robust accuracy?
That is, given a barely robust learning algorithm A which can only learn predictors robust on say
= 10% fraction of the data distribution, we are asking whether it is possible to boost the robustness
of A and learn predictors with high robust accuracy, say 90%. We want to emphasize that we are
interested here in extreme situations when the robustness parameter ⌧ 1. We are interested
in generic boosting algorithms that take as input a black-box learner A and a specification of the
perturbation set U , and output a predictor with high robust accuracy by repeatedly calling A.

In this work, by studying the question above, we offer a new perspective on adversarial robustness.
Specifically, we discover a qualitative and quantitative equivalence between two seemingly unrelated
problems: strongly robust learning and barely robust learning. We show that barely robust learning
implies strongly robust learning through a novel algorithm for boosting robustness. As we elaborate
below, our proposed notion of barely robust learning requires robustness with respect to a “larger”
perturbation set. We also show that this is necessary for strongly robust learning, and that weaker
relaxations of barely robust learning do not imply strongly robust learning.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

