ViTPose: Simple Vision Transformer Baselines for
Human Pose Estimation
Yufei Xu1∗, Jing Zhang1∗ , Qiming Zhang1 , Dacheng Tao2,1
1
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
JD Explore Academy, China
yuxu7116@uni.sydney.edu.au, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au,
qzha2506@uni.sydney.edu.au, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Although no specific domain knowledge is considered in the design, plain vision
transformers have shown excellent performance in visual recognition tasks. However, little effort has been made to reveal the potential of such simple structures for
pose estimation tasks. In this paper, we show the surprisingly good capabilities of
plain vision transformers for pose estimation from various aspects, namely simplicity in model structure, scalability in model size, flexibility in training paradigm,
and transferability of knowledge between models, through a simple baseline model
called ViTPose. Specifically, ViTPose employs plain and non-hierarchical vision
transformers as backbones to extract features for a given person instance and a
lightweight decoder for pose estimation. It can be scaled up from 100M to 1B
parameters by taking the advantages of the scalable model capacity and high
parallelism of transformers, setting a new Pareto front between throughput and performance. Besides, ViTPose is very flexible regarding the attention type, input resolution, pre-training and finetuning strategy, as well as dealing with multiple pose
tasks. We also empirically demonstrate that the knowledge of large ViTPose models
can be easily transferred to small ones via a simple knowledge token. Experimental
results show that our basic ViTPose model outperforms representative methods
on the challenging MS COCO Keypoint Detection benchmark, while the largest
model sets a new state-of-the-art, i.e., 80.9 AP on the MS COCO test-dev set. The
code and models are available at https://github.com/ViTAE-Transformer/ViTPose.

1

Introduction

Human pose estimation is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision and has a wide range of
real-world applications [51, 29]. It aims to localize human anatomical keypoints and is challenging
due to the variations of occlusion, truncation, scales, and human appearances. To deal with these
issues, there has been rapid progress in deep learning-based methods [37, 42, 36, 50], which typically
tackle the challenging task using convolutional neural networks.
Recently, vision transformers [13, 31, 10, 34, 32] have shown great potential in many vision tasks.
Inspired by their success, different vision transformer structures have been deployed for the pose
estimation task. Most of them adopt a CNN as a backbone and then use a transformer of elaborate
structures to refine the extracted features and model the relationship between the body keypoints.
For example, PRTR [23] incorporates both transformer encoders and decoders to gradually refine
the locations of the estimated keypoints in a cascade manner. TokenPose [27] and TransPose [44],
instead, adopt an encoder-only transformer structure to process the features extracted by CNNs. On
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

