Self-Supervised Learning of Brain Dynamics
from Broad Neuroimaging Data
Armin W. Thomas
Department of Psychology
Stanford University
athms@stanford.edu

Christopher Ré
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
chrismre@stanford.edu

Russell A. Poldrack
Department of Psychology
Stanford University
poldrack@stanford.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised learning techniques are celebrating immense success in natural
language processing (NLP) by enabling models to learn from broad language data
at unprecedented scales. Here, we aim to leverage the success of these techniques
for mental state decoding, where researchers aim to identify specific mental states
(e.g., the experience of anger or joy) from brain activity. To this end, we devise a
set of novel self-supervised learning frameworks for neuroimaging data inspired by
prominent learning frameworks in NLP. At their core, these frameworks learn the
dynamics of brain activity by modeling sequences of activity akin to how sequences
of text are modeled in NLP. We evaluate the frameworks by pre-training models on
a broad neuroimaging dataset spanning functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
data from 11, 980 experimental runs of 1, 726 individuals across 34 datasets, and
subsequently adapting the pre-trained models to benchmark mental state decoding
datasets. The pre-trained models transfer well, generally outperforming baseline
models trained from scratch, while models trained in a learning framework based
on causal language modeling clearly outperform the others.

1

Introduction

In mental state decoding, researchers aim to identify certain mental states (e.g., deciding to accept or
reject a gamble or the experience of happiness or fear) from brain activity [1]. To this end, researchers
train predictive models to correctly identify (i.e., decode) these mental states from measured brain
activity. At first sight, this approach seems straightforward, yet researchers interested in training
mental state decoding models are faced with the challenge that individual neuroimaging datasets,
particularly functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data, are often of high dimension and
low sample size, such that individual samples can comprise many hundred thousand dimensions while
individual datasets include only a few hundred samples for each of tens to hundreds of individuals.
In this setting, where the dimensionality of the data far exceed the number of samples, predictive
models are prone to overfitting, which severely limits any generalizable insights that can be gained
from training these models about the studied mental states and brain activity.
In spite of the low sample size of individual datasets, neuroimaging research has recently entered a
big data era, as individual researchers more frequently share their collected datasets publicly [2, 3].
In addition, several efforts have been made to standardize the data structure [4] and preprocessing [5]
of neuroimaging data. Together, these developments open up new possibilities for the application of
pre-training in neuroimaging at scale, by allowing for the pre-training of models on broad, public
neuroimaging data so that the resulting models can be adapted well to the datasets collected by
individual researchers, without the need for much new data.
A wealth of empirical evidence has demonstrated that models pre-trained on large neuroimaging
datasets achieve better mental state decoding performances on new data, while also requiring less
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

