Why Do Artificially Generated Data Help Adversarial
Robustness?
Yue Xing
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
xing49@purdue.edu

Qifan Song
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
qfsong@purdue.edu

Guang Cheng
Department of Statistics
University of California, Los Angeles
guangcheng@ucla.edu

Abstract
In the adversarial training framework of Carmon et al. (2019); Gowal et al. (2021),
people use generated/real unlabeled data with pseudolabels to improve adversarial
robustness. We provide statistical insights to explain why the artificially generated
data improve adversarial training. In particular, we study how the attack strength
and the quality of the unlabeled data affect adversarial robustness in this framework.
Our results show that with a high-quality unlabeled data generator, adversarial
training can benefit greatly from this framework under large attack strength, while
a poor generator can still help to some extent. To make adaptions concerning the
quality of generated data, we propose an algorithm that performs online adjustment
to the weight between the labeled real data and the generated data, aiming to
optimize the adversarial risk. Numerical studies are conducted to verify our
theories and show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Adversarial training is a popular and simple way to improve the adversarial robustness of modern
machine learning models. There are fruitful results in the theoretical justification and methodology
development. Among various research directions, one interesting aspect is to use extra unlabeled
data to assist adversarial training. Recent works successfully demonstrate a great improvement in the
adversarial robustness with additional unlabeled data. For example, Carmon et al. (2019); Xing et al.
(2021b, 2022), show that additional external real data help improve adversarial robustness; Gowal
et al. (2021) uses synthetically generated data to improve the adversarial robustness and achieves
the highest 66% adversarial testing accuracy for CIFAR-10 dataset under AutoAttack (AA) in Croce
et al. (2020)1 in the literature. The algorithms utilizing real/generated unlabeled data in adversarial
training in Carmon et al. (2019); Gowal et al. (2021) are summarized in Figure 1. Note that to unify
the these two algorithms, we view the unlabeled real data used in Carmon et al. (2019) as synthetic
data generated from an ideal generator.
However, two fundamental questions about utilizing additional unlabeled data remain unclear.
First, as shown by Carmon et al. (2019), unlabeled data provide more information about the density of
the data near the decision boundary, leading to a more robust adversarial estimator (e.g., it increases
the robust test accuracy of CIFAR-10 from 53.08% to 59.53% for 8/255 L1 attack). However, the
performance improvement of this training strategy is limited when the attack strength is small or zero.
Therefore, it is natural to ask
Q1: Compared to clean training, why and how can adversarial training significantly benefit from
unlabeled data under the framework of Figure 1?
1

https://robustbench.github.io

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

