Learning Structure from the Ground up—Hierarchical
Representation Learning by Chunking

Shuchen Wu
Computational Principles of Intelligence Lab
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
Tübingen, Germany
shuchen.wu@tuebingen.mpg.de
Noémi Éltető
Department of Computational Neuroscience
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
Tübingen, Germany
noemi.elteto@tuebingen.mpg.de

Ishita Dasgupta
Computational Cognitive Science Lab
Department of Psychology
Princeton University
dasgupta.ishita@gmail.com

Eric Schulz
Computational Principles of Intelligence Lab
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
Tübingen, Germany
eric.schulz@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
From learning to play the piano to speaking a new language, reusing and recombining previously acquired representations enables us to master complex skills and
easily adapt to new environments. Inspired by the Gestalt principle of grouping by
proximity and theories of chunking in cognitive science, we propose a hierarchical
chunking model (HCM). HCM learns representations from non-i.i.d. sequential
data from the ground up by first discovering the minimal atomic sequential units as
chunks. As learning progresses, a hierarchy of chunk representations is acquired
by chunking previously learned representations into more complex representations
guided by sequential dependence. We provide learning guarantees on an idealized
version of HCM, and demonstrate that HCM learns meaningful and interpretable
representations in a human-like fashion. Our model can be extended to learn visual,
temporal, and visual-temporal chunks. The interpretability of the learned chunks
can be used to assess transfer or interference when the environment changes. Finally, in an fMRI dataset, we demonstrate that HCM learns interpretable chunks of
functional coactivation regions and hierarchical modular and sub-modular structures supported by the neuroscientific literature. Taken together, our results show
how cognitive science in general and theories of chunking in particular can inform
novel and more interpretable approaches to representation learning.

1

Introduction

Sequential data in our everyday life is often hierarchically structured. From streaming this sequential
sensory perceptual data, we can identify repeated patterns – and bootstrap these to recognize higher
order patterns. In cognitive science, identifying repeated, invariant patterns from sequences in units
is known as chunking. To get an intuition for chunking, try to read through the following sequence
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

