Unifying Voxel-based Representation with
Transformer for 3D Object Detection

Yanwei Li1

Yilun Chen1

Xiaojuan Qi2

Zeming Li3

Jian Sun3

Jiaya Jia1,4

The Chinese University of Hong Kong1 The University of Hong Kong2
MEGVII Technology3 SmartMore4

Abstract
In this work, we present a unified framework for multi-modality 3D object detection,
named UVTR. The proposed method aims to unify multi-modality representations
in the voxel space for accurate and robust single- or cross-modality 3D detection.
To this end, the modality-specific space is first designed to represent different inputs
in the voxel feature space. Different from previous work, our approach preserves
the voxel space without height compression to alleviate semantic ambiguity and
enable spatial connections. To make full use of the inputs from different sensors,
the cross-modality interaction is then proposed, including knowledge transfer
and modality fusion. In this way, geometry-aware expressions in point clouds
and context-rich features in images are well utilized for better performance and
robustness. The transformer decoder is applied to efficiently sample features from
the unified space with learnable positions, which facilitates object-level interactions.
In general, UVTR presents an early attempt to represent different modalities in a
unified framework. It surpasses previous work in single- or multi-modality entries.
The proposed method achieves leading performance in the nuScenes test set for
both object detection and the following object tracking task. Code is made publicly
available at https://github.com/dvlab-research/UVTR.

1

Introduction

Detecting 3D objects with multi-modality sensors (i.e., LiDAR and camera) is regarded as a fundamental task in real-world scenes. For accurate object detection, data from different modalities
are utilized to provide complementary knowledge, like accurate positions from point clouds and
rich context from images. Toward this purpose, a unified representation is essential to facilitate
knowledge transfer and feature fusion across modalities. However, due to the lack of accurate depth
from cameras, images can not be naturally represented in voxel space like that of point clouds.
In the unified progress, several representations have been studied that can be roughly separated into
input- and feature-level streams. For the first one, multi-modality data is aligned at the beginning
of network. In particular, pseudo point clouds in Figure 1a are transformed from image aided by
predicted depth [1, 2], while the range-view image in Figure 1b is projected from point clouds [3, 4].
Because of inaccurate depth in pseudo point clouds and collapsed 3D geometry in range-view images,
the spatial structure of data is damaged, which brings inferior results. For feature-level method, a
typical approach is to transform image features as frustum and then compress to BEV space [5, 6],
like that in Figure 1c. However, due to ray-like trajectories in the frustum [7], height compression
at each position aggregates features from various objects and thus introduces semantic ambiguity.
Meanwhile, other implicit manners in contemporary work [8, 9, 10] can hardly support explicit
feature interactions in 3D space and restrict further knowledge transfer. Therefore, a more unified
representation is desired to bridge modality gap and facilitate interactions from multiple aspects.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

