OpenXAI: Towards a Transparent Evaluation of
Post hoc Model Explanations
Chirag Agarwal1,2 , Satyapriya Krishna1 , Eshika Saxena1 , Martin Pawelczyk3 , Nari Johnson4 , Isha
Puri1 , Marinka Zitnik1 , and Himabindu Lakkaraju1
1

Harvard University
2
Adobe
3
University of Tubingen
4
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
While several types of post hoc explanation methods have been proposed in
recent literature, there is very little work on systematically benchmarking these
methods. Here, we introduce OpenXAI, a comprehensive and extensible opensource framework for evaluating and benchmarking post hoc explanation methods.
OpenXAI comprises of the following key components: (i) a flexible synthetic data
generator and a collection of diverse real-world datasets, pre-trained models, and
state-of-the-art feature attribution methods, (ii) open-source implementations of
twenty-two quantitative metrics for evaluating faithfulness, stability (robustness),
and fairness of explanation methods, and (iii) the first ever public XAI leaderboards
to readily compare several explanation methods across a wide variety of metrics,
models, and datasets. OpenXAI is easily extensible, as users can readily evaluate
custom explanation methods and incorporate them into our leaderboards.
Overall, OpenXAI provides an automated end-to-end pipeline that not only
simplifies and standardizes the evaluation of post hoc explanation methods, but
also promotes transparency and reproducibility in benchmarking these methods.
While the first release of OpenXAI supports only tabular datasets, the explanation
methods and metrics that we consider are general enough to be applicable to other
data modalities. OpenXAI datasets and data loaders, implementations of stateof-the-art explanation methods and evaluation metrics, as well as leaderboards
are publicly available at https://open-xai.github.io/. OpenXAI will be
regularly updated to incorporate text and image datasets, other new metrics and
explanation methods, and welcomes inputs from the community.

1

Introduction

As predictive models are increasingly deployed in critical domains (e.g., healthcare, law, and finance),
there has been a growing emphasis on explaining the predictions of these models to decision makers
(e.g. doctors, judges) so that they can understand the rationale behind model predictions, and
determine if and when to rely on these predictions. To this end, various techniques have been
proposed in recent literature to generate post hoc explanations of individual predictions made by
complex ML models. Several of such local explanation methods output the influence of each of the
features on the model’s prediction, and are therefore referred to as local feature attribution methods.
Due to their generality, feature attribution methods are increasingly being utilized to explain complex
models in medicine, finance, law, and science [23, 34, 78]. Thus, it is critical to ensure that the
explanations generated by these methods are reliable so that relevant stakeholders and decision
makers are provided with credible information about the underlying models [6].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

