Interaction-Grounded Learning
with Action-Inclusive Feedback
Tengyang Xie∗
UIUC
tx10@illinois.edu

Akanksha Saran∗
Microsoft Research, NYC
akanksha.saran@microsoft.com

Lekan Molu
Microsoft Research, NYC
lekanmolu@microsoft.com

Dylan J. Foster
Microsoft Research, New England
dylanfoster@microsoft.com

Ida Momennejad
Microsoft Research, NYC
idamo@microsoft.com

Paul Mineiro
Microsoft Research, NYC
pmineiro@microsoft.com

Nan Jiang
UIUC
nanjiang@illinois.edu

John Langford
Microsoft Research, NYC
jcl@microsoft.com

Abstract
Consider the problem setting of Interaction-Grounded Learning (IGL), in which a
learner’s goal is to optimally interact with the environment with no explicit reward
to ground its policies. The agent observes a context vector, takes an action, and
receives a feedback vector—using this information to effectively optimize a policy
with respect to a latent reward function. Prior analyzed approaches fail when
the feedback vector contains the action, which significantly limits IGL’s success
in many potential scenarios such as Brain-computer interface (BCI) or Humancomputer interface (HCI) applications. We address this by creating an algorithm
and analysis which allows IGL to work even when the feedback vector contains the
action, encoded in any fashion. We provide theoretical guarantees and large-scale
experiments based on supervised datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
new approach.

1

Introduction

Most real-world learning problems, such as BCI and HCI problems, are not tagged with rewards.
Consequently, (biological and artificial) learners must infer rewards based on interactions with the
environment, which reacts to the learner’s actions by generating feedback, but does not provide any
explicit reward signal. This paradigm has been previously studied by researchers [e.g., Grizou et al.,
2014; Nguyen et al., 2021], including a recent formalization [Xie et al., 2021b] that proposed the
term Interaction-Grounded Learning (IGL).
In IGL, the learning algorithm discovers a grounding for the feedback which implicitly discovers a
reward function. An information-theoretic impossibility argument indicates additional assumptions
are necessary to succeed. Xie et al. [2021b] proceed by assuming the action is conditionally
independent of the feedback given the reward. However, this is unnatural in many settings such as
neurofeedback in BCI [Katyal et al., 2014; Mishra and Gazzaley, 2015; Debettencourt et al., 2015;
Muñoz-Moldes and Cleeremans, 2020; Akinola et al., 2020; Poole and Lee, 2021; Xu et al., 2021]
and multimodal interactive feedback in HCI [Pantic and Rothkrantz, 2003; Vitense et al., 2003;
Freeman et al., 2017; Mott et al., 2017; Duchowski, 2018; Saran et al., 2018, 2020; Zhang et al.,
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

