Distributed Influence-Augmented Local Simulators for
Parallel MARL in Large Networked Systems

Miguel Suau
Delft University of Technology
m.suaudecastro@tudelft.nl

Jinke He
Delft University of Technology
j.he-4@tudelft.nl

Matthijs T. J. Spaan
Delft University of Technology
m.t.j.spaan@tudelft.nl

Mustafa Mert Çelikok
Aalto University
mustafa.celikok@aalto.fi

Frans A. Oliehoek
Delft University of Technology
f.a.oliehoek@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Due to its high sample complexity, simulation is, as of today, critical for the
successful application of reinforcement learning. Many real-world problems,
however, exhibit overly complex dynamics, making their full-scale simulation
computationally slow. In this paper, we show how to factorize large networked
systems of many agents into multiple local regions such that we can build separate
simulators that run independently and in parallel. To monitor the influence that the
different local regions exert on one another, each of these simulators is equipped
with a learned model that is periodically trained on real trajectories. Our empirical
results reveal that distributing the simulation among different processes not only
makes it possible to train large multi-agent systems in just a few hours but also
helps mitigate the negative effects of simultaneous learning.1

1

Introduction

Imagine we have to train a team of agents to control the traffic lights of a very large city, so large
that we simply cannot control all traffic lights using a single policy. The first step would be to split
the problem into multiple sub-regions. A natural division would be to assign one traffic light to each
agent. Then, since the agents act locally, we would limit their observations to contain only local
information. This partial observability could affect their optimal policies but would also make each
individual decision-making problem more manageable (McCallum, 1995; Dearden and Boutilier,
1997). Moreover, we may also want to reward agents only for what occurs in their local neighborhood
such that we reduce the variance of the returns (Spooner et al., 2021) and facilitate credit assignment
(Castellini et al., 2020). Finally, we could train all agents together on a big traffic simulator that
reproduces the global dynamics. However, if the city is truly large, it could take weeks or even
months to optimize their policies. That is assuming training actually converges.
One may argue that, since the agents’ observations and rewards are local, we could as well train them
on separate simulators that model only the local transition dynamics (i.e. cars moving within each
of the sub-regions; van der Pol and Oliehoek 2016). This approach might work if the agents’ local
transitions are isolated from the rest of the system (Becker et al., 2003), but would probably break
when the local regions are coupled. This is because the local simulators would fail to account for the
fact that the agents’ local regions belong to a larger system and depend on one another. A solution
is to model the influence the global system exerts on each local region. Fortunately, this does not
necessarily imply modelling the entire system, or else we would just use the global simulator. In
1

Source code is available at https://github.com/INFLUENCEorg/DIALS.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

