Weighted Mutual Learning with Diversity-Driven
Model Compression

Miao Zhang1,2 , Li Wang5∗, David Campos2 , Wei Huang3 , Chenjuan Guo4 , Bin Yang4
1
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 2 Aalborg University 3 UNSW
4
East China Normal University 5 Shandong First Medical University
zhangmiao@hit.edu.cn; dgcc@cs.aau.dk; weihuang.uts@gmail.com
{cjguo, byang}@dase.ecnu.edu.cn; li.wang-9@student.uts.edu.au

Abstract
Online distillation attracts attention from the community as it simplifies the traditional two-stage knowledge distillation process into a single stage. Online distillation collaboratively trains a group of peer models, which are treated as students,
and all students gain extra knowledge from each other. However, memory consumption and diversity among students are two key challenges to the scalability
and quality of online distillation. To address the two challenges, this paper presents
a framework called Weighted Mutual Learning with Diversity-Driven Model Compression (WML) for online distillation. First, at the base of a hierarchical structure
where students share different parts, we leverage the structured network pruning to
generate diversified students with different models sizes, thus also helping reduce
the memory requirements. Second, rather than taking the average of students, this
paper, for the first time, leverages a bi-level formulation to estimate the relative
importance of students with a close-form, to further boost the effectiveness of the
distillation from each other. Extensive experiments show the generalization of the
proposed framework, which outperforms existing online distillation methods on a
variety of deep neural networks. More interesting, as a byproduct, WML produces
a series of students with different model sizes in a single run, which also achieves
competitive results compared with existing channel pruning methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive success for a variety of application fields,
including computer vision [27, 46], natural language processing [2], time-series analytics [53], and
so on [6, 48, 54]. However, the performance of DNNs is heavily dependent on model parameters and
computations, which hinders its application on intelligent edge systems [20]. To relieve this issue,
various techniques have been proposed to design lightweight models, including network pruning [18],
network quantization [7], and neural architecture search [43]. Knowledge distillation [25, 33, 51],
as a complementary method to further improve the performance of the lightweight models, can
transfer the discriminative ability from a high-capacity yet cumbersome teacher model to a small
and compact student model by encouraging the student to mimic the behavior of the teacher. The
vanilla knowledge distillation [25], as shown in Figure 1 (a), includes two stages: it first trains the
cumbersome teacher model, whose soft logits that contain informative dark knowledge [25] are then
transferred to a compact student model. As the teacher is fixed during the knowledge transferring, the
student can only learn from the teacher once it is trained, and the vanilla knowledge distillation is also
called offline distillation [15]. To further simplify the distillation process and relieve the restriction
when the larger-capacity teacher model is not available, the online distillation framework has been
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

