Benign, Tempered, or Catastrophic:
A Taxonomy of Overfitting
Neil Mallinar⇤
UC San Diego
nmallina@ucsd.edu

James B. Simon⇤
UC Berkeley
james.simon@berkeley.edu

Parthe Pandit
UC San Diego
parthepandit@ucsd.edu

Mikhail Belkin
UC San Diego
mbelkin@ucsd.edu

Amirhesam Abedsoltan
UC San Diego
aabedsoltan@ucsd.edu
Preetum Nakkiran
Apple & UC San Diego
preetum@apple.com

Abstract
The practical success of overparameterized neural networks has motivated the
recent scientific study of interpolating methods, which perfectly fit their training
data. Certain interpolating methods, including neural networks, can fit noisy
training data without catastrophically bad test performance, in defiance of standard
intuitions from statistical learning theory. Aiming to explain this, a body of recent
work has studied benign overfitting, a phenomenon where some interpolating
methods approach Bayes optimality, even in the presence of noise. In this work
we argue that while benign overfitting has been instructive and fruitful to study,
many real interpolating methods like neural networks do not fit benignly: modest
noise in the training set causes nonzero (but non-infinite) excess risk at test time,
implying these models are neither benign nor catastrophic but rather fall in an
intermediate regime. We call this intermediate regime tempered overfitting, and
we initiate its systematic study. We first explore this phenomenon in the context
of kernel (ridge) regression (KR) by obtaining conditions on the ridge parameter
and kernel eigenspectrum under which KR exhibits each of the three behaviors.
We find that kernels with powerlaw spectra, including Laplace kernels and ReLU
neural tangent kernels, exhibit tempered overfitting. We then empirically study
deep neural networks through the lens of our taxonomy, and find that those trained
to interpolation are tempered, while those stopped early are benign. We hope our
work leads to a more refined understanding of overfitting in modern learning.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, the dramatic success of overparameterized deep neural networks (DNNs) has
inspired the field to reexamine the theoretical foundations of generalization. Classical statistical
learning theory suggests that an algorithm which interpolates (i.e. perfectly fits) its training data will
typically catastrophically overfit at test time, generalizing no better than a random function.
Figure 1c illustrates the catastrophic overfitting classically expected of an interpolating method.
Defying this picture, DNNs can interpolate their training data and generalize well nonetheless
[Neyshabur et al., 2015, Zhang et al., 2017], suggesting the need for a new theoretical paradigm
within which to understand their overfitting.
⇤

Co-first authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

