Theory and Approximate Solvers for
Branched Optimal Transport with Multiple Sources

Peter Lippmann
Enrique Fita Sanmartín
Fred A. Hamprecht
IWR at Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
{peter.lippmann, enrique.fita.sanmartin, fred.hamprecht}
@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Branched optimal transport (BOT) is a generalization of optimal transport in which
transportation costs along an edge are subadditive. This subadditivity models an
increase in transport efficiency when shipping mass along the same route, favoring
branched transportation networks. We here study the NP-hard optimization of
BOT networks connecting a finite number of sources and sinks in R2 . First, we
show how to efficiently find the best geometry of a BOT network for many sources
and sinks, given a topology. Second, we argue that a topology with more than
three edges meeting at a branching point is never optimal. Third, we show that the
results obtained for the Euclidean plane generalize directly to optimal transportation
networks on two-dimensional Riemannian manifolds. Finally, we present a simple
but effective approximate BOT solver combining geometric optimization with a
combinatorial optimization of the network topology.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) [27, 6, 23] stipulates transportation costs that increase linearly with the
transported mass. However, in many systems of practical and theoretical interest, a diminishing cost
property is more realistic: it is more economic to jointly transport two loads with nearby destinations
along the same route. The optimal transportation networks under diminishing costs exhibit branching;
and indeed, nature and societies are using branched networks, e.g. in blood circulation, gas supply
or mail delivery. In this paper, we study the theory and practice of finding good or even optimal
solutions in branched optimal transport (BOT).
More formally, we consider a finite set of sources S with supplies µS > 0 and sinks T with demands
µT > 0, located at fixed positions xS and xT in R2 . A possible transportation network is represented
as a directed, edge-weighted graph G(V, E) with nodes V = S ∪ T ∪ B. The edges E ⊂ V × V
interconnect the terminals S and T with the help of a set of additional nodes B, so-called branching
points (BPs), with coordinates xB . The edge direction indicates the direction of mass flow. The edge
weights, denoted by me , specify the absolute flows. Gilbert first proposed the BOT problem [9] in
which the objective is to solve for
X
arg min
mα
(1)
ij ∥xi − xj ∥2 , subject to
B,E,xB ,mE

(i,j) ∈ E

supply µs =

X

demand µt =

X

conservation

k

Xk
k

msk −

X

mkt −

X

mkb =

k

Xk
k

mks at each source s,
mtk at each sink t,
mbk at each BP b,

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

