Analyzing Data-Centric Properties for Graph
Contrastive Learning
Puja Trivedi
University of Michigan
pujat@umich.edu

Ekdeep Singh Lubana
University of Michigan
CBS, Harvard University
eslubana@umich.edu

Danai Koutra
Unversity of Michigan
dkoutra@umich.edu

Mark Heimann
Lawrence Livermore National Labs
heimann2@llnl.gov

Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan
Lawrence Livermore National Labs
jjayaram@llnl.gov

Abstract
Recent analyses of self-supervised learning (SSL) find the following data-centric
properties to be critical for learning good representations: invariance to taskirrelevant semantics, separability of classes in some latent space, and recoverability
of labels from augmented samples. However, given their discrete, non-Euclidean
nature, graph datasets and graph SSL methods are unlikely to satisfy these properties. This raises the question: how do graph SSL methods, such as contrastive
learning (CL), work well? To systematically probe this question, we perform a
generalization analysis for CL when using generic graph augmentations (GGAs),
with a focus on data-centric properties. Our analysis yields formal insights into
the limitations of GGAs and the necessity of task-relevant augmentations. As
we empirically show, GGAs do not induce task-relevant invariances on common
benchmark datasets, leading to only marginal gains over naive, untrained baselines.
Our theory motivates a synthetic data generation process that enables control over
task-relevant information and boasts pre-defined optimal augmentations. This
flexible benchmark helps us identify yet unrecognized limitations in advanced
augmentation techniques (e.g., automated methods). Overall, our work rigorously contextualizes, both empirically and theoretically, the effects of data-centric
properties on augmentation strategies and learning paradigms for graph SSL.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) [1–9] has revolutionized visual representation learning by producing
representations that are more robust [10, 11], transferable [12, 13], and semantically consistent [6]
than their supervised counterparts. This impressive empirical success has motivated a surge of efforts
that seek to gain insights into SSL’s behavior [14–21] or adapt successful frameworks to different
modalities, including graph data [22–26]. Notably, many analyses of SSL have converged upon the
following data-centric properties as critical to its success: (i) augmentations should induce invariance
to task-irrelevant attributes, as to better reflect the underlying data generation process and improve
generalizability; (ii) samples (and corresponding augmentations) from different underlying classes
should be separable in some latent space, as to ensure a high-performing classifier is realizable; and
(iii) labels of augmented samples should be recoverable from the natural sample using which they
were generated [16, 20, 27] so that representations are semantically consistent for downstream tasks.
Correspondence to pujat@umich.edu.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

