Heterogeneous Skill Learning for Multi-agent Tasks

Yuntao Liu
Academy of Military Science
Beijing, China
liu-yt@foxmail.com

Yuan Li
Academy of Military Science
Beijing, China
liyuan@nudt.edu.cn

Yong Dou
National University of Defense Technology
Hunan Changsha, China
douyong@nudt.edu.cn

Xinhai Xu ∗
Academy of Military Science
Beijing, China
xuxinhai@nudt.edu.cn

Donghong Liu ∗
Academy of Military Science
Beijing, China
liu_donghong@sina.com

Abstract
Heterogeneous behaviours are widespread in many multi-agent tasks, which have
not been paid much attention in the community of multi-agent reinforcement learning. It would be a key factor for improving the learning performance to efficiently
characterize and automatically find heterogeneous behaviours. In this paper, we
introduce the concept of the skill to explore the ability of heterogeneous behaviours.
We propose a novel skill-based multi-agent reinforcement learning framework to
enable agents to master diverse skills. Specifically, our framework consists of the
skill representation mechanism, the skill selector and the skill-based policy learning
mechanism. We design an auto-encoder model to generate the latent variable as the
skill representation by incorporating the environment information, which ensures
the distinguishable of agents for skill selection and the discriminability for skill
learning. With the representation, a skill selection mechanism is invented to realize the assignment from agents to skills. Meanwhile, diverse skill-based policies
are generated through a novel skill-based policy learning method. To promote
efficient skill discovery, a mutual information based intrinsic reward function is
constructed. Empirical results show that our framework obtains the best performance on three challenging benchmarks, i.e., StarCraft II micromanagement tasks,
Google Research Football and GoBigger, over state-of-the-art MARL methods.

1

Introduction

The cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has obtained great improvements in
many multi-agent systems, such as real-time strategy games [2], artificial swarms of robots [13]
and autonomous vehicles [14]. The original solution is the independent learning method, in which
each agent treats other agents as part of the environment. The main drawback is that simultaneous
learning of all agents will result in a non-stationary environment from the perspective of each agent
[3]. To avoid this problem, fully centralized learning approaches [18] have been studied, which
aim to learn an optimal joint action of agents in response to the joint observation. However, the
solution space grows exponentially with the number of agents, making it hard to find a good policy in
a limited time [4]. Later, following the centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE)
paradigm, value decomposition based MARL methods have been proposed which attracts wide
attention [21, 26, 33, 31]. The main idea is that each agent learns its policy based on local observation
while a centralized mechanism is designed to guide the training of all agents. In most such methods,
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

