SkinCon: A skin disease dataset densely annotated by
domain experts for fine-grained model debugging and
analysis

Roxana Daneshjou1∗ Mert Yuksekgonul2∗
Zhuo Ran Cai1 Roberto Novoa1 James Zou3
1
Department of Dermatology, Stanford University
2
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
3
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University
{roxanad,merty,zrcai,rnovoa,jamesz}@stanford.edu

Abstract
For the deployment of artificial intelligence (AI) in high risk settings, such as healthcare, methods that provide interpretability/explainability or allow fine-grained error
analysis are critical. Many recent methods for interpretability/explainability and
fine-grained error analysis use concepts, which are meta-labels that are semantically meaningful to humans. However, there are only a few datasets that include
concept-level meta-labels and most of these meta-labels are relevant for natural
images that do not require domain expertise. Previous densely annotated datasets
in medicine focused on meta-labels that are relevant to a single disease such as
osteoarthritis or melanoma. In dermatology, skin disease is described using an
established clinical lexicon that allows clinicians to describe physical exam findings
to one another. To provide a medical dataset densely annotated by domain experts
with annotations useful across multiple disease processes, we developed SkinCon:
a skin disease dataset densely annotated by dermatologists. SkinCon includes 3230
images from the Fitzpatrick 17k skin disease dataset densely annotated with 48
clinical concepts, 22 of which have at least 50 images representing the concept.
The concepts used were chosen by two dermatologists considering the clinical
descriptor terms used to describe skin lesions. Examples include "plaque", "scale",
and "erosion". These same concepts were also used to label 656 skin disease
images from the Diverse Dermatology Images dataset, providing an additional
external dataset with diverse skin tone representations. We review the potential
applications for the SkinCon dataset, such as probing models, concept-based explanations, concept bottlenecks, error analysis, and slice discovery. Furthermore,
we use SkinCon to demonstrate two of these use cases: debugging mistakes of an
existing dermatology AI model with concepts and developing interpretable models
with post-hoc concept bottleneck models.

1

Introduction

As we work towards deploying artificial intelligence (AI) for images in high risk settings such as
healthcare, methods that provide interpretation or explanation for human operators and allow finegrained error analysis are important. Previous methods developed to address these issues in image
analysis have relied on the use of high-level human concepts, which are semantically meaningful and
provide a way to further analyze images (Ghorbani et al., 2019). For example, for a dataset of images
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

