Learning Symmetric Rules with SATNet

Eun-Gyeol Oh∗
Graduate School of Information Security
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
eun-gyeol.oh@kaist.ac.kr

Sangho Lim∗
School of Computing
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
lim.sang@kaist.ac.kr

Hongseok Yang
School of Computing and Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
Discrete Mathematics Group, Institute for Basic Science (IBS)
Daejeon, South Korea
hongseok.yang@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
SATNet is a differentiable constraint solver with a custom backpropagation algorithm, which can be used as a layer in a deep-learning system. It is a promising
proposal for bridging deep learning and logical reasoning. In fact, SATNet has
been successfully applied to learn, among others, the rules of a complex logical
puzzle, such as Sudoku, just from input and output pairs where inputs are given
as images. In this paper, we show how to improve the learning of SATNet by
exploiting symmetries in the target rules of a given but unknown logical puzzle
or more generally a logical formula. We present SymSATNet, a variant of SATNet that translates the given symmetries of the target rules to a condition on the
parameters of SATNet and requires that the parameters should have a particular
parametric form that guarantees the condition. The requirement dramatically reduces the number of parameters to learn for the rules with enough symmetries, and
makes the parameter learning of SymSATNet much easier than that of SATNet. We
also describe a technique for automatically discovering symmetries of the target
rules from examples. Our experiments with Sudoku and Rubik’s cube show the
substantial improvement of SymSATNet over the baseline SATNet.

1

Introduction

Bringing the ability of reasoning to the deep-learning systems has been the aim of a large amount of
recent research efforts [28, 14, 5, 26, 23]. One notable outcome of these endeavours is SATNet [26],
a differentiable constraint solver with an efficient custom backpropagation algorithm. SATNet can
be used as a component of a deep-learning system and make the system capable of learning and
reasoning about sophisticated logical rules. Its potential has been demonstrated successfully with
the tasks of learning the rules of complex logical puzzles, such as Sudoku, just from input-output
examples where the inputs are given as images.
We show how to improve the rule (or constraint) learning of SATNet, when the target rules have
permutation symmetries. By having symmetries, we mean the solutions of the rules are closed under
the permutations of those symmetries. For example, in Sudoku, if a completed 9 × 9 Sudoku board is
a solution, permuting the numbers 1 to 9 in the board, the first three rows, or the last three columns
always gives rise to another solution. Thus, these permutations are symmetries of Sudoku.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

