A composable machine-learning approach for
steady-state simulations on high-resolution grids

Rishikesh Ranade
Office of CTO
Ansys Inc.
Canonsburg, PA 15317
rishikesh.ranade@ansys.com
Lalit Ghule
Office of CTO
Ansys Inc.
Canonsburg, PA, 15317
lalit.ghule@ansys.com

Chris Hill
Fluids Business Unit
Ansys Inc.
Lebanon, NH, 03766
chris.hill@ansys.com
Jay Pathak
Office of CTO
Ansys Inc.
San Jose, CA, 95134
jay.pathak@ansys.com

Abstract
In this paper we show that our Machine Learning (ML) approach, CoMLSim
(Composable Machine Learning Simulator), can simulate PDEs on highly-resolved
grids with higher accuracy and generalization to out-of-distribution source terms
and geometries than traditional ML baselines. Our unique approach combines
key principles of traditional PDE solvers with local-learning and low-dimensional
manifold techniques to iteratively simulate PDEs on large computational domains.
The proposed approach is validated on more than 5 steady-state PDEs across
different PDE conditions on highly-resolved grids and comparisons are made with
the commercial solver, Ansys Fluent as well as 4 other state-of-the-art ML methods.
The numerical experiments show that our approach outperforms ML baselines in
terms of 1) accuracy across quantitative metrics and 2) generalization to out-ofdistribution conditions as well as domain sizes. Additionally, we provide results for
a large number of ablations experiments conducted to highlight components of our
approach that strongly influence the results. We conclude that our local-learning
and iterative-inferencing approach reduces the challenge of generalization that
most ML models face.

1

Introduction

Engineering simulations utilize solutions of partial differential equations (PDEs) to model various
complex physical processes like weather prediction, combustion in a car engine, thermal cooling on
electronic chips etc., where the complexity in physics is driven by several factors such as Reynolds
number, heat source, geometry, etc. Traditional PDE solvers use discretization techniques to approximate PDEs on discrete computational domains and combine them with linear and non-linear
equation solvers to compute PDE solutions. The PDE solutions are dependent on several conditions
imposed on the PDE, such as geometry and boundary conditions of the computational domain as well
as source terms such as heat generation, buoyancy etc. Moreover, many applications in engineering
require highly-resolved computational domains to accurately approximate the PDEs solutions as
well as to capture the intricacies of conditions such as geometry and source terms imposed on the
PDEs. As a result, traditional PDE solvers, although accurate and generalizable across various PDE
conditions, can be computationally slow, especially in the presence of complicated physics and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

