A Classification of G-Invariant Shallow Neural
Networks
Devanshu Agrawal & James Ostrowski
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
dagrawa2@vols.utk.edu, jostrows@utk.edu

Abstract
When trying to fit a deep neural network (DNN) to a G-invariant target function
with G a group, it only makes sense to constrain the DNN to be G-invariant
as well. However, there can be many different ways to do this, thus raising
the problem of “G-invariant neural architecture design”: What is the optimal Ginvariant architecture for a given problem? Before we can consider the optimization
problem itself, we must understand the search space, the architectures in it, and how
they relate to one another. In this paper, we take a first step towards this goal; we
prove a theorem that gives a classification of all G-invariant single-hidden-layer or
“shallow” neural network (G-SNN) architectures with ReLU activation for any finite
orthogonal group G, and we prove a second theorem that characterizes the inclusion
maps or “network morphisms” between the architectures that can be leveraged
during neural architecture search (NAS). The proof is based on a correspondence
of every G-SNN to a signed permutation representation of G acting on the hidden
neurons; the classification is equivalently given in terms of the first cohomology
classes of G, thus admitting a topological interpretation. The G-SNN architectures
corresponding to nontrivial cohomology classes have, to our knowledge, never
been explicitly identified in the literature previously. Using a code implementation,
we enumerate the G-SNN architectures for some example groups G and visualize
their structure. Finally, we prove that architectures corresponding to inequivalent
cohomology classes coincide in function space only when their weight matrices
are zero, and we discuss the implications of this for NAS.

1

Introduction

When trying to fit a deep neural network (DNN) to a target function that is known to be G-invariant
with respect to a group G, it is desirable to enforce G-invariance on the DNN as prior knowledge. This
is a common scenario in many applications such as computer vision, where the class of an object in an
image may be independent of its orientation [Veeling et al., 2018], or point clouds that are permutationinvariant [Qi et al., 2017]. Numerous G-invariant DNN architectures have been proposed over the
years, including G-equivariant convolutional neural networks (G-CNNs) [Cohen and Welling, 2016],
G-equivariant graph neural networks [Maron et al., 2019a], and a DNN stacked on a G-invariant sumproduct layer [Kicki et al., 2020]. However, it is unclear which of these architectures a practitioner
should choose for a given problem, and even after one is selected, additional design choices must be
made; for G-CNNs alone, the practitioner must select a sequence of representations of G to determine
the composition of layers, and it is unknown how best to do this. Moreover, despite a complete
classification of G-CNNs [Kondor and Trivedi, 2018, Cohen et al., 2019b], it is unknown if every
G-invariant DNN is a G-CNN, and hence the “optimal” G-invariant architecture may not even exist
in the space of G-CNNs.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

