ConfounderGAN: Protecting Image Data Privacy
with Causal Confounder
Qi Tian 1 Kun Kuang 1,5,∗ Kelu Jiang 1 Furui Liu 2 Zhihua Wang 3 Fei Wu 1,3,4,5
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University, Shanghai, China
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
5
Key Laboratory for Corneal Diseases Research of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China
{tianqics,kunkuang,jiangkelu,zhihua.wang,wufei}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The success of deep learning is partly attributed to the availability of massive
data downloaded freely from the Internet. However, it also means that users’
private data may be collected by commercial organizations without consent and
used to train their models. Therefore, it’s important and necessary to develop a
method or tool to prevent unauthorized data exploitation. In this paper, we propose
ConfounderGAN, a generative adversarial network (GAN) that can make personal
image data unlearnable to protect the data privacy of its owners. Specifically,
the noise produced by the generator for each image has the confounder property.
It can build spurious correlations between images and labels, so that the model
cannot learn the correct mapping from images to labels in this noise-added dataset.
Meanwhile, the discriminator is used to ensure that the generated noise is small
and imperceptible, thereby remaining the normal utility of the encrypted image
for humans. The experiments are conducted in six image classification datasets,
consisting of three natural object datasets and three medical datasets. The results
demonstrate that our method not only outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
standard settings, but can also be applied to fast encryption scenarios. Moreover,
we show a series of transferability and stability experiments to further illustrate the
effectiveness and superiority of our method.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has achieved great success in many fields, such as computer vision [10],
natural language processing [6], etc. An important factor is that large-scale datasets provide rich and
diverse training examples for deep neural networks. However, many datasets are collected from some
free channels without mutual consent, and this unauthorized collection of private data may violate the
rights of the data owner [3]. For example, Kashmir Hill from the New York Times recently reported
that a company, named Clearview.AI, used web crawler scripts to collect more than 3 billion online
photos from various multimedia websites (e,g., Facebook) for training its own commercial models
[35]. This large unauthorized dataset goes far beyond anything ever constructed by the United States
government or Silicon Valley giants. In addition, Google’s Nightingale Project has also been reported
to collect medical care information from tens of millions of patients without their knowledge, and use
advanced machine learning technology to customize medical services for individual patients [23, 37].
In this context, various information privacy laws around the world have been published to describe
the rights of natural persons to control who is using its data [41]. e.g., General Data Protection
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

