Robustness to Label Noise Depends on the
Shape of the Noise Distribution

Diane Oyen
Los Alamos National Lab
doyen@lanl.gov

Michal Kucer
Los Alamos National Lab

Nick Hengartner
Los Alamos National Lab

Har Simrat Singh
Los Alamos National Lab

Abstract
Machine learning classifiers have been demonstrated, both empirically and theoretically, to be robust to label noise under certain conditions — notably the typical
assumption is that label noise is independent of the features given the class label.
We provide a theoretical framework that generalizes beyond this typical assumption
by modeling label noise as a distribution over feature space. We show that both the
scale and the shape of the noise distribution influence the posterior likelihood; and
the shape of the noise distribution has a stronger impact on classification performance if the noise is concentrated in feature space where the decision boundary
can be moved. For the special case of uniform label noise (independent of features
and the class label), we show that the Bayes optimal classifier for c classes is
robust to label noise until the ratio of noisy samples goes above c−1
c (e.g. 90%
for 10 classes), which we call the tipping point. However, for the special case
of class-dependent label noise (independent of features given the class label), the
tipping point can be as low as 50%. Most importantly, we show that when the
noise distribution targets decision boundaries (label noise is directly dependent
on feature space), classification robustness can drop off even at a small scale of
noise. Even when evaluating recent label-noise mitigation methods we see reduced
accuracy when label noise is dependent on features. These findings explain why
machine learning often handles label noise well if the noise distribution is uniform
in feature-space; yet it also points to the difficulty of overcoming label noise when
it is concentrated in a region of feature space where a decision boundary can move.

1

Introduction

An open question in machine learning is how the quality of training data, especially the labels, affects
the learned model [2, 4, 13, 22, 24]. As an example shown in Figure 1, we imagine a classification
task for detecting cancer based on observed biomarkers. The generative model assumes that there
is a hidden variable, called Y ∗ , denoting whether a person actually has cancer or not. Depending
on the state of Y ∗ , biomarkers can be observed, denoted as a feature vector x, drawn from some
distribution x ∼ P [X|Y ∗ ]. The goal of machine learning (ML) is to predict the presence of cancer
given the biomarkers — yet to train and evaluate the ML model, we have diagnoses, {y}, which may
not always be correct (y ̸= y ∗ for some samples). The question of label uncertainty is thus: What
happens when the observed labels, y, do not match the hidden true labels y ∗ ? Our theory concludes
that the answer depends on the shape of the noisy distribution P [Y |X] with respect to feature space.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

