LogiGAN: Learning Logical Reasoning via
Adversarial Pre-training

Xinyu Pi1∗, Wanjun Zhong2∗ , Yan Gao3 , Nan Duan3 , Jian-Guang Lou3
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, USA
2
Sun Yat-Sen University 3 Microsoft Research Asia
xinyupi2@illinois.edu, zhongwj25@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
{yan.gao, jlou, nanduan}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present LogiGAN, an unsupervised adversarial pre-training framework for improving logical reasoning abilities of language models. Upon automatic identification of logical reasoning phenomena in massive text corpus via detection heuristics,
we train language models to predict the masked-out logical statements. Inspired
by the facilitation effect of reflective thinking in human learning, we analogically
simulate the learning-thinking process with an adversarial Generator-Verifier architecture to assist logic learning. LogiGAN implements a novel sequential GAN
approach that (a) circumvents the non-differentiable challenge of the sequential
GAN by leveraging the Generator as a sentence-level generative likelihood scorer
with a learning objective of reaching scoring consensus with the Verifier; (b) is
computationally feasible for large-scale pre-training with longer target length.
Both base and large size language models pre-trained with LogiGAN demonstrate
obvious performance improvement on 12 datasets requiring general reasoning
abilities, revealing the fundamental role of logic in broad reasoning, as well as
the effectiveness of LogiGAN. Ablation studies on LogiGAN components reveal
the relative orthogonality between linguistic and logic abilities and suggest that
reflective thinking’s facilitation effect might also generalize to machine learning 2 .

1

Introduction
“Learning without thinking is labor lost; thinking without learning is perilous.”

– Confucius

Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020)
are approaching human-level performance in numerous tasks requiring basic linguistic abilities
(Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2018), setting off a huge wave of interest in Natural Language
Processing (NLP). Despite the emerging fervor, researchers soon realized that PLMs are relatively
incompetent in their reasoning abilities, which seems to be an insurmountable bottleneck for PLMs
with even better linguistic abilities (Kassner & Schütze, 2019; Helwe et al., 2021). Following this,
researchers delve into reasoning from multitudinous aspects, striving to improve PLMs’ reasoning
abilities.
From our perspective, reasoning (in natural language) is essentially an inferential process where
an unstated statement is drawn based on several presented statements, and Logic is the systemic
set of principles that provides reasoning with correctness and consistency assurance (Hurley, 1982).
Regardless of the variability of contents, logical reasoning generally incorporates two invariant forms:
drawing conclusions based on some premises (aka. deduction & induction, (Reichertz, 2013)), or
∗
2

indicates equal contribution. Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
The code is released in https://github.com/microsoft/ContextualSP/tree/master/logigan

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

