Convergence beyond the over-parameterized regime
using Rayleigh quotients

David A. R. Robin
INRIA
École Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
david.a.r.robin@gmail.com

Kevin Scaman
INRIA
École Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
kevin.scaman@inria.fr

Marc Lelarge
INRIA
École Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
marc.lelarge@ens.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new strategy to prove the convergence of deep learning architectures to a zero training (or even testing) loss by gradient ow. Our analysis is
centered on the notion of Rayleigh quotients in order to prove Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz
inequalities for a broader set of neural network architectures and loss functions. We
show that Rayleigh quotients provide a unied view for several convergence analysis techniques in the literature. Our strategy produces a proof of convergence for
various examples of parametric learning. In particular, our analysis does not require
the number of parameters to tend to innity, nor the number of samples to be nite,
thus extending to test loss minimization and beyond the over-parameterized regime.

1 Introduction
In order to understand the performance of vastly over-parameterized networks, various works have
investigated the properties of neural tangent kernels (NTK, see Jacot et al., 2018) and their eigenspaces.
While the study of these spectra has led to proofs of convergence to global minima despite the nonconvexity of the problem, these analyses typically rely on an over-parameterization assumption,
or even innite-width limits, casting a shadow on their applicability. Positive-deniteness of the
NTK in particular, granted by the innite-width limit, does not hold with nite width and a growing
number of samples, despite observed successes of neural networks in this regime. We provide a (toy)
counter-example in dimension two to better outline this issue, and x this aw by re-centering the
discussion on Rayleigh quotients, corresponding to xed directions, rather than positive deniteness,
i.e. uniformly bounding in all directions. We give several ideas to obtain bounds on Rayleigh
quotients, and provide non-trivial examples for each of the presented ideas, including a recovery of
known results, but also a new convergence speed guarantee for the multi-class logistic regression.
Overview. In a typical supervised learning task, one is given a training dataset of n ∈ N labeled samples D = ((xi , yi ) ∈ Rd × R)i∈[n] , and a parametric model with m ∈ N parameters,
f : Rm × Rd → R. The task is to nd parameters tting the training data, i.e. nd θ∗ ∈ Rm such
that ∀i ∈ [n], f (θ∗ ; xi ) ≈ yi . Aggregating these into a single vector F : θ → fθ = (f (θ; xi ))i∈[n] ,
this becomes a satisfaction of a system of equations F (θ) ≈ y ∈ Rn . After choosing a functional loss
ℓ : Rn → R+ , one can learn the associated parameters by gradient ow ∂t θ = −DF (θ)T ·∇ℓ(F (θ)),
where the jacobian of the parameterization F is a matrix DF (θ) ∈ Rn×m . This corresponds exactly
to the usual practice of dening a parametric function F , a functional loss ℓ, and training by gradient
ow on the parameters to minimize the parametric loss L = ℓ◦F . The question is then when does this
algorithm converge, and how fast ? Our focus is on the regime of nitely many parameters (m ∈ N)
and large data (n → +∞), where the over-parameterization arguments (m ≫ n) are insufcient.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

