M INE D OJO: Building Open-Ended
Embodied Agents with Internet-Scale Knowledge

Linxi Fan1 , Guanzhi Wang2∗ , Yunfan Jiang3∗ , Ajay Mandlekar1 , Yuncong Yang4 ,
Haoyi Zhu5 , Andrew Tang4 , De-An Huang1 , Yuke Zhu1 6† , Anima Anandkumar1 2†
1
NVIDIA, 2 Caltech, 3 Stanford, 4 Columbia, 5 SJTU, 6 UT Austin
∗
Equal contribution † Equal advising
https://minedojo.org

Abstract
Autonomous agents have made great strides in specialist domains like Atari games
and Go. However, they typically learn tabula rasa in isolated environments with
limited and manually conceived objectives, thus failing to generalize across a wide
spectrum of tasks and capabilities. Inspired by how humans continually learn
and adapt in the open world, we advocate a trinity of ingredients for building
generalist agents: 1) an environment that supports a multitude of tasks and goals,
2) a large-scale database of multimodal knowledge, and 3) a flexible and scalable
agent architecture. We introduce M INE D OJO, a new framework built on the
popular Minecraft game that features a simulation suite with thousands of diverse
open-ended tasks and an internet-scale knowledge base with Minecraft videos,
tutorials, wiki pages, and forum discussions. Using M INE D OJO’s data, we propose
a novel agent learning algorithm that leverages large pre-trained video-language
models as a learned reward function. Our agent is able to solve a variety of openended tasks specified in free-form language without any manually designed dense
shaping reward. We open-source the simulation suite, knowledge bases, algorithm
implementation, and pretrained models (https://minedojo.org) to promote
research towards the goal of generally capable embodied agents.

1

Introduction

Developing autonomous embodied agents that can attain human-level performance across a wide
spectrum of tasks has been a long-standing goal for AI research. There has been impressive progress
towards this goal, most notably in games [62, 66, 96] and robotics [53, 74, 110, 101, 80]. These
embodied agents are typically trained tabula rasa in isolated worlds with limited complexity and
diversity. Although highly performant, they are specialist models that do not generalize beyond a
narrow set of tasks. In contrast, humans inhabit an infinitely rich reality, continuously learn from and
adapt to a wide variety of open-ended tasks, and are able to leverage large amount of prior knowledge
from their own experiences as well as others.
We argue that three main pillars are necessary for generalist embodied agents to emerge. First, the
environment in which the agent acts needs to enable an unlimited variety of open-ended goals
[88, 55, 92, 89]. Natural evolution is able to nurture an ever-expanding tree of diverse life forms
thanks to the infinitely varied ecological settings that the Earth supports [89, 98]. This process has
not stagnated for billions of years. In contrast, today’s agent training algorithms cease to make new
progress after convergence in narrow environments [62, 110]. Second, a large-scale database of
prior knowledge is necessary to facilitate learning in open-ended settings. Just as humans frequently
learn from the internet, agents should also be able to harvest practical knowledge encoded in large
amounts of video demos [31, 59], multimedia tutorials [61], and forum discussions [97, 51, 41]. In a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

