Maximum Likelihood Training of
Implicit Nonlinear Diffusion Models

Dongjun Kim∗
KAIST
dongjoun57@kaist.ac.kr
Dongsoo Lee
NAVER CLOVA

Byeonghu Na∗
KAIST
wp03052@kaist.ac.kr
Wanmo Kang
KAIST

Se Jung Kwon
NAVER CLOVA

Il-Chul Moon
KAIST / Summary.AI

Abstract
Whereas diverse variations of diffusion models exist, extending the linear diffusion
into a nonlinear diffusion process is investigated by very few works. The nonlinearity effect has been hardly understood, but intuitively, there would be promising
diffusion patterns to efficiently train the generative distribution towards the data
distribution. This paper introduces a data-adaptive nonlinear diffusion process
for score-based diffusion models. The proposed Implicit Nonlinear Diffusion
Model (INDM) learns by combining a normalizing flow and a diffusion process.
Specifically, INDM implicitly constructs a nonlinear diffusion on the data space by
leveraging a linear diffusion on the latent space through a flow network. This flow
network is key to forming a nonlinear diffusion, as the nonlinearity depends on
the flow network. This flexible nonlinearity improves the learning curve of INDM
to nearly Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) against the non-MLE curve
of DDPM++, which turns out to be an inflexible version of INDM with the flow
fixed as an identity mapping. Also, the discretization of INDM shows the sampling
robustness. In experiments, INDM achieves the state-of-the-art FID of 1.75 on
CelebA. We release our code at https://github.com/byeonghu-na/INDM.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have recently achieved success on the task of sample generation, and some works
[1, 2] claim state-of-the-art performance over Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [3]. This
success is highlighted particularly in likelihood-based models, including normalizing flows [4],
autoregressive models [5], and Variational Auto-Encoders (VAE) [6]. Moreover, this success is
noteworthy because it is achieved merely using linear diffusion processes, such as Variance Exploding
(VE) Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) [7], and Variance Preserving (VP) SDE [8].
This paper extends linear diffusions of VE/VP SDEs to a data-adaptive trainable nonlinear diffusion.
To motivate the extension, though there are structural similarities between diffusion models and
VAEs, the inference part of a linear diffusion process has not been trained while its counterpart of
VAE (the encoder) has been trained. We introduce Implicit Nonlinear Diffusion Models (INDM) to
train its forward SDE, the inference part in diffusion models. INDM constructs the nonlinearity of
the data diffusion by transforming a linear latent diffusion back to the data space.
We implement the transformation between the data and latent spaces with a normalizing flow. The
invertibility of the flow mapping is key to learning a nonlinear inference part. Invertibility is necessary
*

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

