Anticipating Performativity by
Predicting from Predictions

Celestine Mendler-Dünner
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
cmendler@tuebingen.mpg.de
Frances Ding
Univerity of California, Berkeley
frances@berkeley.edu

Yixin Wang
University of Michigan
yixinw@umich.edu

Abstract
Predictions about people, such as their expected educational achievement or their
credit risk, can be performative and shape the outcome that they are designed to
predict. Understanding the causal effect of predictions on the eventual outcomes is
crucial for foreseeing the implications of future predictive models and selecting
which models to deploy. However, this causal estimation task poses unique challenges: model predictions are usually deterministic functions of input features and
highly correlated with outcomes. This can make the causal effect of predictions
on outcomes impossible to disentangle from the direct effect of the covariates. We
study this problem through the lens of causal identifiability. Despite the hardness of
this problem in full generality, we highlight three natural scenarios where the causal
effect of predictions can be identified from observational data: randomization in
predictions, overparameterization of the predictive model deployed during data
collection, and discrete prediction outputs. Empirically we show that given our
identifiability conditions hold, standard variants of supervised learning that predict
from predictions by treating the prediction as an input feature can find transferable
functional relationships that allow for conclusions about newly deployed predictive
models. These positive results fundamentally rely on model predictions being
recorded during data collection, bringing forward the importance of rethinking
standard data collection practices to enable progress towards a better understanding
of social outcomes and performative feedback loops.

1

Introduction

Predictions can impact sentiments, alter expectations, inform actions, and thus change the course of
events. Through their influence on people, predictions have the potential to change the regularities
in the population they seek to describe and understand. This insight underlies the theories of
performativity [38] and reflexivity [62] that play an important role in modern economics and finance.
Recently, Perdomo et al. [51] pointed out that the social theory of performativity has important
implications for machine learning theory and practice. Prevailing approaches to supervised learning
assume that features X and labels Y are sampled jointly from a fixed underlying data distribution that
is unaffected by attempts to predict Y from X. Performativity questions this assumption and suggests
that the deployment of a predictive model can disrupt the relationship between X and Y . Hence,
changes to the predictive model can induce shifts in the data distribution. For example, consider a
lender with a predictive model for risk of default – performativity could arise if individuals who are
predicted as likely to default are given higher interest loans, which make default even more likely [41],
akin to a self-fulfilling prophecy. In turn, a different predictive model that predicts smaller risk and
suggests offering more low-interest loans could cause some individuals who previously looked risky
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

