Multi-block Min-max Bilevel Optimization with
Applications in Multi-task Deep AUC Maximization

Quanqi Hu
Department of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
quanqi-hu@tamu.edu

Yongjian Zhong
Department of Computer Science
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
yongjian-zhong@uiowa.edu

Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
tianbao-yang@tamu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study multi-block min-max bilevel optimization problems, where
the upper level is non-convex strongly-concave minimax objective and the lower
level is a strongly convex objective, and there are multiple blocks of dual variables
and lower level problems. Due to the intertwined multi-block min-max bilevel
structure, the computational cost at each iteration could be prohibitively high,
especially with a large number of blocks. To tackle this challenge, we present
two single-loop randomized stochastic algorithms, which require updates for only
a constant number of blocks at each iteration. Under some mild assumptions
on the problem, we establish their sample complexity of O(1/ϵ4 ) for finding an
ϵ-stationary point. This matches the optimal complexity for solving stochastic nonconvex optimization under a general unbiased stochastic oracle model. Moreover,
we provide two applications of the proposed method in multi-task deep AUC (area
under ROC curve) maximization and multi-task deep partial AUC maximization.
Experimental results validate our theory and demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method on problems with hundreds of tasks.

1

Introduction

We consider multi-block min-max bilevel optimization problem of the following formulation
m

min maxm F (x, α) :=

x∈Rdx α∈A

1 X
{fi (x, αi , yi (x)) := Eξ∈Pi [fi (x, αi , yi (x); ξ)]}
m i=1

s.t. yi (x) = arg min gi (x, yi ) := Eζ∈Qi [gi (x, yi ; ζ)],

for i = 1, 2, . . . , m.

(upper)
(1)
(lower)

yi ∈Rdy

where fi and gi are smooth functions and A ⊂ Rdα is a convex set. In particular, in this paper
we assume that for each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, fi (x, αi , yi ) is strongly concave in the dual variable αi
but can be nonconvex in the primal variable x, and gi (x, yi ) is strongly convex in yi . The upper
problem minx∈Rdx maxα∈Am F (x, α) is a min-max optimization problem where the lower problems
{yi (x) = arg minyi ∈Rdy gi (x, yi )}m
i=1 are involved as variables. For each block i, the upper-level
objective fi (x, αi , yi ) and the lower-level objective gi (x, yi ) depend only on its corresponding block
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

