AutoST: Towards the Universal Modeling of
Spatio-temporal Sequences
Jianxin Li⇤
BDBC†
Beihang University
Beijing, China 100191
lijx@buaa.edu.cn

Shuai Zhang
BDBC
Beihang University
Beijing, China 100191
zhangs@act.buaa.edu.cn

Hui Xiong
HKUST(GZ)‡
HKUST FYTRI§
Guangzhou, China 511455
xionghui@ust.hk

Haoyi Zhou
BDBC
Beihang University
Beijing, China 100191
haoyi@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The analysis of spatio-temporal sequences plays an important role in many realworld applications, demanding a high model capacity to capture the interdependence among spatial and temporal dimensions. Previous studies provided separated
network design in three categories: spatial first, temporal first, and spatio-temporal
synchronous. However, the manually-designed heterogeneous models can hardly
meet the spatio-temporal dependency capturing priority for various tasks. To
address this, we proposed a universal modeling framework with three distinctive
characteristics: (i) Attention-based network backbone, including S2T Layer (spatial
first), T2S Layer (temporal first), and STS Layer (spatio-temporal synchronous).
(ii) The universal modeling framework, named UniST, with a unified architecture
that enables flexible modeling priorities with the proposed three different modules. (iii) An automatic search strategy, named AutoST, automatically searches
the optimal spatio-temporal modeling priority by network architecture search. Extensive experiments on five real-world datasets demonstrate that UniST with any
single type of our three proposed modules can achieve state-of-the-art performance.
Furthermore, AutoST can achieve overwhelming performance with UniST.

1

Introduction

Modeling and predicting the future of spatio-temporal (ST) sequences based on past observations has
been extensively studied and has been successfully applied in many fields, such as road traffic [13],
medical diagnosis [29], and meteorological research [24]. Traditional statistical methods typically
require input sequence satisfying certain assumptions, which limits its ability in capturing the
complex spatial-temporal dependency. Then, recurrent neural network (RNN) methods [15] leverage
the universal approximation property to build separated network branches to model dependency and
make predictions with fusion gate blocks from the stacking branches. The intrinsic gradient flow in the
back-propagation training process [7] may bring the ST dependency into incorrespondence with the
⇤

Jainxin Li is the corresponding author.
BDBC: Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing.
‡
HKUST(GZ): Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).
§
HKUST FYTRI: Guangzhou HKUST Fok Ying Tung Research Institute.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

