Towards Versatile Embodied Navigation

Hanqing Wang1, 2

∗

Wei Liang1,4

Luc Van Gool2

Wenguan Wang3

∗

1

Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
3
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
4
Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing
Project page: https://github.com/hanqingwangai/VXN

Abstract
With the emergence of varied visual navigation tasks (e.g., image-/object-/audiogoal and vision-language navigation) that specify the target in different ways, the
community has made appealing advances in training specialized agents capable of
handling individual navigation tasks well. Given plenty of embodied navigation
tasks and task-specific solutions, we address a more fundamental question: can we
learn a single powerful agent that masters not one but multiple navigation tasks
concurrently? First, we propose VXN, a large-scale 3D dataset that instantiates four
classic navigation tasks in standardized, continuous, and audiovisual-rich environments. Second, we propose V IENNA, a versatile embodied navigation agent that
simultaneously learns to perform the four navigation tasks with one model. Building
upon a full-attentive architecture, V IENNA formulates various navigation tasks as a
unified, parse-and-query procedure: the target description, augmented with four
task embeddings, is comprehensively interpreted into a set of diversified goal vectors, which are refined as the navigation progresses, and used as queries to retrieve
supportive context from episodic history for decision making. This enables the
reuse of knowledge across navigation tasks with varying input domains/modalities.
We empirically demonstrate that, compared with learning each visual navigation
task individually, our multitask agent achieves comparable or even better performance with reduced complexity.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental research topic, visual navigation has attained extensive attention across many disciplines, including robotics [1], computer vision [2, 3], and natural language processing [4]. Consider a
typical navigation scenario (Fig. 1), in which a human intends to direct a robot agent to navigate to a
target – a buzzing washer. The target can be specified by a photo of the washer (i.e., image-goal
nav. [5]), or the buzzing sound (i.e., audio-goal nav. [6]), or the corresponding semantic tag –
washing machine (i.e., object-goal nav. [7]), or linguistic instructions – “go to the end of this corridor, turn left and enter the laundry-room” (i.e., vision-language nav. [8]). Naturally, the agent is
expected to be smart enough to execute all these kinds of navigation tasks involving varying modalities/domains (i.e., image, audio, semantic tag, text) with different optimal policies. Contrary to our
expectation, almost all existing navigation agents are specifically designed/trained for one specific
task – a “versatile” agent capable of mastering multiple navigation tasks remains far beyond reach.
Besides its great value in practice, investigating embodied navigation in multitask scenarios can help
better understand human intelligence. First, we humans can learn multiple tasks in a parallel ad hoc
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

