Bellman Residual Orthogonalization
for Offline Reinforcement Learning
Andrea Zanette
Department of Computer Sciences and Electrical Engineering
University of California, Berkeley
zanette@berkeley.edu
Martin J. Wainwright
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
Department of Mathematics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and
Department of Computer Sciences and Electrical Engineering,
Department of Statistics,
University of California, Berkeley
wainwrigwork@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose and analyze a reinforcement learning principle that approximates the
Bellman equations by enforcing their validity only along an user-defined space of
test functions. Focusing on applications to model-free offline RL with function
approximation, we exploit this principle to derive confidence intervals for off-policy
evaluation, as well as to optimize over policies within a prescribed policy class.
We prove an oracle inequality on our policy optimization procedure in terms of
a trade-off between the value and uncertainty of an arbitrary comparator policy.
Different choices of test function spaces allow us to tackle different problems
within a common framework. We characterize the loss of efficiency in moving
from on-policy to off-policy data using our procedures, and establish connections
to concentrability coefficients studied in past work. We examine in depth the
implementation of our methods with linear function approximation, and provide
theoretical guarantees with polynomial-time implementations even when Bellman
closure does not hold.

1

Introduction

Markov decision processes (MDP) provide a general framework for optimal decision-making in
sequential settings (e.g., [Put94, Ber95a, Ber95b]). Reinforcement learning refers to a general
class of procedures for estimating near-optimal policies based on data from an unknown MDP
(e.g., [BT96, SB18]). Different classes of problems can be distinguished depending on our access
to the data-generating mechanism. Many modern applications of RL involve learning based on a
pre-collected or offline dataset. Moreover, the state-action spaces are often sufficiently complex that
it becomes necessary to implement function approximation. In this paper, we focus on model-free
offline reinforcement learning (RL) with function approximation, where prior knowledge about the
MDP is encoded via the value function. In this setting, we focus on two fundamental problems: (1)
offline policy evaluation—namely, the task of accurately predicting the value of a target policy; and
(2) offline policy optimization, which is the task of finding a high-performance policy.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

