A consistently adaptive trust-region method

Fadi Hamad
Department of Industrial Engineering
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15261
fah33@pitt.edu

Oliver Hinder
Department of Industrial Engineering
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15261
ohinder@pitt.edu

Abstract
Adaptive trust-region methods attempt to maintain strong convergence guarantees
without depending on conservative estimates of problem properties such as Lipschitz constants. However, on close inspection, one can show existing adaptive
trust-region methods have theoretical guarantees with severely suboptimal dependence on problem properties such as the Lipschitz constant of the Hessian. For
example, TRACE developed by Curtis et al. obtains a O(∆f L3/2 ϵ−3/2 ) + Õ(1) iteration bound where L is the Lipschitz constant of the Hessian. Compared with the
optimal O(∆f L1/2 ϵ−3/2 ) bound this is suboptimal with respect to L. We present
the first adaptive trust-region method which circumvents this issue and requires
at most O(∆f L1/2 ϵ−3/2 ) + Õ(1) iterations to find an ϵ-approximate stationary
point, matching the optimal iteration bound up to an additive logarithmic term. Our
method is a simple variant of a classic trust-region method and in our experiments
performs competitively with both ARC and a classical trust-region method.

1

Introduction

Second-order methods are known to quickly and accurately solve sparse nonconvex optimization
problems that, for example, arise in optimal control [1], truss design [2], AC optimal power flow
[3], and PDE constrained optimization [4]. Recently, there has also been a large push to extend
second-order methods to tackle machine learning problems by coupling them with carefully designed
subproblem solvers [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19].
Much of the early theory for second-order methods focused on showing fast local convergence
and (eventual) global convergence [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29]. These proofs of global
convergence, unsatisfactorily, rested on showing at each iteration second-order methods reduced
the function value almost as much as gradient descent [22, Theorem 4.5] [30, Theorem 3.2.], this is
despite the fact that in practice second-order methods require far fewer iterations. In 2006, Nesterov
and Polyak [31] partially resolved this inconsistency by introducing a new second-order method,
cubic regularized Newton’s method (CRN). Their method can be used to find stationary points of
multivariate and possibly nonconvex functions f : Rn → R. Their convergence results assumes the
optimality gap
∆f := f (x1 ) − inf n f (x)
x∈R

is finite and that the Hessian of f is L-Lipschitz:
∥∇2 f (x) − ∇2 f (x′ )∥ ≤ L∥x − x′ ∥

∀x, x′ ∈ Rn

(1)

where ∥ · ∥ is the spectral norm for matricies and the Euclidean norm for vectors. If L is known they
guarantee their algorithm terminates with an ϵ-approximate stationary point:
∥∇f (x)∥ ≤ ϵ
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

