Pre-trained Adversarial Perturbations

1

Yuanhao Ban1,2∗ , Yinpeng Dong1,3†
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University 3 RealAI
banyh19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dongyinpeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised pre-training has drawn increasing attention in recent years due to
its superior performance on numerous downstream tasks after ﬁne-tuning. However, it is well-known that deep learning models lack the robustness to adversarial
examples, which can also invoke security issues to pre-trained models, despite being less explored. In this paper, we delve into the robustness of pre-trained models
by introducing Pre-trained Adversarial Perturbations (PAPs), which are universal
perturbations crafted for the pre-trained models to maintain the effectiveness when
attacking ﬁne-tuned ones without any knowledge of the downstream tasks. To this
end, we propose a Low-Level Layer Lifting Attack (L4A) method to generate effective PAPs by lifting the neuron activations of low-level layers of the pre-trained
models. Equipped with an enhanced noise augmentation strategy, L4A is effective
at generating more transferable PAPs against ﬁne-tuned models. Extensive experiments on typical pre-trained vision models and ten downstream tasks demonstrate
that our method improves the attack success rate by a large margin compared with
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained models [40, 13] have recently achieved unprecedented success in a variety of
ﬁelds, e.g., natural language processing [21, 27, 1], computer vision [2, 16, 17]. A large amount of
work proposes sophisticated self-supervised learning algorithms, enabling the pre-trained models to
extract useful knowledge from large-scale unlabeled datasets. The pre-trained models consequently
facilitate downstream tasks through transfer learning or ﬁne-tuning [37, 50, 12]. Nowadays, more
practitioners without sufﬁcient computational resources or training data tend to ﬁne-tune the publicly
available pre-trained models on their own datasets. Therefore, it has become an emerging trend to
adopt the paradigm of pre-training to ﬁne-tuning rather than training from scratch [13].
Despite the excellent performance of deep learning models, they are incredibly vulnerable to adversarial examples [44, 11], which are generated by adding small, human-imperceptible perturbations to
natural examples, but can make the target model output erroneous predictions. Adversarial examples
also exhibit an intriguing property called transferability [44, 26, 32], which means that the adversarial perturbations generated for one model or a set of images can remain adversarial for others. For
example, a universal adversarial perturbation (UAP) [32] can be generated for the entire distribution
of data samples, demonstrating excellent cross-data transferability. Other work [26, 7, 47, 8, 34] has
revealed that adversarial examples have high cross-model and cross-domain transferability, making
black-box attacks practical without any knowledge of the target model or even the training data.
However, much less effort has been devoted to exploring the adversarial robustness of pre-trained
models. As these models have been broadly studied and deployed in various real-world applications,
∗

This work was done when Yuanhao Ban was intern at RealAI, Inc; † Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

