Local Bayesian optimization via maximizing
probability of descent

Quan Nguyen∗1 Kaiwen Wu∗2 Jacob R. Gardner2 Roman Garnett1
1
Washington University in St. Louis 2 University of Pennsylvania
{quan,garnett}@wustl.edu
{kaiwenwu,jacobrg}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Local optimization presents a promising approach to expensive, high-dimensional
black-box optimization by sidestepping the need to globally explore the search
space. For objective functions whose gradient cannot be evaluated directly,
Bayesian optimization offers one solution – we construct a probabilistic model of
the objective, design a policy to learn about the gradient at the current location, and
use the resulting information to navigate the objective landscape. Previous work
has realized this scheme by minimizing the variance in the estimate of the gradient,
then moving in the direction of the expected gradient. In this paper, we re-examine
and refine this approach. We demonstrate that, surprisingly, the expected value
of the gradient is not always the direction maximizing the probability of descent,
and in fact, these directions may be nearly orthogonal. This observation then
inspires an elegant optimization scheme seeking to maximize the probability of
descent while moving in the direction of most-probable descent. Experiments
on both synthetic and real-world objectives show that our method outperforms
previous realizations of this optimization scheme and is competitive against other,
significantly more complicated baselines.

1

Introduction

The optimization of expensive-to-evaluate, high-dimensional black-box functions is ubiquitous in
machine learning, science, engineering, and beyond; examples range from hyperparameter tuning
[21] and policy search in reinforcement learning [3, 7], to configuring physics simulations [14].
High-dimensional global optimization faces an inherent difficulty stemming from the curse of
dimensionality, as a thorough exploration of the search space becomes exponentially more expensive.
It is more feasible to seek to locally optimize these high-dimensional objective functions, as we can
then sidestep this inherent burden. This is true even in settings where we cannot directly observe the
gradient of the objective function, as we may appeal to sophisticated techniques such as Bayesian
optimization to nonetheless learn about the gradient of the objective through noisy observations, and
then use this knowledge to navigate the high-dimensional search space locally.
A realization of this scheme has been proposed by Müller et al. [18], where a Gaussian process (GP) is
used to model the objective function, and observations are designed to alternate between minimizing
the variance – and thus uncertainty – of the GP’s estimate of the gradient of the objective at a given
location, then moving in the direction of the expected gradient. Although this approach seems natural,
it fails to account for some nuances in the distribution of the directional derivative induced by the GP.
Specifically, it turns out that beliefs about the gradient with identical uncertainty may nonetheless have
different probabilities of descent along the expected gradient. Further and perhaps surprisingly, the
expected gradient is not necessarily the direction maximizing the probability of descent – in fact, these
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

