Perceptual Attacks of No-Reference Image Quality
Models with Human-in-the-Loop

Weixia Zhang1
Guodong Guo3

Dingquan Li2

Xiongkuo Min1

Xiaokang Yang1

Guangtao Zhai1
Kede Ma4∗

1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Network Intelligence Research Department, Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, West Virginia University
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{zwx8981, minxiongkuo, zhaiguangtao, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, lidq01@pcl.ac.cn
guodong.guo@mail.wvu.edu, kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
No-reference image quality assessment (NR-IQA) aims to quantify how humans
perceive visual distortions of digital images without access to their undistorted
references. NR-IQA models are extensively studied in computational vision,
and are widely used for performance evaluation and perceptual optimization of
man-made vision systems. Here we make one of the first attempts to examine
the perceptual robustness of NR-IQA models. Under a Lagrangian formulation,
we identify insightful connections of the proposed perceptual attack to previous
beautiful ideas in computer vision and machine learning. We test one knowledgedriven and three data-driven NR-IQA methods under four full-reference IQA
models (as approximations to human perception of just-noticeable differences).
Through carefully designed psychophysical experiments, we find that all four NRIQA models are vulnerable to the proposed perceptual attack. More interestingly,
we observe that the generated counterexamples are not transferable, manifesting
themselves as distinct design flows of respective NR-IQA methods. Source code
are available at https://github.com/zwx8981/PerceptualAttack_BIQA.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have revolutionized a wide range of computer
vision and machine learning applications. For example, ResNet [1] reduced the object recognition
error rate on ImageNet [2] to 3.56%, surpassing the performance of informed humans. A similar story
is written in the field of image quality assessment (IQA), where DNN-based IQA models [3, 4, 5, 6]
exhibit very high correlations with human opinions of perceptual quality on various subject-rated
datasets [7, 8, 9, 5]. IQA models can be roughly classified into full-reference IQA (FR-IQA) and
no-reference IQA (NR-IQA) ones depending on the availability of the pristine undistorted image as
reference. Representative FR-IQA methods include the Minkowski distance (i.e., the ℓp -norm induced
metric), the structural similarity (SSIM) index [10], the learned perceptual image patch similarity
(LPIPS) method [3], and the deep image structure and texture similarity (DISTS) model [4], which
are widely used for measuring signal fidelity and quality in various vision applications. NR-IQA
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

