Injecting Domain Knowledge from Empirical
Interatomic Potentials to Neural Networks for
Predicting Material Properties

Zeren Shui
University of Minnesota
shuix007@umn.edu
Ilia A. Nikiforov
University of Minnesota
nikif002@umn.edu

Daniel S. Karls∗
University of Minnesota
karl0100@umn.edu
Ellad B. Tadmor
University of Minnesota
tadmor@umn.edu

Mingjian Wen∗
University of Houston
mjwen@uh.edu
George Karypis
University of Minnesota / AWS
karypis@umn.edu

Abstract
For decades, atomistic modeling has played a crucial role in predicting the behavior
of materials in numerous fields ranging from nanotechnology to drug discovery.
The most accurate methods in this domain are rooted in first-principles quantum
mechanical calculations such as density functional theory (DFT). Because these
methods have remained computationally prohibitive, practitioners have traditionally focused on defining physically motivated closed-form expressions known as
empirical interatomic potentials (EIPs) that approximately model the interactions
between atoms in materials. In recent years, neural network (NN)-based potentials trained on quantum mechanical (DFT-labeled) data have emerged as a more
accurate alternative to conventional EIPs. However, the generalizability of these
models relies heavily on the amount of labeled training data, which is often still
insufficient to generate models suitable for general-purpose applications. In this
paper, we propose two generic strategies that take advantage of unlabeled training
instances to inject domain knowledge from conventional EIPs to NNs in order
to increase their generalizability. The first strategy, based on weakly supervised
learning, trains an auxiliary classifier on EIPs and selects the best-performing EIP
to generate energies to supplement the ground-truth DFT energies in training the
NN. The second strategy, based on transfer learning, first pretrains the NN on a
large set of easily obtainable EIP energies, and then fine-tunes it on ground-truth
DFT energies. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the first strategy improves baseline NN performance by 5% to 51% while the
second improves baseline performance by up to 55%. Combining them further
boosts performance.

1

Introduction

Predictive modeling of materials is a field with manifold applications that has been the subject of
many cross-disciplinary studies. While modeling is conducted at different length scales, all material
behavior ultimately has its origins at the nano scale, where the interactions between individual atoms
must be understood. The most accurate methods at this scale are based on quantum mechanics theory,
requiring explicit consideration of the electronic degrees of freedom described by the Schrödinger
equation. However, these methods are presently limited to systems containing at most several
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

