Learning Generalizable Part-based Feature
Representation for 3D Point Clouds

Xin Wei, Xiang Gu, Jian Sun ( )
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, P. R. China
{wxmath, xianggu}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep networks on 3D point clouds have achieved remarkable success in 3D classification, while they are vulnerable to geometry variations caused by inconsistent
data acquisition procedures. This results in a challenging 3D domain generalization
(3DDG) problem, that is to generalize a model trained on source domain to an
unseen target domain. Based on the observation that local geometric structures
are more generalizable than the whole shape, we propose to reduce the geometry shift by a generalizable part-based feature representation and design a novel
part-based domain generalization network (PDG) for 3D point cloud classification.
Specifically, we build a part-template feature space shared by source and target
domains. Shapes from distinct domains are first organized to part-level features
and then represented by part-template features. The transformed part-level features,
dubbed aligned part-based representations, are then aggregated by a part-based
feature aggregation module. To improve the robustness of the part-based representations, we further propose a contrastive learning framework upon part-based shape
representation. Experiments and ablation studies on 3DDA and 3DDG benchmarks justify the efficacy of the proposed approach for domain generalization,
compared with the previous state-of-the-art methods. Our code will be available on
http://github.com/weixmath/PDG.

1

Introduction

The 3D shape understanding and reasoning play a critical role in wide applications such as automatic
drive, archaeology, virtual reality / augmented reality, etc. Point cloud is a popular representation of
3D shape attributed to its simpleness and effectiveness. Recently, with the thriving of deep learning,
numerous deep architectures [1–10] have been proposed for 3D point cloud analysis. Although these
methods have achieved impressive results on the 3D shape classification task, all of them strongly
rely on the i.i.d assumption on the source and target data but ignore the out-of-distribution situation
in real-world practice. For example, the performance of these methods drops dramatically when
trained on CAD datasets [11, 12] and tested on real scanned datasets [13, 14]. Therefore, it is crucial
and valuable to investigate how to learn a 3D classification model that generalizes well on a related
test domain with domain shift to the training domain [15]. Domain shift refers to the existence of
significant divergence between the distributions of the training and test datasets [15]. The domain
shift may degrade the performance of network trained on a training dataset when generalizing to the
test dataset. Domain generalization methods for improving domain robustness of deep network have
been extensively investigated for 2D images [16–21]. However, little work [22, 23] addresses the
domain generalization (DG) problem for point cloud deep networks. For point clouds, the major
cause of domain shift is the geometry variations generated by inconsistent data collection processes,
e.g., the realistic sensor noises, the non-uniform density of point clouds, and self-occlusion. These
domain shifts specific for 3D point clouds hinder the idea that directly adopts 2D image-oriented
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

