Provable Defense against Backdoor Policies
in Reinforcement Learning
Shubham Kumar Bharti
UW-Madison
Madison, WI, USA
skbharti@cs.wisc.edu

Xuezhou Zhang
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, USA
xz7392@princeton.edu

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS
Saarbrücken, Germany
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Xiaojin Zhu
UW-Madison
Madison, WI, USA
jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We propose a provable defense mechanism against backdoor policies in reinforcement learning under subspace trigger assumption. A backdoor policy is a security
threat where an adversary publishes a seemingly well-behaved policy which in fact
allows hidden triggers. During deployment, the adversary can modify observed
states in a particular way to trigger unexpected actions and harm the agent. We
assume the agent does not have the resources to re-train a good policy. Instead,
our defense mechanism sanitizes the backdoor policy by projecting observed states
to a ‘safe subspace’, estimated from a small number of interactions with a clean
(non-triggered) environment. Our sanitized policy achieves ✏ approximate optimality
⇣ in the⌘presence of triggers, provided the number of clean interactions is
O (1 D)4 ✏2 where is the discounting factor and D is the dimension of state
space. Empirically, we show that our sanitization defense performs well on two
Atari game environments. 1

1

Motivation

The success of reinforcement learning (RL) brings up a new security issue: Often the task is so
complex that it takes considerable amount of resources to train a good policy. Such resources are
increasingly restricted to large corporations or nation states. Consequently, we imagine in the future
many users of RL have to be content with obtaining pretrained policies, without the possibility to
(re)train the policy themselves. Downloading a pretrained RL policy from an untrusted party opens
up a new attack surface known as backdoor policy attacks.
In a backdoor policy attack, an adversary prepares a pair (⇡ † , f ) where ⇡ † is a backdoor policy
and f is a trigger function. The adversary publishes the backdoor policy ⇡ † to be downloaded and
used by interested users. ⇡ † behaves like an optimal policy under normal deployment, until it is
triggered. A naive user, interested in performing well in the underlying RL problem, downloads the
backdoor policy ⇡ † unaware of the fact that adversary can activate the trigger to make the policy
perform poorly in the adversarial environment. For example, ⇡ † may be the driving policy for an
autonomous car. The car will drive normally under ⇡ † until the attacker puts up a special sticker
somewhere within the car’s camera view. The sticker acts as a trigger; when the trigger is present, the
1

The code available at https://github.com/skbharti/Provable-Defense-in-RL

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

