Random Sharpness-Aware Minimization

Yong Liu1 , Siqi Mai2 , Minhao Cheng3 , Xiangning Chen4 , Cho-Jui Hsieh4 , Yang You1
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
HPC-AI Technology Inc. 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST
4
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
{liuyong, youy}@comp.nus.edu.sg, minhaocheng@ust.hk,
{xiangning, chohsieh}@cs.ucla.edu,

Abstract
Currently, Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) is proposed to seek the parameters that lie in a flat region to improve the generalization when training neural
networks. In particular, a minimax optimization objective is defined to find the
maximum loss value centered on the weight, out of the purpose of simultaneously
minimizing loss value and loss sharpness. For the sake of simplicity, SAM applies
one-step gradient ascent to approximate the solution of the inner maximization.
However, one-step gradient ascent may not be sufficient and multi-step gradient
ascents will cause additional training costs. Based on this observation, we propose
a novel random smoothing based SAM (R-SAM) algorithm. To be specific, R-SAM
essentially smooths the loss landscape, based on which we are able to apply the
one-step gradient ascent on the smoothed weights to improve the approximation of
the inner maximization. Further, we evaluate our proposed R-SAM on CIFAR and
ImageNet datasets. The experimental results illustrate that R-SAM can consistently
improve the performance on ResNet and Vision Transformer (ViT) training.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has seen remarkable progress in a variety of areas, with advanced development in
over-parameterized neural networks. However, over-parameterization usually leads to overfitting
and suffers poor generalization for unseen data [31]. To this end, many studies have investigated the
generalization of deep neural network to narrow down the gap [7, 17, 26, 29, 42]. In particular, they
try to analyse the local minima problem and connect it with loss geometry [17, 27, 31]. Amongst
them, Foret et al. propose SAM, with an aim to solve a minimax optimization problem. SAM initially
finds the maximum of loss function in the region of radius ρ centered on the w, regarding which to
minimize the loss value. This will prompt the model to converge to a flat region, where the entire
neighborhood tends to have uniformly low training loss. Inner maximization is a vital part of SAM
procedure as it essentially describes the loss landscape and plays an important role in whether we
can reduce the loss sharpness effectively. The solution for inner maximization is NP-hard, and for
simplicity, SAM uses one-step gradient ascent directly to approximate the maximum loss. However,
one-step gradient ascent may not be sufficient. In addition, multi-step gradient ascents are not efficient
and will cause additional training costs. Therefore, how to improve the approximation of the inner
maximization without additional computation cost is an important problem.
Based on our empirical analysis in Figure 1 and Theorem 1, we find that random initialization can
smooth the loss landscape and obtain a more stable gradient direction. Noted that a more stable
gradient can make a good approximation to the true maximum value. Therefore, in this paper,
we propose a novel random smoothing based sharpness-aware minimization algorithm (R-SAM).
Our proposed R-SAM consists of two steps. First, we use a Gaussian noise to smooth the loss
landscape and escape from the local sharp region to obtain a stable gradient for gradient ascent.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

