Learning Options via Compression

Yiding Jiang∗
Carnegie Mellon University
yidingji@cs.cmu.edu
Benjamin Eysenbach
Carnegie Mellon University
beysenba@cs.cmu.edu

Evan Zheran Liu∗
Stanford University
evanliu@cs.stanford.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Chelsea Finn
Stanford University
cbfinn@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Identifying statistical regularities in solutions to some tasks in multi-task reinforcement learning can accelerate the learning of new tasks. Skill learning offers one
way of identifying these regularities by decomposing pre-collected experiences
into a sequence of skills. A popular approach to skill learning is maximizing the
likelihood of the pre-collected experience with latent variable models, where the
latent variables represent the skills. However, there are often many solutions that
maximize the likelihood equally well, including degenerate solutions. To address
this underspecification, we propose a new objective that combines the maximum
likelihood objective with a penalty on the description length of the skills. This
penalty incentivizes the skills to maximally extract common structures from the
experiences. Empirically, our objective learns skills that solve downstream tasks
in fewer samples compared to skills learned from only maximizing likelihood.
Further, while most prior works in the offline multi-task setting focus on tasks with
low-dimensional observations, our objective can scale to challenging tasks with
high-dimensional image observations.

1

Introduction

While learning tasks from scratch with reinforcement learning (RL) is often sample inefficient [30, 8],
leveraging datasets of pre-collected experience from various tasks can accelerate the learning of new
tasks. This experience can be used in numerous ways, including to learn a dynamics model [18, 38],
to learn compact representations of observations [87], to learn behavioral priors [77], or to extract
meaningful skills or options [79, 42, 2, 59] for hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) [6]. Our
work studies this last approach. The central idea is to extract commonly occurring behaviors from the
pre-collected experience as skills, which can then be used in place of primitive low-level actions to
accelerate learning new tasks via planning [70, 51] or RL [55, 47, 52]. For example, in a navigation
domain, learned skills may correspond to navigating to different rooms or objects.
Prior methods learn skills by maximizing the likelihood of the pre-collected experience [43, 42, 2, 90].
However, this maximum likelihood objective (or the lower bounds on it) is underspecified: it often
admits many solutions, only some of which would help learning new tasks (see Figure 1). For example,
one degenerate solution is to learn a single skill for each entire trajectory; another degenerate solution
is to learn skills that operate for a single timestep, equivalent to the original action space. Both of
these decompositions can perfectly reconstruct the pre-collected experiences (and, hence, maximize
likelihood), but they are of limited use for learning to solve new tasks. Overall, the maximum
likelihood objective cannot distinguish between such decompositions and potentially more useful
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

