TTOpt: A Maximum Volume Quantized Tensor
Train-based Optimization and its Application to
Reinforcement Learning

Konstantin Sozykin ∗ † Andrei Chertkov ∗ † Roman Schutski †
Anh-Huy Phan † Andrzej Cichocki † ‡ § Ivan Oseledets † ¶

Abstract
We present a novel procedure for optimization based on the combination of efficient
quantized tensor train representation and a generalized maximum matrix volume
principle. We demonstrate the applicability of the new Tensor Train Optimizer
(TTOpt) method for various tasks, ranging from minimization of multidimensional
functions to reinforcement learning. Our algorithm compares favorably to popular
gradient-free methods and outperforms them by the number of function evaluations
or execution time, often by a significant margin.

1

Introduction

In recent years learning-based algorithms achieved impressive results in various applications, ranging
from image and text analysis and generation [52] to sequential decision making and control [40]
and even quantum physics simulations [49]. The vital part of every learning-based algorithm is
an optimization procedure, e.g., Stochastic Gradient Descent. In many situations, however, the
problem-specific target function is not differentiable, too complex, or its gradients are not helpful due
to the non-convex nature of the problem [30, 2, 58]. The examples include hyper-parameter selection
during the training of neural models, policy optimization in reinforcement learning (RL), training
neural networks with discrete (quantized) weights [57] or with non-differentiable loss functions [20].
In all these contexts, efficient direct gradient-free optimization procedures are highly needed.
Recently, [53] showed that an essential class of gradient-free methods, namely the evolutionary
strategies (ES) [22, 26], are competitive in reinforcement learning problems. In RL, the goal is to find
the agent’s action distribution π (the policy), maximizing some cumulative reward function J. The
policy is usually parameterized with a set of parameters θ. It follows that the reward is a function of
the parameters of the policy: J(π(θ)) = J(θ). The idea of [53] and similar works [36, 15, 10, 11]
is to directly optimize the cumulative reward function J(θ) = J(θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θd ) with respect to
the parameters of the policy. We pursued a similar approach to transform a traditional Markov
Decision Process into an optimization problem (we provide the details in Appendix B.3). Although
the agents trained with ES often demonstrate more rich behavior and better generalization compared
to traditional gradient-based policy optimization, the convergence of ES is often slow [11].
∗

Equal Contribution, corresponding emails {konstantin.sozykin,a.chertkov}@skoltech.ru
Center of Artificial Intelligence Technology, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
Moscow, Russia
‡
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Tokyo, Japan
§
Systems Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
¶
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute (AIRI), Moscow, Russia
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

