IKEA-Manual: Seeing Shape Assembly Step by Step

Ruocheng Wang
Stanford University

Yunzhi Zhang
Stanford University

Chin-Yi Cheng∗
Google Research

Jiayuan Mao
MIT

Ran Zhang
Autodesk

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Abstract
Human-designed visual manuals are crucial components in shape assembly activities. They provide step-by-step guidance on how we should move and connect
different parts in a convenient and physically-realizable way. While there has been
an ongoing effort in building agents that perform assembly tasks, the information
in human-design manuals has been largely overlooked. We identify that this is due
to 1) a lack of realistic 3D assembly objects that have paired manuals and 2) the
difficulty of extracting structured information from purely image-based manuals.
Motivated by this observation, we present IKEA-Manual, a dataset consisting of
102 IKEA objects paired with assembly manuals. We provide fine-grained annotations on the IKEA objects and assembly manuals, including decomposed assembly
parts, assembly plans, manual segmentation, and 2D-3D correspondence between
3D parts and visual manuals. We illustrate the broad application of our dataset on
four tasks related to shape assembly: assembly plan generation, part segmentation,
pose estimation and 3D part assembly.

1

Introduction

Shape assembly is a common task in our daily lives. Given a list of parts, we sequentially move and
connect them to obtain the target shape—a LEGO toy, an appliance, or an IKEA chair. Due to the
long-horizon nature of the task, we often heavily rely on visual manuals that provide step-by-step
guidance during the assembly process. Previous studies [1, 2] have shown that these carefully
designed manuals decompose the assembly task into a series of simple actions while taking multiple
factors into account, including readability, assembly difficulty, and physical feasibility.
While there is a growing interest in building autonomous models that tackle the shape assembly task
in the vision [3, 4, 5] and robotics communities [6, 7, 8], the information in human-designed manuals
is largely overlooked. We identify two reasons: first, most works leverage shapes from synthetic
datasets such as PartNet [9] as the assembly targets, which do not have corresponding humandesigned manuals; second, directly leveraging the information from visual manuals is challenging:
these manuals are delivered in plain unstructured images, guiding humans via visual elements
including arrows and the 2D projections of 3D shapes. While humans can effortlessly understand
these visual elements, this is not the case for machines.
Motivated by these observations, our goal is to create a dataset for studying shape assembly that
contains realistic 3D assembly objects paired with human-designed manuals, where the manuals
are parsed in a structured format. Towards this end, we introduce IKEA-Manual, a dataset of 3D
IKEA models and human-designed visual manuals with diverse types of annotations, as shown in
Fig. 1. IKEA furniture is well known for being manufactured with assembly parts and visual manuals
∗

Work done when working at Autodesk AI Lab.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

