Amplifying Membership Exposure via Data Poisoning

Yufei Chen1,2 Chao Shen1 Yun Shen3 Cong Wang2 Yang Zhang4
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 City University of Hong Kong
3
NetApp 4 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
As in-the-wild data are increasingly involved in the training stage, machine learning
applications become more susceptible to data poisoning attacks. Such attacks
typically lead to test-time accuracy degradation or controlled misprediction. In this
paper, we investigate the third type of exploitation of data poisoning - increasing
the risks of privacy leakage of benign training samples. To this end, we demonstrate
a set of data poisoning attacks to amplify the membership exposure of the targeted
class. We first propose a generic dirty-label attack for supervised classification
algorithms. We then propose an optimization-based clean-label attack in the
transfer learning scenario, whereby the poisoning samples are correctly labeled
and look “natural” to evade human moderation. We extensively evaluate our
attacks on computer vision benchmarks. Our results show that the proposed attacks
can substantially increase the membership inference precision with minimum
overall test-time model performance degradation. To mitigate the potential negative
impacts of our attacks, we also investigate feasible countermeasures.1

1

Introduction

Training data are the most critical ingredients of machine learning, which are sometimes regarded as a
new type of fuel in the era of artificial intelligence [30]. Over the last decade, training data collection
and preservation have received growing concerns [10, 29], among which two focal agendas arise.
One is data corruption caused by data poisoning attacks, posing serious threats to training data
integrity. Data poisoning attacks exploit the common practice to (usually automatically) collect
training data in the wild, e.g., from the Internet. This practice opens doors for attackers to inject
malicious data at the training time to manipulate model behaviors at the test time. Consequently,
models trained with poisoned training data suffer from either accuracy degradation [7, 19], targeted
misclassification [34, 55], or backdoor implantation [32, 50].
The other is data leakage caused by privacy inference attacks, mainly violating training data confidentiality. Ideally, a machine learning model learns generalizable knowledge of the training data, rather
than details of specific data points. However, previous studies show that conventional learning algorithms can unintentionally remember sensitive information. Such information can later be inferred by
various privacy inference attacks, such as membership inference attacks [33, 38]. Essentially, data
poisoning is a training time attack, while privacy inference is performed at the testing time. Despite
intensive research efforts, most existing works study them separately. It remains unclear whether
these two attacks can be integrated to cause more severe damage to machine learning models.
In this paper, we aim to advance the research frontier on the connection between data integrity
and confidentiality. To this end, we propose a set of poisoning attacks to increase the precision of
membership inference attacks, which is widely adopted as a standard tool to measure privacy leakage
in statistical analysis [15, 40]. In particular, we first show a simple but effective dirty-label poisoning
1

Code is available at https://github.com/yfchen1994/poisoning_membership.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

