Scaling & Shifting Your Features:
A New Baseline for Efficient Model Tuning

Dongze Lian1∗ Daquan Zhou1,2∗ Jiashi Feng2 Xinchao Wang1
1
National University of Singapore 2 ByteDance
{dongze,xinchao}@nus.edu.sg {zhoudaquan21,jshfeng}@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing fine-tuning methods either tune all parameters of the pre-trained model
(full fine-tuning), which is not efficient, or only tune the last linear layer (linear
probing), which suffers a significant accuracy drop compared to the full fine-tuning.
In this paper, we propose a new parameter-efficient fine-tuning method termed as
SSF, representing that researchers only need to Scale and Shift the deep Features
extracted by a pre-trained model to catch up with the performance of full finetuning. In this way, SSF also surprisingly outperforms other parameter-efficient
fine-tuning approaches even with a smaller number of tunable parameters. Furthermore, different from some existing parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods
(e.g., Adapter or VPT) that introduce the extra parameters and computational cost
in the training and inference stages, SSF only adds learnable parameters during
the training stage, and these additional parameters can be merged into the original
pre-trained model weights via re-parameterization in the inference phase. With the
proposed SSF, our model obtains 2.46% (90.72% vs. 88.54%) and 11.48% (73.10%
vs. 65.57%) performance improvement on FGVC and VTAB-1k in terms of Top-1
accuracy compared to the full fine-tuning but only fine-tuning about 0.3M parameters. We also conduct amounts of experiments in various model families (CNNs,
Transformers, and MLPs) and datasets. Results on 26 image classification datasets
in total and 3 robustness & out-of-distribution datasets show the effectiveness of
SSF. Code is available at https://github.com/dongzelian/SSF.

1

Introduction

With the popularity of the data-driven methods in the deep learning community, the dataset scale
and the model size have both got huge explosions. There is a tendency to explore large models and
then adopt these pre-trained models in downstream tasks to achieve better performance and faster
convergence, which gradually becomes a common way.
However, the current procedure depends on full fine-tuning heavily, where all the parameters of the
model are updated. It inevitably causes the model to be over-fitted to the small target dataset and
thus cannot be used for other tasks after the fine-tuning. As a result, the device will need to save
a dedicated set of model parameters for each task, which causes a huge amount of storage space,
especially for today’s large models (e.g., ViT-G/14 [11] 1.8G, CoAtNet [5] 2.4G).
A simple solution for the above problem is linear probing [16], where only the last head layer is
fine-tuned. However, this practice usually yields inferior performance compared to the full fine-tuning
proxy. Motivated by the success of the parameter-efficient fine-tuning strategy with prompt in the
field of natural language processing (NLP) [21, 32, 23, 19], the recent work implements a similar
proxy on vision tasks [29], termed as Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT). Specifically, VPT [29] proposes
to insert learnable prompts as inputs and append them to the original image tokens. These prompts
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

