Tracking Functional Changes in Nonstationary Signals
with Evolutionary Ensemble Bayesian Model for
Robust Neural Decoding

Xinyun Zhu1,2,4 , Yu Qi3,4,∗ , Gang Pan4,2 , Yueming Wang1,4,∗
{zhuxinyun, qiyu, gpan, ymingwang}@zju.edu.cn
1
Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Affiliated Mental Health Center & Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital and the
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-machine Integration,
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
4
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Neural signals are typical nonstationary data where the functional mapping between
neural activities and the intentions (such as the velocity of movements) can occasionally change. Existing studies mostly use a fixed neural decoder, thus suffering
from an unstable performance given neural functional changes. We propose a
novel evolutionary ensemble framework (EvoEnsemble) to dynamically cope with
changes in neural signals by evolving the decoder model accordingly. EvoEnsemble
integrates evolutionary computation algorithms in a Bayesian framework where the
fitness of models can be sequentially computed with their likelihoods according to
the incoming data at each time slot, which enables online tracking of time-varying
functions. Two strategies of evolve-at-changes and history-model-archive are designed to further improve efficiency and stability. Experiments with simulations
and neural signals demonstrate that EvoEnsemble can track the changes in functions effectively thus improving the accuracy and robustness of neural decoding.
The improvement is most significant in neural signals with functional changes.

1

Introduction

Nonstationary signals widely exist in the real world, where the properties and functions can change
continuously over time. Neural signals are typical nonstationary signals, where the inherent dynamics
in the neural systems, the plasticity of synapses driven by learning and adaptation contribute to the
variability of neural encoding of the brain [1, 2]. The nonstationary property of neural signals forms
a challenging problem in the brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) field [3–9], because the decoding
accuracy will degrade over time given changing neural functions and a fixed neural decoder.
Considering the nonstationary of neural signals, the neural encoding model, can be presented by:
y t = ht (xt ) + q t ,

(1)

where y t denotes the neural signal we observed at time t, the function ht (·) is the neural encoding
model that changes over time, and xt denotes the state to be encoded such as the velocity of a
computer cursor, and q t is biological or external noises. Typical neural decoders such as OLE [10]
and Kalman filters (KF) [11] mostly assume a stationary ht (·), namely ht (·) ≡ h0 (·), (t = 1, 2, 3, ...),
∗

Corresponding authors: Yu Qi and Yueming Wang

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

