Latency-aware Spatial-wise Dynamic Networks

Yizeng Han1∗ Zhihang Yuan2∗ Yifan Pu1∗ Chenhao Xue2
Shiji Song1 Guangyu Sun2 Gao Huang1†
1
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
{hanyz18, pyf20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
{yuanzhihang, xch927027, gsun}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Spatial-wise dynamic convolution has become a promising approach to improving
the inference efficiency of deep networks. By allocating more computation to the
most informative pixels, such an adaptive inference paradigm reduces the spatial
redundancy in image features and saves a considerable amount of unnecessary
computation. However, the theoretical efficiency achieved by previous methods
can hardly translate into a realistic speedup, especially on the multi-core processors
(e.g. GPUs). The key challenge is that the existing literature has only focused
on designing algorithms with minimal computation, ignoring the fact that the
practical latency can also be influenced by scheduling strategies and hardware
properties. To bridge the gap between theoretical computation and practical efficiency, we propose a latency-aware spatial-wise dynamic network (LASNet),
which performs coarse-grained spatially adaptive inference under the guidance
of a novel latency prediction model. The latency prediction model can efficiently
estimate the inference latency of dynamic networks by simultaneously considering
algorithms, scheduling strategies, and hardware properties. We use the latency
predictor to guide both the algorithm design and the scheduling optimization on
various hardware platforms. Experiments on image classification, object detection
and instance segmentation demonstrate that the proposed framework significantly
improves the practical inference efficiency of deep networks. For example, the
average latency of a ResNet-101 on the ImageNet validation set could be reduced
by 36% and 46% on a server GPU (Nvidia Tesla-V100) and an edge device (Nvidia
Jetson TX2 GPU) respectively without sacrificing the accuracy. Code is available
at https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/LASNet.

1

Introduction

Dynamic neural networks [7] have attracted great research interests in recent years. Compared to
static models [11, 17, 13, 23] which treat different inputs equally during inference, dynamic networks
can allocate the computation in a data-dependent manner. For example, they can conditionally skip
the computation of network layers [15, 9, 32, 30] or convolutional channels [19, 1], or perform
spatially adaptive inference on the most informative image regions (e.g. the foreground areas)
[6, 5, 31, 35, 33, 8]. Spatial-wise dynamic networks, which typically decide whether to compute
each feature pixel with masker modules [5, 31, 35, 8] (Figure 1 (a)), have shown promising results in
improving the inference efficiency of convolution neural networks (CNNs).
Despite the remarkable theoretical efficiency achieved by spatial-wise dynamic networks [5, 31, 35],
researchers have found it challenging to translate the theoretical results into realistic speedup,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

