Functional Ensemble Distillation
Coby Penso
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
coby.penso24@gmail.com

Idan Achituve
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
idan.achituve@biu.ac.il

Ethan Fetaya
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
ethan.fetaya@biu.ac.il

Abstract
Bayesian models have many desirable properties, most notable is their ability
to generalize from limited data and to properly estimate the uncertainty in their
predictions. However, these benefits come at a steep computational cost as Bayesian
inference, in most cases, is computationally intractable. One popular approach
to alleviate this problem is using a Monte-Carlo estimation with an ensemble
of models sampled from the posterior. However, this approach still comes at a
significant computational cost, as one needs to store and run multiple models at
test time. In this work, we investigate how to best distill an ensemble’s predictions
using an efficient model. First, we argue that current approaches are limited as
they are constrained to classification and the Dirichlet distribution. Second, in
many limited data settings, all ensemble members achieve nearly zero training
loss, namely, they produce near-identical predictions on the training set which
results in sub-optimal distilled models. To address both problems, we propose a
novel and general distillation approach, named Functional Ensemble Distillation
(FED), and we investigate how to best distill an ensemble in this setting. We find
that learning the distilled model via a simple augmentation scheme in the form
of mixup augmentation [43] significantly boosts the performance. We evaluated
our method on several tasks and showed that it achieves superior results in both
accuracy and uncertainty estimation compared to current approaches.

1

Introduction

In parametric Bayesian inference the output is a distribution over model parameters, known as the
posterior distribution. This is in contrast to standard approaches which return a single model. At
test time one needs to marginalize over all models according to the posterior distribution to make a
prediction. The action of averaging over multiple models allows Bayesian approaches to perform well
with limited data [1, 2, 27, 34, 42] and properly estimate uncertainties [17, 18, 34]. The downside
is that in most cases Bayesian inference is intractable and even methods for approximate inference
may be costly. This is especially true for Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), as the dimension of the
parameter space for common neural networks is very large [4, 15].
Two main approaches exist for efficient Bayesian inference. The first approximates the posterior
distribution (e.g., variational inference and the Laplace approximation) with a simple distribution,
usually a Gaussian with diagonal covariance. While this can be done efficiently in some cases [10, 20],
it is more prone to over-fitting as the approximate distribution might cover only a small part of the
posterior. A second approach is Monte-Carlo (MC) estimation where we sample M models from
the posterior using an approximate sampling algorithm, e.g. Markov Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC),
and estimate the mean prediction by the average over the predictions of the M models. While this
can better capture the diversity of the posterior, it requires storing and running M models instead of
one. One important question that will be the focus of this work is how to maintain the benefits of the
Bayesian approach while reducing the computational overhead. It is also important to note that an
ensemble of M models is commonly used outside of Bayesian settings, e.g. bagging [3], so this line
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

