Learning Consistency-Aware Unsigned Distance
Functions Progressively from Raw Point Clouds

Junsheng Zhou1∗ Baorui Ma1∗ Yu-Shen Liu1† Yi Fang2 Zhizhong Han3
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA3
zhoujs21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn mbr18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn yfang@nyu.edu h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Surface reconstruction for point clouds is an important task in 3D computer vision. Most of the latest methods resolve this problem by learning signed distance
functions (SDF) from point clouds, which are limited to reconstructing shapes
or scenes with closed surfaces. Some other methods tried to represent shapes or
scenes with open surfaces using unsigned distance functions (UDF) which are
learned from large scale ground truth unsigned distances. However, the learned
UDF is hard to provide smooth distance fields near the surface due to the noncontinuous character of point clouds. In this paper, we propose a novel method
to learn consistency-aware unsigned distance functions directly from raw point
clouds. We achieve this by learning to move 3D queries to reach the surface with
a field consistency constraint, where we also enable to progressively estimate a
more accurate surface. Specifically, we train a neural network to gradually infer
the relationship between 3D queries and the approximated surface by searching for
the moving target of queries in a dynamic way, which results in a consistent field
around the surface. Meanwhile, we introduce a polygonization algorithm to extract
surfaces directly from the gradient field of the learned UDF. The experimental
results in surface reconstruction for synthetic and real scan data show significant
improvements over the state-of-the-art under the widely used benchmarks. Project
page: https://junshengzhou.github.io/CAP-UDF.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing surfaces from 3D point clouds is vital in 3D vision, robotics and graphics. It
bridges the gap between raw point clouds that can be captured by 3D sensors and the editable
surfaces for various downstream applications. Recently, Neural Implicit Functions (NIFs) have
achieved promising results by training deep networks to learn Signed Distance Functions (SDFs)
[44, 26, 42, 14] or occupancies [40, 46, 41, 10], and then extract a polygon mesh of a continuous
iso-surface from a discrete scalar field using the marching cubes algorithm [35]. However, the NIFs
approaches based on learning internal and external relations can only reconstruct closed surfaces. The
limitation prevents NIFs from representing most real-world objects such as cars with inner structures,
clothes with unsealed ends or 3D scenes with open walls and holes.
∗

Equal contribution.
The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China
(2022YFC3800600, 2020YFF0304100), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263,
62072268).
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

