Why do We Need Large Batchsizes in Contrastive
Learning? A Gradient-Bias Perspective
Changyou Chen1,3
Jiali Duan3
Yiran Chen2
1
University at Buffalo

Jianyi Zhang2

Yi Xu3

Liqun Chen3

Son Dinh Tran3
2
Duke University

Belinda Zeng3

Trishul Chilimbi3
3
Amazon

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL) has been the de facto technique for self-supervised representation learning (SSL), with impressive empirical success such as multi-modal
representation learning. However, traditional CL loss only considers negative
samples from a minibatch, which could cause biased gradients due to the nondecomposibility of the loss. For the first time, we consider optimizing a more
generalized contrastive loss, where each data sample is associated with an infinite
number of negative samples. We show that directly using minibatch stochastic
optimization could lead to gradient bias. To remedy this, we propose an efficient
Bayesian data augmentation technique to augment the contrastive loss into a decomposable one, where standard stochastic optimization can be directly applied
without gradient bias. Specifically, our augmented loss defines a joint distribution
over the model parameters and the augmented parameters, which can be conveniently optimized by a proposed stochastic expectation-maximization algorithm.
Our framework is more general and is related to several popular SSL algorithms.
We verify our framework on both small scale models and several large foundation
models, including SSL of ImageNet and SSL for vision-language representation
learning. Experiment results indicate the existence of gradient bias in all cases, and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method on improving previous state
of the arts. Remarkably, our method can outperform the strong MoCo-v3 under
the same hyper-parameter setting with only around half of the minibatch size; and
also obtains strong results in the recent public benchmark ELEVATER for few-shot
image classification.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen significant developments and applications of contrastive learning (CL), a
promising self-supervised learning (SSL) technique, to a variety of striking research breakthroughs
such as learning of multi-modal foundation models [5] in text and image domains [46, 63, 67] for
natural-language and vision-language representation learning. In addition, CL has also be applied
recently to other scenarios such as supervised learning [32] and reinforcement learning [3, 36]. The
main idea of CL is to define a contrastive loss where each data sample is entangled with both its
positive and negative data samples, and optimize it to learn transformation-invariant features to better
discriminate positive samples from negative ones. From a technical perspective, the contrastive loss
is non-decomposable, in the sense that each data sample is coupled with all the other samples in the
loss function, i.e., to process one data sample, one has to get access to all its positive and negative
samples from the other data samples. This is intractable when considering a more general CL setting
where the number of negative samples are unbounded (potentially infinite). In this case, if stochastic
optimization is applied, only negative samples in the current minibatch are available. Thus, this
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

