Learning Concept Credible Models for Mitigating
Shortcuts
Jiaxuan Wang1 Sarah Jabbour1 Maggie Makar1 Michael Sjoding2 Jenna Wiens1
1

Division of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
2
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Correspondence to: {jiaxuan,wiensj}@umich.edu

Abstract
During training, models can exploit spurious correlations as shortcuts, resulting
in poor generalization performance when shortcuts do not persist. In this work,
assuming access to a representation based on domain knowledge (i.e., known
concepts) that is invariant to shortcuts, we aim to learn robust and accurate models
from biased training data. In contrast to previous work, we do not rely solely on
known concepts, but allow the model to also learn unknown concepts. We propose
two approaches for mitigating shortcuts that incorporate domain knowledge, while
accounting for potentially important yet unknown concepts. The first approach
is two-staged. After fitting a model using known concepts, it accounts for the
residual using unknown concepts. While flexible, we show that this approach
is vulnerable when shortcuts are correlated with the unknown concepts. This
limitation is addressed by our second approach that extends a recently proposed
regularization penalty. Applied to two real-world datasets, we demonstrate that
both approaches can successfully mitigate shortcut learning.

1

Introduction

In practice, machine learning (ML) models often fail to generalize under distribution shift [1–4], due
to shortcut learning [3, 5, 4]. “Shortcut learning occurs when a predictor relies on input features that
are easy to represent (i.e., shortcuts) and are predictive of the outcome in the training data, but do not
remain predictive when the distribution of inputs changes" [5]. For example, consider building an ML
model to predict the severity of knee osteoarthritis from X-ray images [6]. If people with mobility
problems in the training set are more likely to have an X-ray using a particular type of mobile X-ray
scanner, the model may learn to rely on features related to the scanner type to make a prediction,
resulting in a failure to generalize when X-rays are captured from a different scanner.
More formally, consider the causal graph in Figure 1, where Y is the target of interest (e.g., diagnosis), S is the shortcut (e.g., scanner type), X is the input (e.g., X-ray image), and C and U are
representations that can be inferred from X but are not causally affected by S. Here, the dashed
bidirectional arrow denotes a spurious correlation that holds during training but not at test time. Solid
arrows denote causal relationships that are robust to changes. Note that S only affects the part of the
input that is irrelevant for the diagnosis (X ′ ), making it causally irrelevant for the prediction. We will
consider both settings where S is and is not correlated with U . In our example, C could be known
radiological risk factors, and U could be unknown radiological risk factors for the disease.
To mitigate a model’s reliance on S, one can use existing tools if S is observed (e.g., through model
interpretation) [5, 7]. However, these methods do not apply when shortcuts are unknown prior to
the occurrence of distribution shifts. Moreover, such approaches fail when the spurious correlation
is strong (i.e., more convincing shortcuts). In such scenarios, we need additional guardrails. Our
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

