End-to-End Stochastic Optimization with
Energy-Based Model

Lingkai Kong Jiaming Cui Yuchen Zhuang Rui Feng
B. Aditya Prakash Chao Zhang
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
{lkkong,jiamingcui1997,yczhuang,rfeng,badityap,chaozhang}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Decision-focused learning (DFL) was recently proposed for stochastic optimization
problems that involve unknown parameters. By integrating predictive modeling
with an implicitly differentiable optimization layer, DFL has shown superior performance to the standard two-stage predict-then-optimize pipeline. However, most
existing DFL methods are only applicable to convex problems or a subset of nonconvex problems that can be easily relaxed to convex ones. Further, they can be
inefficient in training due to the requirement of solving and differentiating through
the optimization problem in every training iteration. We propose S O -E BM, a
general and efficient DFL method for stochastic optimization using energy-based
models. Instead of relying on KKT conditions to induce an implicit optimization
layer, S O -E BM explicitly parameterizes the original optimization problem using a
differentiable optimization layer based on energy functions. To better approximate
the optimization landscape, we propose a coupled training objective that uses a
maximum likelihood loss to capture the optimum location and a distribution-based
regularizer to capture the overall energy landscape. Finally, we propose an efficient
training procedure for S O -E BM with a self-normalized importance sampler based
on a Gaussian mixture proposal. We evaluate S O -E BM in three applications: power
scheduling, COVID-19 resource allocation, and non-convex adversarial security
game, demonstrating the effectiveness and efficiency of S O -E BM.

1

Introduction

Many real-life decision making tasks are stochastic optimization problems, where one needs to
make decisions to minimize a cost function that involves stochastic parameters. Oftentimes, the
involved stochastic parameters are unknown and context-dependent, meaning that they need to be
predicted from observed features. For example, when allocating clinical resources for COVID-19, it
is necessary to consider future cases in different regions, whose distributions are unknown and have to
be predicted from the current state. As two other examples, hedge funds need to continuously adjust
their portfolio for maximal expected return, by forecasting future return rates of different stocks; and
in supply chain optimization, facility locations need to be decided to minimize long-term operational
costs, by accounting for unknown and uncertain regional supplies and customer demands.
With the feasibility of training powerful deep learning predictors from large amounts of data, it is
increasingly common to solve such stochastic optimization problems using a two-stage predict-thenoptimize pipeline. In the prediction stage, one learns a predictive model for the unknown parameters
using certain prediction loss (e.g., negative likelihood). In the optimization stage, the predicted
distributions of the parameters are used to parameterize the stochastic optimization problem, which
can be then solved using off-the-shelf solvers [21, 2, 12]. This two-stage pipeline relies on an implicit
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

