TANGO: Text-driven Photorealistic and Robust 3D
Stylization via Lighting Decomposition

1

Yongwei Chen1,3 , Rui Chen1 , Jiabao Lei1 , Yabin Zhang2 , Kui Jia1,4∗
South China University of Technology 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
DexForce Co. Ltd. 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
eecyw@mail.scut.edu.cn, kuijia@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Creation of 3D content by stylization is a promising yet challenging problem in computer vision and graphics research. In this work, we focus on stylizing photorealistic
appearance renderings of a given surface mesh of arbitrary topology. Motivated by
the recent surge of cross-modal supervision of the Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training (CLIP) model, we propose TANGO, which transfers the appearance
style of a given 3D shape according to a text prompt in a photorealistic manner.
Technically, we propose to disentangle the appearance style as the spatially varying
bidirectional reflectance distribution function, the local geometric variation, and the
lighting condition, which are jointly optimized, via supervision of the CLIP loss,
by a spherical Gaussians based differentiable renderer. As such, TANGO enables
photorealistic 3D style transfer by automatically predicting reflectance effects even
for bare, low-quality meshes, without training on a task-specific dataset. Extensive
experiments show that TANGO outperforms existing methods of text-driven 3D
style transfer in terms of photorealistic quality, consistency of 3D geometry, and
robustness when stylizing low-quality meshes. Our codes and results are available
at our project webpage https://cyw-3d.github.io/tango.

1

Introduction

3D content creation by stylization (e.g., stylized according to text prompts [31], images [44], or
3D shapes [50]) has important applications in computer vision and graphics areas. The problem is
yet challenging and traditionally requires manual efforts from experts of professional artists and a
large amount of time cost. In the meanwhile, many online 3D repositories [6, 47, 41] can be easily
accessed on the Internet whose contained surface meshes are bare contents without any styles. It is
thus promising if automatic, diverse, and realistic stylization can be achieved given these raw 3D
contents. We note that similar to recent 3D stylization works [31, 50, 18, 33, 21], we consider style as
the particular appearance of an object, which is determined by color (albedo) and physical reflective
effect of the object surface, while considering content as the global shape structure and topology
prescribed by an explicit 3D mesh or other implicit representation of the object surface.
Stylization is usually guided by some sources of styling signals, such as a text prompt [31], a reference
image [44], or a target 3D shape [50]. In this work, we choose to work with stylization by text
prompts, motivated by the surprising effects recently achieved in many applications [44, 19, 10], by
using the cross-modal supervision model of Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training (CLIP) [37].
The goal of this paper is to devise an end-to-end neural architecture system, named TANGO, that
can transfer, guided by a text prompt, the style of a given 3D shape of arbitrary topology. Note that
TANGO can be directly applied to arbitrary meshes with arbitrary target styles, without additional
learning/optimization procedures on a task-specific dataset; Figure 1 gives the illustration.
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

