Rethinking Image Restoration for Object Detection

Shangquan Sun
State Key Laboratory of Information Security
Institute of Information Engineering
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China 100093
sunshangquan@iie.ac.cn
Tao Wang
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
Beijing, China 100085
wangtao10@huawei.com

Wenqi Ren ∗
School of Cyber Science and Technology
Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen Campus
Shenzhen, China 518107
rwq.renwenqi@gmail.com

Xiaochun Cao
School of Cyber Science and Technology
Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen Campus
Shenzhen, China 518107
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Although image restoration has achieved significant progress, its potential to
assist object detectors in adverse imaging conditions lacks enough attention in the
research community. It is reported that the existing image restoration methods
cannot improve the object detector performance and sometimes even reduce the
detection performance. To address the issue, we propose a targeted adversarial
attack in the restoration procedure to boost object detection performance after
restoration. Specifically, we present an ADAM-like adversarial attack to generate
pseudo ground truth for restoration fine-tuning. Resultant restored images are close
to original sharp images, and at the same time, lead to better object detection results.
We conduct extensive experiments in image dehazing and low light enhancement
and show the superiority of our method over conventional training and other domain
adaptation and multi-task methods. The proposed pipeline can be applied to all
restoration methods and both one- and two-stage detectors.

1

Introduction

Image quality degradation is common in outdoor captured images and many image restoration
methods have been developed to automatically recover sharp details from the degraded images.
Typically, the goal of image restoration is to generate sharper results from which human vision
can better identify the structural details and objects in the images. However, in many applications,
large-scale images are collected for high-level computer vision tasks (e.g., object detection, semantic
segmentation, and autonomous driving) other than a visual examination by human. Though significant
progress has been made in terms of the visual quality, its ability to serve as a pre-processing step for
downstream vision tasks lacks enough research attention.
Object detection has achieved remarkable success as the boosting of deep neural networks. Many
successful models, e.g., Faster-RCNN [32] and YOLOv3 [31], have been developed and deployed
in real-world applications such as autonomous driving [4, 38]. However, in the settings of the
commonly used benchmark for object detection, poor weather and imaging conditions are intentionally avoided [7] or insufficient due to data bias [16, 9]. The unbalanced data distribution toward
clean images leads to a domain shift between properly captured images and low-quality ones in
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

