Hyperbolic Feature Augmentation via Distribution
Estimation and Infinite Sampling on Manifolds

1

Zhi Gao1 , Yuwei Wu1,2∗, Yunde Jia2,1 , Mehrtash Harandi3
Beijing Lab of Intellegent Information Technology, School of Computer Science,
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Lab of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Eng.,
Monash University, and Data61, Australia

{gaozhi 2017,wuyuwei,jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

Abstract
Learning in hyperbolic spaces has attracted growing attention recently, owing
to their capabilities in capturing hierarchical structures of data. However, existing learning algorithms in the hyperbolic space tend to overfit when limited data
is given. In this paper, we propose a hyperbolic feature augmentation method
that generates diverse and discriminative features in the hyperbolic space to combat overfitting. We employ a wrapped hyperbolic normal distribution to model
augmented features, and use a neural ordinary differential equation module that
benefits from meta-learning to estimate the distribution. This is to reduce the bias
of estimation caused by the scarcity of data. We also derive an upper bound of
the augmentation loss, which enables us to train a hyperbolic model by using an
infinite number of augmentations. Experiments on few-shot learning and continual
learning tasks show that our method significantly improves the performance of
hyperbolic algorithms in scarce data regimes.

1

Introduction

Several recent studies reveal that real-world data, such as images, videos, graphs, and sentences in
natural language, usually endows a hierarchical structure [1]. In contrast to the Euclidean space with
zero curvature, a hyperbolic space characterized by constant negative curvature can well capture such
hierarchical structures, since the volume of the hyperbolic space grows exponentially with respect to
the radius [2]. This property leads to rich representations and encourages successful developments
of hyperbolic algorithms for various applications. Examples include image retrieval [3], action
recognition [4], graph classification [5], and machine translation [6].
Although existing hyperbolic algorithms have achieved impressive performances, they often rely on
the availability of sufficient data for training. In many practical applications, very limited data is given,
as collecting and labeling data is costly. For example, in few-shot animal recognition [7, 8], animal
images have hierarchical structures according to their species information. With few images (say less
than five) in each class, training a model (e.g., a ResNet combined with hyperbolic geometry [9, 3])
suffers from the undesirable overfitting problem. This motivates us to study combating overfitting
with limited data in the hyperbolic space.
In this paper, we propose a hyperbolic feature augmentation (HFA) method that overcomes overfitting
by generating class-identity-preserving features in the hyperbolic space. Compared with augmentation
∗

Corresponding author: Yuwei Wu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

