GLOBEM Dataset: Multi-Year Datasets for Longitudinal
Human Behavior Modeling Generalization

Xuhai Xu, Han Zhang, Yasaman Sefidgar, Yiyi Ren, Xin Liu, Woosuk Seo, Jennifer Brown
Kevin Kuehn, Mike Merrill, Paula Nurius, Shwetak Patel, Tim Althoff
Margaret E. Morris, Eve Riskin, Jennifer Mankoff, Anind K. Dey
University of Washington, Seattle, USA | {xuhaixu,anind}@uw.edu

Abstract
Recent research has demonstrated the capability of behavior signals captured
by smartphones and wearables for longitudinal behavior modeling. However,
there is a lack of a comprehensive public dataset that serves as an open testbed
for fair comparison among algorithms. Moreover, prior studies mainly evaluate
algorithms using data from a single population within a short period, without
measuring the cross-dataset generalizability of these algorithms. We present the
first multi-year passive sensing datasets, containing over 700 user-years and 497
unique users’ data collected from mobile and wearable sensors, together with a
wide range of well-being metrics. Our datasets can support multiple cross-dataset
evaluations of behavior modeling algorithms’ generalizability across different users
and years. As a starting point, we provide the benchmark results of 18 algorithms
on the task of depression detection. Our results indicate that both prior depression
detection algorithms and domain generalization techniques show potential but need
further research to achieve adequate cross-dataset generalizability. We envision our
multi-year datasets can support the ML community in developing generalizable
longitudinal behavior modeling algorithms.
The GLOBEM website can be found at the-globem.github.io
Our datasets are available at physionet.org/content/globem
Our codebase is open-sourced at github.com/UW-EXP/GLOBEM

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) achieves remarkable success in a wide range of areas, there is a growing
need to show real life robustness of ML models through cross-dataset generalizability. Various domain
generalization techniques have been proposed to improve model performance when the probability
distributions of training data and testing data are different [94, 115]. The majority of existing domain
generalization algorithms focus on the tasks of computer vision (CV) [54, 55, 58, 110] and natural
language processing (NLP) [10, 27, 42, 93]. Only a few studies have examined domain generalization
on time-series data [31, 37, 43], other than short-term human action recognition [57, 114]. However,
even this prior research has only investigated time-series data in controlled settings [73] and did not
explore domain generalization in longitudinal time-series sensor data in the wild. To build deployable
longitudinal time-series systems, it is important to evaluate the model across datasets with different
contexts to ensure its generalizability for real-world applications, such as health monitoring [65],
medical analysis [62], personalized recommendation [103], and weather prediction [53].
Among various longitudinal sensor streams, smartphones and wearables are arguably one of the most
widely available data sources [52]. The advances in mobile technology provide an unprecedented
opportunity to capture multiple aspects of daily human behaviors, by collecting continuous sensor
streams from these devices [69, 95], together with metrics about health and well-being through selfreport or clinical diagnosis as modeling targets. It poses unique challenges compared to traditional
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

