The computational and learning benefits
of Daleian neural networks
Adam Haber
Department of Brain Sciences
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
adam.haber@weizmann.ac.il

Elad Schneidman
Department of Brain Sciences
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
elad.schneidman@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Dale’s principle implies that biological neural networks are composed of neurons
that are either excitatory or inhibitory. While the number of possible architectures
of such Daleian networks is exponentially smaller than non-Daleian ones, the
computational and functional implications of using Daleian networks by the brain
are mostly unknown. Here, we use models of recurrent spiking neural networks
and rate-based networks to show, surprisingly, that despite the structural limitations on Daleian networks, they can approximate the computation performed by
non-Daleian networks to a very high degree of accuracy. Moreover, we find that
Daleian networks are more functionally robust to synaptic noise. We then show that
unlike non-Daleian networks, Daleian ones can learn efficiently by tuning single
neuron features, nearly as well as learning by tuning individual synaptic weights –
suggesting a simpler and more biologically plausible learning mechanism. We thus
suggest that in addition to architectural simplicity, Dale’s principle confers computational and learning benefits for biological networks, and offers new directions for
constructing and training biologically-inspired artificial neural networks.

1

Introduction

The synaptic connectivity of neurons in the brain is shaped by a variety of physical, chemical, and
biological factors [1, 2], even before learning comes into play. For example, the location of neurons
and their morphology induce distance-dependent connectivity [3], whereas molecular lock-and-key
mechanisms induce cell-type specific connectivity patterns [4]. The functional and computational
implications of such constraints - from the architecture of connectomes to cell types - are fundamental
to our understanding how real neural circuits are built and function.
A particularly stringent constraint on the design of biological neural networks is imposed by Dale’s
principle, which asserts that the axonal branches of a neuron release the same set of neurotransmitter
molecules [5, 6]. While some exceptions to Dale’s principle have been reported [7–10], the implied
identity of neurons as either excitatory or inhibitory has been central to our characterization and
understanding of neural circuits’ structure and function [11–14]. Moreover, the balance between
excitatory and inhibitory populations has been at the core of many computational models of the
design of neural circuits and their function [15].
Dale’s principle has far-reaching implications for the architecture of neural circuits: For directed
networks of N neurons, there are N · (N 1) possible synapses, and so for the general case in which
each synapse can be either excitatory, inhibitory, or non-existent - there are 3N ·(N 1) possible signed
N
networks connecting the neurons. However, only 2 · 2N 1 1 of these networks abide by Dale’s
principle (see Supplementary Information, SI). Thus, already for 15 neurons, non-Daleian networks
outnumber the Daleian ones by a factor of ⇠ 1032 . The staggering difference in richness of synaptic
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

