Are Defenses for Graph Neural Networks Robust?

1

Felix Mujkanovic1∗, Simon Geisler1∗ , Stephan Günnemann1 , Aleksandar Bojchevski2
Dept. of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich
2
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{f.mujkanovic, s.geisler, s.guennemann}@tum.de | bojchevski@cispa.de

Abstract
A cursory reading of the literature suggests that we have made a lot of progress in designing effective adversarial defenses for Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Yet, the
standard methodology has a serious flaw – virtually all of the defenses are evaluated
against non-adaptive attacks leading to overly optimistic robustness estimates. We
perform a thorough robustness analysis of 7 of the most popular defenses spanning
the entire spectrum of strategies, i.e., aimed at improving the graph, the architecture,
or the training. The results are sobering – most defenses show no or only marginal
improvement compared to an undefended baseline. We advocate using custom
adaptive attacks as a gold standard and we outline the lessons we learned from
successfully designing such attacks. Moreover, our diverse collection of perturbed
graphs forms a (black-box) unit test offering a first glance at a model’s robustness.1

1

Introduction

The vision community learned a bitter lesson – we need specific carefully crafted attacks to properly
evaluate the adversarial robustness of a defense. Consequently, adaptive attacks are considered the
gold standard [44]. This was not always the case; until recently, most defenses were tested only
against relatively weak static attacks. The turning point was Carlini & Wagner [3]’s work showing
that 10 methods for detecting adversarial attacks can be easily circumvented. Shortly after, Athalye
et al. [1] showed that 7 out of the 9 defenses they studied can be broken since they (implicitly) rely
on obfuscated gradients. So far, this bitter lesson is completely ignored in the graph domain.
SVD-GCN
Jaccard-GCN
Adaptive
attack
Nonadaptive
attack

GNNGuard
RGCN
GCN
ProGNN
GRAND
Soft-Median-GDC
72

74

76

78

Adversarial accuracy (%)

75

80

Adversarial accuracy (%)

0

20

40

0

20

40

60

Correct predicitons (%)

Correct predicitons (%)

(a) Global, Poisoning (b) Global, Evasion (c) Local, Poisoning

(d) Local, Evasion

Figure 1: Adaptive attacks draw a different picture of robustness. All defenses are less robust than
reported, with an undefended GCN [33] outperforming some. We show results on Cora ML for both
poisoning (attack before training) and evasion (attack after training), and both global (attack the test
set jointly) and local (attack individual nodes) setting. The perturbation budget is relative w.r.t. the
#edges for global attacks (5% evasion, 2.5% poisoning) and w.r.t. the degree for local attacks (100%).
In (a)/(b) SVD-GCN is catastrophically broken – our adaptive attacks reach 24%/9% (not visible).
Note that our non-adaptive attacks are already stronger than what is typically used (see § 5).
∗

equal contribution

1

Project page: https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/are-gnn-defenses-robust/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

