Subgroup Robustness Grows On Trees:
An Empirical Baseline Investigation
Josh Gardner1

Zoran Popović1

Ludwig Schmidt1,2

University of Washington 2 Allen Institute for AI
{jpgard, zoran, schmidt}@cs.washington.edu

1

Abstract
Researchers have proposed many methods for fair and robust machine learning,
but comprehensive empirical evaluation of their subgroup robustness is lacking.
In this work, we address this gap in the context of tabular data, where sensitive
subgroups are clearly-defined, real-world fairness problems abound, and prior
works often do not compare to state-of-the-art tree-based models as baselines.
We conduct an empirical comparison of several previously-proposed methods for
fair and robust learning alongside state-of-the-art tree-based methods and other
baselines. Via experiments with more than 340,000 model configurations on eight
datasets, we show that tree-based methods have strong subgroup robustness, even
when compared to robustness- and fairness-enhancing methods. Moreover, the best
tree-based models tend to show good performance over a range of metrics, while
robust or group-fair models can show brittleness, with significant performance
differences across different metrics for a fixed model. We also demonstrate that
tree-based models show less sensitivity to hyperparameter configurations, and are
less costly to train. Our work suggests that tree-based ensemble models make
an effective baseline for tabular data, and are a sensible default when subgroup
robustness is desired.1

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, the field of machine learning (ML) has seen a dramatic expansion along two
related lines. On one hand, concerns about the fairness of ML models, and more broadly their
performance on data outside the training distribution, have grown [50]. Both theoretical and empirical
works have raised these concerns, demonstrating the vulnerability of models to learn biases from data
or suffer performance drops under distribution shifts [44, 66, 35]. On the other hand, an abundance
of methods have been proposed to address these limitations. These include fairness methods used to
equalize metrics across groups, as well as distributional robustness methods which optimize for a
worst-case distribution within a bounded distance of the training distribution.
Our work begins from the observation that, while “fairness” and “robustness” are distinct concepts,
methods in both areas often have similar goals. In particular, they share two (sometimes implicit)
goals: First, models should have low disparity (variation in performance over all subgroups should
be minimized; cf. [75, 17, 25, 43]). Second, models should have good worst-group performance (the
lowest accuracy over all subgroups should be maximized; cf. [74, 62]). As a consequence of these
two criteria, both fairness and robustness typically entail improving subgroup robustness.
1

See https://github.com/jpgard/subgroup-robustness-grows-on-trees for code to reproduce
our experiments and detailed experimental results.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

