Identifiability and Generalizability from Multiple
Experts in Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Paul Rolland
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
paul.rolland@epfl.ch

Luca Viano
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
luca.viano@epfl.ch

Boris Nikolov
SFI, UNIL
Lausanne, Switzerland
boris.nikolov@unil.ch

Norman Schürhoff
SFI, UNIL
Lausanne, Switzerland
norman.schuerhoff@unil.ch

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
While Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to train an agent from a reward function
in a given environment, Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) seeks to recover
the reward function from observing an expert’s behavior. It is well known that, in
general, various reward functions can lead to the same optimal policy, and hence,
IRL is ill-defined. However, [1] showed that, if we observe two or more experts
with different discount factors or acting in different environments, the reward
function can under certain conditions be identified up to a constant. This work
starts by showing an equivalent identifiability statement from multiple experts in
tabular MDPs based on a rank condition, which is easily verifiable and is shown
to be also necessary. We then extend our result to various different scenarios,
i.e., we characterize reward identifiability in the case where the reward function
can be represented as a linear combination of given features, making it more
interpretable, or when we have access to approximate transition matrices. Even
when the reward is not identifiable, we provide conditions characterizing when data
on multiple experts in a given environment allows to generalize and train an optimal
agent in a new environment. Our theoretical results on reward identifiability and
generalizability are validated in various numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Engineering a reward function in Reinforcement Learning can be troublesome in certain scenarios
like driving [2], robotics [3], and economics/finance [4]. In economics and finance, the reward or
objective/utility function of the agent are of fundamental importance but are not known a priori [5–8].
In such cases, it may be easier to get demonstrations from an expert policy. Therefore, multiple
algorithms have been developed to learn from demonstrations, e.g., in inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) and imitation learning (IL).
In IRL, the goal is to recover the reward function maximized by the agent, while in IL the expert
demonstrations are used solely to learn a nearly optimal policy. In economics/finance, inference on
the reward function is the focus of a large literature on estimation, testing, and policy analysis of
structural models [9–11]. However, the reward function is often highly parameterized and represented
by a low-dimensional set of parameters, or the literature focuses on estimating reduced-form causal
relationships but not the true reward function [12, 13]. The attractiveness of IRL relies on the fact
that the reward function is the most “succinct” representation of a task [14]. Indeed, identifying the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

