Understanding and Improving Robustness of Vision
Transformers through Patch-based Negative
Augmentation

Yao Qin

Chiyuan Zhang

Balaji Lakshminarayanan

Ting Chen

Alex Beutel

Xuezhi Wang

Google Research

Abstract
We investigate the robustness of vision transformers (ViTs) through the lens of
their special patch-based architectural structure, i.e., they process an image as a
sequence of image patches. We find that ViTs are surprisingly insensitive to patchbased transformations, even when the transformation largely destroys the original
semantics and makes the image unrecognizable by humans. This indicates that
ViTs heavily use features that survived such transformations but are generally
not indicative of the semantic class to humans. Further investigations show that
these features are useful but non-robust, as ViTs trained on them can achieve high
in-distribution accuracy, but break down under distribution shifts. From this understanding, we ask: can training the model to rely less on these features improve
ViT robustness and out-of-distribution performance? We use the images transformed with our patch-based operations as negatively augmented views and offer
losses to regularize the training away from using non-robust features. This is a
complementary view to existing research that mostly focuses on augmenting inputs with semantic-preserving transformations to enforce models’ invariance. We
show that patch-based negative augmentation consistently improves robustness
of ViTs on ImageNet based robustness benchmarks across 20+ different experimental settings. Furthermore, we find our patch-based negative augmentation are
complementary to traditional (positive) data augmentation techniques and batchbased negative examples in contrastive learning.

1

Introduction

Building vision models that are robust, i.e., that maintain accuracy even on unexpected and out-ofdistribution images, is increasingly a requirement to trusting vision models and a strong benchmark
for progress in the field. Recently, Vision Transformers (ViTs, Dosovitskiy et al. (2021)) sparked
great interest in the literature, as a radically new model architecture offering significant accuracy
improvements and with hope of new robustness benefits. Over the past decade, there has been
extensive work on understanding the robustness of convolution-based neural architectures, as the
dominant design for visual tasks; researchers have explored adversarial robustness (Szegedy et al.,
2013), domain generalization (Xiao et al., 2021; Khani & Liang, 2021), feature biases (Brendel &
Bethge, 2019; Geirhos et al., 2018; Hermann et al., 2020). As a result, with the new promise of vision
transformers, it is critical to understand their properties and in particular their robustness. Recent
early studies (Naseer et al., 2021; Paul & Chen, 2021; Bhojanapalli et al., 2021) have found ViTs be
more robust than ConvNets in some scenarios, with the hypothesis that the non-local attention based
interactions enabled ViTs to capture more global and semantic features. In contrast, we add to this
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

