SAMURAI: Shape And Material from Unconstrained
Real-world Arbitrary Image collections

Mark Boss†
University of Tübingen
Deqing Sun
Google

Andreas Engelhardt†
University of Tübingen

Jonathan T. Barron
Google

Abhishek Kar
Google

Hendrik P. A. Lensch
University of Tübingen

Yuanzhen Li
Google
Varun Jampani
Google

Abstract
Inverse rendering of an object under entirely unknown capture conditions is a fundamental challenge in computer vision and graphics. Neural approaches such as
NeRF have achieved photorealistic results on novel view synthesis, but they require known camera poses. Solving this problem with unknown camera poses
is highly challenging as it requires joint optimization over shape, radiance, and
pose. This problem is exacerbated when the input images are captured in the
wild with varying backgrounds and illuminations. Standard pose estimation techniques fail in such image collections in the wild due to very few estimated correspondences across images. Furthermore, NeRF cannot relight a scene under
any illumination, as it operates on radiance (the product of reflectance and illumination). We propose a joint optimization framework to estimate the shape,
BRDF, and per-image camera pose and illumination. Our method works on inthe-wild online image collections of an object and produces relightable 3D assets
for several use-cases such as AR/VR. To our knowledge, our method is the first
to tackle this severely unconstrained task with minimal user interaction. Project
page: https://markboss.me/publication/2022-samurai/

1

Introduction

Capturing high-quality 3D shapes and materials of real-world objects is essential for many graphics
applications in AR, VR, games, movies, etc. Using active multi-view object capture setups can provide high-quality 3D assets [6, 43] but cannot scale to a large-scale set of objects that are present in
the world. By contrast, image collections provided by image search results or product review images
exist for nearly every object. In this work, we propose a category-agnostic technique to estimate the
3D shape and material properties of objects from such Internet image collections. Estimating 3D
shapes and materials from Internet object image collections poses several challenges as the images
are highly unconstrained with varying backgrounds, illuminations, and camera intrinsics. Fig. 1
(left) shows a sample image collection of an object which forms the input to our technique.
Concretely, we estimate the 3D shape and BRDF material properties [16] while also estimating perimage illumination, camera poses, and intrinsics. Several contemporary works on shape and material
estimation [6, 11, 12, 52, 63] assume constant camera intrinsics, near-perfect segmentation masks as
well as almost-correct camera poses given by COLMAP [49, 50]. However, it is tedious to annotate
object masks in the input images manually. We also observe that COLMAP often fails due to
insufficient correspondences in real-world image collections with highly varying illuminations and
backgrounds even when we constrain the correspondences to lie within object masks. Instead, we
†

Work done during a Student Researcher position at Google.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

