Learning State-Aware Visual Representations from
Audible Interactions
Himangi Mittal1 , Pedro Morgado1 , Unnat Jain2 , Abhinav Gupta1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Meta AI Research

Abstract
We propose a self-supervised algorithm to learn representations from egocentric video data. Recently, significant efforts have been made to capture humans
interacting with their own environments as they go about their daily activities.
In result, several large egocentric datasets of interaction-rich multi-modal data
have emerged. However, learning representations from videos can be challenging. First, given the uncurated nature of long-form continuous videos, learning
effective representations require focusing on moments in time when interactions
take place. Second, visual representations of daily activities should be sensitive
to changes in the state of the environment. However, current successful multimodal learning frameworks encourage representation invariance over time. To
address these challenges, we leverage audio signals to identify moments of likely
interactions which are conducive to better learning. We also propose a novel selfsupervised objective that learns from audible state changes caused by interactions.
We validate these contributions extensively on two large-scale egocentric datasets,
EPIC-Kitchens-100 and the recently released Ego4D, and show improvements
on several downstream tasks, including action recognition, long-term action anticipation, and object state change classification. Code and pretrained model are
available here: https://github.com/HimangiM/RepLAI

1

Introduction

Recent successes in self-supervised learning (SSL) [48, 10, 31, 28] has brought into question the need
for human annotations in order to learn strong visual representations. However, current approaches are
bottlenecked by the lack of rich data – they learn from static images which lack temporal information
and restrict the ability to learn object deformations and state changes. It is clear that we need videos
to learn rich representations in self-supervised manner.
Learning representations from videos is however quite challenging. The first challenge is choosing the
right SSL loss. Approaches such as [67, 54] have attempted to learn representations that are invariant
to object deformations/viewpoints. However, many downstream tasks require representations that are
sensitive to these deformations. Another alternative has been to use the multi-modal data [3, 43, 57]
and learn representations via audio. But again most of these approaches seek to align audio and visual
features in a common space, leading to invariant representations as well. The second challenge is
dealing with the fact that current video-based SSL approaches exploit the curated nature of video
datasets, such as Kinetics [9]. These approaches are designed to leverage carefully selected clips,
displaying a single action or object interaction. This is in contrast to the predominantly untrimmed
real-world data characteristic of large egocentric datasets of daily activities. Here, unlike action
centric datasets, the most ‘interesting‘ or ‘interaction-rich‘ clips have NOT been carefully selected by
human annotators. Thus, learning from untrimmed video poses a major challenge, as a significant
portion of the data does not focus on the concepts we want to learn.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

