Online Learning and Pricing for Network Revenue
Management with Reusable Resources

Huiwen Jia
Industrial and Operations Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
hwjia@umich.edu

Cong Shi
Industrial and Operations Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
shicong@umich.edu

Siqian Shen
Industrial and Operations Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
siqian@umich.edu

Abstract
We consider a price-based network revenue management problem with multiple
products and multiple reusable resources. Each randomly arriving customer requests a product (service) that needs to occupy a sequence of reusable resources
(servers). We adopt an incomplete information setting where the firm does not
know the price-demand function for each product and the goal is to dynamically set
prices of all products to maximize the total expected revenue of serving customers.
We propose novel batched bandit learning algorithms for finding near-optimal
pricing √
policies, and show that they admit a near-optimal cumulative regret bound
of Õ(J XT ), where J, X, and T are the numbers of products, candidate prices,
and service periods, respectively. As part of our regret analysis, we develop the
first finite-time mixing time analysis of an open network queueing system (i.e.,
the celebrated Jackson Network), which could be of independent interest. Our
numerical studies show that the proposed approaches perform consistently well.

1

Introduction

Network revenue management (NRM) (Gallego and Van Ryzin 1997) has attained remarkable results
in a wide range of applications including airline management, electricity pricing, retailing, healthcare,
and leisure (see, e.g., Williamson 1992, Talluri and Van Ryzin 2006, Özer and Phillips 2012). The
bulk of existing literature focuses primarily on canonical settings with perishable resources in which
the product once sold is permanently removed from inventory (Besbes and Zeevi 2012, Ferreira
et al. 2018, Chen and Shi 2019). Little progress has been made for NRM with reusable resources,
mainly due to the complexity of analyzing the underlying stochastic systems (typically manifested
as stochastic queueing networks). In this paper, we develop easy-to-implement online learning and
pricing policies for NRM with reusable resources shared by multiple products and analyze their
theoretical and empirical performances.
1.1

Problem Description

A service-providing firm is endowed with multiple types of reusable resources, each having a fixed
capacity. The firm sells multiple types of products (services), each requiring the use of a sequence
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

