Distilled Gradient Aggregation:
Purify Features for Input Attribution
in the Deep Neural Network

Giyoung Jeon1,3∗ Haedong Jeong1,2∗ Jaesik Choi2,3
1
UNIST 2 KAIST 3 INEEJI
giyoung@unist.ac.kr haedong.jeong@kaist.ac.kr jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Measuring the attribution of input features toward the model output is one of the
popular post-hoc explanations on the Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Among
various approaches to compute the attribution, the gradient-based methods are
widely used to generate attributions, because of its ease of implementation and the
model-agnostic characteristic. However, existing gradient integration methods such
as Integrated Gradients (IG) suffer from (1) the noisy attributions which cause the
unreliability of the explanation, and (2) the selection for the integration path which
determines the quality of explanations. FullGrad (FG) is an another approach
to construct the reliable attributions by focusing the locality of piece-wise linear
network with the bias gradient. Although FG has shown reasonable performance for
the given input, as the shortage of the global property, FG is vulnerable to the small
perturbation, while IG which includes the exploration over the input space is robust.
In this work, we design a new input attribution method which adopt the strengths
of both local and global attributions. In particular, we propose a novel approach
to distill input features using weak and extremely positive contributor masks. We
aggregate the intermediate local attributions obtained from the distillation sequence
to provide reliable attribution. We perform the quantitative evaluation compared
to various attribution methods and show that our method outperforms others. We
also provide the qualitative result that our method obtains object-aligned and sharp
attribution heatmap.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are increasingly applied to many fields in human-life such as selfdriving, medical predictions and time-series forecasts. Along with these improvements, the recent
models get bigger and more complicated that humans cannot investigate and understand the internal
decision mechanism of them. Identifying and analyzing the reasons for the model predictions are
important because the malfunction or the groundless decision of the model can cause the critical
problems. As an effort to provide the evidences on the decisions, the input attribution has been
well-studied, especially in visual tasks. Input attribution method aims to measure how much each
input feature contributes to the model prediction. Because the output of this method takes the form of
heatmap to provide relative importance among input features, it helps to locate the appearance of
human-level semantics in the input. Previous work also applies the attribution to debug the model by
wiping out Clever Hans of DNNs [Lapuschkin et al., 2019]. However, obtaining the trustful input
attribution is still challenging because (1) the highly nonlinear structure of modern DNNs makes it
difficult to correctly track the relationship between the input and the output, and (2) quantifying the
reliability of attribution methods is non-trivial because the ground-truth is not available.
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

