VTC-LFC: Vision Transformer Compression with
Low-Frequency Components

Zhenyu Wang
Alibaba Group
daner.wzy@alibaba-inc.com
Pichao Wang
Alibaba Group
pichao.wang@alibaba-inc.com
Fan Wang
Alibaba Group
fan.w@alibaba-inc.com

Hao Luo ∗
Alibaba Group
michuan.lh@alibaba-inc.com
Feng Ding
Alibaba Group
dingfeng.dingfeng@alibaba-inc.com
Hao Li
Alibaba Group
lihao.lh@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Although Vision transformers (ViTs) have recently dominated many vision tasks,
deploying ViT models on resource-limited devices remains a challenging problem. To address such a challenge, several methods have been proposed to compress ViTs. Most of them borrow experience in convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and mainly focus on the spatial domain. However, the compression only
in the spatial domain suffers from a dramatic performance drop without finetuning and is not robust to noise, as the noise in the spatial domain can easily
confuse the pruning criteria, leading to some parameters/channels being pruned
incorrectly. Inspired by recent findings that self-attention is a low-pass filter and
low-frequency signals/components are more informative to ViTs, this paper proposes compressing ViTs with low-frequency components. Two metrics named
low-frequency sensitivity (LFS) and low-frequency energy (LFE) are proposed
for better channel pruning and token pruning. Additionally, a bottom-up cascade
pruning scheme is applied to compress different dimensions jointly. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed method could save 40% ∼ 60% of the
FLOPs in ViTs, thus significantly increasing the throughput on practical devices
with less than 1% performance drop on ImageNet-1K. Code will be available at
https://github.com/Daner-Wang/VTC-LFC.git.

1

Introduction

Recently, Vision transformer (ViT) [14] and its variants [50, 32, 62] have outperformed convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) in several vision tasks. However, ViT models still face the challenge of high
computational cost when deployed to resource-limited devices. Following previous experiences in
compressing CNN models, some pruning methods based on sparse learning [68, 61], taylor expansion
[60], or automatic searching [9] have been proposed for ViT models to reduce model redundancy via
channel pruning. In addition to the redundancy in parameters, recent literature [48, 28, 41] further
points out that some noise tokens mainly encoded task-irrelevant information (e.g., background), and
some tokens become similar in deeper layers, showing that great redundancy also exists in tokens.
∗

Corresponding author. This work was done when Zhenyu Wang was an intern at Alibaba.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

