AutoLink: Self-supervised Learning of Human
Skeletons and Object Outlines by Linking Keypoints
Xingzhe He
Bastian Wandt
Helge Rhodin
University of British Columbia
{xingzhe, wandt, rhodin}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Structured representations such as keypoints are widely used in pose transfer,
conditional image generation, animation, and 3D reconstruction. However, their
supervised learning requires expensive annotation for each target domain. We
propose a self-supervised method that learns to disentangle object structure from
the appearance with a graph of 2D keypoints linked by straight edges. Both
the keypoint location and their pairwise edge weights are learned, given only
a collection of images depicting the same object class. The resulting graph is
interpretable, for example, AutoLink recovers the human skeleton topology when
applied to images showing people. Our key ingredients are i) an encoder that
predicts keypoint locations in an input image, ii) a shared graph as a latent variable
that links the same pairs of keypoints in every image, iii) an intermediate edge
map that combines the latent graph edge weights and keypoint locations in a soft,
differentiable manner, and iv) an inpainting objective on randomly masked images.
Although simpler, AutoLink outperforms existing self-supervised methods on
the established keypoint and pose estimation benchmarks and paves the way for
structure-conditioned generative models on more diverse datasets. Project website:
https://xingzhehe.github.io/autolink/.

1

Introduction

Object structure representations are widely used in modern computer graphics and computer vision
techniques, including keypoints for image generation [67, 68, 94] and skeletons for 3D reconstruction
[26, 41, 123, 83, 99]. However, the structure is usually supervised on large annotated datasets [61, 2, 3,
71] or via hand-crafted parametric models [65, 84, 111, 80, 5, 59]. Neither approach generalizes well
to new domains and both require additional manual annotation whenever more detail is needed [88].
Our goal is to reconstruct the keypoint locations of an object by learning from an unlabelled image
collection, thereby sidestepping the generalization problem. Our key idea is to leverage that the same
object shares the same topology by introducing an explicit graph that links the same pairs of keypoints
in all instances. By contrast, existing self-supervised keypoint learning methods model objects as a
set of independent parts. Their consistency over different instances of the same object is encouraged
by either enforcing parts to follow hand-crafted image transformations [102, 126, 42, 66, 37, 62] or
by adding implicit bias in the network architecture that encodes such spatial equivariances [35, 34].
Only [43, 93] use an explicit skeleton representation, but both require predefined topology, rely on
video input, and [43] is trained in a CycleGAN setting that still requires manually labeled examples.
We propose a simple yet effective method to learn both the keypoints and their links without
supervision in terms of a sparse graph serving two purposes. First, the graph acts as a bottleneck that
can only store structural information disentangled from appearance. Second, it forms a constraint that
associates observations across training images. We enforce the same topology across instances of
the same class by learning a shared graph with a single set of edge weights. In the absence of labels,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

