Scalable Interpretability via Polynomials
Abhimanyu Dubey
Meta AI
dubeya@fb.com

Filip Radenovic
Meta AI
filipradenovic@fb.com

Dhruv Mahajan
Meta AI
dhruvm@fb.com

Abstract
Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) have quickly become the leading choice for
interpretable machine learning. However, unlike uninterpretable methods such as
DNNs, they lack expressive power and easy scalability, and are hence not a feasible
alternative for real-world tasks. We present a new class of GAMs that use tensor
rank decompositions of polynomials to learn powerful, inherently-interpretable
models. Our approach, titled Scalable Polynomial Additive Models (SPAM) is
effortlessly scalable and models all higher-order feature interactions without a
combinatorial parameter explosion. SPAM outperforms all current interpretable
approaches, and matches DNN/XGBoost performance on a series of real-world
benchmarks with up to hundreds of thousands of features. We demonstrate by
human subject evaluations that SPAMs are demonstrably more interpretable in practice, and are hence an effortless replacement for DNNs for creating interpretable
and high-performance systems suitable for large-scale machine learning. Source
code is available at github.com/facebookresearch/nbm-spam.

1

Introduction

Interpretable machine learning systems suffer from a tradeoff between approximation and interpretability: high-performing models used in practice have millions of parameters and are highly
non-linear, making them difficult to interpret. Post-hoc explainability attempts to remove this tradeoff by explaining black-box predictions with interpretable instance-specific approximations (e.g.,
LIME [Ribeiro et al., 2016], SHAP [Lundberg and Lee, 2017]), however, they are notoriously unstable [Ghorbani et al., 2019a, Lakkaraju and Bastani, 2020], expensive to compute [Slack et al., 2021],
and in many cases, inaccurate [Lipton, 2018]. It is therefore desirable to learn models that are instead
inherently-interpretable (glass-box), i.e., do not require post-hoc interpretability, but provide better
performance than inherently-interpretable classical approaches such as linear or logistic regression.
This has led to a flurry of research interest in Generalized Additive Models [Hastie and Tibshirani,
2017], i.e., methods that non-linearly transform each input feature separately, e.g., tree-based GAM
and GA2 Ms [Lou et al., 2013], or NAMs [Agarwal et al., 2021]. While these are an improvement
over linear methods, due to their highly complex training procedures, they are not a simple dropin replacement for black-box methods. Furthermore, it is not straightforward to model feature
interactions in these models: the combinatorial explosion in higher-order interactions makes this
infeasible without a computationally expensive feature selection [Lou et al., 2013, Chang et al., 2021].
Contrary to these approaches, we revisit an entirely different solution: polynomials. It is folklore in
machine learning that since polynomials are universal approximators [Stone, 1948, Weierstrass, 1885],
hypothetically, modeling all possible feature interactions will suffice in creating powerful learners
and eliminate the need for intricate non-linear transformations of data. Furthermore, polynomials can
also provide a rubric for interpretability: lower-degree polynomials, that have interactions between a
few features are interpretable but likely less accurate, whereas polynomials of higher degree have
larger predictive power at the cost of interpretability. Thus, not only are polynomial models capable
of capturing all possible interactions between features, they also give practitioners the ability to
select a suitable model (order of interactions, i.e., degree) based precisely on their requirement in the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

