Symplectic Spectrum Gaussian Processes:
Learning Hamiltonians from Noisy and Sparse Data
Yusuke Tanaka
Tomoharu Iwata
Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
{yusuke.tanaka.rh,tomoharu.iwata.gy,naonori.ueda.fr}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
Hamiltonian mechanics is a well-established theory for modeling the time evolution
of systems with conserved quantities (called Hamiltonian), such as the total energy
of the system. Recent works have parameterized the Hamiltonian by machine
learning models (e.g., neural networks), allowing Hamiltonian dynamics to be
obtained from state trajectories without explicit mathematical modeling. However,
the performance of existing models is limited as we can observe only noisy and
sparse trajectories in practice. This paper proposes a probabilistic model that can
learn the dynamics of conservative or dissipative systems from noisy and sparse
data. We introduce a Gaussian process that incorporates the symplectic geometric
structure of Hamiltonian systems, which is used as a prior distribution for estimating Hamiltonian systems with additive dissipation. We then present its spectral
representation, Symplectic Spectrum Gaussian Processes (SSGPs), for which we
newly derive random Fourier features with symplectic structures. This allows us to
construct an efficient variational inference algorithm for training the models while
simulating the dynamics via ordinary differential equation solvers. Experiments on
several physical systems show that SSGP offers excellent performance in predicting
dynamics that follow the energy conservation or dissipation law from noisy and
sparse data.

1

Introduction

There is great interest in the data-driven approach for learning the dynamics of physical systems.
Modeling, simulating, and forecasting dynamics from data are fundamental in engineering and
physical sciences; the data-driven approach also has the potential to discover new laws in physics [16,
37]. Many real-world systems can be described by ordinary differential equations (ODEs). Classical
data-driven approaches make strong assumptions about the form of the equations; thus, they are
not applicable if the system’s equation is unknown [8, 31, 32, 36, 41]. The pioneering work of
neural ordinary differential equation (NODE) [4] has been presented as a general black-box model
for learning vector fields, represented by functions, to output time derivatives of the system’s state;
the state of the system is continuously transformed along the vector fields (see the right part of
Figure 1). The Hamiltonian neural network (HNN) [14] and variants (e.g., [6, 12, 48]) allow one
to learn vector fields such that the total energy of the system (called Hamiltonian) is conserved.
This formulation is advantageous for learning dynamics that follow the basic laws of physics (i.e.,
the energy conservation law). Several extended models cover Hamiltonian systems with additive
dissipation [25, 47]. However, neural network based models implicitly assume that a large amount of
training data with high temporal resolution is available.
This paper addresses the problem of learning Hamiltonian dynamics from noisy and sparse trajectories
and predicting the dynamics from an arbitrary initial condition. We illustrate our problem in Figure 1.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

