The Unreliability of Explanations in Few-shot
Prompting for Textual Reasoning

Xi Ye
Greg Durrett
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
{xiye,gdurrett}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

Prompt

Does prompting a large language model (LLM) like GPT-3 with explanations
improve in-context learning? We study this question on two NLP tasks that involve
reasoning over text, namely question answering and natural language inference. We
test the performance of four LLMs on three textual reasoning datasets using prompts
that include explanations in multiple different styles. For these tasks, we find that
including explanations in the prompts for OPT, GPT-3 (davinci), and InstructGPT
(text-davinci-001) only yields small to moderate accuracy improvements over
standard few-show learning. However, text-davinci-002 is able to benefit more
substantially.
We further show that explanations generated by the LLMs may not entail the
models’ predictions nor be factually grounded in the input, even on simple tasks
with extractive explanations. However, these flawed explanations can still be
useful as a way to verify LLMs’ predictions post-hoc. Through analysis in our
three settings, we show that explanations judged by humans to be good—logically
consistent with the input and the prediction—more likely cooccur with accurate
predictions. Following these observations, we train calibrators using automatically
extracted scores that assess the reliability of explanations, allowing us to improve
performance post-hoc across all of our datasets.1
Train
Example

Missing You is a South Korean television series starring Park Yoo-chun and Yoo Seung-ho. Yoo Seung-ho (born 17
August 1993) is a South Korean actor. Park Yoo-chun (born 23 July 1990) is a South Korean actor.
Q: Which Missing You actor was born August 17 1993?

Explanation
+Label

A: First, Missing You stars Yoo Seung-ho. Second, Yoo Seung-ho is born 17 August 1993. The answer is Yoo
Seung-ho.

Test
Example

Crestfallen is a track on The Smashing Pumpkins’ album, Adore. The single's artwork is by Yelena Yemchuk. Johnny
McDaid is a Croatian professional photographer. Yelena Yemchuk is a Ukrainian professional photographer.
Q: Crestfallen’s artwork is done by a photographer of which nationality?

GPT-3
Output

A: First, Crestfallen's artwork is done by Yelena Yemchuk. Second, Yelena Yemchuk is a Croatian professional
photographer. The answer is Croatian.

Calibrator
The prediction is incorrect. The explanation is not factual with respect to the context.

Figure 1: Prompting GPT-3 with explanations. By including explanations in the in-context examples,
we can cause GPT-3 to generate an explanation for the test example as well. In this case, the
generated explanation is nonfactual, despite the simple reasoning involved here. However, we show
this nonfactuality actually provides a signal that can help calibrate the model.
1

Data and code available at https://github.com/xiye17/TextualExplInContext

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

