M4I: Multi-modal Models Membership Inference

Pingyi Hu∗
University of Adelaide
Australia
Ruoxi Sun
CSIRO’s Data61
Australia

Zihan Wang∗
University of Adelaide
Australia

Hu Wang
University of Adelaide
Australia

Minhui Xue
CSIRO’s Data61
Australia

Abstract
With the development of machine learning techniques, the attention of research has
been moved from single-modal learning to multi-modal learning, as real-world data
exist in the form of different modalities. However, multi-modal models often carry
more information than single-modal models and they are usually applied in sensitive
scenarios, such as medical report generation or disease identification. Compared
with the existing membership inference against machine learning classifiers, we
focus on the problem that the input and output of the multi-modal models are
in different modalities, such as image captioning. This work studies the privacy
leakage of multi-modal models through the lens of membership inference attack, a
process of determining whether a data record involves in the model training process
or not. To achieve this, we propose Multi-modal Models Membership Inference
(M4 I) with two attack methods to infer the membership status, named metric-based
(MB) M4 I and feature-based (FB) M4 I, respectively. More specifically, MB M4 I
adopts similarity metrics while attacking to infer target data membership. FB M4 I
uses a pre-trained shadow multi-modal feature extractor to achieve the purpose
of data inference attack by comparing the similarities from extracted input and
output features. Extensive experimental results show that both attack methods
can achieve strong performances. Respectively, 72.5% and 94.83% of attack
success rates on average can be obtained under unrestricted scenarios. Moreover,
we evaluate multiple defense mechanisms against our attacks. The source code
of M4 I attacks is publicly available at https://github.com/MultimodalMI/
Multimodal-membership-inference.git.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has witnessed great progress during recent years and now has been applied to many
multi-modal applications (models that can process and relate information from multiple modalities,
such as image, audio, and text), such as audio-visual speech recognition [1], speech recognition [1],
event detection [2], and image captioning [3–13]. However, prior research [14] has revealed that
machine learning models are vulnerable to membership inference attack. Leaking membership status
(i.e., member or non-member of a dataset) in a multi-modal application leads to serious security and
privacy issues. For example, if a person, unfortunately, gets a tumor and his medical records were
used to train an image captioning model (e.g., to predict whether the tumor is benign or malignant),
the attacker can infer that the person has a tumor. Furthermore, in a large-scale neural language
model, the attacker can infer detailed private data with the membership inference attack, such as
∗

Contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

