Exploiting Semantic Relations for Glass Surface
Detection
Jiaying Lin∗ Yuen-Hei Yeung∗ Rynson W. H. Lau†
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
{jiayinlin5-c, yh.y}@my.cityu.edu.hk, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Glass surfaces are omnipresent in our daily lives and often go unnoticed by the
majority of us. While humans are generally able to infer their locations and
thus avoid collisions, it can be difficult for current object detection systems to
handle them due to the transparent nature of glass surfaces. Previous methods
approached the problem by extracting global context information to obtain priors
such as object boundaries and reflections. However, their performances cannot be
guaranteed when these deterministic features are not available. We observe that
humans often reason through the semantic context of the environment, which offers
insights into the categories of and proximity between entities that are expected
to appear in the surrounding. For example, the odds of the co-occurrence of
glass windows with walls and curtains are generally higher than that with other
objects, such as cars and trees, which have relatively less semantic relevance.
Based on this observation, we propose a model named Glass Semantic Network
(‘GlassSemNet’) that integrates the contextual relationship of the scenes for glass
surface detection with two novel modules: (1) Scene Aware Activation (SAA)
Module to adaptively filter critical channels with respect to spatial and semantic
features, and (2) Context Correlation Attention (CCA) Module to progressively
learn the contextual correlations among objects both spatially and semantically. In
addition, we propose a large-scale glass surface detection dataset named Glass
Surface Detection - Semantics (‘GSD-S’), which contains 4,519 real-world RGB
glass surface images from diverse real-world scenes with detailed annotations
for both glass surface detection and semantic segmentation. Experimental results
show that our model outperforms state-of-the-art works, especially with 42.6%
MAE improvement on our proposed GSD-S dataset. Code, dataset, and models are
available at https: // jiaying. link/ neurips2022-gsds/

1

Introduction

Glass surfaces, including glass doors, windows, and walls of modern architecture, are becoming
prevalent in our daily lives. Due to the ambiguity of the transparency property, the autonomous
systems of contemporary works typically lack the ability to identify glass surfaces. With such
characteristics, the peripheral environment displayed by the glass surface only contains opaque
objects and scenes from the surroundings. These result in a myriad of potential dangers caused by
the impairment of the existing object detection models in handling glass surfaces, as manifested
in previous works [1, 2]. Consequently, it brings a pressing need for a better glass detection
model. Existing methods have explored many characteristics of glass surfaces, including context [3],
∗
†

Joint first authors.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

