Pile of Law: Learning Responsible Data Filtering from
the Law and a 256GB Open-Source Legal Dataset
Peter Henderson⇤, Mark S. Krass⇤, Lucia Zheng, Neel Guha
Christopher D. Manning, Dan Jurafsky, Daniel E. Ho
Stanford University

Abstract
One concern with the rise of large language models lies with their potential for
significant harm, particularly from pretraining on biased, obscene, copyrighted,
and private information. Emerging ethical approaches have attempted to filter
pretraining material, but such approaches have been ad hoc and failed to take
context into account. We offer an approach to filtering grounded in law, which
has directly addressed the tradeoffs in filtering material. First, we gather and
make available the Pile of Law, a ⇠256GB (and growing) dataset of open-source
English-language legal and administrative data, covering court opinions, contracts,
administrative rules, and legislative records. Pretraining on the Pile of Law may
help with legal tasks that have the promise to improve access to justice. Second, we
distill the legal norms that governments have developed to constrain the inclusion of
toxic or private content into actionable lessons for researchers and discuss how our
dataset reflects these norms. Third, we show how the Pile of Law offers researchers
the opportunity to learn such filtering rules directly from the data, providing an
exciting new research direction in model-based processing.
Warning: this paper contains quotations that may be offensive or upsetting.

1

Introduction

The presence of private and toxic content in the most popular corpora for pretraining large language
models is a well-known problem [11, 58]. But what to do about it is largely a matter of researcher
discretion. Some teams implement extensive processes for filtering content deemed toxic or private;
others train on data in virtually unmodified form. Resolving all of the difficulties and nuances of
content filtering can be challenging, potentially explaining why content filtering has been so uneven.
It is practically difficult to perform reliable and transparent filtering at scale. That is partially because
undesirable content is deeply contextual. For example, whether the inclusion of a racial epithet in
a dataset is toxic may depend on factors such as the identity of the speaker and the expectations of
the readers [43, 114]. Likewise, the existence of privacy violations may depend in part on the extent
to which a speaker expected a fact to be widely shared at the time it was expressed [20, 6-7]. And
privacy expectations may vary widely across countries [10].
Any filtering process involves complex trade-offs. Filtering for toxicity may have unexpected effects
on representation in datasets or the bias of downstream outputs [40, 48, 6]. And filtering too widely
for privacy may harm important downstream applications, as when the Census Bureau’s adoption of
differential privacy led to errors in redistricting U.S. Congressional districts [102].
Yet researchers are not the first to balance the merits of open-source transparency with potential
harms: legal and administrative actors have expended significant resources and process in developing
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

