Finite-Time Analysis of Adaptive Temporal Difference
Learning with Deep Neural Networks∗

Tao Sun
College of Computer
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan 410073, China
nudtsuntao@163.com

Dongsheng Li♯
College of Computer
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan 410073, China
dsli@nudt.edu.cn

Bao Wang♯
Scientific Computing & Imaging Institute
University of Utah, USA
wangbaonj@gmail.com

Abstract
Temporal difference (TD) learning with function approximations (linear functions
or neural networks) has achieved remarkable empirical success, giving impetus
to the development of finite-time analysis. As an accelerated version of TD, the
adaptive TD has been proposed and proved to enjoy finite-time convergence under
the linear function approximation. Existing numerical results have demonstrated the
superiority of adaptive algorithms to vanilla ones. Nevertheless, the performance
guarantee of adaptive TD with neural network approximation remains widely
unknown. This paper establishes the finite-time analysis for the adaptive TD with
multi-layer ReLU networks approximation whose samples are generated from
a Markov decision process. Our established theory shows that if the width of
the deep neural network is large enough, the adaptive TD using neural network
approximation can find the (optimal) value function with high probabilities under
the same iteration complexity as TD in general cases. Furthermore, we show
that the adaptive TD using neural network approximation, with the same width
and searching area, can achieve theoretical acceleration when the stochastic semigradients decay fast.

1

Introduction

Temporal difference (TD) learning is a popular and successful iterative algorithm in the area of reinforcement learning (RL) to evaluate a given policy [47, 51], often employed for critic part evaluation
in various RL algorithms [28, 41, 42]. Classical TD algorithm adopts the tabular representation for the
value function, which stores value estimates on a per-state basis. In large-scale scenarios, the tabular
approach becomes intractable due to a large number of states. Thus, the function approximation
techniques have been integrated with TD for better scalability and efficiency [4, 50, 36, 57]. The
function approximation techniques have achieved remarkable empirical success and are theoretically
justifiable when the linear function approximation is used [23]. As a special function approximation
approach, deep neural networks (DNNs) have also been integrated with TD [38, 37, 33], achieving
∗
This work is sponsored in part by National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFB0301200), Hunan
Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (2022JJ10065), and the National Science Foundation of China
(62025208 and 61906200).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

