Ambiguous Images With Human Judgments for
Robust Visual Event Classification
Kate Sanders

Reno Kriz
Anqi Liu
Benjamin Van Durme
Johns Hopkins University
Human Language Technology Center of Excellence
{ksande25, rkriz1, aliu74, vandurme}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Contemporary vision benchmarks predominantly consider tasks on which humans
can achieve near-perfect performance. However, humans are frequently presented
with visual data that they cannot classify with 100% certainty, and models trained
on standard vision benchmarks achieve low performance when evaluated on this
data. To address this issue, we introduce a procedure for creating datasets of
ambiguous images and use it to produce SQUID-E ("Squidy"), a collection of noisy
images extracted from videos. All images are annotated with ground truth values
and a test set is annotated with human uncertainty judgments. We use this dataset
to characterize human uncertainty in vision tasks and evaluate existing visual event
classification models. Experimental results suggest that existing vision models
are not sufficiently equipped to provide meaningful outputs for ambiguous images
and that datasets of this nature can be used to assess and improve such models
through model training and direct evaluation of model calibration. These findings
motivate large-scale ambiguous dataset creation and further research focusing on
noisy visual data.1

1

Introduction

When making decisions, the human brain uses perceptual uncertainty judgments to account for
missing visual information and other noise [22, 2, 26]. For instance, when humans enter a new
environment, they must quickly gauge what events are taking place in it using limited sensory
input [53, 80, 79]. However, this practice is not reflected in most vision models. Robustness to outof-domain or otherwise noisy data has been an area of focus within the computer vision community
in recent years [24, 4] with various studies showing model limitations in this regard. However, little
work has been done on classifying images that humans also struggle to classify accurately. This lack
of emphasis on ambiguous data can cause poor model performance on noisy images that require
human uncertainty quantification.
Due to the temporal nature of events and their semantic complexity, visual event classification
invites significant data-driven ambiguity. A common task in visual event classification is situation
recognition, where a model must identify the verb and corresponding semantic roles (e.g. subject,
object, place, reason, etc.) depicted in an image to characterize the event taking place [78]. In a
typical framework, a situation recognition model first classifies the verb depicted in the image using
an action recognition network and then, given that predicted verb, recurrently identifies semantic
roles associated with it shown in the image [52]. This paradigm lends itself particularly poorly to
ambiguous data, as the output of the model depends heavily on correctly identifying the verb depicted
using only raw pixels as input. If even humans cannot identify the verb taking place with certainty,
1

Dataset and code are available at https://katesanders9.github.io/ambiguous-images.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

