Reinforcement Learning with
Automated Auxiliary Loss Search
Tairan He1⇤ Yuge Zhang2 Kan Ren2† Minghuan Liu1
Che Wang3 Weinan Zhang1 Yuqing Yang2 Dongsheng Li2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 New York University
whynot@sjtu.edu.cn
kan.ren@microsoft.com

Abstract
A good state representation is crucial to solving complicated reinforcement learning
(RL) challenges. Many recent works focus on designing auxiliary losses for learning informative representations. Unfortunately, these handcrafted objectives rely
heavily on expert knowledge and may be sub-optimal. In this paper, we propose a
principled and universal method for learning better representations with auxiliary
loss functions, named Automated Auxiliary Loss Search (A2LS), which automatically searches for top-performing auxiliary loss functions for RL. Specifically,
based on the collected trajectory data, we define a general auxiliary loss space of
size 7.5 ⇥ 1020 and explore the space with an efficient evolutionary search strategy.
Empirical results show that the discovered auxiliary loss (namely, A2-winner)
significantly improves the performance on both high-dimensional (image) and lowdimensional (vector) unseen tasks with much higher efficiency, showing promising
generalization ability to different settings and even different benchmark domains.
We conduct a statistical analysis to reveal the relations between patterns of auxiliary
losses and RL performance. The codes and supplementary materials are available
at https://seqml.github.io/a2ls.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable progress in games [31, 47, 50], financial
trading [8] and robotics [13]. However, in its core part, without designs tailored to specific tasks,
general RL paradigms are still learning implicit representations from critic loss (value predictions)
and actor loss (maximizing cumulative reward). In many real-world scenarios where observations are
complicated (e.g., images) or incomplete (e.g., partial observable), training an agent that is able to
extract informative signals from those inputs becomes incredibly sample-inefficient.
Therefore, many recent works have been devoted to obtaining a good state representation, which
is believed to be one of the key solutions to improve the efficacy of RL [23, 24]. One of the main
streams is adding auxiliary losses to update the state encoder. Under the hood, it resorts to informative
and dense learning signals in order to encode various prior knowledge and regularization [40], and
obtain better latent representations. Over the years, a series of works have attempted to figure out
the form of the most helpful auxiliary loss for RL. Quite a few advances have been made, including
observation reconstruction [51], reward prediction [20], environment dynamics prediction [40, 6, 35],
etc. But we note two problems in this evolving process: (i) each of the loss designs listed above are
obtained through empirical trial-and-errors based on expert designs, thus heavily relying on human
labor and expertise; (ii) few works have used the final performance of RL as an optimization objective
to directly search the auxiliary loss, indicating that these designs could be sub-optimal.
⇤
†

The work was conducted during Tairan He’s internship at Microsoft Research.
The corresponding author is Kan Ren.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

