Active Learning Helps Pretrained Models
Learn the Intended Task
Alex Tamkin* Dat Nguyen* Salil Deshpande* Jesse Mu Noah Goodman
Stanford University

Abstract
Models can fail in unpredictable ways during deployment due to task ambiguity,
when multiple behaviors are consistent with the provided training data. An example
is an object classifier trained on red squares and blue circles: when encountering
blue squares, the intended behavior (classifying shape vs. color) is ambiguous.
We investigate whether pretrained models are better active learners, capable of
choosing examples that improve robustness to such spurious correlations and
domain shifts. Intriguingly, we find that better active learning is an emergent
property of the pretraining process: pretrained models require up to 5× fewer
labels when using uncertainty-based active learning, while non-pretrained models
see no or even negative benefit. We find these gains come from an ability to select
examples with attributes that disambiguate the intended behavior, such as rare
product categories or atypical backgrounds. These attributes are far more linearly
separable in pretrained model’s representation spaces vs non-pretrained models,
suggesting a possible mechanism for this behavior. Code and training scripts are
available at: https://github.com/alextamkin/active-learning-pretrained-models.

Figure 1: Active learning can resolve task ambiguity in datasets. Here, the provided training
data leaves the model unsure of the intended task: is it to predict the shape or the color of the
object? Pretraining enables models to identify and weigh various rich features, eliciting labels from
informative examples (e.g. blue squares) that clarify the user’s intention.

1

Introduction

Modern pretrained models can be adapted to new tasks with remarkably little data, enabling
downstream applications for tasks with only tens or hundreds of examples [8, 46]. However these
low-data applications magnify a fundamental problem in machine learning—namely, that datasets
are often incomplete proxies for the desired behavior. For example, a sentiment classifier may behave
*

Equal contribution. Correspondence: atamkin@stanford.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

