Evaluation Beyond Task Performance:
Analyzing Concepts in AlphaZero in Hex

Charles Lovering∗ Jessica Zosa Forde∗
George Konidaris Ellie Pavlick Michael L. Littman
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
{first}_{last}@brown.edu

Abstract
AlphaZero, an approach to reinforcement learning that couples neural networks
and Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS), has produced state-of-the-art strategies for
traditional board games like chess, Go, shogi, and Hex. While researchers and
game commentators have suggested that AlphaZero uses concepts that humans
consider important, it is unclear how these concepts are captured in the network.
We investigate AlphaZero’s internal representations in the game of Hex using two
evaluation techniques from natural language processing (NLP): model probing
and behavioral tests. In doing so, we introduce new evaluation tools to the RL
community, and illustrate how evaluations other than task performance can be used
to provide a more complete picture of a model’s strengths and weaknesses. Our
analyses in the game of Hex reveal interesting patterns and generate some testable
hypotheses about how such models learn in general. For example, we find that
MCTS discovers concepts before the neural network learns to encode them. We
also find that concepts related to short-term end-game planning are best encoded in
the final layers of the model, whereas concepts related to long-term planning are
encoded in the middle layers of the model.

1

Introduction

AlphaZero [55], a reinforcement-learning agent that combines Monte Carlo tree search [7] with deep
reinforcement learning, has achieved impressive performance at games like Go, chess, shogi, and
Hex. Domain experts have observed that AlphaZero uses, but does not master, identifiable game
concepts. For example, despite being exceptionally strong overall, AlphaZero appeared unable fully
to project the implications of a ladder—an important concept in the game of Go [60].
Good performance can mask flaws in deep learning systems generally [2, 49, 22, 9, 14, 69, 10],
and deep reinforcement-learning systems in particular [66, 70]. Evaluating systems in terms of task
performance alone makes it impossible to know if systems are “right for the right reasons” and difficult
to predict how they will generalize to new situations [67, 68]. Recently, the field of natural language
processing (NLP) has begun to develop evaluation techniques that go beyond “just” task performance
[3, 4]. For example, some techniques, probing classifiers, inspect the form of models’ internal
representations to test whether they are consistent with linguistic theory [1, 8, 58]; other techniques,
behavioral tests or challenge sets, evaluate specific types of out-of-distribution generalization to
assess whether models encode human-like inductive biases [13, 19, 32, 34, 36, 41, 46, 63]. Although
these techniques are only used over known concepts, often requiring expert domain knowledge to
define, the insights generated by these techniques are not only scientifically interesting, but have
begun to yield actionable insights on how to employ and improve models. For example, Geva et al.
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

