Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with
Knowledge Distillation

Wei-Cheng Tseng1 , Tsun-Hsuan Wang2 , Lin Yen-Chen2 , Phillip Isola2
1
University of Toronto, 2 MIT CSAIL
weicheng.tseng@mail.utoronto.ca, {tsunw,yenchenl,phillipi}@mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce an offline multi-agent reinforcement learning (offline MARL) framework that utilizes previously collected data without additional online data collection.
Our method reformulates offline MARL as a sequence modeling problem and thus
builds on top of the simplicity and scalability of the Transformer architecture. In
the fashion of centralized training and decentralized execution, we propose to first
train a teacher policy who has the privilege to access every agent’s observations,
actions, and rewards. After the teacher policy has identified and recombined the
"good" behavior in the dataset, we create separate student policies and distill not
only the teacher policy’s features but also its structural relations among different
agents’ features to student policies. We show that our framework significantly
improves performances on a range of tasks and outperforms state-of-the-art offline
MARL baselines. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the proposed method has a
better convergence rate, is more sample efficient, and is more robust to various
demonstration qualities compared with baselines.

1

Introduction

The online learning paradigm assumed by existing multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
algorithms is one of the biggest obstacles to their widespread adoption. To apply MARL, one has to
repeatedly perform the following two steps: (a) collect experiences by deploying multiple agents,
typically with their latest learned policies, and (b) use the collected experiences to improve the
policies. In many scenarios, frequently performing the first step is impractical because deploying
multi-agents to the environment can be expensive and dangerous (e.g., self-driving cars). Therefore,
devising offline MARL algorithms that can simply learn from previously collected datasets without
interaction with the environment is an important step toward solving real-world problems.
Recently, several works have extended offline RL algorithms under the single-agent setting to offline
MARL [45]. These works focus on addressing the distribution shift issue that causes the values of
unseen state-action pairs to be erroneously estimated. However, these methods are based on temporal
difference (TD) learning and thus require bootstrapping for credit assignment, a problem that is
especially challenging under the multi-agent setting as the interactions between the agents and the
environment can be highly complex.
To mitigate these issues, we explore the possibility to transform offline MARL into a sequence
modeling problem. This paradigm shift, first introduced by Decision Transformer [3] under the
single-agent setting, allows us to bypass bootstrapping and perform credit assignment directly via
self-attention. A concurrent work, MADT [26], proposes to adapt Decision Transformer to the
multi-agent setting by (a) sharing model parameters across agents and (b) attaching one-hot agent
IDs to observations. Different from MADT, we propose a framework based on policy distillation that
achieves better performance (as demonstrated in the experiments).
Our method first trains a teacher policy (instantiated as a decision transformer) to model the entire
offline MARL dataset sequentially by accessing each agent’s observation, action, and reward. The
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

