Robustness Disparities in Face Detection
Samuel Dooley1 , George Z. Wei2 , Tom Goldstein1 , John P. Dickerson1
1
University of Maryland
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{sdooley1, tomg, john}@cs.umd.edu, gzwei@umass.edu
2

Abstract
Facial analysis systems have been deployed by large companies and critiqued
by scholars and activists for the past decade. Many existing algorithmic audits
examine the performance of these systems on later stage elements of facial analysis
systems like facial recognition and age, emotion, or perceived gender prediction;
however, a core component to these systems has been vastly understudied from a
fairness perspective: face detection, sometimes called face localization. Since face
detection is a pre-requisite step in facial analysis systems, the bias we observe in
face detection will flow downstream to the other components like facial recognition
and emotion prediction. Additionally, no prior work has focused on the robustness
of these systems under various perturbations and corruptions, which leaves open
the question of how various people are impacted by these phenomena. We present
the first of its kind detailed benchmark of face detection systems, specifically
examining the robustness to noise of commercial and academic models. We use
both standard and recently released academic facial datasets to quantitatively
analyze trends in face detection robustness. Across all the datasets and systems,
we generally find that photos of individuals who are masculine presenting, older,
of darker skin type, or have dim lighting are more susceptible to errors than their
counterparts in other identities.

1

Introduction

Face detection identifies the presence and location of faces in images and video. In this work, face
detection, also called face localization, refers to the task of placing a rectangle around the location of
all faces in an image. Automated face detection is a core component of myriad systems—including
face recognition technologies (FRT), wherein a detected face is matched against a database of faces,
typically for identification or verification purposes. FRT-based systems are widely deployed [11,
33, 74]. Automated face recognition enables capabilities ranging from the relatively morally neutral
(e.g., searching for photos on a personal phone [27]) to morally laden (e.g., widespread citizen
surveillance [33], or target identification in warzones [51]). Legal and social norms regarding the
usage of FRT are evolving [e.g., 28]. For example, in June 2021, the first county-wide ban on its
use for policing [see, e.g., 24] went into effect in the US [29]. Some use cases for FRT will be
deemed socially repugnant and thus be either legally or de facto banned from use; yet, it is likely that
pervasive use of facial analysis will remain—albeit with more guardrails than today [67].
One such guardrail that has spurred positive, though insufficient, improvements and widespread
attention is the use of benchmarks. For example, in late 2019, the US National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) adapted its venerable Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT) to explicitly
include concerns for demographic effects [28], ensuring such concerns propagate into industry
systems. Yet, differential treatment by FRT of groups has been known for at least a decade [e.g.,
21, 41], and more recent work spearheaded by [8] uncovers unequal performance at the phenotypic
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

