TA-GATES: An Encoding Scheme for Neural
Network Architectures
Xuefei Ning12†⇤

Zixuan Zhou1⇤

Changcheng Tang3

Junbo Zhao1

Shuang Liang3

Tianchen Zhao1
Huazhong Yang1

Yiping Deng2
Yu Wang1†

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University1
TCS Lab, Huawei2
Novauto Technology Co. Ltd.3

Abstract
Neural architecture search tries to shift the manual design of neural network (NN)
architectures to algorithmic design. In these cases, the NN architecture itself
can be viewed as data and needs to be modeled. A better modeling could help
explore novel architectures automatically and open the black box of automated
architecture design. To this end, this work proposes a new encoding scheme for
neural architectures, the Training-Analogous Graph-based ArchiTecture Encoding
Scheme (TA-GATES). TA-GATES encodes an NN architecture in a way that is
analogous to its training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the flexibility and
discriminative power of TA-GATES lead to better modeling of NN architectures.
We expect our methodology of explicitly modeling the NN training process to
benefit broader automated deep learning systems. The code is available at https:
//github.com/walkerning/aw_nas.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed tremendous advances of deep learning (DL) methods using neural
networks (NNs). One of the key driving forces behind NN’s widespread applications is the clever
design of NN architectures that are both effective and efficient [15, 37, 11, 13]. Nevertheless, longtail distributed tasks and platforms in the real world pose challenges to the scalability of manual
architecture design workflows. One pathway to tackle these challenges is to construct Automated
Deep Learning (AutoDL) systems [38, 32, 9] that can decide on factors in all aspects of NN training
and inference in an automated and algorithmic way. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [57, 8, 46] is
a subfield of AutoDL that focuses on automated architecture exploration.
As NAS shifts up the architecture design level from manual design to algorithmic design, NN
architectures themselves can be viewed as data and need to be modeled. For example, predictor-based
NAS [27, 23, 42, 20] constructs a performance predictor consisting of an architecture encoding
scheme and a prediction head, and uses its predictions for unseen architectures to guide architecture
sampling. A better architecture encoding scheme enables more accurate predictions, and thereby
enable us to explore the space more efficiently by only sampling promising architectures [23, 27, 43].
Moreover, an encoding scheme can also be used to improve the widely-used parameter-sharing
evaluation [55] or help open the black box of automated architecture design [33]. To this end, our
work aims at designing a better encoding scheme for NN architectures.
State-of-the-art (SOTA) encoding schemes [54, 27] of NN architectures are graph-based ones that view
an architecture as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of computations. As shown in Fig. 1 and described
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding to: foxdoraame@gmail.com, yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

