Spartan: Differentiable Sparsity
via Regularized Transportation
Kai Sheng Tai
Meta AI

Taipeng Tian
Meta AI

Ser-Nam Lim
Meta AI

Abstract
We present Spartan, a method for training sparse neural network models with
a predetermined level of sparsity. Spartan is based on a combination of two
techniques: (1) soft top-k masking of low-magnitude parameters via a regularized
optimal transportation problem and (2) dual averaging-based parameter updates
with hard sparsification in the forward pass. This scheme realizes an explorationexploitation tradeoff: early in training, the learner is able to explore various sparsity
patterns, and as the soft top-k approximation is gradually sharpened over the course
of training, the balance shifts towards parameter optimization with respect to a
fixed sparsity mask. Spartan is sufficiently flexible to accommodate a variety
of sparsity allocation policies, including both unstructured and block structured
sparsity, as well as general cost-sensitive sparsity allocation mediated by linear
models of per-parameter costs. On ImageNet-1K classification, Spartan yields 95%
sparse ResNet-50 models and 90% block sparse ViT-B/16 models while incurring
absolute top-1 accuracy losses of less than 1% compared to fully dense training.

1

Introduction

Sparse learning algorithms search for model parameters that minimize training loss while retaining
only a small fraction of non-zero entries. Parameter sparsity yields benefits along several axes:
reduced model storage costs, greater computational and energy efficiency during training and inference, and potentially improved model generalization [33]. However, sparse training is a challenging
optimization problem: for the general problem of learning parameters ✓ 2 Rd subject to the constraint
that ✓ is k-sparse, the feasible set is the union of kd axis-aligned hyperplanes intersecting at the
origin, each of dimension k. This complex, nonconvex geometry of the feasible set compounds the
existing difficulty of optimizing deep neural network models.
This work focuses on improving the generalization error of sparse neural network models. To this
end, we introduce Spartan, or Sparsity via Regularized Transportation—a sparse learning algorithm
that leverages an optimal transportation-based top-k masking operation to induce parameter sparsity
during training. Spartan belongs to the family of “parameter dense” training algorithms that maintains
a dense parameter vector ✓ 2 Rd throughout training [48; 24], in contrast to “parameter sparse”
training algorithms that adhere to a Õ(k) memory budget for representing the parameters of a ksparse model [3; 31; 32; 13; 16]. While computational cost and memory usage at training time are
important considerations, Spartan primarily optimizes for performance at inference time.
Intuitively, Spartan aims to achieve a controlled transition between the exploration and exploitation
of various sparsity patterns during training. In the exploration regime, the goal is for the learner to
easily transition between differing sparsity patterns in order to escape those that correspond to poor
minima of the loss function. On the other hand, the goal of exploitation is for the learner to optimize
model parameters given a fixed sparsity pattern, or a small set of similar patterns. This latter setting
Correspondence to: Kai Sheng Tai (kst@meta.com)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

