Inverse Game Theory for Stackelberg Games:
the Blessing of Bounded Rationality
Jibang Wu
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
wujibang@uchicago.edu
Fei Fang
Institute for Software Research
Carnegie Mellon University
feif@cmu.edu

Weiran Shen
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
shenweiran@ruc.edu.cn
Haifeng Xu
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
haifengxu@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Optimizing strategic decisions (a.k.a. computing equilibrium) is key to the success
of many non-cooperative multi-agent applications. However, in many real-world
situations, we may face the exact opposite of this game-theoretic problem — instead
of prescribing equilibrium of a given game, we may directly observe the agents’
equilibrium behaviors but want to infer the underlying parameters of an unknown
game. This research question, also known as inverse game theory, has been studied
in multiple recent works in the context of Stackelberg games. Unfortunately,
existing works exhibit quite negative results, showing statistical hardness [27, 37]
and computational hardness [24, 25, 26], assuming follower’s perfectly rational
behaviors. Our work relaxes the perfect rationality agent assumption to the classic
quantal response model, a more realistic behavior model of bounded rationality.
Interestingly, we show that the smooth property brought by such bounded rationality
model actually leads to provably more efficient learning of the follower utility
parameters in general Stackelberg games. Systematic empirical experiments on
synthesized games confirm our theoretical results and further suggest its robustness
beyond the strict quantal response model.

1

Introduction

One primary objective of game theory is to predict the behaviors of agents through equilibrium
concepts in a given game. In practice, however, we may observe some equilibrium behaviors of
agents, but the game itself turns out to be unknown. For example, an online shopping platform
can observe the shoppers’ purchase decisions on different sale prices, but the platform has limited
knowledge of the exact utilities of the shoppers. Similarly, while the policymaker could observe
the market reactions to its policy announcement, the exact motives behind traders’ reactions are
usually unclear. In various security domains, the defender may want to understand the intentions or
incentives of the attackers from their responses to different defense strategies so as to improve her
future defense strategy. As such, recovering the underlying game parameters would not only lead
us to better strategic decisions, but also improve our explications of the motives and rationale in the
dark.
These potentials and prospects motivate a class of research problems known as the inverse game
theory [26]: given the agents’ equilibrium behaviors, what are possible utilities that induce these
behaviors? In this paper, we specifically target the sequential game setting from the perspective of the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

