On the Spectral Bias of Convolutional Neural Tangent
and Gaussian Process Kernels
Amnon Geifman1
1

Meirav Galun1

David Jacobs2

Ronen Basri1

Department of Computer Science, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
{amnon.geifman, meirav.galun, ronen.basri}@weizmann.ac.il
2

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
djacobs@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
We study the properties of various over-parameterized convolutional neural architectures through their respective Gaussian Process and Neural Tangent kernels. We
prove that, with normalized multi-channel input and ReLU activation, the eigenfunctions of these kernels with the uniform measure are formed by products of
spherical harmonics, defined over the channels of the different pixels. We next use
hierarchical factorizable kernels to bound their respective eigenvalues. We show
that the eigenvalues decay polynomially, quantify the rate of decay, and derive
measures that reflect the composition of hierarchical features in these networks.
Our theory provides a concrete quantitative characterization of the role of locality
and hierarchy in the inductive bias of over-parameterized convolutional network
architectures.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [23] have produced dramatic improvements over past
machine learning approaches [22, 35, 18]. Two key properties that distinguish CNNs are their ability
to encode geometric properties of the data, by incorporating multiscale analysis and invariance or
equivariance. Shift invariant networks produce the same output when the input is shifted, which
can be valuable, for example, in classification tasks in which objects are not well aligned. Shift
equivariant networks produce shifted output when the input is shifted, and are important in imageto-image networks that, for example, denoise or segment the input [21, 24, 37]. Multiscale feature
representations naturally arise in these networks as the receptive field size varies with depth.
However, we still lack a theoretical analysis of CNNs that can quantitatively predict their behavior.
Our analysis builds on the Gaussian Process and Neural Tangent kernels (resp. GPK and NTK). It
has been shown theoretically that massively overparameterized networks can be well approximated
by a linearization about their initialization [1, 2, 15, 20]. With this linearization, neural networks
become kernel regressors, with training dynamics and smoothness properties determined by the
eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of their kernel, which determine their Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS).
A series of interesting works has derived the spectrum of NTK for fully connected networks (denoted
FC-NTK). This eigen-analysis tells us which functions a network learns most rapidly, since the speed
of learning an eigenfunction with gradient descent (GD) is inversely proportional to the corresponding
eigenvalue [6]. For example, it allows us to determine that FC-NTK learns low frequency components
of a function faster than high frequency components, and characterize the rates at which this happens
[4, 5, 6, 8, 9]. So this eigen-analysis allows us to characterize the inductive bias of over-parametrized
neural networks. Convolutional GPKs and NTKs (resp. CGPKs and CNTKs) have been derived for
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

