Confident Approximate Policy Iteration for Efficient
Local Planning in 𝑞 𝜋 -realizable MDPs

Gellért Weisz
DeepMind, London, UK
University College London, London, UK
Tadashi Kozuno
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
Omron Sinic X, Tokyo, Japan

András György
DeepMind, London, UK

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind, London, UK
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada

Abstract
We consider approximate dynamic programming in 𝛾-discounted Markov decision processes and apply it to approximate planning with linear value-function
approximation. Our first contribution is a new variant of A PPROXIMATE P OL ICY I TERATION (API), called C ONFIDENT A PPROXIMATE P OLICY I TERATION
(CAPI), which computes a deterministic stationary policy with an optimal error
bound scaling linearly with the product of the effective horizon 𝐻 and the worstcase approximation error 𝜀 of the action-value functions of stationary policies.
This improvement over API (whose error scales with 𝐻 2 ) comes at the price of
an 𝐻-fold increase in memory cost. Unlike Scherrer and Lesner [2012], who
recommended computing a non-stationary policy to achieve a similar improvement
(with the same memory overhead), we are able to stick to stationary policies. This
allows for our second contribution, the application of CAPI to planning with local
access to a simulator and 𝑑-dimensional linear function approximation. As such,
we design a planning algorithm that applies CAPI to obtain a sequence of policies
with successively refined√accuracies on a dynamically evolving set of states. The
algorithm outputs an Õ ( 𝑑𝐻𝜀)-optimal policy after issuing Õ (𝑑𝐻 4 /𝜀 2 ) queries
to the simulator, simultaneously achieving the optimal accuracy bound and the best
known query complexity bound, while earlier algorithms in the literature achieve
only one of them. This query complexity is shown to be tight in all parameters except 𝐻. These improvements come at the expense of a mild (polynomial) increase
in memory and computational costs of both the algorithm and its output policy.

1

Introduction

A key question in reinforcement learning is how to use value-function approximation to arrive at
scaleable algorithms that can find near-optimal policies in Markov decision processes (MDPs). A
flurry of recent results aims at solving this problem efficiently with varying models of interaction
with the MDP. In this paper we focus on the problem of planning with a simulator when using linear
function approximation. A simulator is a “device” that, given a state-action pair as a query, returns a
next state and reward generated from the transition kernel of the MDP that is simulated. Depending
on the application, such a simulator is often readily available (e.g., in chess, go, Atari). Planning
with simulator access comes with great benefits: for example, in a recent work, Wang et al. [2021]
showed that under some conditions it is exponentially more efficient to find a near-optimal policy if
a simulator of the MDP (that can reset to a state) is available compared to the online case where a
learner interacts with its environment by following trajectories but without the help of a simulator.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

