Large Language Models are Zero-Shot Reasoners

Takeshi Kojima
The University of Tokyo
t.kojima@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Machel Reid
Google Research∗

Yutaka Matsuo
The University of Tokyo

Shixiang Shane Gu
Google Research, Brain Team

Yusuke Iwasawa
The University of Tokyo

Abstract
Pretrained large language models (LLMs) are widely used in many sub-fields of
natural language processing (NLP) and generally known as excellent few-shot
learners with task-specific exemplars. Notably, chain of thought (CoT) prompting,
a recent technique for eliciting complex multi-step reasoning through step-bystep answer examples, achieved the state-of-the-art performances in arithmetics
and symbolic reasoning, difficult system-2 tasks that do not follow the standard
scaling laws for LLMs. While these successes are often attributed to LLMs’
ability for few-shot learning, we show that LLMs are decent zero-shot reasoners
by simply adding “Let’s think step by step” before each answer. Experimental
results demonstrate that our Zero-shot-CoT, using the same single prompt template,
significantly outperforms zero-shot LLM performances on diverse benchmark
reasoning tasks including arithmetics (MultiArith, GSM8K, AQUA-RAT, SVAMP),
symbolic reasoning (Last Letter, Coin Flip), and other logical reasoning tasks (Date
Understanding, Tracking Shuffled Objects), without any hand-crafted few-shot
examples, e.g. increasing the accuracy on MultiArith from 17.7% to 78.7% and
GSM8K from 10.4% to 40.7% with large-scale InstructGPT model (text-davinci002), as well as similar magnitudes of improvements with another off-the-shelf
large model, 540B parameter PaLM. The versatility of this single prompt across
very diverse reasoning tasks hints at untapped and understudied fundamental
zero-shot capabilities of LLMs, suggesting high-level, multi-task broad cognitive
capabilities may be extracted by simple prompting. We hope our work not only
serves as the minimal strongest zero-shot baseline for the challenging reasoning
benchmarks, but also highlights the importance of carefully exploring and analyzing
the enormous zero-shot knowledge hidden inside LLMs before crafting finetuning
datasets or few-shot exemplars.

1

Introduction

Scaling up the size of language models has been key ingredients of recent revolutions in natural
language processing (NLP) [Vaswani et al., 2017, Devlin et al., 2019, Raffel et al., 2020, Brown et al.,
2020, Thoppilan et al., 2022, Rae et al., 2021, Chowdhery et al., 2022]. The success of large language
models (LLMs) is often attributed to (in-context) few-shot or zero-shot learning. It can solve various
tasks by simply conditioning the models on a few examples (few-shot) or instructions describing the
task (zero-shot). The method of conditioning the language model is called “prompting” [Liu et al.,
2021b], and designing prompts either manually [Schick and Schütze, 2021, Reynolds and McDonell,
2021] or automatically [Gao et al., 2021, Shin et al., 2020] has become a hot topic in NLP.
∗

Work done while at The University of Tokyo.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

