Explicable Policy Search

Yu Zhang
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281
yzhan442@asu.edu

Ze Gong
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281
zgong11@asu.edu

Abstract
Human teammates often form conscious and subconscious expectations of each
other during interaction. Teaming success is contingent on whether such expectations can be met. Similarly, for an intelligent agent to operate beside a human,
it must consider the human’s expectation of its behavior. Disregarding such expectations can lead to the loss of trust and degraded team performance. A key
challenge here is that the human’s expectation may not align with the agent’s
optimal behavior, e.g., due to the human’s partial or inaccurate understanding of
the task domain. Prior work on explicable planning described the ability of agents
to respect their human teammate’s expectations by trading off task performance for
more expected or “explicable” behaviors. In this paper, we introduce Explicable
Policy Search (EPS) to significantly extend such an ability to stochastic domains
in a reinforcement learning (RL) setting with continuous state and action spaces.
Furthermore, in contrast to the traditional RL methods, EPS must at the same
time infer the human’s hidden expectations. Such inferences require information
about the human’s belief about the domain dynamics and her reward model but
directly querying them is impractical. We demonstrate that such information can
be necessarily and sufficiently encoded by a surrogate reward function for EPS,
which can be learned based on the human’s feedback on the agent’s behavior. The
surrogate reward function is then used to reshape the agent’s reward function, which
is shown to be equivalent to searching for an explicable policy. We evaluate EPS in
a set of navigation domains with synthetic human models and in an autonomous
driving domain with a user study. The results suggest that our method can generate
explicable behaviors that reconcile task performance with human expectations
intelligently and has real-world relevance in human-agent teaming domains.

1

Introduction

Intelligent agents are quickly becoming a part of our daily lives in a variety of domains, including
smart home, autonomous driving, education, and so on. In such domains, the agents are expected
to perform in human inhabited environments and even collaborate closely with them. Members in
such a collaborative setting often form conscious and subconscious expectations of each other and
the success of collaboration depends on whether such expectations can be met. A key challenge
here is that the human’s expectation may not align with the agent’s optimal behavior. Hence, agents
choosing their optimal behaviors without considering the human observers or collaborators could be
seen as unexpected, leading to degraded team performance and loss of trust [19, 6].
Consider a drone navigation scenario in Fig. 1a where a drone is tasked to navigate from the starting
position (as shown) to a destination. On a good day, the drone would be expected to navigate (almost)
straight to the goal under mild air perturbation (thus possibly introducing a slightly curved trajectory
as illustrated in red). When there is a heavy wind that changes the domain dynamics (which the
human observer is unaware of), it may become impossible for the drone to navigate as usual. Two
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

