Simplified Graph Convolution with Heterophily

Sudhanshu Chanpuriya
University of Massachusetts Amherst
schanpuriya@cs.umass.edu

Cameron Musco
University of Massachusetts Amherst
cmusco@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Recent work has shown that a simple, fast method called Simple Graph Convolution (SGC) (Wu et al., 2019), which eschews deep learning, is competitive with
deep methods like graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017)
in common graph machine learning benchmarks. The use of graph data in SGC
implicitly assumes the common but not universal graph characteristic of homophily,
wherein nodes link to nodes which are similar. Here we confirm that SGC is indeed
ineffective for heterophilous (i.e., non-homophilous) graphs via experiments on
synthetic and real-world datasets. We propose Adaptive Simple Graph Convolution
(ASGC), which we show can adapt to both homophilous and heterophilous graph
structure. Like SGC, ASGC is not a deep model, and hence is fast, scalable, and
interpretable; further, we can prove performance guarantees on natural synthetic
data models. Empirically, ASGC is often competitive with recent deep models at
node classification on a benchmark of real-world datasets. The SGC paper questioned whether the complexity of graph neural networks is warranted for common
graph problems involving homophilous networks; our results similarly suggest
that, while deep learning often achieves the highest performance, heterophilous
structure alone does not necessitate these more involved methods.

1

Introduction

Data involving relationships between entities arises in biology, sociology, and many other fields, and
such data is often best expressed as a graph. Therefore, models of graph data that yield algorithms
for common graph machine learning tasks, like node classification, have wide-reaching impact. Deep
learning (LeCun et al., 2015) has enjoyed great success in modeling image and text data, and graph
convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017) attempt to extend this success to graph data.
Various deep models branch off from GCNs, offering additional speed, accuracy, or other features.
However, like other deep models, these algorithms involve repeated nonlinear transformations of
inputs and are therefore time and memory intensive to train.
Recent work has shown that a much simpler model, simple graph convolution (SGC) (Wu et al.,
2019), is competitive with GCNs in common graph machine learning benchmarks. SGC is much
faster than GCNs, partly because the role of the graph in SGC is restricted to a feature extraction
step in which node features are smoothed across the graph; by contrast, GCNs include graph
convolution steps as part of an end-to-end model, resulting in expensive backpropagation calculations.
However, the feature smoothing operation in SGC implicity assumes the common but not universal
graph characteristic of homophily, wherein nodes mostly link to similar nodes; indeed, recent
work (NT & Maehara, 2019) suggests that many GCNs may assume such structure. We ask whether
a feature extraction approach, that, like SGC, is free of deep learning, can tackle heterophilous (i.e.,
non-homophilous) graph structure. We see this work as extending the following broader research
question introduced by the SGC paper to a wider range of graphs:
Are nonlinearities, end-to-end backpropagation, and other characteristics of deep
learning essential to effective learning on graphs?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

