On Margin Maximization in Linear and
ReLU Networks
Gal Vardi
TTI-Chicago and Hebrew University∗
galvardi@ttic.edu

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
The implicit bias of neural networks has been extensively studied in recent years.
Lyu and Li [2019] showed that in homogeneous networks trained with the exponential or the logistic loss, gradient flow converges to a KKT point of the max margin
problem in parameter space. However, that leaves open the question of whether
this point will generally be an actual optimum of the max margin problem. In this
paper, we study this question in detail, for several neural network architectures
involving linear and ReLU activations. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that in many
cases, the KKT point is not even a local optimum of the max margin problem. On
the flip side, we identify multiple settings where a local or global optimum can be
guaranteed.

1

Introduction

A central question in the theory of deep learning is how neural networks generalize even when
trained without any explicit regularization, and when there are far more learnable parameters than
training examples. In such optimization problems there are many solutions that label the training data
correctly, and gradient descent seems to prefer solutions that generalize well [Zhang et al., 2016].
Hence, it is believed that gradient descent induces an implicit bias [Neyshabur et al., 2014, 2017],
and characterizing this bias has been a subject of extensive research in recent years.
A main focus in the theoretical study of implicit bias is on homogeneous neural networks. These are
networks where scaling the parameters by any factor α > 0 scales the predictions by αL for some
constant L. For example, fully-connected and convolutional ReLU networks without bias terms are
homogeneous. Lyu and Li [2019] proved that in linear and ReLU homogeneous networks trained
with the exponential or the logistic loss, if gradient flow (GF) converges to a sufficiently small loss2 ,
then the direction to which the parameters of the network converge can be characterized as a first
order stationary point (KKT point) of the maximum margin problem in parameter space. Namely,
the problem of minimizing the `2 norm of the parameters under the constraints that each training
example is classified correctly with margin at least 1. They also showed that this KKT point satisfies
necessary conditions for optimality. However, the conditions are not known to be sufficient even for
local optimality. It is analogous to showing that some unconstrained optimization problem converges
to a point with gradient zero, without proving that it is either a global or a local minimum. Thus, the
∗

Work done while the author was at the Weizmann Institute of Science
They also assumed directional convergence, but [Ji and Telgarsky, 2020] later showed that this assumption
is not required.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

