Generating multivariate time series with COmmon
Source CoordInated GAN (COSCI-GAN)

Ali Seyfi
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC
aliseyfi@cs.ubc.ca

Jean-Francois Rajotte
Data Science Institute
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC
jfraj@mail.ubc.ca

Raymond T. Ng
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC
rng@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Generating multivariate time series is a promising approach for sharing sensitive
data in many medical, financial, and IoT applications. A common type of multivariate time series originates from a single source such as the biometric measurements
from a medical patient. This leads to complex dynamical patterns between individual time series that are hard to learn by typical generation models such as GANs.
There is valuable information in those patterns that machine learning models can
use to better classify, predict or perform other downstream tasks. We propose a
novel framework that takes time series’ common origin into account and favors
channel/feature relationships preservation. The two key points of our method are:
1) the individual time series are generated from a common point in latent space and
2) a central discriminator favors the preservation of inter-channel/feature dynamics.
We demonstrate empirically that our method helps preserve channel/feature correlations and that our synthetic data performs very well in downstream tasks with
medical and financial data.

1

Introduction

Multivariate Time Series (MTS) are composed of individual time series (TS) sharing the same time
reference. In some cases, the individual time series further share a common source such as the
biometric values from a medical patient, the stock prices from economic events or geographically
separated seismic measurements from a single earthquake. This leads to specific correlation patterns
and time dynamics across the time series. Such complex patterns can be crucial when a model is
trained on MTS and might need a huge amount of training samples to be captured by a machine
learning algorithm. For many applications, however, there may not be enough high-quality training
data. For example, for many biomedical and health care applications, data scarcity is common and
data sharing to build a larger training set is challenging due to regulatory requirements or ethical
concerns ([1], [2]). Such concerns are justified; it is well known that sharing data associated with a
single individual, even anonymized, can lead to unexpected privacy breaches ([3], [4], [5], and [6]).
Synthetic MTS could be an attractive alternative to share the patterns and statistical information of an
MTS dataset. If done properly, synthetic MTS should not have a one-to-one mapping to the original
data, although it can come with its own privacy and quality challenges (see [7] for example).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

