Active Learning Polynomial Threshold Functions

Omri Ben-Eliezer
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
omrib@mit.edu

Max Hopkins
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
nmhopkin@eng.ucsd.edu

Chutong Yang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
yct1998@stanford.edu

Hantao Yu
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
hantao.yu@columbia.edu

Abstract
We initiate the study of active learning polynomial threshold functions (PTFs).
While traditional lower bounds imply that even univariate quadratics cannot be
non-trivially actively learned, we show that allowing the learner basic access to
the derivatives of the underlying classifier circumvents this issue and leads to a
computationally efficient algorithm for active learning degree-d univariate PTFs in
Õ(d3 log(1/εδ)) queries. We extend this result to the batch active setting, providing
a smooth transition between query complexity and rounds of adaptivity, and also
provide near-optimal algorithms for active learning PTFs in several average case
settings. Finally, we prove that access to derivatives is insufficient for active
learning multivariate PTFs, even those of just two variables.

1

Introduction

Today’s deep neural networks perform incredible feats when provided sufficient training data. Sadly,
annotating enough raw data to train your favorite classifier can often be prohibitively expensive,
especially in important scenarios like computer-assisted medical diagnoses where labeling requires
the advice of human experts. This issue has led to a surge of interest in active learning, a paradigm
introduced to mitigate extravagant labeling costs. Active learning, originally studied by Angluin in
1988 [1], is in essence formed around two basic hypotheses: raw (unlabeled) data is cheap, and not
all data is equally useful. The idea is that by adaptively selecting only the most informative data to
label, we can get the same accuracy without the prohibitive cost. As a basic example, consider the
class of thresholds in one dimension. Identifying the threshold within some ε accuracy requires about
1/ε labeled data points, but if we are allowed to adaptively select points we can use binary search to
recover the same error in only log(1/ε) labels, an exponential improvement!
Unfortunately, there’s a well-known problem with this approach: it breaks down for most non-trivial
classifiers beyond 1D-thresholds [2], providing no asymptotic benefit over standard non-adaptive
methods. This has lead researchers in recent years to develop a slew of new strategies overcoming
this obstacle. We follow an approach pioneered by Kane, Lovett, Moran, and Zhang (KLMZ) [3]:
asking more informative questions. KLMZ suggest that if we are modeling access to a human expert,
there’s no reason to restrict ourselves to asking only about the labels of raw data; rather, we should be
allowed access to other natural application-dependent questions as well. They pay particular attention
to learning halfspaces in this model via “comparison queries,” which given x, x′ ∈ Rd ask which
point is closer to the bounding hyperplane (think of asking a doctor “which patient is more sick?”).
Such queries had already shown promise in practice [4–6], and KLMZ proved they could be used
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

