Alignment-guided Temporal Attention for Video
Action Recognition

1

Yizhou Zhao1∗†
Zhenyang Li2∗†
Xun Guo3
Yan Lu3
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Tsinghua University
Microsoft Research Asia
yizhouz@andrew.cmu.edu, lizy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{xunguo, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Temporal modeling is crucial for various video learning tasks. Most recent approaches employ either factorized (2D+1D) or joint (3D) spatial-temporal operations to extract temporal contexts from the input frames. While the former is
more efficient in computation, the latter often obtains better performance. In this
paper, we attribute this to a dilemma between the sufficiency and the efficiency
of interactions among various positions in different frames. These interactions
affect the extraction of task-relevant information shared among frames. To resolve
this issue, we prove that frame-by-frame alignments have the potential to increase
the mutual information between frame representations, thereby including more
task-relevant information to boost effectiveness. Then we propose Alignmentguided Temporal Attention (ATA) to extend 1-dimensional temporal attention with
parameter-free patch-level alignments between neighboring frames. It can act
as a general plug-in for image backbones to conduct the action recognition task
without any model-specific design. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks
demonstrate the superiority and generality of our module.

1

Introduction

Unlike images, videos include a wealth of temporal information due to common and distinct patterns
in nearby frames. In images, the whole scene is static. In videos, however, the background, the
foreground, and each part of them can have different degrees of movement. These differences
necessitate temporal modeling in video learning tasks.
With respect to this, recent literature mainly focuses on two branches of modelings, namely, factorized
(2D+1D) spatial-temporal operations [49, 15, 3, 34] and joint (3D) spatial-temporal operations [42,
11, 37, 32]. The former considers staggering or dividing spatial operations with temporal ones, such
as separable 3D convolutions and factorized spatial-temporal attention. Since the two groups of
operations are relatively independent, this paradigm leverages indirect interactions for features at
different space-time locations. Enjoying the efficiency from fewer participants for each operation,
it often suffers from less sufficiency of cross-frame cross-location interactions. In contrast, the
latter extends 2-dimensional operations to their 3-dimensional varieties, thereby jointly interacting
features from neighboring areas as well as frames, e.g., 2D convolutions vs. 3D convolutions and
spatial attention vs. joint spatial-temporal attention. This line of work explores a more global
view compared with the former one, bringing more direct and adequate interactions at the cost of
dramatically increased complexity. As a result, a conflict seemingly exists between the sufficiency
and the efficiency of interactions among various positions in different frames.
∗
†

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

