Luckiness in Multiscale Online Learning

Muriel Felipe Pérez-Ortiz
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI)
muriel.perez@cwi.nl

Wouter M. Koolen
CWI and University of Twente
wmkoolen@cwi.nl

Abstract
Algorithms for full-information online learning are classically tuned to minimize
their worst-case regret. Modern algorithms additionally provide tighter guarantees
outside the adversarial regime, most notably in the form of constant pseudoregret
bounds under statistical margin assumptions. We investigate the multiscale extension of the problem where the loss ranges of the experts are vastly different. Here,
the regret with respect to each expert needs to scale with its range, instead of the
maximum overall range. We develop new multiscale algorithms, tuning schemes
and analysis techniques to show that worst-case robustness and adaptation to easy
data can be combined at a negligible cost. We further develop an extension with
optimism and apply it to solve multiscale two-player zero-sum games. We demonstrate experimentally the superior performance of our scale-adaptive algorithm and
discuss the subtle relationship of our results to Freund’s 2016 open problem.

1

Introduction

The abstract problem of online prediction with expert advice [Littlestone and Warmuth, 1994, Freund
and Schapire, 1997] is of fundamental importance in computational learning theory. Efficient and
optimal algorithms for solving it have a substantial impact on various problems in general online
convex optimization [Hazan, 2019], online model selection [Foster et al., 2017], boosting [Freund
and Schapire, 1997], and maximal probabilistic inequalities [Rakhlin and Sridharan, 2017], to name a
few. Concretely, a decision maker chooses among experts’ advices sequentially, and the environment
assigns each advice a scalar loss. If all losses have the same numerical range [−σ, σ], the situation is
well understood. Indeed, Freund and Schapire [1997] showed that,√for K experts and t rounds, the
Hedge algorithm guarantees the minimax regret (defined below) σ 2t ln K. Furthermore, modern
algorithms additionally guarantee lower or even constant regret when the sequence of losses is more
benign [see De Rooij et al., 2014, Koolen and Van Erven, 2015, Mourtada and Gaïffas, 2019].
In the multiscale setting, where the experts’ loss ranges may differ by orders of magnitude, it is
natural to ask about the existence of algorithms that guarantee an optimal worst-case regret bound that
scales with the loss range of the best expert instead of the maximum range. This question has been
answered affirmatively [Chen et al., 2021, Bubeck et al., 2019, Cutkosky and Orabona, 2018, Foster
et al., 2017]. The algorithms developed in this line of work have had a significant impact in different
areas of computational learning theory and practice. Unfortunately, as we will see, the best known
algorithms still fail to guarantee lower regret even for the simplest benign statistical cases. Ensuring
these goals poses serious technical challenges. In particular, Bernstein’s inequality, the engine of
classical same-scale luckiness arguments, has no suitable multiscale upgrade. Moreover, intuitive
candidate upgrades of same-scale results would contradict recent lower bounds (see Section 7). To
make things worse, in order to obtain multiscale regret bounds, close attention needs to be paid to
terms that are conventionally insignificant but now carry the maximum scale of the problem. This
motivates our main question: can a single algorithm have multiscale worst-case regret guarantees
and, in addition, exhibit constant (pseudo)regret in stochastic lucky cases?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

