A Direct Approximation of AIXI Using Logical State
Abstractions
Samuel Yang-Zhao⇤ †
Australian National University
Canberra ACT 2601
samuel.yang-zhao@anu.edu.au

Tianyu Wang⇤
Australian National University
Canberra ACT 2601
tianyu.wang2@anu.edu.au

Kee Siong Ng
Australian National University
Canberra ACT 2601
keesiong.ng@anu.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a practical integration of logical state abstraction with AIXI, a Bayesian
optimality notion for reinforcement learning agents, to significantly expand the
model class that AIXI agents can be approximated over to complex historydependent and structured environments. The state representation and reasoning
framework is based on higher-order logic, which can be used to define and enumerate complex features on non-Markovian and structured environments. We address
the problem of selecting the right subset of features to form state abstractions by
adapting the -MDP optimisation criterion from state abstraction theory. Exact
Bayesian model learning is then achieved using a suitable generalisation of Context
Tree Weighting over abstract state sequences. The resultant architecture can be
integrated with different planning algorithms. Experimental results on controlling
epidemics on large-scale contact networks validates the agent’s performance.

1

Introduction

The AIXI agent [1] is a mathematical solution to the general reinforcement learning problem that
combines Solomonoff induction [2] with sequential decision theory. At time t, after observing the
observation-reward sequence or1:t 1 and performing previous actions a1:t 1 the AIXI agent chooses
action at given by
X
X
X
at = arg max
. . . max
[rt + . . . + rt+m ]
2 l(q) ,
(1)
at

ort

at+m

ort+m

q:U (q,a1:t+m )=or1:t+m

where U is a universal Turing machine, U (q, a1:n ) is the output of U given program q and input a1:n ,
m 2 N is the lookahead horizon, and l(q) is the length of q in bits. [1] shows that AIXI’s environment
model converges rapidly to the true environment and its policy is pareto optimal and self-optimising.
While mathematically elegant, a fundamental issue with AIXI is that it is only asymptotically computable. The question of whether a good practical approximation of AIXI can be constructed remains
an open problem twenty years after AIXI was first introduced [3]. The most direct approximation of
AIXI given so far is [4], in which the Bayesian mixture over all Turing machines is approximated over
n-Markov environments using Context Tree Weighting [5] and the expectimax search is approximated
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

