Towards a Unified Framework for Uncertainty-aware
Nonlinear Variable Selection with Theoretical
Guarantees
Wenying Deng
Harvard University
wdeng@g.harvard.edu

Beau Coker
Harvard University
beaucoker@g.harvard.edu

Jeremiah Zhe Liu⇤
Harvard University & Google Research
jereliu@google.com

Rajarshi Mukherjee
Harvard University
ram521@mail.harvard.edu

Brent A. Coull⇤
Harvard University
bcoull@hsph.harvard.edu

Abstract
We develop a simple and unified framework for nonlinear variable importance
estimation that incorporates uncertainty in the prediction function and is compatible
with a wide range of machine learning models (e.g., tree ensembles, kernel methods,
neural networks, etc). In particular, for a learned nonlinear model f (x), we consider
quantifying the importance of an input variable xj using the integrated partial
@
2
derivative j = k @x
j f (x)kPX . We then (1) provide a principled approach for
quantifying uncertainty in variable importance by deriving its posterior distribution,
and (2) show that the approach is generalizable even to non-differentiable models
such as tree ensembles. Rigorous Bayesian nonparametric theorems are derived
to guarantee the posterior consistency and asymptotic uncertainty of the proposed
approach. Extensive simulations and experiments on healthcare benchmark datasets
confirm that the proposed algorithm outperforms existing classical and recent
variable selection methods.

1

Introduction

Variable selection is often of fundamental interest in many data science applications, providing
benefits in prediction error, interpretability, and computation by excluding unnecessary variables.
As datasets grow in complexity and size, it is crucial that variable importance estimation methods
can account for complex dependencies among variables while remaining computationally feasible.
Furthermore, as the number of approaches to model such datasets has increased, it is crucial that the
importance of each variable can be compared across model classes and extended to new ones as they
are developed.
While there are established approaches for quantifying variable importance in linear models (e.g.,
LASSO regression Hastie et al. [2015]), there is little consensus as to the preferred methodology
or theory for variable importance in nonlinear models. Generalized additive models Hastie and
Tibshirani [1990] use similar methods as their linear counterparts Wang et al. [2014], but the
additivity assumption for nonlinear functions of the variables is too restrictive in many applications.
Random Forests (RF) Breiman [2001] measure variable importance using an impurity measure, which
is based on the average reduction of the loss function were a given variable removed from the model.
Friedman [2001] extended this method to boosting, where the definition of variable importance is
generalized by considering the average over all of the decision trees. Deep neural networks (DNNs)
are widely-used for many artificial intelligence applications, and a substantial effort has been invested
⇤

Co-senior author. Work done at Harvard University.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

