Interpreting Operation Selection in Differentiable
Architecture Search: A Perspective from
Influence-Directed Explanations

1

Miao Zhang1,2 , Wei Huang3 , Bin Yang4∗
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 2 Aalborg University
3
RIKEN AIP 4 East China Normal University

zhangmiao@hit.edu.cn; wei.huang.vr@riken.jp; byang@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The Differentiable ARchiTecture Search (DARTS) has dominated the neural architecture search community due to its search efficiency and simplicity. DARTS
leverages continuous relaxation to convert the intractable operation selection problem into a continuous magnitude optimization problem which can be easily handled
with gradient-descent, while it poses an additional challenge in measuring the operation importance or selecting an architecture from the optimized magnitudes.
The vanilla DARTS assumes the optimized magnitudes reflect the importance
of operations, while more recent works find this naive assumption leads to poor
generalization and is without any theoretical guarantees. In this work, we leverage
influence functions, the functional derivatives of the loss function, to theoretically
reveal the operation selection part in DARTS and estimate the candidate operation
importance by approximating its influence on the supernet with Taylor expansions.
We show the operation strength is not only related to the magnitude but also secondorder information, leading to a fundamentally new criterion for operation selection
in DARTS, named Influential Magnitude. Empirical studies across different tasks
on several spaces show that vanilla DARTS and its variants can avoid most failures
by leveraging the proposed theory-driven operation selection criterion.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has been successfully applied to automating the process of neural
network design for a broad of deep learning fields [35, 41, 48, 50]. However, the early NAS methods
are often heavily computational-expensive and require hundreds or even thousands GPU days [34].
To improve the efficiency for more practical applications, a lot of recent works are proposed based on
one-shot (also known as weight-sharing) paradigm [33] to improve the search efficiency significantly.
Differentiable ARchiTecture Search (DARTS) [27], as the most popular one-shot NAS method, has
dominated this area since its appearance. DARTS leverages continuous relaxation to convert the
intractable operation selection problem into a continuous magnitude optimization problem, which
can be gracefully solved by gradient-descent based on the bi-level optimization [8]. A discrete
architecture is then derived based on the optimized magnitudes through operation selection.
Although the continuous relaxation makes DARTS able to optimize the magnitudes with rigorous
theoretical formulation and guarantees [51] in the supernet training part, it poses an additional
challenge in selecting a discrete architecture from the optimized magnitudes that there is no existing
work can give a theoretical explanation. DARTS is based on the weight-sharing paradigm [33], which
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

