Personalized Federated Learning towards
Communication Efficiency, Robustness and Fairness

Shiyun Lin1,2 ∗ Yuze Han2 ∗ Xiang Li2 Zhihua Zhang1,2
1
Center for Statistical Science, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
shiyunlin@stu.pku.edu.cn hanyuze97@pku.edu.cn
lx10077@pku.edu.cn zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Personalized Federated Learning faces many challenges such as expensive communication costs, training-time adversarial attacks, and performance unfairness
across devices. Recent developments witness a trade-off between a reference model
and local models to achieve personalization. We follow the avenue and propose
a personalized FL method towards the three goals. When it is time to communicate, our method projects local models into a shared-and-fixed low-dimensional
random subspace and uses infimal convolution to control the deviation between the
reference model and projected local models. We theoretically show our method
converges for smooth objectives with square regularizers and the convergence
dependence on the projection dimension is mild. We also illustrate the benefits
of robustness and fairness on a class of linear problems. Finally, we conduct a
large number of experiments to show the empirical superiority of our method over
several state-of-the-art methods on the three aspects.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) emerges as a new distributed computing paradigm that would perform
privately distributed optimization in large-scale networks of remote clients [51]. For the sake of
privacy protection, data are generated locally and are kept in the original location during training,
which incurs a discrepancy among local data distributions. Furthermore, the nature that FL works as
a decentralized system poses greater challenges to its communication efficiency, robustness against
adversarial attacks, and fairness on resource allocation [32].
To detour the data heterogeneity issue, one considers to personalize local models [35]. A key feature
that any personalization method has is to differ local models from the global model. The simplest
way for personalization is training purely with local data on each device. Chen et al. [10] showed
that when the degree of data heterogeneity is above some threshold value, pure local training is
minimax optimal; otherwise, the global model is minimax optimal. In practice, we prefer a method
that intervenes between the two extremes. It brings out another popular approach that interpolates
between a reference model and local models [19, 20, 12, 13, 26, 64]. Recently, Li et al. [44] suggested
that personalization can be leveraged not only to improve accuracy, but also to allow for competing
constraints such as robustness and fairness. Inspired by their work, we would explore the following
question:
Can we balance different constraints of interest (i.e., communication efficiency, robustness and
fairness) simultaneously?
In this paper, we give an affirmative answer to the question by proposing a personalized FL method
named as lp-proj, whose core is Lp -regularization and low-dimensional random projection. We
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

