Fair Wrapping for Black-box Predictions
Alexander Soen
Australian National University
alexander.soen@anu.edu.au

Yishay Mansour
Google Research
Tel Aviv University
mansour@google.com

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin
Google Research
ibomohsin@google.com

Nyalleng Moorosi
Google Research
nyalleng@google.com

Ke Sun
Australian National University
CSIRO’s Data61
sunk@ieee.org

Sanmi Koyejo
Google Research
Stanford University
sanmik@google.com

Richard Nock
Google Research
Australian National University
richardnock@google.com

Lexing Xie
Australian National University
lexing.xie@anu.edu.au

Abstract
We introduce a new family of techniques to post-process (“wrap") a black-box
classifier in order to reduce its bias. Our technique builds on the recent analysis
of improper loss functions whose optimization can correct any twist in prediction,
unfairness being treated as a twist. In the post-processing, we learn a wrapper
function which we define as an ↵-tree, which modifies the prediction. We provide
two generic boosting algorithms to learn ↵-trees. We show that our modification
has appealing properties in terms of composition of ↵-trees, generalization, interpretability, and KL divergence between modified and original predictions. We
exemplify the use of our technique in three fairness notions: conditional valueat-risk, equality of opportunity, and statistical parity; and provide experiments on
several readily available datasets.

1

Introduction

The social impact of Machine Learning (ML) has seen a dramatic increase over the past decade
– enough so that the bias of model outputs must be accounted for alongside accuracy [1, 14, 35].
Considering the various number of fairness targets [20] and the energy and CO2 footprint of ML
[19, 28], the combinatorics of training accurate and fair models is non-trivial. This is especially so
given the inherit incompatibilities of fairness constraints [17] and the underlying tension of satisfying
fairness whilst maintaining accuracy. One trend in the field "decouples" the two constraints by
post-processing pretrained (accurate) models to achieve fairer outputs [35]. Post-processing may be
the only option if we have no access to the model’s training data / algorithm / hyperparameters (etc.).
Within the post-processing approach, three trends have emerged: learning a new fair model close to
the black-box, tweaking the output subject to fairness constraints, and exploiting sets of classifiers. If
the task is class probability estimation [24], the estimated black-box is an accurate but potentially
unfair posterior ⌘u : X ! [0, 1] which neither can be opened nor trained further. The goal is then to
learn a fair posterior ⌘f from it. In addition to the black-box constraint, a number of desiderata can
be considered for post-processing. Ideally in correcting a black-box, we would want the approach
to have (flexibility) in satisfying substantially different fairness criteria, (proximity) of the learnt
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

