Unsupervised Object Representation Learning using
Translation and Rotation Group Equivariant VAE

Alireza Nasiri
Simons Machine Learning Center
New York Structural Biology Center
anasiri@nysbc.org

Tristan Bepler
Simons Machine Learning Center
New York Structural Biology Center
tbepler@nysbc.org

Abstract
In many imaging modalities, objects of interest can occur in a variety of locations
and poses (i.e. are subject to translations and rotations in 2d or 3d), but the location
and pose of an object does not change its semantics (i.e. the object’s essence). That
is, the specific location and rotation of an airplane in satellite imagery, or the 3d
rotation of a chair in a natural image, or the rotation of a particle in a cryo-electron
micrograph, do not change the intrinsic nature of those objects. Here, we consider
the problem of learning semantic representations of objects that are invariant to
pose and location in a fully unsupervised manner. We address shortcomings in
previous approaches to this problem by introducing TARGET-VAE, a translation
and rotation group-equivariant variational autoencoder framework. TARGET-VAE
combines three core innovations: 1) a rotation and translation group-equivariant
encoder architecture, 2) a structurally disentangled distribution over latent rotation, translation, and a rotation-translation-invariant semantic object representation,
which are jointly inferred by the approximate inference network, and 3) a spatially equivariant generator network. In comprehensive experiments, we show that
TARGET-VAE learns disentangled representations without supervision that significantly improve upon, and avoid the pathologies of, previous methods. When trained
on images highly corrupted by rotation and translation, the semantic representations
learned by TARGET-VAE are similar to those learned on consistently posed objects, dramatically improving clustering in the semantic latent space. Furthermore,
TARGET-VAE is able to perform remarkably accurate unsupervised pose and
location inference. We expect methods like TARGET-VAE will underpin future approaches for unsupervised object generation, pose prediction, and object detection.
Our code is available at https://github.com/SMLC-NYSBC/TARGET-VAE.

1

Introduction

In many imaging modalities, objects of interest are arbitrarily located and oriented within the image
frame. Examples include airplanes in satellite images, galaxies in astronomy images [1], and particles
in single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) micrographs [2]. However, neither the location
nor the rotation of an object within an image frame changes the nature (i.e. the semantics) of the
object itself. An airplane is an airplane regardless of where it is in the image, and different rotations
of a particle in a cryo-EM micrograph are still projections of the same protein. Hence, there is great
interest in learning semantic representations of objects that are invariant to their locations and poses.
In general, unsupervised representation learning methods do not recover representations that disentangle the semantics of an object from its location or its pose. Popular unsupervised deep learning
methods for images, such as variational autoencoders (VAE) [3], usually use encoder-decoder frameworks in which an encoder network is learned to map an input image to an unstructured latent variable
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

