Representing Spatial Trajectories as Distributions

Dídac Surís
Columbia University
didac.suris@columbia.edu

Carl Vondrick
Columbia University
vondrick@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We introduce a representation learning framework for spatial trajectories. We
represent partial observations of trajectories as probability distributions in a learned
latent space, which characterize the uncertainty about unobserved parts of the
trajectory. Our framework allows us to obtain samples from a trajectory for
any continuous point in time—both interpolating and extrapolating. Our flexible
approach supports directly modifying specific attributes of a trajectory, such as its
pace, as well as combining different partial observations into single representations.
Experiments show our method’s advantage over baselines in prediction tasks. See
trajectories.cs.columbia.edu for video results and code.

1

Introduction

The visual world is full of objects moving around in predictable ways. Examples of these spatial
trajectories include human motion, such as people dancing or exercising; objects moving, such as
a ball rolling; trajectories of cars and bicycles; or animal migration patterns. Evidence suggests
that the human perceptual system encodes motion into high-level neural codes that represent the
motion holistically, going beyond the specific input observations [22]. Humans use this abstract
representation for downstream tasks like inferring intention [6]. Computer vision systems likely need
similar mechanisms to encode trajectories and motions into global representations.
Representation learning has been transformative in other domains such as images and text for its
ability to obtain high-level representations that reorganize the information in the input, and are better
at downstream tasks than the original signals. A global representation of trajectories would allow
us to evaluate a trajectory at any point in time, even ones not yet observed. However, modeling
trajectories presents a series of challenges for representation learning. First, in real-time scenarios,
the future of the trajectory is never observed. Second, temporal and spatial occlusions may impede
observing part of a trajectory. Third, trajectories are by nature continuous in time. And finally, a
trajectory-level metric is usually not well defined and application-dependent.
We propose a representation learning framework for trajectories that deals with all these challenges
in a unified way. Our key contribution is the representation of a partial observation of a trajectory
as a probability distribution in a learned latent space, that represents all the possible trajectories the
observation could have been sampled from. Our framework’s simplicity and generality allows it to be
flexible: it does not constrain the input-space metric, accepts observations of different lengths and at
any (irregularly sampled) point in time, can be implemented using different families of latent space
distributions, and is capable of performing inference-time tasks for which it has not been explicitly
trained. Our experiments on human movement datasets show that our method can accurately predict
the past and future of a trajectory segment, as well as the interpolation between two different segments,
outperforming autoregressive baselines. Additionally, it can do so for any continuous point in time.
We also show how we can modify given trajectories by manipulating their representations.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

