SageMix: Saliency-Guided Mixup for Point Clouds

Sanghyeok Lee∗
Korea University
cat0626@korea.ac.kr
Injae Kim
Korea University
dna9041@korea.ac.kr

Minkyu Jeon∗
Korea University
jmk94810@korea.ac.kr

Yunyang Xiong
Meta Reality Labs
yunyang@fb.com

Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Korea University
hyunwoojkim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Data augmentation is key to improving the generalization ability of deep learning
models. Mixup is a simple and widely-used data augmentation technique that has
proven effective in alleviating the problems of overfitting and data scarcity. Also,
recent studies of saliency-aware Mixup in the image domain show that preserving
discriminative parts is beneficial to improving the generalization performance.
However, these Mixup-based data augmentations are underexplored in 3D vision,
especially in point clouds. In this paper, we propose SageMix, a saliency-guided
Mixup for point clouds to preserve salient local structures. Specifically, we extract salient regions from two point clouds and smoothly combine them into one
continuous shape. With a simple sequential sampling by re-weighted saliency
scores, SageMix preserves the local structure of salient regions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method consistently outperforms existing
Mixup methods in various benchmark point cloud datasets. With PointNet++, our
method achieves an accuracy gain of 2.6% and 4.0% over standard training in 3D
Warehouse dataset (MN40) and ScanObjectNN, respectively. In addition to generalization performance, SageMix improves robustness and uncertainty calibration.
Moreover, when adopting our method to various tasks including part segmentation and standard 2D image classification, our method achieves competitive
performance. Code is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/SageMix.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved high performance in various domains including image, video,
and speech. Recent researches [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] have been proposed to employ deep learning model
for 3D vision, especially in point clouds. However, in the point cloud domain, deep learning models
are prone to suffer from weak-generalization performance due to the limited availability of data
compared to the image datasets, which contain almost millions of training samples. For alleviating
the data scarcity issue, data augmentation is a prevalent solution to increase the training data.
In the image domain, Mixup-based methods [7, 8, 9] combine two training images to generate
augmented samples. More recent Mixup methods [10, 11, 12, 13] focus on leveraging saliency to
preserve the discriminative regions such as foreground objects. Despite the success of saliencyaware Mixup methods, it has been less studied in point clouds due to its unordered and non-grid
structure. Moreover, saliency-aware augmentation methods require solving an additional optimization
problem [11, 12], resulting in a considerable computational burden.
∗
†

First two authors have equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

