Trade-off between Payoff and Model Rewards in
Shapley-Fair Collaborative Machine Learning

Quoc Phong Nguyen, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low§ , and Patrick Jaillet†
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore§
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA†
qphongmp@gmail.com, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg§ , jaillet@mit.edu†

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of fairly trading off between payoff and model
rewards in collaborative machine learning (ML) where parties aggregate their
datasets together to obtain improved ML models over that of each party. Supposing
parties can afford the optimal model trained on the aggregated dataset, we propose
an allocation scheme that distributes the payoff fairly. Notably, the same scheme
can be derived from two different approaches based on (a) desirable properties of
the parties’ payoffs or (b) that of the underlying payoff flows from one party to
another. While the former is conceptually simpler, the latter can be used to handle
the practical constraint on the budgets of parties. In particular, we propose desirable
properties for achieving a fair adjustment of the payoff flows that can trade off
between the model reward’s performance and the payoff reward. We empirically
demonstrate that our proposed scheme is a sensible solution in several scenarios of
collaborative ML with different budget constraints.

1

Introduction

While machine learning (ML) has proven its usefulness in a wide range of applications, a significant
amount of diverse training data is often required to achieve desirable performance. Although this
may not be an issue for very large corporations, it can hardly be met by other businesses. In practice,
the dataset coming from an individual data owner (e.g., a company), called a party, is often limited
in size (e.g., due to the size of the customer base) and diversity (e.g., due to the constraints in the
geographical location and/or the customer demographics). Hence, there is a strong urge for parties to
obtain high-quality ML models by performing collaborative ML: training models on their aggregated
dataset which is often of much larger quantity and higher diversity than those of individual parties.
However, the goal of obtaining improved models may not outweigh the concern of fairness if all parties
receive the same model while their contributions differ (due to the difference in the size and quality
of different parties’ datasets). For instance, a party with a larger contribution feels “under-rewarded”
if all parties receive models of equal performances without any other compensation/rewards for the
difference in their contributions. Hence, a “fair” reward allocation scheme is desirable to give all
parties enough incentives to join the collaboration. Let us classify existing works on fair reward
allocation schemes into 2 groups depending on whether there exists an external source of reward to
be distributed among parties. This source of reward can be thought of as an external buyer of the
model who is interested in the model but does not contribute data, so he/she is willing to pay a reward
to parties in the collaboration to obtain the model.
As an example, a company distributes monetary payoffs to its users for contributing user data to train a
model. Then, one can view users as parties who collaborate to train the model and the company as an
external buyer of the model. In this case, one can compensate for the difference in users’ contributions
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

