Autoformalization with Large Language Models

Yuhuai Wu1,2†
Markus N. Rabe1

Albert Q. Jiang3
Charles Staats1

Mateja Jamnik3

Wenda Li3
Christian Szegedy1

1

Google Research
Stanford University
3
University of Cambridge
2

Abstract
Autoformalization is the process of automatically translating from natural language
mathematics to formal specifications and proofs. A successful autoformalization
system could advance the fields of formal verification, program synthesis, and
artificial intelligence. While the long-term goal of autoformalization seemed
elusive for a long time, we show large language models provide new prospects
towards this goal. We make the surprising observation that LLMs can correctly
translate a significant portion (25.3%) of mathematical competition problems
perfectly to formal specifications in Isabelle/HOL. We demonstrate the usefulness
of this process by improving a previously introduced neural theorem prover via
training on these autoformalized theorems. Our methodology results in a new
state-of-the-art result on the MiniF2F theorem proving benchmark, improving the
proof rate from 29.6% to 35.2%.

1

Introduction

Autoformalization refers to the task of automatically translating from natural language mathematics
to a formal language [46, 42]. The implication of a successful autoformalization tool is huge in
both practical and philosophical terms. It would reduce the currently excessive cost of formalization
efforts [27], and in the long-term it could connect the various research fields that automate aspects of
mathematical reasoning, such as automated theorem proving and computer algebra, to the vast body
of mathematical knowledge exclusively written up in natural language. Moreover, autoformalization
would be a true testament to machine understanding, grasping both the fuzziness of natural language
and the preciseness of formal language.
Recent advances in large language models [8, 10] showed promising capabilities of understanding
formal languages [9, 32]. However, the existing successes are limited to formal languages where
there exists a large body of corpus on the web (e.g., Python language). Formal mathematics data is
very scarce. For example, one of the largest formal mathematics libraries, the Archive of Formal
Proofs, is only 180MB in size, that is less than 0.18% of the training data for the large language
model Codex [9]. Moreover, unlike in the case of commonly used programming languages, where
natural language docstrings are broadly available, there is almost zero aligned data between natural
language and formal mathematics. Therefore, it is unclear the recent successes can directly contribute
to the development of autoformalization.
In this work, we explore the prospects of autoformalization with large language models. To our
surprise, we find that large language models already have a decent capability of formalizing natural
†

Corresponding author (yuhuai@google.com).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

