When to Make Exceptions: Exploring Language
Models as Accounts of Human Moral Judgment
Zhijing Jin⇤
MPI & ETH Zürich
zjin@tue.mpg.de
Ojasv Kamal
IIT Kharagpur
kamalojasv47@iitkgp.ac.in

Rada Mihalcea†
University of Michigan
mihalcea@umich.edu

Sydney Levine⇤
MIT & Harvard
smlevine@mit.edu

Fernando Gonzalez⇤
ETH Zürich
fgonzalez@ethz.ch

Maarten Sap
LTI, Carnegie Mellon University
maartensap@cmu.edu
Joshua Tenenbaum†
MIT
jbt@mit.edu

Mrinmaya Sachan†
ETH Zürich
msachan@ethz.ch
Bernhard Schölkopf†
MPI for Intelligent Systems
bs@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
AI systems are becoming increasingly intertwined with human life. In order to
effectively collaborate with humans and ensure safety, AI systems need to be
able to understand, interpret and predict human moral judgments and decisions.
Human moral judgments are often guided by rules, but not always. A central
challenge for AI safety is capturing the flexibility of the human moral mind — the
ability to determine when a rule should be broken, especially in novel or unusual
situations. In this paper, we present a novel challenge set consisting of moral
exception question answering (MoralExceptQA) of cases that involve potentially
permissible moral exceptions – inspired by recent moral psychology studies. Using
a state-of-the-art large language model (LLM) as a basis, we propose a novel moral
chain of thought (M ORAL C OT) prompting strategy that combines the strengths of
LLMs with theories of moral reasoning developed in cognitive science to predict
human moral judgments. M ORAL C OT outperforms seven existing LLMs by 6.2%
F1, suggesting that modeling human reasoning might be necessary to capture the
flexibility of the human moral mind. We also conduct a detailed error analysis to
suggest directions for future work to improve AI safety using MoralExceptQA.1

1

Introduction

AI systems need to be able to understand, interpret, and predict human decisions in order to successfully cooperate with humans and navigate human environments. Several key decisions that humans
make are morally charged – they deal with concerns of harm, justice, and fairness (Turiel, 1983) or,
more broadly, the problem of interdependent rational choice (Braithwaite, 1955; Gauthier, 1986).
Moral decisions are often guided by rules that seem rigid. Don’t lie. Don’t cheat. Don’t steal. On
further reflection, however, the human moral mind displays remarkable flexibility – rules admit of
nearly infinite exceptions. For instance, it seems like there is one simple rule about queuing: don’t
cut the line. Yet, most people think it fine to let a cleaning person cut the line to a bathroom to clean
⇤

†
Equal contribution.
Equal supervision.
Our data is open-sourced at https://huggingface.co/datasets/feradauto/MoralExceptQA and
code at https://github.com/feradauto/MoralCoT.
1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

