Bridging the Gap: Unifying the Training and
Evaluation of Neural Network Binary Classifiers

Nathan Tsoi
Yale University
nathan.tsoi@yale.edu

Kate Candon
Yale University
kate.candon@yale.edu

Yofti Milkessa
Yale University
yofti.milkessa@yale.edu

Deyuan Li
Yale University
deyuan.li@yale.edu

Marynel Vázquez
Yale University
marynel.vazquez@yale.edu

Abstract
While neural network binary classifiers are often evaluated on metrics such as
Accuracy and F1 -Score, they are commonly trained with a cross-entropy objective.
How can this training-evaluation gap be addressed? While specific techniques have
been adopted to optimize certain confusion matrix based metrics, it is challenging or
impossible in some cases to generalize the techniques to other metrics. Adversarial
learning approaches have also been proposed to optimize networks via confusion
matrix based metrics, but they tend to be much slower than common training
methods. In this work, we propose a unifying approach to training neural network
binary classifiers that combines a differentiable approximation of the Heaviside
function with a probabilistic view of the typical confusion matrix values using soft
sets. Our theoretical analysis shows the benefit of using our method to optimize
for a given evaluation metric, such as F1 -Score, with soft sets. Also, our extensive
experiments show the effectiveness of our approach in several domains.

1

Introduction

Neural network binary classifiers output a probability p ∈ [0, 1] which is often used at training time
to optimize model parameters using the binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss. The network’s output p can
also be translated to a binary value {0, 1} indicating set membership to the negative or positive class.
To determine set membership, the Heaviside step function H is commonly used with a threshold τ ,
where p ≥ τ are considered positive classification outcomes. This notion of set membership is often
used in evaluation metrics for binary classifiers.
It is a common assumption that optimizing a network via the desired evaluation metric is preferable
to optimizing a surrogate objective [12, 18, 29, 33]. Unfortunately, optimizing a network using the
desired evaluation metric, such as F1 -Score, is typically not feasible. The Heaviside step function
used to compute confusion matrix set membership in terms of true positives, false negatives, false
positives, and true negatives, has a gradient with properties not conducive to optimization via gradient
descent. The Heaviside function’s gradient is not defined at the threshold τ and is zero everywhere
else.
Empirical results (e.g., [12]) show that the training-evaluation gap hinders evaluation performance.
The gap means that in many applications, the metric differs significantly from the surrogate loss [33]
and there may not be a strong correlation between minimizing a surrogate loss and improving an
evaluation metric [29]. Also, it could mean that classifiers are solving “the wrong problem” when
optimizing a surrogate loss, leading to sub-optimal evaluation performance [18].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

