HUMANISE: Language-conditioned
Human Motion Generation in 3D Scenes
Zan Wang1,2 , Yixin Chen2 , Tengyu Liu2
Yixin Zhu3 , Wei Liang1,4 , Siyuan Huang2
indicates corresponding authors
1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing
https://silverster98.github.io/HUMANISE/
Sit on the couch
Walk to the refrigerator

Stand up from the table
far away from the door

Lie down on the bed

Sit on the toilet

Figure 1: Examples from our proposed Human-Scene Interaction (HSI) dataset—HUMANISE. It contains
19.6k high-quality motion sequences in 643 indoor scenes. Each motion segment contains rich semantic information about the ground-truth action type and objects being interacted with, specified by language descriptions.

Abstract
Learning to generate diverse scene-aware and goal-oriented human motions in
3D scenes remains challenging due to the mediocre characteristics of the existing
datasets on Human-Scene Interaction (HSI); they only have limited scale/quality
and lack semantics. To fill in the gap, we propose a large-scale and semantic-rich
synthetic HSI dataset, denoted as HUMANISE, by aligning the captured human
motion sequences with various 3D indoor scenes. We automatically annotate
the aligned motions with language descriptions that depict the action and the
unique interacting objects in the scene; e.g., sit on the armchair near the desk.
HUMANISE thus enables a new generation task, language-conditioned human
motion generation in 3D scenes. The proposed task is challenging as it requires
joint modeling of the 3D scene, human motion, and natural language. To tackle
this task, we present a novel scene-and-language conditioned generative model
that can produce 3D human motions of the desirable action interacting with the
specified objects. Our experiments demonstrate that our model generates diverse
and semantically consistent human motions in 3D scenes.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

