Private Synthetic Data for
Multitask Learning and Marginal Queries
Giuseppe Vietri ⇤
University of Minnesota
vietr002@umn.edu

Cedric Archambeau
Amazon AWS AI/ML
cedrica@amazon.com

Sergul Aydore
Amazon AWS AI/ML
saydore@amazon.com

William Brown†
Columbia University
w.brown@columbia.edu

Michael Kearns
Amazon AWS AI/ML
University of Pennsylvania
mkearns@cis.upenn.edu

Aaron Roth
Amazon AWS AI/ML
University of Pennsylvania
aaroth@cis.upenn.edu

Ankit Siva
Amazon AWS AI/ML
ankitsiv@amazon.com

Shuai Tang
Amazon AWS AI/ML
shuat@amazon.com

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Amazon AWS AI/ML
Carnegie Mellon University
zhiweiw@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We provide a differentially private algorithm for producing synthetic data simultaneously useful for multiple tasks: marginal queries and multitask machine learning
(ML). A key innovation in our algorithm is the ability to directly handle numerical features, in contrast to a number of related prior approaches which require
numerical features to be first converted into high cardinality categorical features
via a binning strategy. Higher binning granularity is required for better accuracy,
but this negatively impacts scalability. Eliminating the need for binning allows
us to produce synthetic data preserving large numbers of statistical queries such
as marginals on numerical features, and class conditional linear threshold queries.
Preserving the latter means that the fraction of points of each class label above a
particular half-space is roughly the same in both the real and synthetic data. This
is the property that is needed to train a linear classifier in a multitask setting. Our
algorithm also allows us to produce high quality synthetic data for mixed marginal
queries, that combine both categorical and numerical features. Our method consistently runs 2-5x faster than the best comparable techniques, and provides significant
accuracy improvements in both marginal queries and linear prediction tasks for
mixed-type datasets.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of synthetic data generation subject to the formal requirement of differential
privacy [DMNS06]. Private synthetic data have the advantage that they can be reused without any
further privacy cost. As a result, they can use a limited privacy budget to simultaneously enable a
wide variety of downstream machine learning and query release tasks.
⇤
Giuseppe is the lead author; all other authors are listed in alphabetical order. Giuseppe performed this work
during an internship at AWS AI/ML
†
William performed this work during an internship at AWS AI/ML.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

