E-MAPP: Efficient Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning with Parallel Program Guidance

Can Chang1,2∗, Ni Mu3 , Jiajun Wu4 , Ling Pan5 , Huazhe Xu1,2
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 3 Southeast University
4
Stanford University 5 Mila, Université de Montréal
cc22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuhuazhe12@gmail.com

1

Abstract
A critical challenge in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is for multiple
agents to efficiently accomplish complex, long-horizon tasks. The agents often
have difficulties in cooperating on common goals, dividing complex tasks, and
planning through several stages to make progress. We propose to address these
challenges by guiding agents with programs designed for parallelization, since
programs as a representation contain rich structural and semantic information, and
are widely used as abstractions for long-horizon tasks. Specifically, we introduce
Efficient Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Parallel Program Guidance (EMAPP), a novel framework that leverages parallel programs to guide multiple
agents to efficiently accomplish goals that require planning over 10+ stages. EMAPP integrates the structural information from a parallel program, promotes
the cooperative behaviors grounded in program semantics, and improves the time
efficiency via a task allocator. We conduct extensive experiments on a series
of challenging, long-horizon cooperative tasks in the Overcooked environment.
Results show that E-MAPP outperforms strong baselines in terms of the completion
rate, time efficiency, and zero-shot generalization ability by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved significant progress by advancing the cooperation of multiple agents to accomplish complex tasks, e.g., multi-robot control [20], autonomous
driving [48, 54], and video games [50, 4]. Most recent advances in MARL focus on tasks that feature
behavior coordination [39] or joint motion planning [41]. However, for long-horizon tasks such
as preparing a dish, existing methods often suffer from the inability to understand the task compositionality and subtasks’ dependencies, resulting in inefficient cooperation and frequent conflicts.
Therefore, a natural question to ask here is how we can solve long-horizon tasks in MARL, in the
face of large state/action spaces and sparse feedback.
Long-horizon tasks are usually blessed with rich structure, and thus can be divided into a sequence
of subtasks that can be resolved separately. Previous work [45, 52] has introduced programs as
instructions to help a single agent understand the task hierarchy and accomplish the task. Inspired
by them, we develop a general multi-agent framework, where agents can leverage programs for
accomplishing long-horizon tasks together. This is a challenging problem, and three substantial issues
will emerge if multiple agents are naively enforced to follow sequential programs: first, sequential
programs do not explicitly express the dependencies among subtasks, thus hindering the division
∗

Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/e-mapp.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

