Understanding Hyperdimensional Computing for
Parallel Single-Pass Learning

Tao Yu∗
Cornell University
tyu@cs.cornell.edu

Yichi Zhang∗
Cornell University
yz2499@cornell.edu

Zhiru Zhang
Cornell University
zhiruz@cornell.edu

Christopher De Sa
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Hyperdimensional computing (HDC) is an emerging learning paradigm that computes with high dimensional binary vectors. There is an active line of research
on HDC in the community of emerging hardware because of its energy efficiency
and ultra-low latency—but HDC suffers from low model accuracy, with little
theoretical understanding of what limits its performance. We propose a new theoretical analysis of the limits of HDC via a consideration of what similarity matrices
can be “expressed” by binary vectors, and we show how the limits of HDC can
be approached using random Fourier features (RFF). We extend our analysis to
the more general class of vector symbolic architectures (VSA), which compute
with high-dimensional vectors (hypervectors) that are not necessarily binary. We
propose a new class of VSAs, finite group VSAs, which surpass the limits of
HDC. Using representation theory, we characterize which similarity matrices can
be “expressed” by finite group VSA hypervectors, and we show how these VSAs
can be constructed. Experimental results show that our RFF method and group
VSA can both outperform the state-of-the-art HDC model by up to 7.6% while
maintaining hardware efficiency. This work aims to inspire a future interest on
HDC in the ML community and connect to the hardware community.

1

Introduction

Hyperdimensional computing (HDC) is an emerging learning paradigm. Unlike conventional cognitive modeling that computes with real numbers, it computes with high dimensional binary vectors,
referred to as binary hypervectors, the dimension of which is usually at least in the thousands. HDC
is brain-inspired as high dimensional representations have two fundamental properties similar to
human brains: they are (1) distributed and highly parallel; and (2) robust to noise and tolerant to
component failure [Kanerva, 2009]. On the other hand, the massive parallelism and simple arithmetic
project HDC into the scope of energy-efficient and ultra-low-latency computing, especially with the
rise of emerging hardware [Imani et al., 2021, 2020, Gupta et al., 2020, Salamat et al., 2019]. As a
result, HDC has recently attracted considerable attention from edge applications, e.g., robotics, DNA
pattern matching, and health diagnosis, as well as data center applications such as recommendation
systems [Mitrokhin et al., 2019, Neubert et al., 2019, Neubert and Schubert, 2021, Kim et al., 2020,
Burrello et al., 2019, Guo et al., 2021].
∗

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

