EgoTaskQA: Understanding Human Tasks in
Egocentric Videos

Baoxiong Jia1,2:

Ting Lei2,3:

Song-Chun Zhu2,3,4

baoxiongjia@ucla.edu

ting_lei@pku.edu.cn

sczhu@bigai.ai

Siyuan Huang2
syhuang@bigai.ai
1

UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy (VCLA)
2
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
https://sites.google.com/view/egotaskqa

Abstract
Understanding human tasks through video observations is an essential capability
of intelligent agents. The challenges of such capability lie in the difficulty of
generating a detailed understanding of situated actions, their effects on object states
(i.e., state changes), and their causal dependencies. These challenges are further
aggravated by the natural parallelism from multi-tasking and partial observations
in multi-agent collaboration. Most prior works leverage action localization or
future prediction as an indirect metric for evaluating such task understanding from
videos. To make a direct evaluation, we introduce the EgoTaskQA benchmark that
provides a single home for the crucial dimensions of task understanding through
question-answering on real-world egocentric videos. We meticulously design
questions that target the understanding of (1) action dependencies and effects,
(2) intents and goals, and (3) agents’ beliefs about others. These questions are
divided into four types, including descriptive (what status?), predictive (what will?),
explanatory (what caused?), and counterfactual (what if?) to provide diagnostic
analyses on spatial, temporal, and causal understandings of goal-oriented tasks.
We evaluate state-of-the-art video reasoning models on our benchmark and show
their significant gaps between humans in understanding complex goal-oriented
egocentric videos. We hope this effort will drive the vision community to move
onward with goal-oriented video understanding and reasoning.

1

Introduction

The study of human motion perception has suggested that humans perceive motion as goal-directed
behaviors rather than plain pattern movements [1–3]. Developmental psychologists [4] categorized
such an ability into two distinct mechanisms: (1) action-effect associations that the desired effects
activate the corresponding action; and (2) simulative procedures, which argues that goal attribution
comes from planning under the rational action principle in others’ shoes. Both mechanisms require
detailed knowledge of action dependencies and effects, agent’s intents and goals and beliefs about
other agents. With such knowledge playing crucial roles in human cognitive development, learning
them from visual observation is pivotal for building more intelligent agents.
:

Work done during internship at BIGAI.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

