Neural Estimation of Submodular Functions
with Applications to Differentiable Subset Selection

Abir De
Soumen Chakrabarti
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
{abir,soumen}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Submodular functions and variants, through their ability to characterize diversity
and coverage, have emerged as a key tool for data selection and summarization.
Many recent approaches to learn submodular functions suffer from limited expressiveness. In this work, we propose F LEX S UB N ET, a family of flexible neural
models for both monotone and non-monotone submodular functions. To fit a
latent submodular function from (set, value) observations, F LEX S UB N ET applies a
concave function on modular functions in a recursive manner. We do not draw the
concave function from a restricted family, but rather learn from data using a highly
expressive neural network that implements a differentiable quadrature procedure.
Such an expressive neural model for concave functions may be of independent
interest. Next, we extend this setup to provide a novel characterization of monotone
α-submodular functions, a recently introduced notion of approximate submodular
functions. We then use this characterization to design a novel neural model for such
functions. Finally, we consider learning submodular set functions under distant
supervision in the form of (perimeter-set, high-value-subset) pairs. This yields a
novel subset selection method based on an order-invariant, yet greedy sampler built
around the above neural set functions. Our experiments on synthetic and real data
show that F LEX S UB N ET outperforms several baselines.

1

Introduction

Owing to their strong characterization of diversity and coverage, submodular functions and their
extensions, viz., weak and approximate submodular functions, have emerged as a powerful machinery
in data selection tasks [46, 84, 35, 66, 91, 63, 5, 23, 75]. We propose trainable parameterized families
of submodular functions under two supervision regimes. In the first setting, the goal is to estimate the
submodular function based on (set, value) pairs, where the function outputs the value of an input set.
This problem is hard in the worst case for poly(n) value oracle queries [31]. This has applications in
auction design where one may like to learn a player’s valuation function based on her bids [6]. In the
second setting, the task is to learn the submodular function under the supervision of (perimeter-set,
high-value-subset) pairs, where high-value-subset potentially maximizes the underlying function
against all other subsets of perimeter-set. The trained function is expected to extract high-value
subsets from freshly-specified perimeter sets. This scenario has applications in itemset prediction in
recommendation [78, 79], data summarization [50, 2, 4, 10, 74], etc.
1.1

Our contributions

Driven by the above motivations, we propose (i) a novel family of highly expressive neural models
for submodular and α-submodular functions which can be estimated under the supervisions of both
(set, value) and (perimeter-set, high-value-subset) pairs; (ii) a novel permutation adversarial training
method for differentiable subset selection, which efficiently trains submodular and α-submodular
functions based on (perimeter-set, high-value-subset) pairs. We provide more details below.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

