Diffusion Curvature for Estimating Local Curvature
in High Dimensional Data

Dhananjay Bhaskar
Department of Genetics
Yale University
dhananjay.bhaskar@yale.edu

Kincaid MacDonald
Department of Mathematics
Yale University
kincaid.macdonald@yale.edu

Oluwadamilola Fasina
Applied Mathematics Program
Yale University
dami.fasina@yale.edu

Dawson Thomas
Department of Mathematics
Department of Physics
Yale University
dawson.thomas@yale.edu

Bastian Rieck
Institute of AI for Health
Helmholtz Pioneer Campus, Helmholtz Munich
bastian.rieck@helmholtz-muenchen.de

Ian Adelstein
Department of Mathematics
Yale University
ian.adelstein@yale.edu

Smita Krishnaswamy
Department of Computer Science
Department of Genetics
Applied Mathematics Program
Program for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics
Yale University
smita.krishnaswamy@yale.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new intrinsic measure of local curvature on point-cloud data called
diffusion curvature. Our measure uses the framework of diffusion maps, including
the data diffusion operator, to structure point cloud data and define local curvature
based on the laziness of a random walk starting at a point or region of the data.
We show that this laziness directly relates to volume comparison results from
Riemannian geometry. We then extend this scalar curvature notion to an entire
quadratic form using neural network estimations based on the diffusion map of
point-cloud data. We show applications of both estimations on toy data, single-cell
data and on estimating local Hessian matrices of neural network loss landscapes.

1

Introduction

With the advent of high-throughput high-dimensional point-cloud data in many fields including
biomedicine, social science, physics, and finance, there is an increasing need for methods to extract
structure and patterns. A key framework for exploring such data is the manifold hypothesis, which
states that high-dimensional data arise as samples from an underlying lower dimensional manifold.
The diffusion geometry and diffusion map framework first introduced by Coifman et al. [1] has
proven to be a useful framework for the shape and structure of the data. Diffusion geometry involves
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

