Matching in Multi-arm Bandit with Collision

1

Yirui Zhang1 , Siwei Wang2 , Zhixuan Fang1,3∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
zhangyr22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
siweiwang@microsoft.com
zfang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the matching of multi-agent multi-armed bandit problem, i.e., while agents prefer arms with higher expected reward, arms also have
preferences on agents. In such case, agents pulling the same arm may encounter
collisions, which leads to a reward of zero. For this problem, we design a specific
communication protocol which uses deliberate collision to transmit information
among agents, and propose a layer-based algorithm that helps establish optimal
stable matching between agents and arms. With this subtle communication protocol, our algorithm achieves a state-of-the-art O(log T ) regret in the decentralized
matching market, and outperforms existing baselines in experimental results.

1

Introduction

Decentralized matching between two sides with preferences (e.g., supply and demand) is the core
process in many online marketplaces, such as passengers and riders on ridesharing platforms (e.g.,
Uber), or customers and free-lancers in online labor markets (e.g., TaskRabbit), etc. Since in practical
scenarios, participants in the online market obtain information mainly through their own experiences,
a crucial question arises on how to achieve an optimal stable matching among these competing agents,
through learning from the iterative interactions with the other side, and, at what cost?
Learning the uncertainty in two-sided markets has been studied from various angles, e.g., the
contextual bandit scenario ([8, 7]), the economic perspective [1], and the stability and fairness in
the centralized matching market [5]. Following a strand of recent literature (e.g., [9, 2]), we model
the problem as a multi-agent multi-arm bandit problem. Specifically, in the decentralized matching
market with multi-armed bandits, we consider a set M of M agents, and a set A of K arms, with
M ≤ K. Every agent knows M , K, and the time horizon T . Each arm has its fixed preference
towards agents, which is unknown to all the agents. The notation i ≻k j means that arm k prefers
agent i rather than agent j.
At each time t, every agent j pulls an arm Ij (t) ∈ A. When multiple agents pull the same arm k
at time t, a collision occurs on this arm. Only the agent that the arm prefers most, e.g., j, will win
the competition. The winning agent does not encounter collision, and obtains a stochastic reward
Rj (t) from the arm, which is sampled from a unknown fixed distribution Fjk with mean ujk . In
the meantime, the other agents i that pull arm k will encounter collision and receive zero reward,
i.e., Ri (t) = 0. Same with the previous works, we assume that the minimal gap of utility between
two arms among all agents ∆ ≜ minm∈M mink,n∈A,k̸=n |umk − umn | is positive. We let Cj (t)
represent the collision indicator for agent j at time t, i.e., Cj (t) = 1 denotes that agent j encounters
collision at time step t and Cj (t) = 0 otherwise. In our model, each agent j is informed of her own
collision signal Cj (t) and reward Rj (t) after her pull. At each time step t, every agent j pulls an arm
Ij (t) only according to her observed history {(Ij (τ ), Rj (τ ), Cj (τ ))}τt−1
=1 .
∗

Corresponding author: Zhixuan Fang (zfang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

