Assistive Teaching of Motor Control Tasks to Humans

Megha Srivastava
Stanford University
megha@cs.stanford.edu

Erdem Bıyık
UC Berkeley
ebiyik@berkeley.edu

Noah D. Goodman
Stanford University
ngoodman@stanford.edu

Suvir Mirchandani
Stanford University
suvir@cs.stanford.edu

Dorsa Sadigh
Stanford University
dorsa@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Recent works on shared autonomy and assistive-AI technologies, such as assistive
robot teleoperation, seek to model and help human users with limited ability in a
fixed task. However, these approaches often fail to account for humans’ ability to
adapt and eventually learn how to execute a control task themselves. Furthermore,
in applications where it may be desirable for a human to intervene, these methods
may inhibit their ability to learn how to succeed with full self-control. In this
paper, we focus on the problem of assistive teaching of motor control tasks such as
parking a car or landing an aircraft. Despite their ubiquitous role in humans’ daily
activities and occupations, motor tasks are rarely taught in a uniform way due to
their high complexity and variance. We propose an AI-assisted teaching algorithm
that leverages skill discovery methods from reinforcement learning (RL) to (i)
break down any motor control task into teachable skills, (ii) construct novel drill
sequences, and (iii) individualize curricula to students with different capabilities.
Through an extensive mix of synthetic and user studies on two motor control tasks—
parking a car with a joystick and writing characters from the Balinese alphabet—we
show that assisted teaching with skills improves student performance by around
40% compared to practicing full trajectories without skills, and practicing with
individualized drills can result in up to 25% further improvement.1

1

Introduction

Imagine a novice human is tasked with operating a machine with challenging or unfamiliar controls,
such as landing an aircraft or parking an oversized vehicle with novel transmission. A fully autonomous form of assistance, such as a self-driving car, would aid this user by entirely replacing their
control, seeking interventions only when necessary. Shared autonomous systems, such as those used
in assistive robot teleoperation [1, 2, 3], would seek to model the human’s goals and capabilities, and
provide assistance in the form of corrections [4] or simplified control spaces [3]. However, neither
form of assistance would actually help the user learn how to successfully operate the machine, and
may even serve as a crutch that prevents their ability to ever perform the task independently.
Although humans can learn a variety of complex motor control tasks (e.g., driving a car, or operating
surgical robots), they often rely on the assistance of specialized teachers. Receiving fine-grained
instruction from these specialized teachers can often be non-uniform, costly, and limited by their
availability. In this work, we are interested in a more accessible and efficient approach: we wish to
develop an AI-assisted teaching algorithm capable of teaching motor control tasks in an individualized
manner. While several works have leveraged AI techniques to aid instruction in traditional education
tasks such as arithmetic [5, 6, 7] and foreign language learning [8, 9], motor control tasks introduce
1 Our source code is available at https://github.com/Stanford-ILIAD/teaching.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

