Calibrated Data-Dependent Constraints with Exact
Satisfaction Guarantees
Songkai Xue
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
sxue@umich.edu

Yuekai Sun
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
yuekai@umich.edu

Mikhail Yurochkin
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com

Abstract
We consider the task of training machine learning models with data-dependent
constraints. Such constraints often arise as empirical versions of expected value
constraints that enforce fairness or stability goals. We reformulate data-dependent
constraints so that they are calibrated: enforcing the reformulated constraints
guarantees that their expected value counterparts are satisfied with a user-prescribed
probability. The resulting optimization problem is amendable to standard stochastic
optimization algorithms, and we demonstrate the efficacy of our method on a
fairness-sensitive classification task where we wish to guarantee the classifier’s
fairness (at test time).

1

Motivation

In machine learning (ML) practice, accuracy is often only one of many training objectives. For example, algorithmic fairness considerations may require a credit scoring system to perform comparably
on men and women. Here are a few other examples.
Churn rate and stability The churn rate of an ML model compared to another model is the fraction
of samples on which the predictions of the two models differ [21, 30]. In ML practice, one may wish
to control the churn rate between a new model and its predecessor because a high churn rate can
disorient users and downstream system components. One way of training models with small churn is
to enforce a churn rate constraint during training.
Precision, recall, etc. Classification and information retrieval models must often balance precision
and recall. To train such models, practitioners carefully trade off one metric for the other by optimizing
for one metric subject to constraints on the other.
Resource constraints Practitioners sometimes wish to control how often a classifier predicts a
certain class due to budget or resource constraints. For example, a company that uses ML to select
customers for a targeted offer may wish to constrain the fraction of customers selected for the offer.
Another prominent example of a stochastic optimization problem with resource constraints is the
newsvendor problem, which we come back to in section 4.
Unlike constraints on the structure of model parameters (e.g., sparsity), the constraints encoding the
preceding training objectives are data-dependent. This leads to the issue of constraint generalization:
whether the constraints generalize out-of-sample. For example, if a classifier is trained to have
comparable accuracy on two subpopulations in the training data, will it also have comparable
accuracy on samples from the two subpopulations at test time?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

