Distilling Representations from GAN Generator
via Squeeze and Span

Yu Yang1∗ , Xiaotian Cheng1∗, Chang Liu1 , Hakan Bilen2 , Xiangyang Ji1
1
Tsinghua University, BNRist 2 University of Ediburgh
yang-yu16@foxmail.com, cxt20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{liuchang2022, xyji}@tsinghua.edu.cn, hbilen@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
In recent years, generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been an actively studied topic and shown to successfully produce high-quality realistic images in various
domains. The controllable synthesis ability of GAN generators suggests that they
maintain informative, disentangled, and explainable image representations, but
leveraging and transferring their representations to downstream tasks is largely
unexplored. In this paper, we propose to distill knowledge from GAN generators
by squeezing and spanning their representations. We squeeze the generator features into representations that are invariant to semantic-preserving transformations
through a network before they are distilled into the student network. We span the
distilled representation of the synthetic domain to the real domain by also using
real training data to remedy the mode collapse of GANs and boost the student
network performance in a real domain. Experiments justify the efficacy of our
method and reveal its great significance in self-supervised representation learning.
Code is available at https://github.com/yangyu12/squeeze-and-span.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [23] continue to achieve impressive image synthesis results
thanks to large datasets and recent advances in network architecture design [5, 36, 37, 34]. GANs
synthesize not only realistic images but also steerable ones towards specific content or styles [22, 52,
49, 33, 57, 53, 32]. These properties motivate a rich body of works to adopt powerful pretrained GANs
for various computer vision tasks, including part segmentation [68, 56, 61], 3D reconstruction [67],
image alignment [48, 45], showing the strengths of GANs in the few-label regime.
GANs typically produce fine-grained, disentangled, and explainable representations, which allow for
higher data efficiency and better generalization [42, 68, 56, 61, 67, 48]. Prior works on GAN-based
representation learning focus on learned features from either a discriminator network [50] or an
encoder network mapping images back into the latent space [19, 17, 18]. However, there is still
inadequate exploration about how to leverage or transfer the learned representations in generators.
Inspired by the recent success of [68, 56, 61], we hypothesize that representations produced in
generator networks are rich and informative for downstream discriminative tasks. Hence, this paper
proposes to distill representations from feature maps of a pretrained generator network into a student
network (see Fig. 1).
In particular, we present a novel “squeeze-and-span” technique to distill knowledge from a generator
into a representation network2 that is transferred to a downstream task. Unlike transferring discrimi∗

Equal Contribution
Throughout the paper, two terms“representation network” and “student network” are used interchangeably,
as are the “generator network” and “teacher network”.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

