Globally Convergent Policy Search for Output
Estimation
Jack Umenberger
CSAIL, MIT

Max Simchowitz
CSAIL, MIT

Juan C. Perdomo
EECS, UC Berkeley

umnbrgr@mit.edu

msimchow@mit.edu

jcperdomo@berkeley.edu

Kaiqing Zhang
CSAIL & LIDS, MIT

Russ Tedrake
CSAIL, MIT

kaiqing@mit.edu

russt@mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce the first direct policy search algorithm which provably converges
to the globally optimal dynamic filter for the classical problem of predicting the
outputs of a linear dynamical system, given noisy, partial observations. Despite
the ubiquity of partial observability in practice, theoretical guarantees for direct
policy search algorithms, one of the backbones of modern reinforcement learning,
have proven difficult to achieve. This is primarily due to the degeneracies which
arise when optimizing over filters that maintain an internal state.
In this paper, we provide a new perspective on this challenging problem based
on the notion of informativity, which intuitively requires that all components of a
filter’s internal state are representative of the true state of the underlying dynamical
system. We show that informativity overcomes the aforementioned degeneracy.
Specifically, we propose a regularizer which explicitly enforces informativity, and
establish that gradient descent on this regularized objective – combined with a
“reconditioning step” – converges to the globally optimal cost at a O(1/T ) rate.

1

Introduction

Data used for prediction and control of real world dynamical systems is almost always noisy and
incomplete (partially observed). Sensors and other measurement procedures inevitably introduce
errors into the datasets, so designing reliable learning algorithms for these noisy or partially observed
domains requires confronting fundamental questions of disturbance filtering and state estimation.
Despite the ubiquity of partial observation in practice, these concerns are often underexplored in
modern analyses of learning for control that assume perfect observations of the underlying dynamics.
In this work, we study the output estimation (OE) problem or learning to predict in partially observed
linear dynamical systems. The output estimation problem is one of the most fundamental problems
in theoretical statistics and learning theory. Both in theory and in practice, advances in predicting
partially observed linear systems have led to successes in a variety of areas from controls to biology
and economics, (c.f. e.g. Athans [1974], Lillacci and Khammash [2010], Gautier and Poignet
[2001]). We revisit this classical problem from a modern optimization perspective, and study the
possibility of learning the optimal predictor via model-free procedures and direct policy search.
Relative to model-based procedures, which first estimate the underlying dynamics and then return
a policy by solving an optimization problem using the estimated model, model-free methods offer
several potential advantages. For instance, direct policy search allows one to easily specify the complexity of the policy class over which one searches. In addition, model-free policy search optimizes
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

