Nonparametric Uncertainty Quantification
for Single Deterministic Neural Network
Nikita Kotelevskii1 , Aleksandr Artemenkov1 , Kirill Fedyanin2 ,
Fedor Noskov1,4 , Alexander Fishkov1 , Artem Shelmanov3,7 ,
Artem Vazhentsev1,3 , Aleksandr Petiushko5,6 , and Maxim Panov2
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
2
Technology Innovation Institute, Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
4
HSE University, Moscow, Russia
5
Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia
6
Nuro, Inc.
7
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Abstract
This paper proposes a fast and scalable method for uncertainty quantification of machine learning models’ predictions. First, we show the principled way to measure
the uncertainty of predictions for a classifier based on Nadaraya-Watson’s nonparametric estimate of the conditional label distribution. Importantly, the proposed
approach allows to disentangle explicitly aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties. The
resulting method works directly in the feature space. However, one can apply it
to any neural network by considering an embedding of the data induced by the
network. We demonstrate the strong performance of the method in uncertainty
estimation tasks on text classification problems and a variety of real-world image
datasets, such as MNIST, SVHN, CIFAR-100 and several versions of ImageNet.

1 Introduction
In many machine learning applications, it is crucial to complement model predictions with uncertainty
scores that reflect the degree of trust in these predictions. The total uncertainty of a prediction sums
from two uncertainty types, arising from different sources: aleatoric and epistemic [14, 33]. The
former reflects the irreducible noise and ambiguity in the data due to class overlap, while the latter
is related to the lack of knowledge about model parameters, and can be reduced by expanding the
training dataset. Disentangling epistemic uncertainty can help to identify out-of-distribution (OOD)
data or to spot instances important for annotation during active learning [22]. The areas with high
aleatoric uncertainty might contain some incorrectly labeled instances. If we quantify both types
of uncertainty well, we can effectively abstain from predictions in unreliable areas and address a
decision to a human expert [18], which is important in safe-critical fields, such as medicine [53],
autonomous driving [43, 20], and finance [6].
There is no universally accepted uncertainty measure, and diverse, often heuristic treatments are used
in practice. For this purpose, one simply could use maximum softmax probabilities of deep neural
network (NN). However, MaxProb represents only aleatoric uncertainty, and the resulting measure is
notorious to be overconfident in data areas the model did not see during training [59]. Methods based
on ensembling [37] or Bayesian techniques [21] can capture both types of uncertainty and yield more
Correspondence to: <Nikita.Kotelevskii@skoltech.ru> and <Maxim.Panov@tii.ae>
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

