Zeroth-Order Hard-Thresholding:
Gradient Error vs. Expansivity

William de Vazelhes1 , Hualin Zhang2 , Huimin Wu2 , Xiao-Tong Yuan2 , Bin Gu1
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology
{wdevazelhes,zhanghualin98,xtyuan1980,jsgubin}@gmail.com,
wuhuimin@nuist.edu.cn

Abstract
ℓ0 constrained optimization is prevalent in machine learning, particularly for highdimensional problems, because it is a fundamental approach to achieve sparse
learning. Hard-thresholding gradient descent is a dominant technique to solve
this problem. However, first-order gradients of the objective function may be
either unavailable or expensive to calculate in a lot of real-world problems, where
zeroth-order (ZO) gradients could be a good surrogate. Unfortunately, whether ZO
gradients can work with the hard-thresholding operator is still an unsolved problem. To solve this puzzle, in this paper, we focus on the ℓ0 constrained black-box
stochastic optimization problems, and propose a new stochastic zeroth-order gradient hard-thresholding (SZOHT) algorithm with a general ZO gradient estimator
powered by a novel random support sampling. We provide the convergence analysis
of SZOHT under standard assumptions. Importantly, we reveal a conflict between
the deviation of ZO estimators and the expansivity of the hard-thresholding operator, and provide a theoretical minimal value of the number of random directions
in ZO gradients. In addition, we find that the query complexity of SZOHT is
independent or weakly dependent on the dimensionality under different settings.
Finally, we illustrate the utility of our method on a portfolio optimization problem
as well as black-box adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

ℓ0 constrained optimization is prevalent in machine learning, particularly for high-dimensional
problems, because it is a fundamental approach to achieve sparse learning. In addition to improving
the memory, computational and environmental footprint of the models, these sparse constraints
help reduce overfitting and obtain consistent statistical estimation [46, 5, 33, 29]. We formulate the
problem as follows:
min {f (x) := Eξ f (x, ξ)} , s.t. ∥x∥0 ≤ k
(1)
x∈Rd

d

where f (·, ξ) : R → R is a differentiable function and ξ is a noiseP
term, for instance related to an
n
underlying finite sum structure in f , of the form: Eξ f (x, ξ) = n1 i=1 fi (x). Hard-thresholding
gradient algorithm [17, 31, 45] is a dominant technique to solve this problem. It generally consists in
alternating between a gradient step, and a hard-thresholding operation which only keeps the k-largest
components (in absolute value) of the current iterate. The advantage of hard-thresholding over its
convex relaxations ([39, 41]) is that it can often attain similar precision, but is more computationally
efficient, since it can directly ensure a desired sparsity level instead of tuning an ℓ1 penalty or
constraint. The only expensive computation in hard-thresholding is the hard-thresholding step itself,
which requires finding the top k elements of the current iterate. Hard-thresholding was originally
developed in its full gradient form [17], but has been later on extended to the stochastic setting by
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

