Your Transformer May Not be as Powerful
as You Expect

Shengjie Luo1,5∗, Shanda Li2∗ , Shuxin Zheng3 , Tie-Yan Liu3 , Liwei Wang1,4†, Di He1†
1
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Machine Learning Department, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Microsoft Research 4 Center for Data Science, Peking University 5 Zhejiang Lab
luosj@stu.pku.edu.cn, shandal@cs.cmu.edu,
{shuz, tyliu}@microsoft.com, {wanglw,dihe}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Relative Positional Encoding (RPE), which encodes the relative distance between
any pair of tokens, is one of the most successful modifications to the original
Transformer. As far as we know, theoretical understanding of the RPE-based
Transformers is largely unexplored. In this work, we mathematically analyze the
power of RPE-based Transformers regarding whether the model is capable of
approximating any continuous sequence-to-sequence functions. One may naturally
assume the answer is in the affirmative—RPE-based Transformers are universal
function approximators. However, we present a negative result by showing there
exist continuous sequence-to-sequence functions that RPE-based Transformers
cannot approximate no matter how deep and wide the neural network is. One
key reason lies in that most RPEs are placed in the softmax attention that always
generates a right stochastic matrix. This restricts the network from capturing
positional information in the RPEs and limits its capacity. To overcome the problem and make the model more powerful, we first present sufficient conditions
for RPE-based Transformers to achieve universal function approximation. With
the theoretical guidance, we develop a novel attention module, called Universal
RPE-based (URPE) Attention, which satisfies the conditions. Therefore, the corresponding URPE-based Transformers become universal function approximators.
Extensive experiments covering typical architectures and tasks demonstrate that
our model is parameter-efficient and can achieve superior performance to strong
baselines in a wide range of applications. The code will be made publicly available
at https://github.com/lsj2408/URPE.

1

Introduction

Transformer [61] is well acknowledged as a powerful neural network in modeling sequential
data [12, 42]. Relative Positional Encoding (RPE) is one of the most successful modifications
to the Transformer model [49]. Unlike the originally designed Absolute Positional Encoding (APE)
that encodes each position as an embedding vector, RPE encodes the relative distance between any
pair of tokens and is usually placed in the softmax exponentiation in the self-attention module.
Empirically, many studies show that RPE-based Transformers can achieve impressive performance
on various language tasks [54, 10] and have better extrapolation ability on longer sequences [52].
Another point worth noting is that RPE makes Transformer easily be extended to other data modalities,
∗
†

Equal contribution. The order is decided by rolling the dice.
Correspondence to: Di He<dihe@pku.edu.cn>, Liwei Wang <wanglw@pku.edu.cn>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

