Learning Fractional White Noises in
Neural Stochastic Differential Equations

Anh Tong
KAIST
anhtong@kaist.ac.kr

Thanh Nguyen-Tang
Johns Hopkins University
nguyent@cs.jhu.edu

Toan Tran
VinAI Research, Vietnam
v.toantm3@vinai.io

Jaesik Choi
KAIST, INEEJI
jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Differential equations play important roles in modeling complex physical systems.
Recent advances present interesting research directions by combining differential
equations with neural networks. By including noise, stochastic differential equations (SDEs) allows us to model data with uncertainty and measure imprecision.
There are many variants of noises known to exist in many real-world data. For
example, previously white noises are idealized and induced by Brownian motions.
Nevertheless, there is a lack of machine learning models that can handle such
noises. In this paper, we introduce a generalized fractional white noise to existing
models and propose an efficient approximation of noise sample paths based on
classical integration methods and sparse Gaussian processes. Our experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed model can capture noise characteristics such
as continuity from various time series data, therefore improving model fittings over
existing models. We examine how we can apply our approach to score-based generative models, showing that there exists a case of our generalized noise resulting
in a better image generation measure.

1

Introduction

Differential equations center around modeling relations between functions and their rate of change,
playing important roles in many dynamical systems in physics, biology and finance. Incorporating
such a tool in machine learning not only helps us understand more about machine learning models [42,
66, 44], but also expands the range of applications [31, 12]. Recent work on neural ordinary
differential equations (neural ODEs) opens a new direction of connecting differential equations and
neural networks [11]. Extensions to stochastic differential equations (SDEs) is proposed for handling
noise in data or model uncertainty [83, 84, 54, 46].
Noises in data are often encountered in many real-world cases, and can directly affect model performance. The importance of understanding the characteristics of noise in data has been emphasized
in a number of studies including: heteroscedastic noise modeling in time series analysis [82, 57],
volatility modeling in financial research and market simulation [40, 14]; the significance of colored
noise in neuroscience [20, 7, 4]. Rather than using traditional Brownian noises [5] in neural SDEs,
providing a capacity to model more generalized type of noises not only allows this framework to
extend to such applications but also retains the expressiveness from the representation powers of
neural networks. By learning noises together with the drift functions and diffusion functions of
SDEs, the models become more flexible as the drift functions and diffusion functions, in turn, will be
adjusted according to the learned noises. Although mathematical research on analyzing general white
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

