Minimax Regret for Cascading Bandits
Daniel Vial
UT Austin & UIUC
dvial@utexas.edu

Sujay Sanghavi
UT Austin & Amazon
sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Sanjay Shakkottai
UT Austin
sanjay.shakkottai@utexas.edu

R. Srikant
UIUC
rsrikant@illinois.edu

Abstract
Cascading bandits is a natural and popular model that frames the task of learning to
rank from Bernoulli click feedback in a bandit setting. For the case of unstructured
rewards, we prove matching upper and lower bounds for the problem-independent
(i.e., gap-free) regret, both of which strictly improve the best known. A key
observation is that the hard instances of this problem are those with small mean
rewards, i.e., the small click-through rates that are most relevant in practice. Based
on this, and the fact that small mean implies small variance for Bernoullis, our
key technical result shows that variance-aware confidence sets derived from the
Bernstein and Chernoff bounds lead to optimal algorithms (up to log terms),
whereas Hoeffding-based algorithms suffer order-wise suboptimal regret. This
sharply contrasts with the standard (non-cascading) bandit setting, where the
variance-aware algorithms only improve constants. In light of this and as an
additional contribution, we propose a variance-aware algorithm for the structured
case of linear rewards and show its regret strictly improves the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

The cascading click model describes users interacting with ranked lists, such as search results or
online advertisements [Craswell et al., 2008]. In this model, there is a set of items [L] = {1, . . . , L}.
The user is given a list of K items A = (a1 , . . . , aK ), sequentially examines the list, and clicks on
the first attractive item (if any). If a click occurs, the user leaves without examining the subsequent
items. It is assumed that the e-th item has an attraction probability w̄(e) (which we also call the mean
reward), and that the random (Bernoulli) clicks are conditionally independent given A.
Cascading bandits, introduced concurrently by Kveton et al. [2015a] and Combes et al. [2015], are a
sequential learning version of the model where the mean rewards {w̄(e)}L
e=1 are initially unknown.
At each round t 2 [n], the learner chooses an action, which is a list of items At = (at1 , . . . , atK ). As
in the basic click model, the user scans the list and clicks on the first attractive item (if any). Thus,
t 1
if the Ct -th item is clicked, the learner knows that the user was not attracted to {atk }C
k=1 but was
t
t K
attracted to aCt . However, the learner receives no feedback on the items {ak }k=Ct +1 that the user
did not examine before leaving. The objective for the learner is to choose the sequence {At }nt=1 to
maximize the expected number of clicks, or equivalently, minimize the regret defined in (1).
This work provides problem-independent (i.e., gap-free) regret bounds for cascading bandits that
strictly improve the state-of-the-art. In the case of unstructured rewards, our results provide the first
minimax-optimal regret bounds (up to log terms). Our key insight is that, compared to the standard
bandit problem, the reward variance plays an outsized role in the gap-free analysis. In particular, we
show that for cascading bandits, the worst-case problem instances are those with low mean rewards –
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

