Efficient Aggregated Kernel Tests
using Incomplete U -statistics
Antonin Schrab
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London & Inria London
a.schrab@ucl.ac.uk

Ilmun Kim
Department of Statistics & Data Science
Department of Applied Statistics
Yonsei University
ilmun@yonsei.ac.kr

Benjamin Guedj
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London & Inria London
b.guedj@ucl.ac.uk

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a series of computationally efficient nonparametric tests for the twosample, independence, and goodness-of-fit problems, using the Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (MMD), Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC), and Kernel Stein Discrepancy (KSD), respectively. Our test statistics are incomplete
U -statistics, with a computational cost that interpolates between linear time in the
number of samples, and quadratic time, as associated with classical U -statistic
tests. The three proposed tests aggregate over several kernel bandwidths to detect
departures from the null on various scales: we call the resulting tests MMDAggInc,
HSICAggInc and KSDAggInc. This procedure provides a solution to the fundamental kernel selection problem as we can aggregate a large number of kernels
with several bandwidths without incurring a significant loss of test power. For
the test thresholds, we derive a quantile bound for wild bootstrapped incomplete
U -statistics, which is of independent interest. We derive non-asymptotic uniform
separation rates for MMDAggInc and HSICAggInc, and quantify exactly the tradeoff between computational efficiency and the attainable rates: this result is novel
for tests based on incomplete U -statistics, to our knowledge. We further show
that in the quadratic-time case, the wild bootstrap incurs no penalty to test power
over the more widespread permutation-based approach, since both attain the same
minimax optimal rates (which in turn match the rates that use oracle quantiles). We
support our claims with numerical experiments on the trade-off between computational efficiency and test power. In all three testing frameworks, the linear-time
versions of our proposed tests perform at least as well as the current linear-time
state-of-the-art tests.

1

Introduction

Nonparametric hypothesis testing is a fundamental field of statistics, and is widely used by the machine
learning community and practitioners in numerous other fields, due to the increasing availability of
huge amounts of data. When dealing with large-scale datasets, computational cost can quickly emerge
as a major issue which might prevent from using expensive tests in practice; constructing efficient
tests is therefore crucial for their real-world applications. In this paper, we construct kernel-based
aggregated tests using incomplete U -statistics (Blom, 1976) for the two-sample, independence and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

