AMP: Automatically Finding Model Parallel Strategies
with Heterogeneity Awareness

c

Dacheng Lic , Hongyi Wangc , Eric Xingmcp, Hao Zhangb
Carnegie Mellon University m Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
p
Petuum Inc. b University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Scaling up model sizes can lead to fundamentally new capabilities in many machine learning (ML) tasks. However, training big models requires strong distributed
system expertise to carefully design model-parallel execution strategies that suit the
model architectures and cluster setups. In this paper, we develop AMP, a framework
that automatically derives such strategies. AMP identifies a valid space of model
parallelism strategies and efficiently searches the space for high-performed strategies, by leveraging a cost model designed to capture the heterogeneity of the model
and cluster specifications. Unlike existing methods, AMP is specifically tailored to
support complex models composed of uneven layers and cluster setups with more
heterogeneous accelerators and bandwidth. We evaluate AMP on popular models
and cluster setups from public clouds and show that AMP returns parallel strategies
that match the expert-tuned strategies on typical cluster setups. On heterogeneous
clusters or models with heterogeneous architectures, AMP finds strategies with
1.54× and 1.77× higher throughput than state-of-the-art model-parallel systems,
respectively. 1

1

Introduction

Recent progress in language understanding [6, 4], multimodal learning [1], and many other ML
applications can largely credit to the use of extremely big models. For example, the largest language
models [4, 14] with billions of parameters are found to have fundamentally new capabilities. Due
to the increased model size, training such models, however, calls for model parallelism execution
strategies in order to place the gigantic model computation across multiple, heterogeneous accelerator
devices (e.g., TPUs and GPUs), and ensure efficient distributed execution.
Different from typical data parallelism strategies [28, 5, 15], model parallelism considers a much
larger space of parallelization techniques. In particular, when a model is too large to fit in a single
device memory, we can either place the computation of different layers across different devices (a.k.a.
pipeline parallelism), or partition the computation of particular layers and dispatch parts onto parallel
devices (i.e., tensor model parallelism (TMP) [23]). Due to their distinct communication and memory
requirements, these model parallelism dimensions have different applicable scenarios, which may
change with model architectures and cluster setups. For example, TMP results in high communication
volumes, hence is favored on devices connected with high bandwidth, but may become less effective
with limited communication bandwidth. Designing performant execution strategies requires combining these parallelism dimensions to trade-off among memory, communication, and computation, then
tuning the configurations in each parallelism dimension to align with the heterogeneity of the model
and the training cluster.
1

Codes and experiment logs are available at https://github.com/MccRee177/AMP for reproducibility.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

