Improving Transformer with an Admixture of
Attention Heads
Tan M. Nguyen⇤
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
tanmnguyen89@ucla.edu
Hai Do
FPT Software AI Center
haidn6@fsoft.com.vn

Khai Nguyen
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
University of Texas at Austin
khainb@utexas.edu

Vishwanath Saragadam
Department of ECE
Rice University
vishwanath.saragadam@rice.edu
Duy Khuong Nguyen
FPT Software AI Center
khuongnd6@fsoft.com.vn

Tam Nguyen⇤
FPT Software AI Center
nguyenminhtam9520@gmail.com

Minh Pham
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
minhrose@ucla.edu
Nhat Ho⇤⇤
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
University of Texas at Austin
minhnhat@utexas.edu

Stanley J. Osher⇤⇤
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
sjo@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
Transformers with multi-head self-attention have achieved remarkable success in
sequence modeling and beyond. However, they suffer from high computational and
memory complexities for computing the attention matrix at each head. Recently, it
has been shown that those attention matrices lie on a low-dimensional manifold
and, thus, are redundant. We propose the Transformer with a Finite Admixture of
Shared Heads (FiSHformers), a novel class of efficient and flexible transformers
that allow the sharing of attention matrices between attention heads. At the core
of FiSHformer is a novel finite admixture model of shared heads (FiSH) that
samples attention matrices from a set of global attention matrices. The number
of global attention matrices is much smaller than the number of local attention
matrices generated. FiSHformers directly learn these global attention matrices
rather than the local ones as in other transformers, thus significantly improving
the computational and memory efficiency of the model. We empirically verify
the advantages of the FiSHformer over the baseline transformers in a wide range
of practical applications including language modeling, machine translation, and
image classification. On the WikiText-103, IWSLT’14 De-En and WMT’14 EnDe, FiSHformers use much fewer floating-point operations per second (FLOPs),
memory, and parameters compared to the baseline transformers.
⇤

Co-first authors. ⇤⇤ Co-last authors. Please correspond to: tanmnguyen89@ucla.edu
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

