Decomposed Mutual Information Optimization for
Generalized Context in Meta-Reinforcement Learning
Yao Mu
The University of Hong Kong

Yuzheng Zhuang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Fei Ni
Tianjin University

muyao@connect.hku.hk

zhuangyuzheng@huawei.com

fei_ni@tju.edu.cn

Bin Wang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
wangbin158@huawei.com

Jianyu Chen
Tsinghua University
jianyuchen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Jianye Hao
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Ping Luo ⇤
The University of Hong Kong

haojianye@huawei.com

pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Adapting to the changes in transition dynamics is essential in robotic applications.
By learning a conditional policy with a compact context, context-aware metareinforcement learning provides a flexible way to adjust behavior according to
dynamics changes. However, in real-world applications, the agent may encounter
complex dynamics changes. Multiple confounders can influence the transition
dynamics, making it challenging to infer accurate context for decision-making.
This paper addresses such a challenge by DecOmposed Mutual INformation
Optimization (DOMINO) for context learning, which explicitly learns a disentangled context to maximize the mutual information between the context and historical
trajectories, while minimizing the state transition prediction error. Our theoretical
analysis shows that DOMINO can overcome the underestimation of the mutual
information caused by multi-confounded challenges via learning disentangled
context and reduce the demand for the number of samples collected in various
environments. Extensive experiments show that the context learned by DOMINO
benefits both model-based and model-free reinforcement learning algorithms for
dynamics generalization in terms of sample efficiency and performance in unseen
environments. Open-sourced code is released on our homepage.

1

Introduction

Dynamics generalization in deep reinforcement learning (RL) investigates the problem of training a
RL agent in a few kinds of environments and adapting across unseen system dynamics or structures,
such as different physical parameters or robot mythologies. Meta-Reinforcement Learning (MetaRL) has been proposed to tackle the problem by training on a range of tasks, and fast adapting
to a new task with the learned prior knowledge. However, training in meta-RL requires orders of
magnitudes more samples than single-task RL since the agent not only has to learn to infer the change
of environment but also has to learn the corresponding policies. Context-aware meta-RL methods
take a step further and show promising potential to capture local dynamics explicitly by learning an
⇤
Ping Luo is the corresponding author. Yao Mu and Fei Ni conducted this work during the internship in
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

