SGAM: Building a Virtual 3D World through
Simultaneous Generation and Mapping

1

Yuan Shen1 Wei-Chiu Ma2 Shenlong Wang1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{yshen47, shenlong}@illinois.edu
weichium@mit.edu

Abstract
We present simultaneous generation and mapping (SGAM), a novel 3D scene
generation algorithm. Our goal is to produce a realistic, globally consistent 3D
world on a large scale. Achieving this goal is challenging and goes beyond the
capacities of existing 3D generation or video generation approaches, which fail to
scale up to create large, globally consistent 3D scene structures. Towards tackling
the challenges, we take a hybrid approach that integrates generative sensor modeling with 3D reconstruction. Our proposed approach is an autoregressive generative
framework that simultaneously generates sensor data at novel viewpoints and builds
a 3D map at each timestamp. Given an arbitrary camera trajectory, our method
repeatedly applies this generation-and-mapping process for thousands of steps,
allowing us to create a gigantic virtual world. Our model can be trained from
RGB-D sequences without having access to the complete 3D scene structure. The
generated scenes are readily compatible with various interactive environments and
rendering engines. Experiments on CLEVER and GoogleEarth datasets demonstrates ours can generate consistent, realistic, and geometrically-plausible scenes
that compare favorably to existing view synthesis methods. Our project page is
available at https://yshen47.github.io/sgam/.

1

Introduction

Human perception goes way beyond simple recognition and reconstruction. Our extraordinary
abilities not only allow us to make sense of what we see, but also enable us to imagine what we do not
(e.g., reason what the scene looks like outside the image). With a simple glance, we can effortlessly
re-build a mental world, that may not be exactly like the original, but is perceived by our brain to be
the same. In fact, it is such a profound ability drawing us apart from existing AI systems.
The goal of this paper is to equip computational machines with similar capabilities. We aim to
develop a program that can create an arbitrarily large, realistic, and consistent 3D world from a
single snapshot of the scene. The task is of paramount interest to many applications in computer
vision (60; 40; 74), computer graphics (65; 65), geography (5), and robotics (13; 44), since it unlocks
numerous potentials. For instance, it may allow us to build an interactive virtual environment without
any costly and laborious 3D modeling pipeline (12).
Indeed, there has been a consistent pursuit within the computer vision and graphics community in the
past few decades (17; 16; 85; 65; 9; 68; 72), where people attempt to design algorithms and models
that are capable of extrapolating and hallucinating the world from a single input image. Unfortunately,
a large body of efforts have been focusing on modeling in the 2D image space (17; 16; 85; 18; 37; 9),
or require external 3D assets and manually specified rules for restricted 3D generation (10). Recently,
with the advent of deep generative models (36; 76; 40; 61; 60), researchers have made great strides
in unconstrained 3D syntheses. However, due to the highly complex structure of the task, these
approaches mostly focus on object-centric scenarios, or generating small-scale environments.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

