Adaptive Sampling for Discovery

Ziping Xu
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
zipingxu@umich.edu

Eunjae Shim
Department of Chemistry
University of Michigan
eunjae@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
tewaria@umich.edu

Paul Zimmerman
Department of Chemistry
University of Michigan
paulzim@umich.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study a sequential decision-making problem, called Adaptive
Sampling for Discovery (ASD). Starting with a large unlabeled dataset, algorithms
for ASD adaptively label the points with the goal to maximize the sum of responses.
This problem has wide applications to real-world discovery problems, for example
drug discovery with the help of machine learning models. ASD algorithms face
the well-known exploration-exploitation dilemma. The algorithm needs to choose
points that yield information to improve model estimates but it also needs to
exploit the model. We rigorously formulate the problem and propose a general
information-directed sampling (IDS) algorithm. We provide theoretical guarantees
for the performance of IDS in linear, graph and low-rank models. The benefits
of IDS are shown in both simulation experiments and real-data experiments for
discovering chemical reaction conditions.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) models are becoming increasingly popular for discovery problems in various
areas like drug discovery [40, 5, 38] and scientific discoveries [13, 23, 19]. Despite its success in
real-data applications, the theoretical aspects of the problem are not fully understood in the machine
learning literature. In this paper, we consider a particular case of discovery and formalize it as a
problem that we call Adaptive Sampling for Discovery (ASD). In ASD, an algorithm sequentially
picks T samples X1 , . . . , XT out of a size-n unlabeled dataset S n (T  n) and obtains their labels
PT
Y1 , . . . , YT with the goal to maximize the sum t=1 Yt . The labels correspond to the quality of
discoveries, which can be continuous or ordered categorical variables depending on the types of
discoveries. As a sequential decision-making problem, we find it substantially connected to the
existing literature on Multi-arm Bandit (MAB) and other related decision-making problems, which
we briefly review in the rest of this section.
Multi-arm bandit. MAB is a decision-making problem that maximizes the total rewards by
sequentially pulling arms and each arm corresponds to a reward distribution [27]. MAB faces the
well-known exploration–exploitation trade-off dilemma. ASD has to deal with the same explorationexploitation dilemma if one treats each arm as an unlabeled point. The major difference between
ASD and MAB is that each arm after being pulled once can still be pulled for infinite number of
times, while we can only label a sample once in ASD. This is because a discovery can only be made
once: one receives no credit making the same discovery twice.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

