Robust Learning against Relational Adversaries

Yizhen Wang
Visa Research
yizhewan@visa.com

Mohannad Alhanahnah
University of Wisconsin–Madison
alhanahnah@wisc.edu

Xiaozhu Meng ∗
Rice University
Xiaozhu.Meng@rice.edu
Mihai Christodorescu †
Visa Research
mihai.christodorescu@visa.com

Ke Wang
Visa Research
kewang@visa.com
Somesh Jha
University of Wisconsin–Madison
jha@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Test-time adversarial attacks have posed serious challenges to the robustness of
machine-learning models, and in many settings the adversarial perturbation needs
not be bounded by small ℓp -norms. Motivated by attacks in program analysis and
security tasks, we investigate relational adversaries, a broad class of attackers who
create adversarial examples in a reflexive-transitive closure of a logical relation. We
analyze the conditions for robustness against relational adversaries and investigate
different levels of robustness-accuracy trade-off due to various patterns in a relation.
Inspired by the insights, we propose normalize-and-predict, a learning framework
that leverages input normalization to achieve provable robustness. The framework
solves the pain points of adversarial training against relational adversaries and can
be combined with adversarial training for the benefits of both approaches. Guided
by our theoretical findings, we apply our framework to source code authorship
attribution and malware detection. Results of both tasks show our learning framework significantly improves the robustness of models against relational adversaries.
In the process, it outperforms adversarial training, the most noteworthy defense
mechanism, by a wide margin.

1

Introduction

The robustness of machine learning (ML) systems has been challenged by test-time attacks using
adversarial examples [Szegedy et al., 2013]. These adversarial examples are intentionally manipulated
inputs that preserve the essential characteristics of the original inputs, and thus are expected to have
the same test outcome as the originals by human standard; yet they severely affect the performance
of many ML models across different domains [Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016, Eykholt et al., 2018,
Qin et al., 2019]. As models in high-stake domains such as system security are also undermined by
attacks [Grosse et al., 2017, Rosenberg et al., 2018, Hu and Tan, 2018, Pierazzi et al., 2020], robust
ML in adversarial test environment becomes an imperative task for the ML community.
Existing work on test-time attack and defense evaluation predominately considers ℓp -norm bounded
adversarial manipulation [Goodfellow et al., 2014, Carlini and Wagner, 2017, Papernot et al., 2018,
∗
†

This work was done when the author was at Rice University.
This work was done when the author was at Visa Research. The author is now at Google.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

