Sampling with Riemannian Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
in a Constrained Space

Yunbum Kook
Georgia Tech
yb.kook@gatech.edu

Yin Tat Lee
Microsoft Research,
University of Washington
yintat@uw.edu

Ruoqi Shen
University of Washington
shenr3@cs.washington.edu

Santosh S. Vempala
Georgia Tech
vempala@gatech.edu

Abstract
We demonstrate for the first time that ill-conditioned, non-smooth, constrained distributions in very high dimension, upwards of 100,000, can be sampled efficiently
in practice. Our algorithm incorporates constraints into the Riemannian version
of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and maintains sparsity. This allows us to achieve a
mixing rate independent of condition numbers.
On benchmark data sets from systems biology and linear programming, our algorithm outperforms existing packages by orders of magnitude. In particular, we
achieve a 1,000-fold speed-up for sampling from the largest published human
metabolic network (RECON3D). Our package has been incorporated into the
COBRA toolbox.

1

Introduction

Sampling is Fundamental. Sampling algorithms arise naturally in models of statistical physics,
e.g., Ising, Potts models for magnetism, Gibbs model for gases, etc. These models directly suggest
Markov chain algorithms for sampling the corresponding configurations. In the Ising model where
the vertices of a graph are assigned a spin, i.e., ±1, in each step, we pick a vertex at random and flip
its spin with some probability. The probability is chosen so that the distribution of the vector of all
spins approaches a target distribution where the probability exponentially decays with the number
of agreements in spin for pairs corresponding to edges of the graph. In the Gibbs model, particles
move randomly with collisions and their motion is often modeled as reflecting Brownian motion.
Sampling with Markov chains is today the primary algorithmic approach for high-dimensional
sampling. For some fundamental problems, sampling with Markov chains is the only known efficient
approach or the only approach to have guarantees of efficiency. Two notable examples are sampling
perfect matchings of a bipartite graph and sampling points from a convex body. These are the core
subroutines for estimating the permanent of a nonnegative matrix and estimating the volume of
a convex body, respectively. The solution space for these problems scales exponentially with the
dimension. In spite of this, polynomial-time algorithms have been discovered for both problems. The
current best permanent algorithm scales as n7 (time) [2, 23], while the current best volume algorithm
scales as n3 (number of membership tests) [24]. For the latter, the first polynomial-time algorithm
had a complexity of n27 [16], and the current best complexity is the result of many breakthrough
discoveries, including general-purpose algorithms and analysis tools.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

