Efficient learning of nonlinear prediction models with
time-series privileged information
Bastian Jung
Chalmers University of Technology
mail@bastianjung.com

Fredrik D. Johansson
Chalmers University of Technology
fredrik.johansson@chalmers.se

Abstract
In domains where sample sizes are limited, efficient learning algorithms are critical.
Learning using privileged information (LuPI) offers increased sample efficiency by
allowing prediction models access to auxiliary information at training time which
is unavailable when the models are used. In recent work, it was shown that for
prediction in linear-Gaussian dynamical systems, a LuPI learner with access to
intermediate time series data is never worse and often better in expectation than
any unbiased classical learner. We provide new insights into this analysis and
generalize it to nonlinear prediction tasks in latent dynamical systems, extending
theoretical guarantees to the case where the map connecting latent variables and
observations is known up to a linear transform. In addition, we propose algorithms
based on random features and representation learning for the case when this map is
unknown. A suite of empirical results confirm theoretical findings and show the
potential of using privileged time-series information in nonlinear prediction.

1

Introduction

In data-poor domains, making the best use of all available information is central to efficient and
effective machine learning. Despite this, supervised learning is often applied in such a way that
informative data is ignored. A good example of this is learning to predict the condition of a patient
at a set follow-up time based on information of the first medical examination. Classical supervised
learning makes use only of the initial data to predict the disease status at the follow-up, although
in many cases data about medications, laboratory tests or vital signs are routinely collected about
patients also at intermediate time points. This information is privileged (Vapnik and Vashist, 2009),
as it is unavailable at the time of prediction, but can be used for training a model.
Learning using privileged information (LuPI) (Vapnik and Vashist, 2009), generalized distillation (Lopez-Paz et al., 2016) and multi-view learning (Rosenberg and Bartlett, 2007) have been
proposed to increase the sample efficiency by leveraging privileged information in learning. Theoretical results guarantee improved learning rates (Pechyony and Vapnik, 2010; Vapnik et al., 2015) or
tighter generalization bounds (Wang, 2019) for large sample sizes under appropriate assumptions.
However, privileged information is not always beneficial; it must be related to the task at hand (Jonschkowski et al., 2015). Previous works do not identify such settings. Moreover, existing analyses do
not state when learning with privileged information is preferable to classical learning for problems
with small sample sizes—which is where efficiency is needed the most.
Karlsson et al. (2022) studied LuPI in the context of predicting an outcome observed at the end of a
time series based on variables collected at the first time step. They showed that making use of data
from intermediate time steps in particular settings always leads to lower or equal prediction risk—for
any sample size—compared to the best unbiased model which does not make use of this privileged
information. However, their method called learning using privileged time series (LuPTS) was limited
to settings where the outcome function, and estimators of it, are linear functions of baseline features.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

