Robust Rent Division
Dominik Peters
CNRS, Université Paris Dauphine–PSL
dominik@lamsade.fr

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

David Zhu
Harvard University
david.zhu@gmail.com

Abstract
In fair rent division, the problem is to assign rooms to roommates and fairly split
the rent based on roommates’ reported valuations for the rooms. Envy-free rent
division is the most popular application on the fair division website Spliddit. The
standard model assumes that agents can correctly report their valuations for each
room. In practice, agents may be unsure about their valuations, for example because
they have had only limited time to inspect the rooms. Our goal is to find a robust
rent division that remains fair even if agent valuations are slightly different from
the reported ones. We introduce the lexislack solution, which selects a rent division
that remains envy-free for valuations within as large a radius as possible of the
reported valuations. We also consider robustness notions for valuations that come
from a probability distribution, and use results from learning theory to show how
we can find rent divisions that (almost) maximize the probability of being envy-free,
or that minimize the expected envy. We show that an almost optimal allocation can
be identified based on polynomially many samples from the valuation distribution.
Finding the best allocation given these samples is NP-hard, but in practice such an
allocation can be found using integer linear programming.

1

Introduction

The literature on fair division of resources has produced allocation mechanisms for many domains,
such as course allocation, indivisible goods, chores, house assignment, and the selection of citizens’
assemblies [Budish, 2011, Caragiannis et al., 2019, Moulin, 2019, Flanigan et al., 2021]. But arguably
the most widely used example is rent division: this is the most popular application on the fair division
website spliddit.org [Goldman and Procaccia, 2014], where it has been used more than 30,000 times
since its launch in 2014.
Rent division deals with the common situation where a group of n future roommates are planning to
move into a house or apartment which has n rooms, one for each roommate. They will split the rent
payments among themselves. The roommates may differ in how much they are willing to pay for
different rooms. Given the room valuations of each roommate, our task is to assign the rooms, and to
decide how to split the rent. We wish to do this fairly, and so we will choose an allocation that is
envy-free: no roommate would strictly prefer to get another room, given the prices we have assigned
to those rooms. Such an allocation is guaranteed to exist [Svensson, 1983].
Let us consider an example with n = 3 roommates, and let the total rent be $1000. Table 1 shows
the valuation that each agent assigns to each room. Given this information, the algorithm in use on
Spliddit will assign Room 1 to Alice, Room 2 to Bob, and Room 3 to Charlie, charging them $100,
$500, and $400 respectively. This allocation is envy-free under the assumption (which we will make
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

