The Policy-gradient Placement and Generative
Routing Neural Networks for Chip Design

Ruoyu Cheng1 , Xianglong Lyu1 , Yang Li1 , Junjie Ye2 , Jianye Hao2 , Junchi Yan1∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{roy_account,kyle_lyu,emiyali,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
{yejunjie4, haojianye}@huawei.com

Abstract
Placement and routing are two critical yet time-consuming steps of chip design in
modern VLSI systems. Distinct from traditional heuristic solvers, this paper on
one hand proposes an RL-based model for mixed-size macro placement, which
differs from existing learning-based placers that often consider the macro by
coarse grid-based mask. While the standard cells are placed via gradient-based
GPU acceleration. On the other hand, a one-shot conditional generative routing
model, which is composed of a special-designed input-size-adapting generator
and a bi-discriminator, is devised to perform one-shot routing to the pins within
each net, and the order of nets to route is adaptively learned. Combining these
techniques, we develop a flexible neural pipeline, which to our best knowledge,
is the first joint placement and routing network without involving any traditional
heuristic solver. Experimental results on chip design benchmarks showcase the
effectiveness of our approach. Source code will be made publicly available at:
https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/EDA-AI

1

Introduction

The scale of integrated circuits (ICs) has been enlarged dramatically, posing a challenge to the existing
Electronic Design Automation (EDA) technologies. The increasing circuit density raises additional
issues for VLSI placers and routers as the component size of modern VLSI design continues to drop
and on-chip connectivity becomes increasingly sophisticated. Due to growing on-chip connectivity,
concentrated needs and restricted resources, modern designs are prone to congestion issues and
wirelength minimization, which has become a critical task at every stage of the chip design process.
Accordingly, placement and routing that physically arranges the locations and the routes of nets
become more crucial in modern VLSI systems, which are also very time-consuming.
The components of a netlist, including macros and standard cells, are mapped to positions on the
chip layout by placement, with standard cells being basic logic cells (e.g. logic gates) and macros as
functional blocks (e.g. SRAMs). Moreover, the increasingly extensive use of intellectual property
(IP) modules and pre-designed macro blocks make mixed-size placement an indispensable part of
physical design. The goal of placement is to optimize power, performance, and area (PPA) metrics
meanwhile obeying the constraints e.g. placement density and routing congestion. It is worth noting
that, in this paper we address the global routing problem, while the detailed routing involves more
physical constraints, and is beyond the scope of this paper.
Global routing, on the other hand, creates routing channels inside a layout based on the placement
assignment by connecting pins of positioned IC components to a net while adhering to technological
∗

The SJTU authors are also with MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, SJTU. Junchi Yan is the correspondence author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

