Non-convex online learning via algorithmic
equivalence

Udaya Ghai ∗†‡

Zhou Lu∗†

Elad Hazan∗†

Abstract
We study an algorithmic equivalence technique between non-convex gradient
descent and convex mirror descent. We start by looking at a harder problem of
regret minimization in online non-convex optimization. We show that under certain
geometric and smoothness conditions, online gradient descent applied to nonconvex functions is an approximation of online mirror descent applied to convex
functions under reparameterization. In continuous time, the gradient flow with
this reparameterization was shown to be exactly equivalent to continuous-time
mirror descent by Amid and Warmuth [4], but theory for the analogous discrete
2
time algorithms is left as an open problem. We prove an O(T 3 ) regret bound for
non-convex online gradient descent in this setting, answering this open problem.
Our analysis is based on a new and simple algorithmic equivalence method.

1

Introduction

Gradient descent is probably the simplest and most popular algorithm in convex optimization, with
numerous and extensive studies on its convergence properties. For non-convex objectives, it is known
that gradient descent does not necessarily converge to the global optimum, which is in general NP
hard. Thus recent research focuses on alternate objectives, such as finding first-order stationary points
efficiently, or the importance of higher order stationary points, e.g. [19, 22, 1].
However, the study of global convergence of gradient descent for non-convex objectives is increasingly
important due to the fact that in practice, gradient descent and its variants can achieve zero error on a
highly non-convex loss function of a deep neural network.
To explain the success of modern deep learning it is thus important to understand why gradient
descent can converge to a global minimum for some highly non-convex functions. Several important
research directions have stemmed from this motivation, including the study of optimization for deep
linear networks [20, 21, 6], non-convex matrix factorization [7], provable convergence for neural
networks in the linearization regime of the neural tangent kernel [26, 12, 13, 2, 32, 18, 9], and more.
A recent promising approach, proposed in [4, 3], is to consider reparameterizing mirror descent as
gradient descent. In particular, [4] shows that a continuous-time online mirror descent with a convex
loss can be written in an equivalent form of a continuous-time online gradient descent whose loss
isn’t necessarily convex after reparameterization, but has significant structure. [3] further explores
this idea, showing that after reparameterization, online gradient descent has the same worst-case
regret bound as the exponentiated gradient algorithm. Both [4] and [3] provide a new prospect on
understanding the convergence of non-convex gradient descent. More recently, [23] provides a more
general result, tightly characterizing when gradient flow can be written as mirror flow by introducing
the notion of a commuting parameterization.
∗

Google AI Princeton
Princeton University
‡
Correspondence to: <ughai@cs.princeton.edu>.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

