Meta-Query-Net: Resolving Purity-Informativeness
Dilemma in Open-set Active Learning

Dongmin Park1 , Yooju Shin1 , Jihwan Bang2,3 , Youngjun Lee1 , Hwanjun Song2∗, Jae-Gil Lee1∗
1
KAIST, 2 NAVER AI Lab, 3 NAVER CLOVA
{dongminpark, yooju.shin, youngjun.lee, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr
{jihwan.bang, hwanjun.song}@navercorp.com

Abstract
Unlabeled data examples awaiting annotations contain open-set noise inevitably.
A few active learning studies have attempted to deal with this open-set noise for
sample selection by filtering out the noisy examples. However, because focusing on
the purity of examples in a query set leads to overlooking the informativeness of the
examples, the best balancing of purity and informativeness remains an important
question. In this paper, to solve this purity-informativeness dilemma in open-set
active learning, we propose a novel Meta-Query-Net (MQ-Net) that adaptively
finds the best balancing between the two factors. Specifically, by leveraging
the multi-round property of active learning, we train MQ-Net using a query set
without an additional validation set. Furthermore, a clear dominance relationship
between unlabeled examples is effectively captured by MQ-Net through a novel
skyline regularization. Extensive experiments on multiple open-set active learning
scenarios demonstrate that the proposed MQ-Net achieves 20.14% improvement in
terms of accuracy, compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning in many complex tasks highly depends on the availability of massive
data with well-annotated labels, which are very costly to obtain in practice [1]. Active learning (AL)
is one of the popular learning frameworks to reduce the high human-labeling cost, where a small
number of maximally-informative examples are selected by a query strategy and labeled by an oracle
repeatedly [2]. Numerous query (i.e., sample selection) strategies, mainly categorized into uncertaintybased sampling [3, 4, 5] and diversity-based sampling [6, 7, 8], have succeeded in effectively reducing
the labeling cost while achieving high model performance.
Despite their success, most standard AL approaches rely on a strict assumption that all unlabeled
examples should be cleanly collected from a pre-defined domain called in-distribution (IN), even
before being labeled [9]. This assumption is unrealistic in practice since the unlabeled examples are
mostly collected from rather casual data curation processes such as web-crawling. Notably, in the
Google search engine, the precision of image retrieval is reported to be 82% on average, and it is
worsened to 48% for unpopular entities [10, 11]. That is, such collected unlabeled data naturally
involves open-set noise, which is defined as a set of the examples collected from different domains
called out-of-distribution (OOD) [12].
In general, standard AL approaches favor the examples either highly uncertain in predictions or highly
diverse in representations as a query for labeling. However, the addition of open-set noise makes these
two measures fail to identify informative examples; the OOD examples also exhibit high uncertainty
and diversity because they share neither class-distinctive features nor other inductive biases with IN
examples [14, 15]. As a result, an active learner is confused and likely to query the OOD examples to
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

