Distributionally Adaptive Meta Reinforcement
Learning

Anurag Ajay∗ †‡§ , Abhishek Gupta * †§ , Dibya Ghosh¶ , Sergey Levine¶ , Pulkit Agrawal†‡§
Improbable AI Lab†
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab‡
University of California, Berkeley¶
Massachusetts Institute Technology§

Abstract
Meta-reinforcement learning algorithms provide a data-driven way to acquire policies that quickly adapt to many tasks with varying rewards or dynamics functions.
However, learned meta-policies are often effective only on the exact task distribution on which they were trained and struggle in the presence of distribution shift
of test-time rewards or transition dynamics. In this work, we develop a framework for meta-RL algorithms that are able to behave appropriately under test-time
distribution shifts in the space of tasks. Our framework centers on an adaptive
approach to distributional robustness that trains a population of meta-policies to
be robust to varying levels of distribution shift. When evaluated on a potentially
shifted test-time distribution of tasks, this allows us to choose the meta-policy with
the most appropriate level of robustness, and use it to perform fast adaptation. We
formally show how our framework allows for improved regret under distribution
shift, and empirically show its efficacy on simulated robotics problems under a
wide range of distribution shifts.

1

Introduction

The diversity and dynamism of the real world require reinforcement learning (RL) agents that
can quickly adapt and learn new behaviors when placed in novel situations. Meta reinforcement
learning provides a framework for conferring this ability to RL agents, by learning a “meta-policy”
trained to adapt as quickly as possible to tasks from a provided training distribution [40, 11, 34, 49].
Unfortunately, meta-RL agents assume tasks to be always drawn from the training task distribution
and often behave erratically when asked to adapt to tasks beyond the training distribution [5, 8]. As
an example of this negative transfer, consider using meta-learning to teach a robot to navigate to
goals quickly (illustrated in Figure 1). The resulting meta-policy learns to quickly adapt and walk to
any target location specified in the training distribution, but explores poorly and fails to adapt to any
location not in that distribution. This is particularly problematic for the meta-learning setting, since
the scenarios where we need the ability to learn quickly are usually exactly those where the agent
experiences distribution shift. This type of meta-distribution shift afflicts a number of real-world
problems including autonomous vehicle driving [10], in-hand manipulation [18, 1, 9], and quadruped
locomotion [25, 23, 19], where training task distribution may not encompass all real-world scenarios.
In this work, we study algorithms that learn meta-policies resilient to task distribution shift at test time.
We assume the test-time distribution shift to be unknown but within a fixed range. One approach to
enable this resiliency is leveraging the distributional robustness framework [38] to learn a meta-policy
robust to a wide range of distribution shifts. However, the resulting meta-policy can be slow to adapt
∗

denotes equal contribution. Correspondence to aajay@mit.edu and abhgupta@cs.washington.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

