Rotation-Equivariant Conditional Spherical Neural
Fields for Learning a Natural Illumination Prior

James A. D. Gardner
Department of Computer Science
University of York
York, United Kingdom
james.gardner@york.ac.uk

Bernhard Egger
Cognitive Computer Vision Lab
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen, Germany
bernhard.egger@fau.de

William A. P. Smith
Department of Computer Science
University of York
York, United Kingdom
william.smith@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Inverse rendering is an ill-posed problem. Previous work has sought to resolve this
by focussing on priors for object or scene shape or appearance. In this work, we
instead focus on a prior for natural illuminations. Current methods rely on spherical
harmonic lighting or other generic representations and, at best, a simplistic prior
on the parameters. We propose a conditional neural field representation based on a
variational auto-decoder with a SIREN network and, extending Vector Neurons,
build equivariance directly into the network. Using this, we develop a rotationequivariant, high dynamic range (HDR) neural illumination model that is compact
and able to express complex, high-frequency features of natural environment
maps. Training our model on a curated dataset of 1.6K HDR environment maps of
natural scenes, we compare it against traditional representations, demonstrate its
applicability for an inverse rendering task and show environment map completion
from partial observations. A PyTorch implementation, our dataset and trained
models can be found at jadgardner.github.io/RENI.

1

Introduction

Compact but expressive lighting representations play an essential role in graphics, enabling realistic
lighting effects at real-time frame rates [38, 53, 54, 34, 22] and in computer vision enabling scene
relighting [59, 58], face relighting [55, 43, 17, 42] and object insertion [56, 47, 31]. Real-world illumination is highly complex and variable, with a very high dynamic range, and is therefore inherently
challenging to represent. However, real-world illumination does contain statistical regularities [16],
particularly for outdoor, naturally lit scenes. For example, lighting usually comes predominantly from
above, often with the strongest illumination coming from primary light sources in a few directions.
Also, the sky and sunlight produce only a limited range of colours. In addition, illumination environments have a canonical up direction (vertical axis aligns with gravity) but arbitrary horizontal rotation
(any rotation about the vertical is equally likely). These regularities and geometric symmetries can
significantly restrict the space of possible illuminations to constrain inverse problems or enable the
synthesis of realistic lighting.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

