HumanLiker: A Human-like Object Detector
to Model the Manual Labeling Process

Haoran Wei1,∗ Ping Guo2 Yangguang Zhu1 Chenglong Liu1 Peng Wang2
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Intel Labs China
{weihaoran18, zhuyangguang19, liuchenglong20}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{ping.guo, patricia.p.wang}@intel.com

Abstract
Popular object detection models generate bounding boxes in a different way than
we humans. As an example, modern detectors yield object box either upon the
regression of its center and width/height (center-guided detector), or by grouping
paired estimated corners (corner-guided detector). However, that is not the pattern
we manually label an object due to high degrees of freedom in searching centers or
low efficiency of grouping corners. Empirically, humans run two steps to locate an
object bounding box manually: 1) click the mouse at the top-left corner of object,
and then drag the mouse to the bottom-right corner; 2) refine the corner positions
to make the bounding box more precisely, if necessary. Inspired by this manual
labeling process, we propose a novel human-like detector, termed as HumanLiker,
which is devised as a two-stage end-to-end detector to simulate the two aforementioned. Like we humans in manual labeling, HumanLiker can effectively avert
both the thorny center searching and heuristic corner grouping. Different from the
mainstream detector branches, i.e., the center/corner-guided methods, the HumanLiker provides a new paradigm which integrates the advantages of both branches to
balance the detection efficiency and bounding box quality. On MS-COCO test-dev
set, HumanLiker can achieve 50.2%/51.6% and 53.8%/55.6% in term of AP with
ResNeXt-101 and SwinTransformer backbones in single/multi-scale testing, outperforming current popular center/corner-guided baselines (e.g., DETR/CornerNet)
by a large margin, with much less training epochs and higher inference FPS. Code
will be available at https://github.com/Ucas-HaoranWei/HumanLiker.

1

Introduction

Object detection is an active research direction in artificial intelligence, aiming to know “where are
objects of interest” in an image. In almost a decade, with the development of deep learning [15, 13]
techniques, object detectors have been developed rapidly and achieved promising performance in
terms of both accuracy and efficiency, which enables emerging applications in various fields, e.g.,
driver assistance [31], ID card identification [18], image search, etc.
Among modern object detectors, the most popular branch is the center-guided type [27, 24, 20, 1, 36,
30, 3] which often regards object centers as reference points to predict the object location and size
(width/height). Another interesting branch is the corner-guided type [14, 7, 6, 32] which determines
object boundaries via estimating and grouping corner pairs. These two detection paradigms enjoy
their distinctive advantages while enduring the shortcomings. More specifically, center-guided
methods are effective in estimating the coarse object locations to achieve higher AP50 compared
to corner-guided methods that suffer weak robustness corner grouping. For instance, despite the
∗

This work was done when the first author was interning at Intel Labs China.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

