Understanding Robust Learning through the Lens of
Representation Similarities
Christian Cianfarani⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago

Arjun Nitin Bhagoji⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago

Vikash Sehwag⇤
Department of ECE
Princeton University

Ben Zhao
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago

Haitao Zheng
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago

Prateek Mittal
Department of ECE
Princeton University

Abstract
Representation learning, i.e. the generation of representations useful for downstream applications, is a task of fundamental importance that underlies much of
the success of deep neural networks (DNNs). Recently, robustness to adversarial
examples has emerged as a desirable property for DNNs, spurring the development
of robust training methods that account for adversarial examples. In this paper, we
aim to understand how the properties of representations learned by robust training
differ from those obtained from standard, non-robust training. This is critical to
diagnosing numerous salient pitfalls in robust networks, such as, degradation of
performance on benign inputs, poor generalization of robustness, and increase in
over-fitting. We utilize a powerful set of tools known as representation similarity
metrics, across three vision datasets, to obtain layer-wise comparisons between
robust and non-robust DNNs with different training procedures, architectural parameters and adversarial constraints. Our experiments highlight hitherto unseen
properties of robust representations that we posit underlie the behavioral differences of robust networks. We discover a lack of specialization in robust networks’
representations along with a disappearance of ‘block structure’. We also find
overfitting during robust training largely impacts deeper layers. These, along with
other findings, suggest ways forward for the design and training of better robust
networks.

1

Introduction

Representation learning is fundamental to machine learning and a task on which deep neural networks
perform remarkably well. Given complex high-dimensional input signals, such as images, speech,
or text, deep neural networks (DNNs) can learn meaningful, lower-dimensional representations [33,
6, 57, 13, 24, 12, 66]. The downstream utility of these representations underlies DNNs’ success
on different tasks [5, 15, 51, 36, 3]. For standard image classification, neural networks learn wellseparated representations of inputs from different classes to achieve high accuracy. The discovery
of adversarial examples [4, 54], perturbed inputs that induce high error in model predictions (even
for well-trained classifiers) has motivated the need for another desirable property: adversarial
robustness. Robust training methods typically protect against adversarial examples during the training
phase by converting the standard empirical risk minimization objective to a min-max one (Figure
1) [35, 46, 65]. However, they typically have far worse performance on benign inputs, converge
⇤

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

