Adversarial Style Augmentation for Domain
Generalized Urban-Scene Segmentation

1

Zhun Zhong1∗ † Yuyang Zhao2∗ Gim Hee Lee2 Nicu Sebe1
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento
2
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of domain generalization in semantic segmentation, which aims to learn a robust model using only labeled synthetic (source)
data. The model is expected to perform well on unseen real (target) domains.
Our study finds that the image style variation can largely influence the model’s
performance and the style features can be well represented by the channel-wise
mean and standard deviation of images. Inspired by this, we propose a novel adversarial style augmentation (AdvStyle) approach, which can dynamically generate
hard stylized images during training and thus can effectively prevent the model
from overfitting on the source domain. Specifically, AdvStyle regards the style
feature as a learnable parameter and updates it by adversarial training. The learned
adversarial style feature is used to construct an adversarial image for robust model
training. AdvStyle is easy to implement and can be readily applied to different
models. Experiments on two synthetic-to-real semantic segmentation benchmarks
demonstrate that AdvStyle can significantly improve the model performance on
unseen real domains and show that we can achieve the state of the art. Moreover,
AdvStyle can be employed to domain generalized image classification and produces
a clear improvement on the considered datasets.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation plays a critical role in autonomous driving, which has achieved impressive
improvements with the recent development of deep networks [20, 5, 1, 45]. However, these achievements have been mostly attributed to large-scale labeled segmentation datasets, in which annotating
pixel-wise labels is very expensive and time-consuming. Moreover, the model trained on one dataset
commonly produces poor performance on unseen datasets captured in different conditions. This
degradation phenomenon is mainly caused by domain shifts [7], including differences in weather,
season, light, etc. For instance, the segmentation model trained on the dataset captured in sunny
London will have low accuracy when deployed on the streets of Zurich in rainy weather.
To address the cross-domain problem, domain adaptation methods [21, 41] are designed to transfer
the knowledge of labeled source data to unlabeled target data. However, one of their main drawbacks
is that they require the use of target data during training, which cannot always be accessible in practice.
Another promising line is domain generalization (DG), which focuses on learning a generalizable
model using only the labeled source domain. To reduce the annotating cost and protect data privacy,
the existing DG works [7, 40, 46] in semantic segmentation commonly choose to learn the robust
model with synthetic data, e.g., GTAV [28]. In this paper, we focus on this synthetic-to-real DG
problem for semantic segmentation.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

