Scalable design of Error-Correcting Output Codes
using Discrete Optimization with Graph Coloring

Samarth Gupta
Center for Computational Science & Engg.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
samarthg@mit.edu

Saurabh Amin
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
amins@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of scalable design of Error-Correcting Output Codes (ECOC)
for multi-class classification. Prior works on ECOC-based classifiers are limited to
codebooks with small number of rows (classes) or columns, and do not provide optimality guarantees for the codebook design problem. We address these limitations
by developing a codebook design approach based on a Mixed-Integer Quadratically
Constrained Program (MIQCP). This discrete formulation is naturally suited for
maximizing the error-correction capability of ECOC-based classifiers and incorporates various design criteria in a flexible manner. Our solution approach is tractable
in that it incrementally increases the codebook size by adding columns to maximize
the gain in error-correcting capability. In particular, we show that the maximal
gain in error-correction can be upper bounded by solving a graph-coloring problem.
As a result, we can efficiently generate near-optimal codebooks for very large
problem instances. These codebooks provide competitive multi-class classification
performance on small class datasets such as MNIST and CIFAR10. Moreover,
by leveraging transfer-learned binary classifiers, we achieve better classification
performance over transfer-learned multi-class CNNs on large class datasets such as
CIFAR100, Caltech-101/256. Our results highlight the advantages of simple and
modular ECOC-based classifiers in improving classification accuracy without the
risk of overfitting.

1

Introduction

Error-correcting codes have found many applications in machine learning. Their use range from
natural classification tasks [8, 24, 2, 17, 21] including multi-label classification [11] to robust
classification [43, 46, 16] to federated learning [22] to zero-shot learning [40] to life-long learning
[20]. The seminal paper of [8] proposed the use of error-correcting output codes (ECOCs) for
classification tasks. Their framework lead to a significant activity on the design of ECOCs with a
variety of features; for e.g. the use of different class of encodings [7, 17, 39], hierarchical classifiers
[14, 12], decoding schemes [2, 9] and accounting for the underlying data-distribution [49, 47, 30, 33].
However, a key challenge that remains to be addressed is a flexible and tractable approach for
designing high-quality codebooks. Our paper addresses this challenge.
We tackle some of the limitations of prior works on solving the discrete codebook design problem.
In particular, we depart from the classical approach that performs a continuous relaxation of the
discrete codebook design problem and attempts to solve the resulting non-linear optimization problem
[7, 49, 47, 33]. That approach has been shown to scale to large number of classes k, but under the
limitation that the size of the codebook (i.e. number of columns L) is small. However, with small
L, codebooks do not fully exploit the error-correcting capability, which is the key motivation to use
ECOCs in the first place. Besides, the continuous relaxation approach typically does not provide
codebooks with strong optimality guarantees.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

