Rethinking the Reverse-engineering of Trojan Triggers

Zhenting Wang
Rutgers University
zhenting.wang@rutgers.edu
Hailun Ding
Rutgers University
hailun.ding@rutgers.edu

Kai Mei
Rutgers University
kai.mei@rutgers.edu

Juan Zhai
Rutgers University
juan.zhai@rutgers.edu

Shiqing Ma
Rutgers University
sm2283@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks are vulnerable to Trojan (or backdoor) attacks. Reverseengineering methods can reconstruct the trigger and thus identify affected models.
Existing reverse-engineering methods only consider input space constraints, e.g.,
trigger size in the input space. Expressly, they assume the triggers are static patterns
in the input space and fail to detect models with feature space triggers such as image
style transformations. We observe that both input-space and feature-space Trojans
are associated with feature space hyperplanes. Based on this observation, we
design a novel reverse-engineering method that exploits the feature space constraint
to reverse-engineer Trojan triggers. Results on four datasets and seven different
attacks demonstrate that our solution effectively defends both input-space and
feature-space Trojans. It outperforms state-of-the-art reverse-engineering methods
and other types of defenses in both Trojaned model detection and mitigation tasks.
On average, the detection accuracy of our method is 93%. For Trojan mitigation,
our method can reduce the ASR (attack success rate) to only 0.26% with the
BA (benign accuracy) remaining nearly unchanged. Our code can be found at
https://github.com/RU-System-Software-and-Security/FeatureRE.

1

Introduction

DNNs are vulnerable to Trojan attacks [1–6]. After injecting a Trojan into the DNN model, the
adversary can manipulate the model prediction by adding a Trojan trigger to get the target label.
The adversary can inject the Trojan by performing the poisoning attack or supply chain attack. In
the poisoning attack, the adversary can control the training dataset and injects the Trojan by adding
samples with the Trojan trigger labeled as the target label. In the supply chain attack, the adversary
can replace a benign model with a Trojaned model by performing the supply chain attack. The Trojan
trigger is becoming more and more stealthy. Earlier works use static patterns, e.g., a yellow pad as
the trigger, which is known as the input space triggers. Researchers recently proposed using more
dynamic and input-aware techniques to generate stealthy triggers that mix with benign features, which
are referred to as the feature space triggers. For example, the trigger of the feature-space Trojans can
be a warping process [7] or a generative model [3, 8, 9]. The Trojan attack is a prominent threat to
the trustworthiness of DNN models, especially in security-critical applications, such as autonomous
driving [1], malware classification [10], and face recognition [11].
Prior works have proposed several ways to defend against Trojan attacks, such as removing poisons
in training [12–14], detecting Trojan samples at runtime [15–18], etc. Many of above methods can
only work for one type of Trojan attack. For example, training and pre-training time defense (e.g.,
removing poisoning data, training a benign model with poisoning data) fail to defend against the
supply chain attack. Trigger reverse-engineering [19–23] is a general method to defend against
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

