On the role of overparameterization in off-policy
Temporal Difference learning with linear function
approximation

Valentin Thomas
Mila, Université de Montréal
vltn.thomas@gmail.com

Abstract
Much of the recent successes of deep learning can be attributed to scaling up the
size of the networks to the point where they often are vastly overparameterized.
Thus, understanding the role of overparameterization is of increasing importance.
While predictive theories have been developed for supervised learning, little is
known about the Reinforcement Learning case. In this work, we take a theoretical
approach and study the role of overparameterization for off-policy Temporal Difference (TD) learning in the linear setting. We leverage tools from random matrix
theory and random graph theory to obtain a characterization of the spectrum of the
TD operator. We use this result to study the stability and optimization dynamics
of TD learning as a function of the number of parameters.

1

Introduction

Occam’s razor principle states that among many plausible explanations, the simplest one is the
most likely to be true. In statistics and machine learning, this is often interpreted as models with
a restricted number of parameters should be privileged as they generalize better (Akaike, 1974).
This view is supported by the classical bias-variance trade-off which implies that models that
are too flexible are bound to overfit (Geman et al., 1992). Yet, deep neural networks with more
parameters than training data points achieved remarkable performance in many domains (LeCun
et al., 1989; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Devlin et al., 2018), challenging this conventional wisdom.
A significant understanding of this apparent tension has been reached in recent years. A large
body of work using tools from random matrix theory has shown that, in models with random
features, overparameterization does not lead to overfitting but instead better generalization (Belkin
et al., 2020). This phenomenon is known as double descent and unifies the traditional and modern
understanding of bias and variance. Importantly, Kuzborskij et al. (2021) has shown that the double
descent phenomenon is in large part explained by purely optimization rather than label noise.
Following their insight, we mainly take an optimization approach in the rest of our paper.
While we now have a theory of overparameterization in supervised learning, the theoretical analysis
of overparameterization in the reinforcement learning (RL) setting is largely unexplored (Xiao et al.,
2021). Indeed, RL poses several new additional challenges. First, the agent has to interact with an
environment whose structure may be complex. Second, each state may not be sampled with equal
probability while each datapoint is usually sampled uniformly in supervised learning. In this work,
we focus mainly on policy evaluation, i.e evaluating the expected return of a fixed policy. More
precisely, we study the behavior of Temporal Difference learning (Sutton, 1988) which has become
ubiquitous for policy evaluation in modern Deep RL (Mnih et al., 2013; Haarnoja et al., 2018).
Our contributions are, in the limit of large number of states and parameters: 1) We introduce a
class of random graphs for which we can compute analytically the spectrum of the TD operator
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

