Improving Multi-Task Generalization via
Regularizing Spurious Correlation

Ziniu Hu1∗, Zhe Zhao2 , Xinyang Yi2 , Tiansheng Yao2 , Lichan Hong2 , Yizhou Sun1 , Ed H. Chi2
1
University of California, Los Angeles, {bull, yzsun}@cs.ucla.edu
2
Google Research, Brain Team, {zhezhao,xinyang,tyao,lichan,edchi}@google.com

Abstract
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is a powerful learning paradigm to improve generalization performance via knowledge sharing. However, existing studies find that MTL
could sometimes hurt generalization, especially when two tasks are less correlated.
One possible reason that hurts generalization is spurious correlation, i.e., some
knowledge is spurious and not causally related to task labels, but the model could
mistakenly utilize them and thus fail when such correlation changes. In MTL setup,
there exist several unique challenges of spurious correlation. First, the risk of
having non-causal knowledge is higher, as the shared MTL model needs to encode
all knowledge from different tasks, and causal knowledge for one task could be
potentially spurious to the other. Second, the confounder between task labels
brings in a different type of spurious correlation to MTL. Given such label-label
confounders, we theoretically and empirically show that MTL is prone to taking
non-causal knowledge from other tasks. To solve this problem, we propose MultiTask Causal Representation Learning (MT-CRL) framework. MT-CRL aims to
represent multi-task knowledge via disentangled neural modules, and learn robust
task-to-module routing graph weights via MTL-specific invariant regularization.
Experiments show that MT-CRL could enhance MTL model’s performance by
5.5% on average over Multi-MNIST, MovieLens, Taskonomy, CityScape, and
NYUv2, and show it could indeed alleviate spurious correlation problem.

1

Introduction

Multi-Task Learning (MTL), a learning paradigm (Caruana, 1997; Zhang & Yang, 2018) aiming to
train a single model for multiple tasks, is expected to benefit the overall generalization performance
than single-task learning (Maurer et al., 2016; Tripuraneni et al., 2020) given the assumption that
there exists some common knowledge to handle different tasks. However, recent studies observed
that, when two tasks are less correlated, MTL could lead to even worse overall performance (Parisotto
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2021). A line of works (Yu et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Fifty et al.,
2021) resort performance drop to optimization challenge because conflicting tasks might compete
for model capacity. However, both Standley et al. (2020) and our analysis in Section 2.2 show that,
even with an over-parameterized model that achieves low MTL training loss, the final generalization
performance could be worse than single-task learning. This finding motivates us to think about the
following question: Are there any intrinsic problems in MTL that hurt generalization?
One widely studied issue that influences generalization is the spurious correlation problem (Geirhos
et al., 2019, 2020), i.e., correlation that only existed in training datasets due to unobserved confounders (Lopez-Paz, 2016), but not causally correct. For example, as Beery et al. (2018) discussed,
when we train an image classification model to identify cows with a biased dataset where cows mostly
∗

This work was done when Ziniu was an intern at Google.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

