Deciding What to Model: Value-Equivalent Sampling
for Reinforcement Learning

Dilip Arumugam
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
dilip@cs.stanford.edu

Benjamin Van Roy
Department of Electrical Engineering
Department of Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
bvr@stanford.edu

Abstract
The quintessential model-based reinforcement-learning agent iteratively refines
its estimates or prior beliefs about the true underlying model of the environment.
Recent empirical successes in model-based reinforcement learning with function
approximation, however, eschew the true model in favor of a surrogate that, while
ignoring various facets of the environment, still facilitates effective planning over
behaviors. Recently formalized as the value equivalence principle, this algorithmic
technique is perhaps unavoidable as real-world reinforcement learning demands
consideration of a simple, computationally-bounded agent interacting with an overwhelmingly complex environment, whose underlying dynamics likely exceed the
agent’s capacity for representation. In this work, we consider the scenario where
agent limitations may entirely preclude identifying an exactly value-equivalent
model, immediately giving rise to a trade-off between identifying a model that
is simple enough to learn while only incurring bounded sub-optimality. To address this problem, we introduce an algorithm that, using rate-distortion theory,
iteratively computes an approximately-value-equivalent, lossy compression of the
environment which an agent may feasibly target in lieu of the true model. We
prove an information-theoretic, Bayesian regret bound for our algorithm that holds
for any finite-horizon, episodic sequential decision-making problem. Crucially,
our regret bound can be expressed in one of two possible forms, providing a performance guarantee for finding either the simplest model that achieves a desired
sub-optimality gap or, alternatively, the best model given a limit on agent capacity.

1

Introduction

A central challenge of the reinforcement-learning problem [154, 87] is exploration, where a sequential
decision-making agent must judiciously balance exploitation of knowledge accumulated thus far
against the need to further acquire information for optimal long-term performance. Historically,
provably-efficient reinforcement-learning algorithms [91, 35, 90, 20, 23, 151, 81, 121, 45, 120, 22,
46, 10, 85, 168, 56, 105] have often relied upon one of two possible mechanisms for addressing
the exploration challenge in a principled manner: optimism in the face of uncertainty or posterior
sampling. Briefly, methods in the former category begin with optimistically-biased value estimates
for all state-action pairs; an agent acting greedily with respect to these estimates will be incentivized
to visit all state-action pairs a sufficient number of times until this bias dissipates and the agent
is left with an accurate estimate of the value function for deriving optimal behavior. In contrast,
posterior-sampling methods primarily operate based on Thompson sampling [156, 141] whereby the
agent begins with a prior belief over the Markov Decision Process (MDP) with which it is interacting
and acts optimally with respect to a single sample drawn from these beliefs. The resulting experience
sampled from the true environment allows the agent to derive a corresponding posterior distribution
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

