MACE: Higher Order Equivariant Message Passing
Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields
Dávid Péter Kovács
Engineering Laboratory,
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ UK

Ilyes Batatia
Engineering Laboratory,
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ UK
Department of Chemistry,
ENS Paris-Saclay, Université Paris-Saclay
91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
ilyes.batatia@ens-paris-saclay.fr
Gregor N. C. Simm
Engineering Laboratory,
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ UK

Christoph Ortner
Department of Mathematics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z2

Gábor Csányi
Engineering Laboratory,
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ UK

Abstract
Creating fast and accurate force fields is a long-standing challenge in computational
chemistry and materials science. Recently, several equivariant message passing
neural networks (MPNNs) have been shown to outperform models built using
other approaches in terms of accuracy. However, most MPNNs suffer from high
computational cost and poor scalability. We propose that these limitations arise
because MPNNs only pass two-body messages leading to a direct relationship
between the number of layers and the expressivity of the network. In this work,
we introduce MACE, a new equivariant MPNN model that uses higher body order
messages. In particular, we show that using four-body messages reduces the
required number of message passing iterations to just two, resulting in a fast and
highly parallelizable model, reaching or exceeding state-of-the-art accuracy on the
rMD17, 3BPA, and AcAc benchmark tasks. We also demonstrate that using higher
order messages leads to an improved steepness of the learning curves.

1

Introduction

The earliest approaches for creating force fields (interatomic potentials) using machine learning techniques were using local atom-centered symmetric descriptors and feed-forward neural networks [6],
Gaussian Process regression[2] or linear regression [44, 47]. The first attempts to use graph neural networks to model the potential energy of atomistic systems had only limited success. The DTNN [42],
SchNet [41], HIP-NN [35], PhysNet [48], or DimeNet [20, 29] approaches could only come close
to but not improve upon the atomic descriptor-based methods in terms of computational efficiency
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

