Jump Self-attention: Capturing High-order Statistics
in Transformers
Haoyi Zhou
BDBC
Beihang University
Beijing, China 100191
haoyi@buaa.edu.cn

Siyang Xiao
BDBC
Beihang University
Beijing, China 100191
xiaosy@act.buaa.edu.cn

Jieqi Peng
BDBC
Beihang University
Beijing, China 100191
pengjq@act.buaa.edu.cn

Shanghang Zhang
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Shuai Zhang
BDBC
Beihang University
Beijing, China 100191
zhangs@act.buaa.edu.cn

Jianxin Li∗
BDBC†
Beihang University
Beijing, China 100191
lijx@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The recent success of Transformer has benefited many real-world applications, with
its capability of building long dependency through pairwise dot-products. However,
the strong assumption that elements are directly attentive to each other limits the
performance of tasks with high-order dependencies such as natural language understanding and Image captioning. To solve such problems, we are the first to define
the Jump Self-attention (JAT) to build Transformers. Inspired by the pieces moving
of English Draughts, we introduce the spectral convolutional technique to calculate
JAT on the dot-product feature map. This technique allows JAT’s propagation in
each self-attention head and is interchangeable with the canonical self-attention.
We further develop the higher-order variants under the multi-hop assumption to
increase the generality. Moreover, the proposed architecture is compatible with
the pre-trained models. With extensive experiments, we empirically show that our
methods significantly increase the performance on ten different tasks.

1

Introduction

Transformers have made great success in many domains, such as NLP, Vision, Time-series, and
Speech. However, the giant model GPT-3 [2] and switch Transformer [7], with their massive
layers and over-parameterized architectures, have not further achieved significant performance
improvements since the BERT model [5] beat the Human Performance in GLUE [21] and SQuAD [12].
Recently two visualization works [19, 3] reveal that the self-attention mechanism mainly learns
superficial connections among inputs. The principle of direct accessing among inputs in the dotproduct self-attention lies as the core of above models, which solely relies on their mutual similarity in
the vector space. However, as “every coin has two sides”, while the dot-product is simple and effective
in capturing long-range dependencies, it has limited capability in learning high-order dependencies.
To solve this problem, we are inspired by the pieces moving of English Draughts, a checker game
spread to Great Britain in about 1100. It allows two moving rules: one is the simple move from the
∗
†

Jainxin Li is the corresponding author.
BDBC is the abbreviation for the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

