What is Where by Looking: Weakly-Supervised
Open-World Phrase-Grounding without Text Inputs

Tal Shaharabany Yoad Tewel Lior Wolf
Tel-Aviv University
{shaharabany,yoadtewel,wolf}@mail.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Given an input image, and nothing else, our method returns the bounding boxes
of objects in the image and phrases that describe the objects. This is achieved
within an open world paradigm, in which the objects in the input image may
not have been encountered during the training of the localization mechanism.
Moreover, training takes place in a weakly supervised setting, where no bounding boxes are provided. To achieve this, our method combines two pre-trained
networks: the CLIP image-to-text matching score and the BLIP image captioning
tool. Training takes place on COCO images and their captions and is based on
CLIP. Then, during inference, BLIP is used to generate a hypothesis regarding
various regions of the current image. Our work generalizes weakly supervised
segmentation and phrase grounding and is shown empirically to outperform the
state of the art in both domains. It also shows very convincing results in the
novel task of weakly-supervised open-world purely visual phrase-grounding presented in our work. For example, on the datasets used for benchmarking phrasegrounding, our method results in a very modest degradation in comparison to methods that employ human captions as an additional input. Our code is available at
https://github.com/talshaharabany/what-is-where-by-looking and
a live demo can be found at https://replicate.com/talshaharabany/
what-is-where-by-looking.

1

Introduction
What does it mean, to see? The plain man’s answer (and Aristotle’s too) would be, to know what is
where by looking. In other words, vision is the process of discovering from images what is present in
the world, and where it is.
Marr [50]

We address the task of detecting the objects that exist in a given image, without limiting ourselves to
a predefined list of objects, of the type that detection algorithms employ. This property is sometimes
referred to as open-world vision. Our method assigns a text phrase to each detected object. The
similar task that employs an additional text input describing the image is called phrase-grounding.
We describe our approach as “purely visual” to denote that there is no text input. Since the task
is performed without the use of bounding boxes in any phase of training, the level of supervision
employed corresponds to weakly supervised. As far as we can ascertain, the task of weakly-supervised
open-world purely visual phrase-grounding is entirely novel. For short, we refer to this task, which is
illustrated in Fig 1, as “what is where by looking” (WWbL).
In order to tackle this task we rely on two recent pretrained vision-language models: CLIP [60] and
BLIP [41]. These models are trained on large corpora of matching images and captions and can
produce a matching score between an input image and an input text. Trained on millions of such pairs,
CLIP has been extensively used in zero-shot recognition [94], image generation [21, 25, 45], image
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

