Proppo: a Message Passing Framework for
Customizable and Composable Learning Algorithms

Paavo Parmas∗
Kyoto University
paavo@sys.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Takuma Seno†
Keio University
seno@ailab.ics.keio.ac.jp

Abstract
While existing automatic differentiation (AD) frameworks allow flexibly composing model architectures, they do not provide the same flexibility for composing learning algorithms—everything has to be implemented in terms of backpropagation. To address this gap, we invent Automatic Propagation (AP) software,
which generalizes AD, and allows custom and composable construction of complex
learning algorithms. The framework allows packaging custom learning algorithms
into propagators that automatically implement the necessary computations, and can
be reused across different computation graphs. We implement Proppo, a prototype
AP software package built on top of the Pytorch AD framework. To demonstrate
the utility of Proppo, we use it to implement Monte Carlo gradient estimation
techniques, such as reparameterization and likelihood ratio gradients, as well as
the total propagation algorithm and Gaussian shaping gradients, which were previously used in model-based reinforcement learning, but do not have any publicly
available implementation. Finally, in minimalistic experiments, we show that these
methods allow increasing the gradient estimation accuracy by orders of magnitude,
particularly when the machine learning system is at the edge of chaos.3

1

Introduction
Application

Application

Application

Software library

Software library

Computation software

Computation software

Computation software

Automatic propagation

(a) Direct approach

(b) Library approach

(c) Automatic propagation software approach

Figure 1: A simplified taxonomy of machine learning (ML) software development methodologies.
The computation software refers to existing ML tools such as PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) or NumPy
(Harris et al., 2020); the software library is reusable code for a new ML method.
When a machine learning (ML) researcher comes up with a new algorithm, they are faced with
a dilemma: do they directly implement an application of their algorithm using existing ML tools
(Fig. 1a); or do they implement a library for their algorithm, then use the library to implement the
desired application (Fig. 1b). The first approach is faster, because the researcher only has to worry
about the details of the specific application; the second approach may take longer to implement, but
will enable reuse of the code and speed up implementing future applications. Clearly, the second
∗

Affiliated with the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology (OIST) during much of the project.
Hired by OIST during his contribution to the project. Currently working at Sony AI.
3
The code is available at https://github.com/proppo/proppo.

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

