Pre-Train Your Loss: Easy Bayesian Transfer
Learning with Informative Priors

Ravid Shwartz-Ziv∗
New York University
ravid.shwartz.ziv@nyu.edu
Hossein Souri
Johns Hopkins University

Micah Goldblum∗
New York University
goldblum@nyu.edu

Sanyam Kapoor
New York University

Yann LeCun
New York University
Meta AI Research

Chen Zhu
University of Maryland

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University
andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Deep learning is increasingly moving towards a transfer learning paradigm whereby
large foundation models are fine-tuned on downstream tasks, starting from an
initialization learned on the source task. But an initialization contains relatively
little information about the source task, and does not reflect the belief that our
knowledge of the source task should affect the locations and shape of optima on the
downstream task. Instead, we show that we can learn highly informative posteriors
from the source task, through supervised or self-supervised approaches, which then
serve as the basis for priors that modify the whole loss surface on the downstream
task. This simple modular approach enables significant performance gains and more
data-efficient learning on a variety of downstream classification and segmentation
tasks, serving as a drop-in replacement for standard pre-training strategies. These
highly informative priors also can be saved for future use, similar to pre-trained
weights, and stand in contrast to the zero-mean isotropic uninformative priors that
are typically used in Bayesian deep learning.

1

Introduction

The ability to transfer what is learned from one task to another — learning to ride a bicycle to then
ride a unicycle — has historically set apart biological intelligence from machine learning approaches.
However, transfer learning is quickly becoming mainstream practice in deep learning. Typically,
large “foundation models” are pre-trained on massive volumes of source data, and then the learned
parameter vector is used as an initialization for training in a downstream task. While this approach
has had great empirical success, reliance on an initialization is a very limited way to perform transfer
learning. If we are doing a good job of optimization, then our final solution should be independent
of initialization, barring local minima with identical training loss. Moreover, our knowledge of the
source task should affect the locations and shapes of optima on the downstream knowledge.
We propose to instead use a re-scaled Bayesian parameter posterior from the first task as a pre-trained
prior for the downstream task. Since the negative log posterior on the downstream task is our loss
function, this procedure has the effect of reshaping our training objective on the downstream task,
∗

Authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

