Bayesian Clustering of Neural Spiking Activity Using
a Mixture of Dynamic Poisson Factor Analyzers

Ganchao Wei
Department of Statistics
University of Connecticut
ganchao.wei@uconn.edu

Ian. H. Stevenson
Department of Psychological Sciences
University of Connecticut
ian.stevenson@uconn.edu

Xiaojing Wang
Department of Statistics
University of Connecticut
xiaojing.wang@uconn.edu

Abstract
Modern neural recording techniques allow neuroscientists to observe the spiking
activity of many neurons simultaneously. Although previous work has illustrated
how activity within and between known populations of neurons can be summarized
by low-dimensional latent vectors, in many cases what determines a unique population may be unclear. Neurons differ in their anatomical location, but also, in their
cell types and response properties. Moreover, multiple distinct populations may
not be well described by a single low-dimensional, linear representation. To tackle
these challenges, we develop a clustering method based on a mixture of dynamic
Poisson factor analyzers (mixDPFA) model, with the number of clusters treated as
an unknown parameter. To do the analysis of DPFA model, we propose a novel
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm to efficiently sample its posterior
distribution. Validating our proposed MCMC algorithm with simulations, we find
that it can accurately recover the true clustering and latent states and is insensitive
to the initial cluster assignments. We then apply the proposed mixDPFA model to
multi-region experimental recordings, where we find that the proposed method can
identify novel, reliable clusters of neurons based on their activity, and may, thus,
be a useful tool for neural data analysis.

1

Introduction

With modern high-density probes (Jun et al., 2017), neuroscientists can observe the spiking activity
of many neurons from many different anatomical regions simultaneously. With these expanding
capabilities, new methods to analyze neural data at the population-level and at the level of multiple
populations become necessary. Several recent models have been developed to extract shared latent
structures from simultaneous neural recordings, assuming that neural activity can be described
through low-dimensional latent states. Many existing approaches are extensions of two basic models:
the linear dynamical system (LDS) model (Macke et al., 2011) and a Gaussian process factor analysis
(GPFA) model (Yu et al., 2009). The LDS model is built on the state-space model and assumes
latent factors evolve with linear dynamics. On the other hand, GPFA models the latent vectors by
non-parametric Gaussian processes. However, in both cases, the observation model is generalized
linear. Several variants of these models have been implemented to analyze multiple neural populations
and their interactions (Semedo et al., 2019; Glaser et al., 2020). However, in many cases, the total
number of distinct populations and which neurons belong to a population is unclear.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

