Self-Explaining Deviations for Coordination
Hengyuan Hu⇤ †
Stanford University
hengyuan@cs.stanford.edu
Anton Bakhtin
Meta AI
yolo@meta.com

Samuel Sokota⇤
Carnegie Mellon University
ssokota@andrew.cmu.edu

Andrei Lupu
Meta AI & FLAIR, University of Oxford
alupu@meta.com

David Wu
Meta AI
dwu@meta.com
Brandon Cui†
Mosaic ML
brandon@mosaicml.com

Jakob N. Foerster†
FLAIR, University of Oxford
jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Fully cooperative, partially observable multi-agent problems are ubiquitous in the
real world. In this paper, we focus on a specific subclass of coordination problems
in which humans are able to discover self-explaining deviations (SEDs). SEDs are
actions that deviate from the common understanding of what reasonable behavior
would be in normal circumstances. They are taken with the intention of causing
another agent or other agents to realize, using theory of mind, that the circumstance
must be abnormal. We motivate this idea with a real world example and formalize
its definition. Next, we introduce an algorithm for improvement maximizing SEDs
(IMPROVISED). Lastly, we evaluate IMPROVISED both in an illustrative toy
setting and the popular benchmark setting Hanabi, where we show that it can
produce so called finesse plays.

1

Introduction

Humans generally assume other humans follow certain social norms when acting in the society and
interpret behavior using these norms to infer hidden information about the world. For example, when
a driver sees a car ahead suddenly stopping on a road, they may infer that there is some accident
ahead or the car is broken. However, humans also have the ability to improvise when the conventional
actions are restricted or there exist other actions that can bring about superior outcomes. Taking the
event in Figure 1 as an example, the caller deviates from the conventional practice of stating the
situation truthfully because it would have negative consequences. This type of deviation involves
two noteworthy aspects. First, it can be detected by the dispatcher because it appears to be a mistake
under common practice. Second, the dispatcher’s response can be independently decided by both
individuals based on the common understanding of the world and the deviation chosen by the caller.
We refer to this type of phenomena as self-explaining deviations (SEDs). SEDs are actions that,
under normal circumstances, would not make sense, given the agents’ common understanding. They
are executed with the intention that teammates will use theory of mind to deduce that the situation
is unusual in a particular way, and will adapt their behavior to account for this additional information.
⇤
†

Equal Contribution.
Work done while at Meta AI.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

