Conditional Meta-Learning of Linear Representations
Giulia Denevi⇤
Leonardo Labs (Italy)
giulia.denevi.ext@leonardo.com
Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italy) & University College of London (UK)
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it
Carlo Ciliberto
University College of London (UK) & Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italy)
c.ciliberto@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Standard meta-learning for representation learning aims to find a common representation to be shared across multiple tasks. The effectiveness of these methods is often
limited when the nuances of the tasks’ distribution cannot be captured by a single
representation. In this work we overcome this issue by inferring a conditioning
function, mapping the tasks’ side information (such as the tasks’ training dataset
itself) into a representation tailored to the task at hand. We study environments in
which our conditional strategy outperforms standard meta-learning, such as those
in which tasks can be organized in separate clusters according to the representation
they share. We then propose a meta-algorithm capable of leveraging this advantage
in practice. In the unconditional setting, our method yields a new estimator enjoying faster learning rates and requiring less hyper-parameters to tune than current
state-of-the-art methods. Our results are supported by preliminary experiments.

1

Introduction

Learning a shared representation among a class of machine learning problems is a well-established
approach used both in multi-task learning [3, 20, 11] and meta-learning [18, 15, 5, 17, 35, 24, 30, 9, 7].
The idea behind this methodology is to consider two nested problem: at the within-task level an
empirical risk minimization is performed on each task, using inputs transformed by the current
representation, on the outer-task (meta-) level, such a representation is updated taking into account
the errors of the within-task algorithm on previous tasks.
Such a technique was shown to be advantageous in contrast to solving each task independently when
the tasks share a low dimensional representation, see e.g. [27, 25, 15, 24, 35, 5, 22, 9]. However,
in real world applications we often deal with heterogeneous classes of learning tasks, which may
overall be only loosely related. Consequently, the tasks’ commonalities may not be captured well by
a single representation shared among all the tasks. This is for instance the case in which the tasks can
be organized in different groups (clusters), where only tasks belonging to the same cluster share the
same low-dimensional representation.
In order to overcome this issue, previous authors developed non-convex methods (or convex relaxations) attempting at clustering the tasks, see e.g. [4, 26, 2, 20, 28, 40, 38, 31]. In this work, we follow
⇤

Work done while the first author was with Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italy).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

