FedAvg with Fine Tuning: Local Updates Lead to
Representation Learning

Liam Collins
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
liamc@utexas.edu
Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Hamed Hassani
ESE Department
University of Pennsylvania
hassani@seas.upenn.edu
Sanjay Shakkottai
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
sanjay.shakkottai@utexas.edu

Abstract
The Federated Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm, which consists of alternating between a few local stochastic gradient updates at client nodes, followed by a model
averaging update at the server, is perhaps the most commonly used method in
Federated Learning. Notwithstanding its simplicity, several empirical studies have
illustrated that the model output by FedAvg leads to a model that generalizes well
to new unseen tasks after a few fine-tuning steps. This surprising performance of
such a simple method, however, is not fully understood from a theoretical point
of view. In this paper, we formally investigate this phenomenon in the multi-task
linear regression setting. We show that the reason behind the generalizability of
the FedAvg output is FedAvg’s power in learning the common data representation
among the clients’ tasks, by leveraging the diversity among client data distributions
via multiple local updates between communication rounds. We formally establish
the iteration complexity required by the clients for proving such result in the setting
where the underlying shared representation is a linear map. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first result showing that FedAvg learns an expressive representation in any setting. Moreover, we show that multiple local updates between
communication rounds are necessary for representation learning, as distributed
gradient methods that make only one local update between rounds provably cannot
recover the ground-truth representation in the linear setting, and empirically yield
neural network representations that generalize drastically worse to new clients than
those learned by FedAvg trained on heterogeneous image classification datasets.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [1] provides a communication-efficient and privacy preserving means to
learn from data distributed across clients such as cell phones, autonomous vehicles, and hospitals.
FL aims for each client to benefit from collaborating in the learning process without sacrificing
data privacy or paying a substantial communication cost. Federated Averaging (FedAvg) [1] is
the predominant FL algorithm. In FedAvg, also known as Local SGD [2–4], the clients achieve
communication efficiency by making multiple local updates of a shared global model before sending
the result to the server, which averages the locally updated models to compute the next global model.
FedAvg is motivated by settings with homogeneous data across clients, since multiple local updates
should improve model performance on all other clients’ data when their data is similar. In contrast,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

