GAGA: Deciphering Age-path of Generalized
Self-paced Regularizer

Xingyu Qu1∗ Diyang Li2∗ Xiaohan Zhao2 Bin Gu1,2†
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology
{Xingyu.Qu,bin.gu}@mbzuai.ac.ae,
Diyounglee@gmail.com, xiaohan.zhao42@foxmail.com

Abstract
Nowadays self-paced learning (SPL) is an important machine learning paradigm
that mimics the cognitive process of humans and animals. The SPL regime involves
a self-paced regularizer and a gradually increasing age parameter, which plays a
key role in SPL but where to optimally terminate this process is still non-trivial
to determine. A natural idea is to compute the solution path w.r.t. age parameter
(i.e., age-path). However, current age-path algorithms are either limited to the simplest regularizer, or lack solid theoretical understanding as well as computational
efficiency. To address this challenge, we propose a novel Generalized Age-path
Algorithm (GAGA) for SPL with various self-paced regularizers based on ordinary
differential equations (ODEs) and sets control, which can learn the entire solution
spectrum w.r.t. a range of age parameters. To the best of our knowledge, GAGA is
the first exact path-following algorithm tackling the age-path for general self-paced
regularizer. Finally the algorithmic steps of classic SVM and Lasso are described
in detail. We demonstrate the performance of GAGA on real-world datasets, and find
considerable speedup between our algorithm and competing baselines.

1

Introduction

The SPL. Self-paced learning (SPL) [1] is a classical learning paradigm and has attracted increasing
attention in the communities of machine learning [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], data mining [7, 8] and computer vision
[9, 10, 11]. The philosophy under this paradigm is simulating the strategy that how human-beings
learn new knowledge. In other words, SPL starts learning from easy tasks and gradually levels
up the difficulty while training samples are fed to the model sequentially. At its core, SPL can be
viewed as an automatic variant of curriculum learning (CL) [12, 13], which uses prior knowledge to
discriminate between simple instances and hard ones along the training process. Different from CL,
the SPL assigns a real-valued “easiness weight” to each sample implicitly by adding a self-paced
regularizer (SP-regularizer briefly) to the primal learning problem and optimizes the original model
parameters as well as these weights. Considering this setting, the SPL is reported to alleviate the
problem of getting stuck in bad local minima and provides better generalization as well as robustness
for the models, especially in hard condition of heavy noises or a high outlier rate [1, 14].
There are two critical aspects in SPL, namely the SP-regularizer and a gradually increasing age
parameter. Different SP-regularizers can be designed for different kinds of training tasks. At
the primary stage of SPL, only the hard SP-regularizer is utilized and leads to a binary variable
for weighting samples [1]. Going with the advancing of the diverse SP-regularizers [15], SPL
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

