Sparse Hypergraph Community Detection Thresholds
in Stochastic Block Model
Erchuan Zhang
School of Science
Edith Cowan University
erchuan.zhang@ecu.edu.au

David Suter
School of Science
Edith Cowan University
d.suter@ecu.edu.au

Giang Truong
School of Science
Edith Cowan University
h.truong@ecu.edu.au

Syed Zulqarnain Gilani
School of Science
Edith Cowan University
s.gilani@ecu.edu.au

Abstract
Community detection in random graphs or hypergraphs is an interesting fundamental problem in statistics, machine learning and computer vision. When the
hypergraphs are generated by a stochastic block model, the existence of a sharp
threshold on the model parameters for community detection was conjectured by
Angelini et al. 2015. In this paper, we confirm the positive part of the conjecture,
the possibility of non-trivial reconstruction above the threshold, for the case of two
blocks. We do so by comparing the hypergraph stochastic block model with its
Erdös-Rényi counterpart. We also obtain estimates for the parameters of the hypergraph stochastic block model. The methods developed in this paper are generalised
from the study of sparse random graphs by Mossel et al. 2015 and are motivated
by the work of Yuan et al. 2022. Furthermore, we present some discussion on the
negative part of the conjecture, i.e., non-reconstruction of community structures.

1

Introduction

Community detection, or clustering, aims to identify groups sharing similar properties from a global
population. It is a fundamentally important problem in statistics, network analysis and computer
vision [15, 34, 11, 28, 26]. Many clustering algorithms have been developed based on graphs in
which each edge contains exactly two vertices representing pairwise relationships on data. However,
real-world data are often much more complicated than the ordinary graph structures. For example, in
the co-authorship network [9, 24, 27], the number of co-authors may vary from paper to paper so that
one can hardly study edges consisting of two co-authors only.
To represent higher order relationships among data, hypergraphs have been proposed to model data
and have been shown to have some advantages over graphs [36]. In the co-authorship example above,
a generalised edge (called hyperedge) allows us to consider the connectivity of arbitrarily many coauthors. In recent years, hypergraphs have been widely used to model complex data relationships, for
instance, in robust multi-structure clustering [26], bioinformatics [31], and social networks extraction
[35]. However, from both theoretical and methodological sides, the complexity of hypergraphs
creates much more challenges in the sense that many analysis tools developed in the graph case can
not be easily generalised to the hypergraph case. In general, analysing the spectral properties of the
adjacency tensor of a hypergraph is more difficult than studying the spectrum of the adjacency matrix
of a graph.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

