Understanding Benign Overfitting in
Gradient-based Meta Learning

Lisha Chen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, USA
chenl21@rpi.edu

Songtao Lu
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
songtao@ibm.com

Tianyi Chen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, USA
chentianyi19@gmail.com

Abstract
Meta learning has demonstrated tremendous success in few-shot learning with limited supervised data. In those settings, the meta model is usually overparameterized.
While the conventional statistical learning theory suggests that overparameterized
models tend to overfit, empirical evidence reveals that overparameterized meta
learning methods still work well – a phenomenon often called “benign overfitting.”
To understand this phenomenon, we focus on the meta learning settings with a
challenging bilevel structure that we term the gradient-based meta learning, and
analyze its generalization performance under an overparameterized meta linear
regression model. While our analysis uses the relatively tractable linear models, our
theory contributes to understanding the delicate interplay among data heterogeneity,
model adaptation and benign overfitting in gradient-based meta learning tasks. We
corroborate our theoretical claims through numerical simulations.

1

Introduction

Meta learning, also referred to as “learning to learn”, usually learns a prior model from multiple
tasks so that the learned model is able to quickly adapt to unseen tasks [43, 26]. Meta learning has
been successfully applied to few-shot learning learning [2, 13], image recognition [52], federated
learning [29], reinforcement learning [21] and communication systems [10]. While there are many
exciting meta learning methods today, in this paper, we will study a representative meta learning
setting where the goal is to learn a shared initial model that can quickly adapt to task-specific models.
This adaptation may take an explicit form such as the output of one gradient descent step, which is
referred to as the model agnostic meta learning (MAML) method [21]. Alternatively, the adaptation
step may take an implicit form such as the solution of another optimization problem, which is referred
to as the implicit MAML (iMAML) method [39]. Since both MAML and iMAML will solve a bilevel
optimization problem, we term them the gradient-based meta learning thereafter. In many cases,
overparameterized models are used as the initial models in meta learning for quick adaptation. For
example, Resnet-based MAML models typically have around 6 million parameters, but are trained
on 1-3 million meta-training data [12]. Training such initial models is often difficult in meta learning
because the number of training data is much smaller than the dimension of the model parameter.
Previous works on meta learning mainly focus on addressing the optimization challenges or analyzing
the generalization performance with sufficient data [18, 19, 14]. Different from these works, we
are particularly interested in the generalization performance of the sought initial model in practical
scenarios where the total number of data from all tasks is smaller than the dimension of the initial
model, which we term overparameterized meta learning. In those overparameterized regimes, the
generalization error of meta learning models is not fully understood. Motivated by this, we ask:
If and when overparameterized meta learning models would lead to overfitting, provably?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

