Provably Feedback-Efficient Reinforcement Learning
via Active Reward Learning

Dingwen Kong
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
dingwenk@pku.edu.cn

Lin F. Yang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
An appropriate reward function is of paramount importance in specifying a task
in reinforcement learning (RL). Yet, it is known to be extremely challenging in
practice to design a correct reward function for even simple tasks. Human-in-theloop (HiL) RL allows humans to communicate complex goals to the RL agent by
providing various types of feedback. However, despite achieving great empirical
successes, HiL RL usually requires too much feedback from a human teacher and
also suffers from insufficient theoretical understanding. In this paper, we focus on
addressing this issue from a theoretical perspective, aiming to provide provably
feedback-efficient algorithmic frameworks that take human-in-the-loop to specify
rewards of given tasks. We provide an active-learning-based RL algorithm that
first explores the environment without specifying a reward function and then asks
a human teacher for only a few queries about the rewards of a task at some stateaction pairs. After that, the algorithm guarantees to provide a nearly optimal policy
for the task with high probability. We show that, even with the presence of random
2
e
noise in the feedback, the algorithm only takes O(Hdim
R ) queries on the reward
function to provide an ε-optimal policy for any ε > 0. Here H is the horizon
of the RL environment, and dimR specifies the complexity of the function class
representing the reward function. In contrast, standard RL algorithms require to
query the reward function for at least Ω(poly(d, 1/ε)) state-action pairs where d
depends on the complexity of the environmental transition.

1

Introduction

A suitable reward function is essential for specifying a reinforcement learning (RL) agent to perform
a complex task. Yet obvious approaches such as hand-designed reward is not scalable for large
number of tasks, especially in the multitask settings [Wilson et al., 2007, Brunskill and Li, 2013,
Yu et al., 2020, Sodhani et al., 2021], and can also be extremely challenging (e.g., [Ng et al., 1999,
Marthi, 2007] shows even intuitive reward shaping can lead to undesired side effects). Recently, a
popular framework called Human-in-the-loop (HiL) RL [Knox and Stone, 2009, Christiano et al.,
2017, MacGlashan et al., 2017, Ibarz et al., 2018, Lee et al., 2021, Wang et al., 2022] gains more
interests as it allows humans to communicate complex goals to the RL agent directly by providing
various types of feedback. In this sense, a reward function can be learned automatically and can also
be corrected at proper times if unwanted behavior is happening. Despite its promising empirical
performance, HiL algorithms still suffer from insufficient theoretical understanding and possess
drawbacks Arakawa et al. [2018], e.g., it assumes humans can give precise numerical rewards and
do so without delay and at every time step, which are usually not true. Moreover, these approaches
usually train on every new task separately and cannot incorporate exiting experiences.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

