SIREN: Shaping Representations for Detecting
Out-of-Distribution Objects

Xuefeng Du, Gabriel Gozum, Yifei Ming, Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{xfdu,gozum,alvinming,sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) objects is indispensable for safely deploying
object detectors in the wild. Although distance-based OOD detection methods have
demonstrated promise in image classification, they remain largely unexplored in
object-level OOD detection. This paper bridges the gap by proposing a distancebased framework for detecting OOD objects, which relies on the model-agnostic
representation space and provides strong generality across different neural architectures. Our proposed framework SIREN contributes two novel components: (1) a
representation learning component that uses a trainable loss function to shape the
representations into a mixture of von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distributions on the unit
hypersphere, and (2) a test-time OOD detection score leveraging the learned vMF
distributions in a parametric or non-parametric way. SIREN achieves competitive
performance on both the recent detection transformers and CNN-based models, improving the AUROC by a large margin compared to the previous best method. Code
is publicly available at https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/siren.

1

Introduction

Teaching object detectors to be aware of out-of-distribution (OOD) data is indispensable for building
reliable AI systems. Today, the mainstream object detection models have been operating in the
closed-world setting. That is, a model will match an object to one of the given class labels, even if
it is irrelevant. Instead, the open-world setting emphasizes that objects from the unknown classes
can naturally emerge, which should not be blindly predicted into a known class. In safety-critical
applications, such as autonomous driving, failing to detect OOD objects on the road can directly lead
to disastrous accidents [50]. The situation can be better avoided if the object detector recognizes the
object as unfamiliar and appropriately cautions the human driver to take over.
In this paper, we pioneer a distance-based framework for detecting OOD objects. Currently, the
distance-based method remains largely unexplored in object-level OOD detection. In particular, by
operating in the representation space, distance-based methods are model-agnostic and provide strong
generality across neural architectures. In contrast, existing approaches derive highly specialized OOD
detection scores based on the outputs of the object detectors, which may not be seamlessly applicable
across architectures. For example, the classification output of the Faster R-CNN [52] is optimized by
the multi-class softmax loss, whereas the recent transformer-based object detection networks such
as DEFORMABLE - DETR [75] uses multi-label focal loss [36]. Thereby, while output-based OOD
scoring functions may be limited to specific architectures, distance-based methods are not.
Although distance-based OOD scoring functions have been studied in image classification, they do not
trivially transfer to object detection models. For example, [33] modeled the feature embedding space
as a mixture of multivariate Gaussian distributions and used the maximum Mahalanobis distance [41]
to all class centroids for OOD detection. However, we observe that the modern object detection
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

