Detection and Localization of Changes in Conditional
Distributions
Lizhen Nie
Department of Statistics
The University of Chicago
lizhen@uchicago.edu

Dan Nicolae
Department of Statistics
The University of Chicago
nicolae@statistics.uchicago.edu

Abstract
We study the change point problem that considers alterations in the conditional
distribution of an inferential target on a set of covariates. This paired data scenario
is in contrast to the standard setting where a sequentially observed variable is
analyzed for potential changes in the marginal distribution. We propose new
methodology for solving this problem, by starting from a simpler task that analyzes
changes in conditional expectation, and generalizing the tools developed for that
task to conditional distributions. Large sample properties of the proposed statistics
are derived. In empirical studies, we illustrate the performance of the proposed
method against baselines adapted from existing tools. Two real data applications
are presented to demonstrate its potential.

1

Introduction

The canonical setting for change point (CP) analysis is concerned with the detection and localization
of changes in distributions of an independent sequence of observations {xt , t = 1, 2, · · · , n}. In
many applications, however, the observation at each index t is a pair (xt , yt ) with xt a set of
covariates and yt a variable of special interest for inference. This setting incorporates many important
problems in a variety of scientific fields. For example, in finance, market data are often affected by
monetary policies. Thus, to more accurately predict stock prices using this additional information,
one may want to first understand whether and when the relationship between the target stock price
and its associated covariates changes over time [37, 38, 28, 29, 49]. Another example comes from
environmental analysis [6], where one goal is to learn the relationship between the levels of pollutants
and the number of weekly hospital admissions for circulatory and respiratory diseases, which is
subject to potential changes. Before considering more complex models that incorporate time-varying
relationships, one needs to understand first whether the relationship indeed changes and if so, when.
Despite the existence of many applied scenarios where the relationship between a pair changes,
change point methods specifically designed for paired data are quite scarce. As far as we know,
existing methods assume univariate y’s and aim at changes in the conditional expectation of y given
x. Moreover, most papers [26, 24, 25, 39, 2, 4, 22, 43, 15, 40, 11] focus on the setting where the
conditional expectation of y depends linearly on x. The nonlinear and nonparametric cases, however,
are relatively under-investigated. The existing methods mainly focus on two settings. One setting
arises from challenges in econometric modelling, and they focus exclusively on the problem of testing
for structural stability of the conditional mean function over time series [49, 19, 47, 46], while the
(perhaps more) important problem of localizing the change point(s) is not investigated. Another
setting assumes that the covariate xt ’s are fixed, univariate, and form an equi-spaced sequence lying
in interval [0, 1] [31, 32]. A detailed review of these related works is included in Section 2.
We are interested here in the case where both x and y can lie in a general space (not necessarily
the real line), and we aim to identify changes in the whole conditional distribution, rather than only
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

