Pre-activation Distributions Expose Backdoor Neurons

Runkai Zheng1∗, Rongjun Tang2∗ , Jianze Li3 , Li Liu3†
1
School of Data Science,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
School of Science and Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
rkteddy@outlook.com, rongjuntang@link.cuhk.edu.cn
lijianze@gmail.com, liuli@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) can be manipulated to perform specific
behaviors when encountering a particular trigger pattern without affecting the
performance on normal samples, which is referred to as backdoor attack. The backdoor attack is usually achieved by injecting a small proportion of poisoned samples
into the training set, through which the victim trains a model embedded with the
designated backdoor. In this work, we demonstrate that backdoor neurons are
exposed by their pre-activation distributions, where populations from benign data
and poisoned data show significantly different moments. This property is shown to
be attack-invariant and allows us to efficiently locate backdoor neurons. On this
basis, we make several proper assumptions on the neuron activation distributions,
and propose two backdoor neuron detection strategies based on (1) the differential
entropy of the neurons, and (2) the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the benign sample distribution and a poisoned statistics based hypothetical distribution.
Experimental results show that our proposed defense strategies are both efficient
and effective against various backdoor attacks. Source code is available here.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved tremendous success during the past few years
in a wide range of areas. However, training a CNN from scratch involves a large amount of data and
expensive computational costs, which is sometimes infeasible. A more practical strategy is to obtain
pretrained models or utilize public datasets from a third party, which brings convenience but also
raises severe security problems into the deployment of models. For example, a malicious third party
may provide pretrained models embedded with a designated backdoor, such that the model will have
a predefined response to some specific pattern, which is also called the trigger. More realistically, the
attacker can inject only a small proportion of malicious data into the public dataset to mislead the
trained model, which is referred to as backdoor poisoning attacks [24]. For instance, the malicious
data can be created by patching a particular pattern into the benign data and changing the label to the
desired target. The correlation between the trigger and the specified target label will be learned by
the models during the training time. In this way, the infected model will misclassify the input to the
attack target when the pattern is patched, while behaving normally otherwise, as shown in Figure 1.
According to previous studies, it was empirically found that an infected model always possesses one
or more neurons that have high correlation with the trigger activation, and pruning these neurons can
∗
†

Eual Contribution
Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

