Are GANs overkill for NLP?
David Alvarez-Melis∗
Microsoft Research
daalvare@microsoft.com

Vikas Garg∗
YaiYai Ltd and Aalto University
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Adam Tauman Kalai∗
Microsoft Research
adam@kal.ai

Abstract
This work offers a novel theoretical perspective on why, despite numerous attempts, adversarial approaches to generative modeling (e.g., GANs) have not been
as successful for certain generation tasks, particularly sequential tasks such as
Natural Language Generation, as they have in others, such as Computer Vision.
In particular, on sequential data such as text, maximum-likelihood approaches
are significantly more utilized than GANs. We show that, while it may seem that
maximizing likelihood is inherently different than minimizing distinguishability,
this distinction is largely an artifact of the limited representational capacity of the
model family, for a wide class of adversarial objectives. We give a theoretical
model in which minimizing KL-divergence (i.e., maximizing likelihood) is a more
efficient approach to effectively minimizing the same distinguishability criteria
that adversarial models seek to optimize. Reductions show that minimizing distinguishability can be seen as simply boosting likelihood for certain families of
models including n-gram models and neural networks with a softmax output layer.
To achieve a full polynomial-time reduction, a novel next-token distinguishability
model is considered. Some preliminary empirical evidence is also provided to
substantiate our theoretical analyses.

1

Introduction

Consider a situation where one has samples from a true distribution p over a set X and one wishes
to learn to generate similar samples, such as learning to generate English sentences from a large
English text corpus. One seeks an approximation q of p which is “close” in some sense and from
which samples can efficiently be generated. A common approach to fit these models is Maximum
Likelihood Estimation (MLE), which given a training set from p and a parametrized distribution qθ
seeks parameters θ that maximize the likelihood qθ assigns to a training set. MLE has long been one
of the most popular methods for fitting generative models of sequential data, such as language, where
autoregressive neural language models generate remarkably realistic text, e.g., GPT-3 [6] and PaLM
[11]. MLE generally involves computing likelihoods qθ (x) which can be more challenging in some
domains than others, e.g., it may be more difficult to estimate the probability of a (high-dimensional,
real-valued) image than a (discrete-valued) sentence.
An alternative approach, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), has become popular across
several domains, particularly Computer Vision, owing to breakthrough realism in the images they
output [e.g., 19, 65]. GANs employ an adversarial approach to generation through a zero-sum game
between a generator and a distinguisher in which the generator produces samples x ∈ X which
the distinguisher tries to distinguish from real samples from p. Often, both the generator and the
distinguisher are differentiable neural networks, though this min-max approach of choosing a model
whose outputs are nearly indistinguishable from real examples might be considered for any families
of generative models and distinguishers. A major advantage of GANs (particularly for images) is
that they can be used for generation without requiring computing likelihoods. This advantage is not
∗

equal contribution, alphabetic ordering

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

