Learning Partial Equivariances from Data

David W. Romero∗
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
d.w.romeroguzman@vu.nl

Suhas Lohit
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
Cambridge, MA, USA
slohit@merl.com

Abstract
Group Convolutional Neural Networks (G-CNNs) constrain learned features to
respect the symmetries in the selected group, and lead to better generalization when
these symmetries appear in the data. If this is not the case, however, equivariance
leads to overly constrained models and worse performance. Frequently, transformations occurring in data can be better represented by a subset of a group than
by a group as a whole, e.g., rotations in [−90○ , 90○ ]. In such cases, a model that
respects equivariance partially is better suited to represent the data. In addition,
relevant transformations may differ for low and high-level features. For instance,
full rotation equivariance is useful to describe edge orientations in a face, but partial
rotation equivariance is better suited to describe face poses relative to the camera.
In other words, the optimal level of equivariance may differ per layer. In this work,
we introduce Partial G-CNNs: G-CNNs able to learn layer-wise levels of partial
and full equivariance to discrete, continuous groups and combinations thereof as
part of training. Partial G-CNNs retain full equivariance when beneficial, e.g., for
rotated MNIST, but adjust it whenever it becomes harmful, e.g., for classification
of 6 / 9 digits or natural images. We empirically show that partial G-CNNs pair
G-CNNs when full equivariance is advantageous, and outperform them otherwise.2

1

Introduction

The translation equivariance of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [31] has proven an important
inductive bias for good generalization on vision tasks. This is achieved by restricting learned features
to respect the translation symmetry encountered in visual data, such that if an input is translated,
its features are also translated, but not modified. Group equivariant CNNs (G-CNNs) [7] extend
equivariance to other symmetry groups. Analogously, they restrict the learned features to respect the
symmetries in the group considered such that if an input is transformed by an element in the group,
e.g., a rotation, its features are also transformed, e.g., rotated, but not modified.
Nevertheless, the group to which G-CNNs are equivariant must be fixed prior to training, and
imposing equivariance to symmetries not present in the data leads to overly constrained models and
worse performance [6]. The latter comes from a difference in the data distribution, and the family
of distributions the model can describe. Consequently, the group must be selected carefully, and it
should correspond to the transformations that appear naturally in the data.
Frequently, transformations appearing in data can be better represented by a subset of a group than
by a group as a whole, e.g., rotations in [−90○ , 90○ ]. For instance, natural images much more likely
show an elephant standing straight or slightly rotated than an elephant upside-down. In some cases,
group transformations even change the desired model response, e.g., in the classification of the digits
6 and 9. In both examples, the data distribution is better represented by a model that respects rotation
equivariance partially. That is, a model equivariant to some, but not all rotations.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
∗

Work done at Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories.
Our code is publicly available at github.com/merlresearch/partial_gcnn.

2

