Increasing the Scope as You Learn:
Adaptive Bayesian Optimization in Nested Subspaces

Leonard Papenmeier
Lund University
leonard.papenmeier@cs.lth.se

Luigi Nardi
Lund University, Stanford University, DBtune
luigi.nardi@cs.lth.se

Matthias Poloczek∗
Amazon
San Francisco, CA 94105, USA
matpol@amazon.com

Abstract
Recent advances have extended the scope of Bayesian optimization (BO) to
expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions with dozens of dimensions, aspiring
to unlock impactful applications, for example, in the life sciences, neural architecture search, and robotics. However, a closer examination reveals that the state-ofthe-art methods for high-dimensional Bayesian optimization (HDBO) suffer from
degrading performance as the number of dimensions increases or even risk failure
if certain unveriﬁable assumptions are not met. This paper proposes BA X US that
leverages a novel family of nested random subspaces to adapt the space it optimizes over to the problem. This ensures high performance while removing the
risk of failure, which we assert via theoretical guarantees. A comprehensive evaluation demonstrates that BA X US achieves better results than the state-of-the-art
methods for a broad set of applications.

1

Introduction

The optimization of expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions where no derivative information is
available has found many applications, for example in chemical engineering [11, 28, 31, 58, 60],
materials science [23, 29, 30, 32, 52, 64, 68], aerospace engineering [39, 43], hyperparameter optimization [5, 33, 38, 61], neural architecture search [36, 57], vehicle design [14, 34], hardware
design [19, 49], drug discovery [51], robotics [12, 13, 41, 46, 54], and the life sciences [18, 59, 65].
Here increasing the number of dimensions (or parameters) of the optimization problem usually allows for better solutions. For example, by exposing more process parameters of a chemical reaction,
we obtain a more granular control of the process; for a design task, we may optimize a larger number
of design decisions jointly; in robotics, we gain access to more sophisticated control policies.
A series of breakthroughs have recently pushed the envelope of high-dimensional Bayesian optimization and facilitated a wider adoption in science and engineering. The key challenge for further
scaling is the so-called curse of dimensionality. The complexity of the task of ﬁnding an optimum
grows exponentially with the number of dimensions [7, 22]. Recently, methods that rely on local
’trust regions’ have gained popularity. They usually achieve good performance for problems with
up to a couple of dozen input parameters. However, we observe that their performance degrades for
higher-dimensional problems. This is not surprising, given that trust regions have a smaller volume
but still the full dimensionality of the problem. Other state-of-the-art methods suppose the existence
∗

The work was done before Matthias joined Amazon.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

