Towards Understanding Grokking:
An Effective Theory of Representation Learning

Ziming Liu, Ouail Kitouni, Niklas Nolte, Eric J. Michaud, Max Tegmark, Mike Williams
Department of Physics, Institute for AI and Fundamental Interactions, MIT
{zmliu,kitouni,nnolte,ericjm,tegmark,mwill}@mit.edu

Abstract
We aim to understand grokking, a phenomenon where models generalize long after
overfitting their training set. We present both a microscopic analysis anchored by an
effective theory and a macroscopic analysis of phase diagrams describing learning
performance across hyperparameters. We find that generalization originates from
structured representations whose training dynamics and dependence on training set
size can be predicted by our effective theory in a toy setting. We observe empirically
the presence of four learning phases: comprehension, grokking, memorization, and
confusion. We find representation learning to occur only in a “Goldilocks zone”
(including comprehension and grokking) between memorization and confusion.
We find on transformers the grokking phase stays closer to the memorization phase
(compared to the comprehension phase), leading to delayed generalization. The
Goldilocks phase is reminiscent of “intelligence from starvation” in Darwinian
evolution, where resource limitations drive discovery of more efficient solutions.
This study not only provides intuitive explanations of the origin of grokking, but
also highlights the usefulness of physics-inspired tools, e.g., effective theories and
phase diagrams, for understanding deep learning.

1

Introduction

Perhaps the central challenge of a scientific understanding of deep learning lies in accounting for neural network generalization. Power et al. [1] recently added a new puzzle to the task of understanding
generalization with their discovery of grokking. Grokking refers to the surprising phenomenon of
delayed generalization where neural networks, on certain learning problems, generalize long after
overfitting their training set. It is a rare albeit striking phenomenon that violates common machine
learning intuitions, raising three key puzzles:
Q1 The origin of generalization: When trained on the algorithmic datasets where grokking occurs,
how do models generalize at all?
Q2 The critical training size: Why does the training time needed to “grok” (generalize) diverge as
the training set size decreases toward a critical point?
Q3 Delayed generalization: Under what conditions does delayed generalization occur?
We provide evidence that representation learning is central to answering each of these questions. Our
answers can be summarized as follows:
A1 Generalization can be attributed to learning a good representation of the input embeddings,
i.e., a representation that has the appropriate structure for the task and which can be predicted
from the theory in Section 3. See Figures 1 and 2.
A2 The critical training set size corresponds to the least amount of training data that can determine
such a representation (which, in some cases, is unique up to linear transformations).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

