GenSDF: Two-Stage Learning of
Generalizable Signed Distance Functions

Gene Chou
Princeton University
gchou@princeton.edu

Ilya Chugunov
Princeton University
chugunov@princeton.edu

Felix Heide
Princeton University
fheide@princeton.edu

Abstract
We investigate the generalization capabilities of neural signed distance functions
(SDFs) for learning 3D object representations for unseen and unlabeled point
clouds. Existing methods can fit SDFs to a handful of object classes and boast fine
detail or fast inference speeds, but do not generalize well to unseen shapes. We
introduce a two-stage semi-supervised meta-learning approach that transfers shape
priors from labeled to unlabeled data to reconstruct unseen object categories. The
first stage uses an episodic training scheme to simulate training on unlabeled data
and meta-learns initial shape priors. The second stage then introduces unlabeled
data with disjoint classes in a semi-supervised scheme to diversify these priors
and achieve generalization. We assess our method on both synthetic data and
real collected point clouds. Experimental results and analysis validate that our
approach outperforms existing neural SDF methods and is capable of robust zeroshot inference on 100+ unseen classes. Code can be found here.

1

Introduction

Learned 3D representations form the core of shape recovery [1], robotic manipulation [2], scene
understanding [3], and content generation [4] tasks. While simple to interpret, high-quality explicit 3D
representations can come with a slew of hidden costs. Conventional voxel grids without acceleration
suffer from cubical memory requirements [5, 6, 7], dense point clouds contain large amounts
of redundant information make querying local structures computationally expensive [8, 9], and
direct optimization of mesh representations is often infeasible [10]. As an alternative, works such
as [11, 12, 13] propose implicit learned representations; networks trained to functionally approximate
some underlying 3D geometry. These methods can offer lower memory requirements and faster
training and inference speeds [14] than conventional explicit representation methods [5, 8].
Neural signed distance functions (SDFs) [11] are a subset of this work which implicitly model
the distance from a queried location to the nearest point on a shape’s surface – negative inside the
shape, positive outside, zero at the surface. Existing methods are capable of approximating diverse
synthetic geometry, including multiple objects [11, 15, 16] and varying levels of detail for single
objects [17, 18]. However, most successful methods are fully supervised–they require access to
ground truth signed distance values to fit to an object. As ordinary point clouds lack these values, a
fully-supervised approach cannot learn from such unlabeled data.
To replace the need for any annotated data, fully unsupervised approaches [19, 20, 21] operate directly
on point clouds. These methods leverage pseudo-labels and proxies for ground truth signed distance
values, for example the unsigned distance to the nearest point in the point cloud. Unfortunately,
existing unsupervised methods can only reconstruct a handful of shapes, and break down when we
introduce just three or four additional additional object categories. As a result, these approaches
can also not take advantage of large unlabeled point cloud datasets [22, 23, 24] and their real-world
applications are limited. Our proposed method lifts this limitation, and learns from large-scale
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

