Which Explanation Should I Choose?
A Function Approximation Perspective to
Characterizing Post Hoc Explanations
Tessa Han
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
than@g.harvard.edu

Suraj Srinivas
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
ssrinivas@seas.harvard.edu

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu

Abstract
A critical problem in the field of post hoc explainability is the lack of a common
foundational goal among methods. For example, some methods are motivated by
function approximation, some by game theoretic notions, and some by obtaining
clean visualizations. This fragmentation of goals causes not only an inconsistent
conceptual understanding of explanations but also the practical challenge of not
knowing which method to use when.
In this work, we begin to address these challenges by unifying eight popular
post hoc explanation methods (LIME, C-LIME, KernelSHAP, Occlusion, Vanilla
Gradients, Gradients ⇥ Input, SmoothGrad, and Integrated Gradients). We show
that these methods all perform local function approximation of the black-box
model, differing only in the neighbourhood and loss function used to perform the
approximation. This unification enables us to (1) state a no free lunch theorem
for explanation methods, demonstrating that no method can perform optimally
across all neighbourhoods, and (2) provide a guiding principle to choose among
methods based on faithfulness to the black-box model. We empirically validate
these theoretical results using various real-world datasets, model classes, and
prediction tasks.
By bringing diverse explanation methods into a common framework, this work
(1) advances the conceptual understanding of these methods, revealing their shared
local function approximation objective, properties, and relation to one another, and
(2) guides the use of these methods in practice, providing a principled approach to
choose among methods and paving the way for the creation of new ones.

1

Introduction

As machine learning models become increasingly complex and are increasingly deployed in highstakes settings (e.g., medicine [1], law [2], and finance [3]), there is a growing emphasis on understanding how models make predictions so that decision-makers (e.g., doctors, judges, and loan officers) can
assess the extent to which they can trust model predictions. To this end, several post hoc explanation
methods have been developed, including LIME [4], C-LIME [5], SHAP [6], Occlusion [7], Vanilla
Gradients [8], Gradient x Input [9], SmoothGrad [10], and Integrated Gradients [11].
However, different methods have different goals. Such differences lead to both conceptual and
practical challenges to understanding and using explanation methods, thwarting progress in the field.
From a conceptual standpoint, the misalignment of goals among methods leads to an inconsistent
view of explanations. What is an explanation? This is unclear as different methods have different
notions of explanation. Depending on the method, explanations may be local function approximations
(LIME and C-LIME), Shapley values (SHAP), raw gradients (Vanilla Gradients), raw gradients
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

