EHRSQL: A Practical Text-to-SQL Benchmark for
Electronic Health Records
Gyubok Lee1 , Hyeonji Hwang1 , Seongsu Bae1 , Yeonsu Kwon2 ,
Woncheol Shin1 , Seongjun Yang1 , Minjoon Seo1 , Jongyeup Kim†, Edward Choi1
KAIST, Daejeon1 Seoul Women’s University, Seoul2
College of Medicine, Konyang University, Daejeon†
{gyubok.lee,localh,seongsu,swc1905,seongjunyang,
minjoon,edwardchoi}@kaist.ac.kr1
dustn1259@swu.ac.kr2 , jykim@kyuh.ac.kr†

Abstract
We present a new text-to-SQL dataset for electronic health records (EHRs). The
utterances were collected from 222 hospital staff, including physicians, nurses,
insurance review and health records teams, and more. To construct the QA dataset
on structured EHR data, we conducted a poll at a university hospital and templatized
the responses to create seed questions. Then, we manually linked them to two
open-source EHR databases—MIMIC-III and eICU—and included them with
various time expressions and held-out unanswerable questions in the dataset, which
were all collected from the poll. Our dataset poses a unique set of challenges: the
model needs to 1) generate SQL queries that reflect a wide range of needs in the
hospital, including simple retrieval and complex operations such as calculating
survival rate, 2) understand various time expressions to answer time-sensitive
questions in healthcare, and 3) distinguish whether a given question is answerable
or unanswerable based on the prediction confidence. We believe our dataset,
EHRSQL, could serve as a practical benchmark to develop and assess QA models
on structured EHR data and take one step further towards bridging the gap between
text-to-SQL research and its real-life deployment in healthcare. EHRSQL is
available at https://github.com/glee4810/EHRSQL.

1

Introduction

Electronic health records (EHRs) are relational databases that store a patient’s entire medical history
in the hospital. From hospital admission to patient treatment and discharge, all medical events
that happened in the hospital are recorded and stored in the EHR. The records cover a wide range
of clinical knowledge, from individual-level information to group-level insight, in various forms,
including tables, text, and images [16, 17, 11, 15]. As a vast and comprehensive knowledge base,
hospital staff, including physicians, nurses, and administrators, constantly interact with EHRs to store
and retrieve patient information to make better clinical decisions [32, 3].
Meanwhile, most hospital staff interact with the EHR database using pre-defined rule conversion
systems. To look for information beyond the rules, one needs to undergo special training to modify
and extend the system [32]. As a result, it is a massive bottleneck for the users to fully utilize the
information stored in the EHR. An alternative way to tackle this problem is to build a system that
can automatically translate questions directly into the corresponding SQL queries. Then, the users
can simply type or verbally ask their questions to the system, and it will return the answers without
going through any complicated process. Such systems will unleash the potential of EHR data and
tremendously speed up any task involving data retrieval from the database.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

