On Elimination Strategies for Bandit
Fixed-Confidence Identification
Andrea Tirinzoni∗
Meta AI
Paris, France
tirinzoni@fb.com
Rémy Degenne
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
remy.degenne@inria.fr

Abstract
Elimination algorithms for bandit identification, which prune the plausible correct
answers sequentially until only one remains, are computationally convenient since
they reduce the problem size over time. However, existing elimination strategies are
often not fully adaptive (they update their sampling rule infrequently) and are not
easy to extend to combinatorial settings, where the set of answers is exponentially
large in the problem dimension. On the other hand, most existing fully-adaptive
strategies to tackle general identification problems are computationally demanding
since they repeatedly test the correctness of every answer, without ever reducing the
problem size. We show that adaptive methods can be modified to use elimination
in both their stopping and sampling rules, hence obtaining the best of these two
worlds: the algorithms (1) remain fully adaptive, (2) suffer a sample complexity
that is never worse of their non-elimination counterpart, and (3) provably eliminate
certain wrong answers early. We confirm these benefits experimentally, where elimination improves significantly the computational complexity of adaptive methods
on common tasks like best-arm identification in linear bandits.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit is a sequential decision-making task which is now extensively studied
(see, e.g., [1] for a recent review). In this problem, an algorithm interacts with its environment
by sequentially “pulling” one among K ∈ N arms and observing a sample from a corresponding
distribution. Among the possible objectives, we focus on fixed-confidence identification [2, 3, 4, 5].
In this setting, the algorithm successively collects samples until it decides to stop and return an answer
to a given query about the distributions. Its task is to return the correct answer with at most a given
probability of error δ, and its secondary goal is to do so while stopping as early as possible. This
problem is called “fixed-confidence” as opposed to “fixed-budget”, where the goal is to minimize the
error probability with at most a given number of samples [6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
The most studied query is best arm identification (BAI), where the aim is to return the arm whose
distribution has highest mean. A variant is Top-m identification [11], where the goal is to find the
m arms with highest means. While these are the most common, other queries have been studied,
including thresholding bandits [9], minimum threshold [12], and multiple correct answers [13].
∗

Work done while at Inria Lille.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

