Formalizing Consistency and Coherence of
Representation Learning
Harald Strömfelt
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London, SW7 2AZ
h.stromfelt17@imperial.ac.uk

Luke Dickens
Department of Information Studies
University College London
London, WC1E 6BT
l.dickens@ucl.ac.uk

Artur d’Avila Garcez
Department of Computer Science
City, University of London
London, EC1V 0HB
a.garcez@city.ac.uk

Alessandra Russo
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London, SW7 2AZ
a.russo@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In the study of reasoning in neural networks, recent efforts have sought to improve
consistency and coherence of sequence models, leading to important developments
in the area of neuro-symbolic AI. In symbolic AI, the concepts of consistency
and coherence can be defined and verified formally, but for neural networks these
definitions are lacking. The provision of such formal definitions is crucial to
offer a common basis for the quantitative evaluation and systematic comparison
of connectionist, neuro-symbolic and transfer learning approaches. In this paper,
we introduce formal definitions of consistency and coherence for neural systems.
To illustrate the usefulness of our definitions, we propose a new dynamic relationdecoder model built around the principles of consistency and coherence. We
compare our results with several existing relation-decoders using a partial transfer
learning task based on a novel data set introduced in this paper. Our experiments
show that relation-decoders that maintain consistency over unobserved regions
of representation space retain coherence across domains, whilst achieving better
transfer learning performance.

1

Introduction

Humans are capable of learning concepts that can be applied to many different scenarios [18, 34, 23].
An important principle is that human-like concepts remain coherent across contexts [31]. As an
example, consider the concept of ordinality, e.g. “A is larger than B”, which allows comparisons to
be made between ordered sets. Ordinality should apply equally whether A and B are digits or a tower
of blocks. It is said that a concept may pertain to a multitude of properties: position, volume, reach,
etc. As long as one of these properties can be attributed to an object, a set of objects can be compared
on that basis. All in all, if the concept of ordinality was to be learned in its most general form, its use
should be consistent across objects and coherent across object properties.
In [31], empirical results on story generation and instruction-following have shown that an intuitive
use of consistency and coherence can increase the accuracy of neural networks. Following a neurosymbolic perspective [12], it is argued in [31] that System 1 approaches, fast and capable of learning
* Funding in direct support of this work: EPSRC Training Grant, project reference EP/L504786/1.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

