Sub-exponential time Sum-of-Squares lower bounds
for Principal Components Analysis
Aaron Potechin⇤
University of Chicago
potechin@uchicago.edu

Goutham Rajendran⇤
University of Chicago
goutham@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Principal Components Analysis (PCA) is a dimension-reduction technique widely
used in machine learning and statistics. However, due to the dependence of the
principal components on all the dimensions, the components are notoriously hard to
interpret. Therefore, a variant known as sparse PCA is often preferred. Sparse PCA
learns principal components of the data but enforces that such components must
be sparse. This has applications in diverse fields such as computational biology
and image processing. To learn sparse principal components, it’s well known
that standard PCA will not work, especially in high dimensions, and therefore
algorithms for sparse PCA are often studied as a separate endeavor. Various
algorithms have been proposed for Sparse PCA over the years, but given how
fundamental it is for applications in science, the limits of efficient algorithms
are only partially understood. In this work, we study the limits of the powerful
Sum of Squares (SoS) family of algorithms for Sparse PCA. SoS algorithms have
recently revolutionized robust statistics, leading to breakthrough algorithms for
long-standing open problems in machine learning, such as optimally learning
mixtures of gaussians, robust clustering, robust regression, etc. Moreover, it is
believed to be the optimal robust algorithm for many statistical problems. Therefore,
for sparse PCA, it’s plausible that it can beat simpler algorithms such as diagonal
thresholding that have been traditionally used. In this work, we show that this is not
the case, by exhibiting strong tradeoffs between the number of samples required,
the sparsity and the ambient dimension, for which SoS algorithms, even if allowed
sub-exponential time, will fail to optimally recover the component. Our results
are complemented by known algorithms in literature, thereby painting an almost
complete picture of the behavior of efficient algorithms for sparse PCA. Since SoS
algorithms encapsulate many algorithmic techniques such as spectral or statistical
query algorithms, this solidifies the message that known algorithms are optimal for
sparse PCA. Moreover, our techniques are strong enough to obtain similar tradeoffs
for Tensor PCA, another important higher order variant of PCA with applications
in topic modeling, video processing, etc.

1

Introduction

Principal components analysis (PCA) [62] is a popular data processing and dimension reduction
routine that is widely used. It has numerous applications in Machine Learning, Statistics, Engineering,
Biology, etc. Given a dataset, PCA projects the data to a lower dimensional space spanned by
the principal components. The intuition is that PCA sheds lower order information such as noise
⇤

Equal contribution
A.P. was supported in part by NSF grant CCF-2008920 and G.R. was supported in part by NSF grants
CCF-1816372 and CCF-2008920
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

