BR-SNIS: Bias Reduced Self-Normalized Importance
Sampling

Gabriel Cardoso
Centre de Mathématiques appliquées,
Ecole polytechnique,
IHU Liryc, fondation Bordeaux Université,
Univ Bordeaux, CRCTB U4045, INSERM,
gabriel.victorino-cardoso@polytechnique.edu
Sergey Samsonov
HSE University
Achille Thin
UMR MIA,
AgroParisTech,
Eric Moulines
Centre de Mathématiques appliquées,
Ecole polytechnique,
Jimmy Olsson
Department of Mathematics,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology.

Abstract
Importance Sampling (IS) is a method for approximating expectations under a
target distribution using independent samples from a proposal distribution and
the associated importance weights. In many applications, the target distribution
is known only up to a normalization constant, in which case self-normalized IS
(SNIS) can be used. While the use of self-normalization can have a positive effect
on the dispersion of the estimator, it introduces bias. In this work, we propose a new
method, BR-SNIS, whose complexity is essentially the same as that of SNIS and
which significantly reduces bias without increasing the variance. This method is a
wrapper in the sense that it uses the same proposal samples and importance weights
as SNIS, but makes clever use of iterated sampling–importance resampling (i-SIR)
to form a bias-reduced version of the estimator. We furnish the proposed algorithm
with rigorous theoretical results, including new bias, variance and high-probability
bounds, and these are illustrated by numerical examples.

1

Introduction

Background and previous work: Importance sampling [17, 1] (IS) is a classical Monte Carlo
technique for estimating expectations under some given probability distribution (the target) on the
basis of a sample of draws from a different distribution (the proposal). In the modern era of artificial
intelligence and statistical machine learning, characterized by large computational resources and
Bayesian inference, IS technologies are enjoying a revival; see, e.g., [37, 23] and [11] for a recent
survey. The method is not only relevant to situations where sampling from the target is intractable; it
can also be used to achieve variance reduction [24]. When the proposal is dominating the target—
in the sense that the support of the latter is contained in the support of the former—unbiased
estimation can be achieved by assigning each draw an importance weight given by the likelihood
ratio between the target and the proposal. In the very common case where the target is known only
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

