A Unified Hard-Constraint Framework for
Solving Geometrically Complex PDEs

Songming Liu1 , Zhongkai Hao1 , Chengyang Ying1 , Hang Su1,2∗, Jun Zhu1,2∗ , Ze Cheng3
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, THBI Lab, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory; Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
3
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
csuastt@gmail.com

Abstract
We present a unified hard-constraint framework for solving geometrically complex
PDEs with neural networks, where the most commonly used Dirichlet, Neumann,
and Robin boundary conditions (BCs) are considered. Specifically, we first introduce the “extra fields” from the mixed finite element method to reformulate
the PDEs so as to equivalently transform the three types of BCs into linear forms.
Based on the reformulation, we derive the general solutions of the BCs analytically,
which are employed to construct an ansatz that automatically satisfies the BCs.
With such a framework, we can train the neural networks without adding extra
loss terms and thus efficiently handle geometrically complex PDEs, alleviating
the unbalanced competition between the loss terms corresponding to the BCs and
PDEs. We theoretically demonstrate that the “extra fields” can stabilize the training
process. Experimental results on real-world geometrically complex PDEs showcase
the effectiveness of our method compared with state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Many fundamental problems in science and engineering (e.g., [2, 19, 28]) are characterized by partial
differential equations (PDEs) with the solution constrained by boundary conditions (BCs) that are
derived from the physical system of the problem. Among all types of BCs, Dirichlet, Neumann, and
Robin are the most commonly used [33]. Figure 1 gives an illustrative example on these three types
of BCs. Furthermore, in practical problems, physical systems can be very geometrically complex
(where the geometry of the definition domain is irregular or has complex structures, e.g., a lithium-ion
battery [11], a heat sink [40], etc), leading to a large number of BCs. How to solve such PDEs has
become a challenging problem shared by both the scientific and industrial communities.
The field of solving PDEs with neural networks has a history of more than 20 years [6, 1, 34, 8, 36].
Such methods are intrinsically mesh-free and therefore can handle high-dimensional as well as
geometrically complex problems more efficiently compared with traditional mesh-based methods,
like the finite element method (FEM). Physical-informed neural network (PINN) [25] is one of the
most influential works, where the neural network is trained in the way of taking the residuals of both
the PDEs and the BCs as multiple terms of the loss function. Although there are many wonderful
improvements such as DPM [13], PINNs still face serious challenges as discussed in the paper [15].
Some theoretical works [37, 38] point out that there exists an unbalanced competition between the
terms of PDEs and BCs, limiting the application of PINNs to geometrically complex problems. To
address this issue, some researchers [3, 35, 18] have tried to embed BCs into the ansatz. Some of
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

