Escaping Saddle Points with Bias-Variance Reduced
Local Perturbed SGD for Communication Efficient
Nonconvex Distributed Learning

Tomoya Murata∗
NTT DATA Mathematical Systems Inc., Tokyo, Japan
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
Taiji Suzuki†
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
In recent centralized nonconvex distributed learning and federated learning, local methods are one of the promising approaches to reduce communication time.
However, existing work has mainly focused on studying first-order optimality
guarantees. On the other side, second-order optimality guaranteed algorithms,
i.e., algorithms escaping saddle points, have been extensively studied in the nondistributed optimization literature. In this paper, we study a new local algorithm
called Bias-Variance Reduced Local Perturbed SGD (BVR-L-PSGD), that combines the existing bias-variance reduced gradient estimator with parameter perturbation to find second-order optimal points in centralized nonconvex distributed
optimization. BVR-L-PSGD enjoys second-order optimality with nearly the same
communication complexity as the best known one of BVR-L-SGD to find first-order
optimality. Particularly, the communication complexity is better than non-local
methods when the local datasets heterogeneity is smaller than the smoothness of
the local loss. In an extreme case, the communication complexity approaches to
e
Θ(1) when the local datasets heterogeneity goes to zero. Numerical results validate
our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Distributed learning is an attractive approach to reduce the total execution time by utilizing the
parallel computations. However, the communication time in distributed learning can be a main
bottleneck in the entire process due to huge parameter size typical in deep learning or low bandwidth
communication environments.
To reduce communication time, one of the promising approaches is the usage of local methods
such as local SGD (also called as Parallel Restart SGD or FedAvg). In local SGD, each worker
independently executes multiple updates of the local model based on his own local dataset, and the
server periodically communicates and aggregates the local models. Many paper have studied local
SGD [25, 30, 7, 6, 15, 13, 28, 27]. Particularly, for convex objectives, it has been shown in [27], for
the first time, the communication complexity (that is the necessary number of communication rounds
to achieve given desired optimization error) of local SGD can be smaller than the one of minibatch
∗
†

murata@msi.co.jp
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

