Beyond the Return: Off-policy Function Estimation
under User-specified Error-measuring Distributions
Audrey Huang
Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
audreyh5@illinois.edu

Nan Jiang
Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation often refers to two related tasks: estimating the expected
return of a policy and estimating its value function (or other functions of interest,
such as density ratios). While recent works on marginalized importance sampling
(MIS) show that the former can enjoy provable guarantees under realizable function
approximation, the latter is only known to be feasible under much stronger assumptions such as prohibitively expressive discriminators. In this work, we provide
guarantees for off-policy function estimation under only realizability, by imposing
proper regularization on the MIS objectives. Compared to commonly used regularization in MIS, our regularizer is much more flexible and can account for an
arbitrary user-specified distribution, under which the learned function will be close
to the groundtruth. We provide exact characterization of the optimal dual solution
that needs to be realized by the discriminator class, which determines the datacoverage assumption in the case of value-function learning. As another surprising
observation, the regularizer can be altered to relax the data-coverage requirement,
and completely eliminate it in the ideal case with strong side information.

1

Introduction

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) often refers to two related tasks in reinforcement learning (RL): estimating the expected return of a target policy using a dataset collected from a different behavior policy,
versus estimating the policy’s value function (or other functions of interest, such as density ratios).
The former is crucial to hyperparameter tuning and verifying the performance of a policy before
real-world deployment in offline RL [VLJY19; Pai+20; ZJ21]. The latter, on the other hand, plays
an important role in (both online and offline) training, often as the subroutine of actor-critic-style
algorithms [LP03; LSAB19], but is also generally more difficult than the former: if an accurate value
function is available, one could easily estimate the return by plugging in the initial distribution.
Between the two tasks, the theoretical nature of off-policy return estimation is relatively well
understood, especially in terms of the function-approximation assumptions needed for samplecomplexity guarantees. Among the available algorithms, importance sampling (IS) and its variants
[PSS00; TTG15; JL16] do not require any function approximation, but incur exponential-in-horizon
variance; Fitted-Q Evaluation [EGW05; LVY19] can enjoy polynomial sample complexity under
appropriate coverage assumptions, but the guarantee relies on the strong Bellman-completeness
assumption on the function class; marginalized importance sampling (MIS) methods, which have
gained significant attention recently [LLTZ18; XMW19; UHJ20; NCDL19], use two function classes
to simultaneously approximate the value and the density-ratio (or weight) function and optimize
minimax objectives. Notably, it is the only family of methods known to produce accurate return
estimates with a polynomial sample complexity, when the function classes only satisfy the relatively
weak realizability assumptions (i.e., they contain the true value and weight functions).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

