Doubly Robust Counterfactual Classification

Kwangho Kim
Harvard Medical School
kkim@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Edward H. Kennedy
Carnegie Mellon University
edward@stat.cmu.edu

José R. Zubizarreta
Harvard University
zubizarreta@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Abstract
We study counterfactual classification as a new tool for decision-making under hypothetical (contrary to fact) scenarios. We propose a doubly-robust nonparametric
estimator for a general counterfactual classifier, where we can incorporate flexible constraints by casting the classification problem as a nonlinear mathematical
program involving counterfactuals. We go on to analyze the rates of convergence
of the estimator and provide a closed-form expression for its asymptotic distribution. Our analysis shows that the proposed√estimator is robust against nuisance
model misspecification, and can attain fast n rates with tractable inference even
when using nonparametric machine learning approaches. We study the empirical
performance of our methods by simulation and apply them for recidivism risk
prediction.

1

Introduction

Counterfactual or potential outcomes are often used to describe how an individual would respond to
a specific treatment or event, irrespective of whether the event actually takes place. Counterfactual
outcomes are commonly used for causal inference, where we are interested in measuring the effect of
a treatment on an outcome variable [15, 16, 45].
Recently, counterfactual outcomes have also proved useful for predicting outcomes under hypothetical
interventions. This is commonly referred to as counterfactual prediction. Counterfactual prediction
can be particularly useful to inform decision-making in clinical practice. For example, in order for
physicians to make effective treatment decisions, they often need to predict risk scores assuming no
treatment is given; if a patient’s risk is relatively low, then she or he may not need treatment. However,
when a treatment is initiated after baseline, simply operationalizing the hypothetical treatment as
another baseline predictor will rarely give the correct (counterfactual) risk estimates because of
confounding [58]. Counterfactual prediction can be also helpful when we want our prediction model
developed in one setting to yield predictions successfully transportable to other settings with different
treatment patterns. Suppose that we develop our risk prediction model in a setting where most patients
have access to an effective (post-baseline) treatment. However, if we deploy our factual prediction
model in a new setting in which few individuals have access to the treatment, our model is likely to
fail in the sense that it may not be able to accurately identify high-risk individuals. Counterfactual
prediction may allow us to achieve more robust model performance compared to factual prediction,
even when model deployment influences behaviors that affect risk. [see, e.g., 10, 27, 54, for more
examples].
However, the problem of counterfactual prediction brings challenges that do not arise in typical
prediction problems because the data needed to build the predictive models are inherently not fully
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

