Optimal Brain Compression: A Framework for
Accurate Post-Training Quantization and Pruning

Elias Frantar ∗
IST Austria
elias.frantar@ist.ac.at

Sidak Pal Singh
ETH Zurich
sidak.singh@inf.ethz.ch

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & Neural Magic
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Abstract
We consider the problem of model compression for deep neural networks (DNNs)
in the challenging one-shot/post-training setting, in which we are given an accurate
trained model, and must compress it without any retraining, based only on a small
amount of calibration input data. This problem has become popular in view of
the emerging software and hardware support for executing models compressed
via pruning and/or quantization with speedup, and well-performing solutions have
been proposed independently for both compression approaches. In this paper, we
introduce a new compression framework which covers both weight pruning and
quantization in a unified setting, is time- and space-efficient, and considerably
improves upon the practical performance of existing post-training methods. At the
technical level, our approach is based on an exact and efficient realization of the
classical Optimal Brain Surgeon (OBS) framework of [LeCun, Denker, and Solla,
1990] extended to also cover weight quantization at the scale of modern DNNs.
From the practical perspective, our experimental results show that it can improve
significantly upon the compression-accuracy trade-offs of existing post-training
methods, and that it can enable the accurate compound application of both pruning
and quantization in a post-training setting.

1

Introduction

The impressive recent progress of deep learning for solving challenging tasks across several domains
has been accompanied by a significant increase in parameter counts and computational costs for
executing such models. A natural consequence has been a growing effort to reduce such costs via
model compression, and the two most popular approaches for model compression are pruning—
removing neural network weights by setting them to zero—and quantization, reducing the precision
at which neural network weights and activations are stored and manipulated. Hundreds of such
pruning and quantization approaches have been proposed and analyzed [17, 11], with the general
goal of obtaining efficient variants of deep neural nets (DNNs) which would preserve accuracy while
maximizing compression. Despite impressive progress, compression is still a laborious process: the
pruning and quantization stages are often done independently, and recovering model accuracy after
compression often requires partial or even full retraining of the compressed model.
An alternative but challenging scenario is the post-training compression setup [31, 24, 19, 25], in
which we are given a trained but uncompressed model, together with a small amount of calibration
data, and must produce an accurate compressed model in one shot, i.e. a single compression step,
without retraining, and with limited computational costs. This is motivated by practical scenarios
such as the MLPerf Inference Benchmark [37], and is the setting we focus on in this paper.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

