Rethinking Resolution in the Context of Efficient
Video Recognition

Chuofan Ma∗
The University of Hong Kong
b20mcf@connect.hku.hk
Ping Luo
The University of Hong Kong
pluo@cs.hku.hk

Yi Jiang†
ByteDance Inc.
jiangyi0425@gmail.com

Qiushan Guo
The University of Hong Kong
qsguo@cs.hku.hk
Zehuan Yuan
ByteDance Inc.
yuanzehuan@bytedance.com

Xiaojuan Qi†
The University of Hong Kong
xjqi@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we empirically study how to make the most of low-resolution frames
for efficient video recognition. Existing methods mainly focus on developing
compact networks or alleviating temporal redundancy of video inputs to increase
efficiency, whereas compressing frame resolution has rarely been considered a
promising solution. A major concern is the poor recognition accuracy on lowresolution frames. We thus start by analyzing the underlying causes of performance
degradation on low-resolution frames. Our key finding is that the major cause of
degradation is not information loss in the down-sampling process, but rather the
mismatch between network architecture and input scale. Motivated by the success
of knowledge distillation (KD), we propose to bridge the gap between network
and input size via cross-resolution KD (ResKD). Our work shows that ResKD is a
simple but effective method to boost recognition accuracy on low-resolution frames.
Without bells and whistles, ResKD considerably surpasses all competitive methods
in terms of efficiency and accuracy on four large-scale benchmark datasets, i.e.,
ActivityNet, FCVID, Mini-Kinetics, Something-Something V2. In addition, we
extensively demonstrate its effectiveness over state-of-the-art architectures, i.e.,
3D-CNNs and Video Transformers, and scalability towards super low-resolution
frames. The results suggest ResKD can serve as a general inference acceleration method for state-of-the-art video recognition. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/ResKD.

1

Introduction

In recent years, video recognition has gained popularity due to the phenomenal growth of social media
platforms and the deluge of online videos. With the introduction of various temporal fusion modules
[25, 27, 30, 31], 3D-CNNs [41, 4, 9], and video transformers [34, 2, 35, 29], remarkable progress
has been made toward increasing recognition accuracy. Nevertheless, the impressive performance
comes at the cost of high computational budgets and latency. State-of-the-art models usually require
thousands of GFLOPs of computation to recognize a ten-second video [29], which limits their
deployment to resource-restricted devices or latency-constrained applications.
To overcome this limitation, extensive studies [42, 8, 23, 32, 46, 28] have been conducted to increase
inference speed on videos. A large group of works [50, 24, 28] concentrates on developing efficient
∗
†

This work was performed when Chuofan Ma worked as an intern at ByteDance.
Corresponding authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

