An Adaptive Kernel Approach to Federated Learning
of Heterogeneous Causal Effects

Thanh Vinh Vo1
Arnab Bhattacharyya1
Young Lee2
Tze-Yun Leong1
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
Roche AG and Harvard University
{votv,arnabb,leongty}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose a new causal inference framework to learn causal effects from multiple,
decentralized data sources in a federated setting. We introduce an adaptive transfer
algorithm that learns the similarities among the data sources by utilizing Random
Fourier Features to disentangle the loss function into multiple components, each
of which is associated with a data source. The data sources may have different
distributions; the causal effects are independently and systematically incorporated.
The proposed method estimates the similarities among the sources through transfer
coefficients, and hence requiring no prior information about the similarity measures.
The heterogeneous causal effects can be estimated with no sharing of the raw
training data among the sources, thus minimizing the risk of privacy leak. We also
provide minimax lower bounds to assess the quality of the parameters learned from
the disparate sources. The proposed method is empirically shown to outperform
the baselines on decentralized data sources with dissimilar distributions.

1

Introduction

Many important questions posed in the natural and social sciences are causal in nature: What are
the long-term effects of mild Covid-19 infection on lung and brain functions? How is mortality
rate influenced by the daily air pollution? How would a welfare policy affect employment rate of a
minority group? Causal inference has been applied in a wide range of domains, including economics
(Finkelstein and Hendren 2020), medicine (Henderson et al. 2016; Powers et al. 2018), and social
welfare (Gutman et al. 2017). The large amount of experimental and/or observation data needed
to accurately estimate the causal effects often resides across different sites. In most cases, the data
sources cannot be combined to support centralized processing due to some inherent organizational or
policy constraints. For example, in many countries, medical or health records of cancer patients are
kept strictly confidential at local hospitals; direct exchange or sharing of the records among hospitals,
especially for research purposes, are not allowed (Gostin et al. 2009). The main research question is:
How to securely access these diverse data sources to build an effective global causal effect estimator,
while balancing the risk of breaching data privacy and confidentiality?
Current causal inference approaches (e.g., Shalit et al. 2017; Yao et al. 2018) require the shared
data to be put in one place for processing. Current federated learning algorithms (e.g., Sattler et al.
2020; Wang et al. 2020) allow collaborative learning of joint models based on non-independent
and identically distributed (non iid) data; they cannot, however, directly support causal inference as
the different data sources might have disimilar distributions that would lead to biased causal effect
estimation. For example, the demographic profile and average age for cancer patients from two
different hospitals may be drastically different. If the two data sets are combined to support causal
inference, one distribution may dominate over the other, leading to biased causal effect estimation.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

