Variable-rate hierarchical CPC
leads to acoustic unit discovery in speech

Santiago Cuervo1,2

Adrian Łańcucki3

Paweł Rychlikowski1

Ricard Marxer2
Jan Chorowski4

1

2

University of Wrocław, Poland
Université de Toulon, Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LIS, France
3
NVIDIA, Poland
4
Pathway, France

Abstract
The success of deep learning comes from its ability to capture the hierarchical
structure of data by learning high-level representations defined in terms of low-level
ones. In this paper we explore self-supervised learning of hierarchical representations of speech by applying multiple levels of Contrastive Predictive Coding
(CPC). We observe that simply stacking two CPC models does not yield significant
improvements over single-level architectures. Inspired by the fact that speech is
often described as a sequence of discrete units unevenly distributed in time, we
propose a model in which the output of a low-level CPC module is non-uniformly
downsampled to directly minimize the loss of a high-level CPC module. The
latter is designed to also enforce a prior of separability and discreteness in its
representations by enforcing dissimilarity of successive high-level representations
through focused negative sampling, and by quantization of the prediction targets.
Accounting for the structure of the speech signal improves upon single-level CPC
features and enhances the disentanglement of the learned representations, as measured by downstream speech recognition tasks, while resulting in a meaningful
segmentation of the signal that closely resembles phone boundaries.

1

Introduction

Perceptual signals, such as speech, images, or natural language are hierarchical, and exhibit a nonuniform information density. We believe that by caring for these two aspects of the data we can
learn improved representations of such signals. Modern self-supervised representation learners do
so only partially: while they are implemented using deep neural networks which internally learn a
hierarchy of concepts, the usual training criteria are only applied at the top layer and do not fully
benefit from the hierarchical nature of the signals. Moreover, the models often assume a uniform
information density and process the data at fixed input-driven rates (e.g., by striding or uniform
pooling over time or pixels on speech and images, respectively). We demonstrate that the quality of
learned representations can be improved by explicitly modeling the data at two different, non-uniform
sampling rates, and with different training criteria applied at each level of data modeling.
We demonstrate our results on speech, which is a hierarchical signal with a well understood structure.
We extend a frame-wise feature extraction model with a boundary predictor, followed by another
feature transformation applied to variable length contiguous segments of frames. We show that
through a careful design of the second level training criterion we can improve on the quality of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

