Online Convex Optimization with Hard Constraints:
Towards the Best of Two Worlds and Beyond

Hengquan Guo
ShanghaiTech University
guohq@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Xin Liu ˚
ShanghaiTech University
liuxin7@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Honghao Wei
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
honghaow@umich.edu

Lei Ying
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
leiying@umich.edu

Abstract
This paper considers online convex optimization with hard constraints and analyzes
achievable regret and cumulative hard constraint violation (violation for short). The
problem distinguishes itself from online convex optimization with soft constraints,
where a violation at one round can be compensated/cancelled by a conservative
decision at a different round. We propose a RECtified Online Optimization algorithm (RECOO) and consider two settings: fixed constraints and adversarial
constraints. Both settings have been considered in the literature. Compared with
existing results, RECOO achieves the best of `?
two worlds
and beyond. For the
˘
fixed-constraints setting, RECOO achieves O T regret and Op1q violation,
?
where T is the
learning
horizon.
The
best
known
results
in
this
case
are
Op
Tq
`
˘
regret and O T 1{4 violation. For the adversarial-constraints setting, it guarantees
?
Op T q regret and OpT 3{4 q violation, which match the best existing results. When
the loss function is strongly convex, RECOO can guarantee Oplog
? T q regret and
Op1q violation for fixed constraints, and Oplog T q regret and Op T log T q violation for adversarial constraints. Both these results are order-wise better than the
existing bounds. The regret and violation bounds mentioned above use the best
fixed decision in hindsight as the baseline. This paper further considers a dynamic
baseline where the comparator sequence is time-varying. This paper shows that
RECOO not only improves the existing bounds for the fixed-constraints setting
but also for the first time, establishes dynamic regret and violation bounds for
the adversarial-constraints setting. Our experiment results confirm that RECOO
outperforms several existing algorithms for both fixed and adversarial constraints.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) is a general framework for modelling and studying online decisionmaking in uncertain environments [24, 10, 21], where the learner adapts its decisions to minimize a
loss function or to maximize a utility function when interacting with the environment in real-time.
OCO has a broad range of applications such as online advertising [18, 3], resource allocation in
network systems [9, 2, 33], load balancing in queueing systems [13, 15], and personalized healthcare
[36, 26], etc. Specifically, given an unknown convex loss function ft p¨q, the learner makes decision
řT
xt at each round to minimize the total loss over T rounds, i.e. minxPX t“1 ft pxt q, where the loss
˚

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

