Pruning Neural Networks via Coresets and Convex
Geometry: Towards No Assumptions

Murad Tukan∗ †
muradtuk@gmail.com

Loay Mualem∗ †
loaymua@gmail.com

Alaa Maalouf∗ †
alaamaalouf12@gmail.com

Abstract
Pruning is one of the predominant approaches for compressing deep neural networks (DNNs). Lately, coresets (provable data summarizations) were leveraged
for pruning DNNs, adding the advantage of theoretical guarantees on the trade-off
between the compression rate and the approximation error. However, coresets in
this domain were either data-dependent or generated under restrictive assumptions
on both the model’s weights and inputs. In real-world scenarios, such assumptions
are rarely satisfied, limiting the applicability of coresets. To this end, we suggest a
novel and robust framework for computing such coresets under mild assumptions
on the model’s weights and without any assumption on the training data. The idea
is to compute the importance of each neuron in each layer with respect to the output
of the following layer. This is achieved by a combination of Löwner ellipsoid and
Caratheodory theorem. Our method is simultaneously data-independent, applicable
to various networks and datasets (due to the simplified assumptions), and theoretically supported. Experimental results show that our method outperforms existing
coreset based neural pruning approaches across a wide range of networks and
datasets. For example, our method achieved a 62% compression rate on ResNet50
on ImageNet with 1.09% drop in accuracy.

1

Introduction and Backround

Deep neural networks (DNNs) achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on a large variety of
tasks, e.g., in computer vision [33, 50] and natural language processing (NLP; [87, 20]). However,
DNNs usually contain millions or even billions of parameters in order to achieve SOTA performances
resulting in large storage requirements and long inference time. This is obstructive when, e.g., dealing
with limited hardware or real-time systems such as autonomous cars and text/speech translation. To
this end, a large body of research is dedicated to reducing the size and inference costs of DNNs.
Pruning. A dominant approach widely used for reducing the size of DNNs is to utilize a pruning
algorithm to remove redundant parameters from the original, over-parameterized network. In general,
pruning can be categorized into two main types: (i) Unstructured pruning [31, 6] reduces the
number of non-zero parameters by inducing sparsity into weight parameters, which can achieve
high compression rates but requires specialized software and/or hardware in order to achieve faster
inference times. (ii) Structured pruning [35, 60, 77] modifies the structure of the underlying weight
tensors, by removing filters/neurons from each layer, usually resulting in smaller compression rates
while directly achieving faster inference times with no specialized software; see section 4
∗
†

These authors equally contributed to this paper.
Department of Computer Science, University of Haifa

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

