PY KT: A Python Library to Benchmark Deep

Learning based Knowledge Tracing Models

Zitao Liu
Guangdong Institute of Smart Education
Jinan University
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
liuzitao@jnu.edu.cn

Qiongqiong Liu
Think Academy International Education
TAL Education Group
Beijing, China
liuqiongqiong1@tal.com

Jiahao Chen
Think Academy International Education
TAL Education Group
Beijing, China
chenjiahao@tal.com

Shuyan Huang⇤
Think Academy International Education
TAL Education Group
Beijing, China
huangshuyan@tal.com

Jiliang Tang
Computer Science and Engineering Department
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI, United States
tangjili@msu.edu

Weiqi Luo
Guangdong Institute of Smart Education
Jinan University
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
lwq@jnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge tracing (KT) is the task of using students’ historical learning interaction
data to model their knowledge mastery over time so as to make predictions on their
future interaction performance. Recently, remarkable progress has been made of
using various deep learning techniques to solve the KT problem. However, the
success behind deep learning based knowledge tracing (DLKT) approaches is still
left somewhat unknown and proper measurement and analysis of these DLKT
approaches remain a challenge. First, data preprocessing procedures in existing
works are often private and custom, which limits experimental standardization.
Furthermore, existing DLKT studies often differ in terms of the evaluation protocol
and are far away real-world educational contexts. To address these problems, we
introduce a comprehensive python based benchmark platform, PY KT, to guarantee
valid comparisons across DLKT methods via thorough evaluations. The PY KT
library consists of a standardized set of integrated data preprocessing procedures
on 7 popular datasets across different domains, and 10 frequently compared DLKT
model implementations for transparent experiments. Results from our fine-grained
and rigorous empirical KT studies yield a set of observations and suggestions for effective DLKT, e.g., wrong evaluation setting may cause label leakage that generally
leads to performance inflation; and the improvement of many DLKT approaches is
minimal compared to the very first DLKT model proposed by Piech et al. [25]. We
have open sourced PY KT and our experimental results at https://pykt.org/.
We welcome contributions from other research groups and practitioners.

⇤

The corresponding author: Shuyan Huang.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

