Imbalance Trouble:
Revisiting Neural-Collapse Geometry
Christos Thrampoulidis⋆ , Ganesh R. Kini† , Vala Vakilian⋆ , Tina Behnia⋆ ∗
⋆
University of British Columbia, † University of California, Santa Barbara.

Abstract
Neural Collapse refers to the remarkable structural properties characterizing
the geometry of class embeddings and classifier weights, found by deep nets
when trained beyond zero training error. However, this characterization only
holds for balanced data. Here we thus ask whether it can be made invariant
to class imbalances. Towards this end, we adopt the unconstrained-features
model (UFM), a recent theoretical model for studying neural collapse,
and introduce Simplex-Encoded-Labels Interpolation (SELI) as an invariant
characterization of the neural collapse phenomenon. We prove for the UFM
with cross-entropy loss and vanishing regularization that, irrespective of
class imbalances, the embeddings and classifiers always interpolate a simplexencoded label matrix and that their individual geometries are determined
by the SVD factors of this same label matrix. We then present extensive
experiments on synthetic and real datasets that confirm convergence to
the SELI geometry. However, we caution that convergence worsens with
increasing imbalances. We theoretically support this finding by showing that
unlike the balanced case, when minorities are present, ridge-regularization
plays a critical role in tweaking the geometry. This defines new questions
and motivates further investigations into the impact of class imbalances on
the rates at which first-order methods converge to their preferred solutions.

1

Introduction

What are the unique structural properties of models learned by training deep neural networks
to zero training error? Is there an implicit bias towards solutions of certain geometry? How
does this vary across training instances, architectures, and data? These questions are at
the core of understanding the optimization landscape of deep-nets. Also, they are naturally
informative about the role of models since different parameterizations might affect preferred
geometries. Ultimately, such understanding makes progress towards explaining generalization
of overparameterized models.
Recently, remarkable new progress in answering these questions has been made by Papyan et al.
[26], who empirically discover and formalize the so-called Neural-collapse (NC) phenomenon.
NC describes geometric properties of the learned embeddings (aka last-layer features) and of
the classifier weights of deep-nets, trained with cross-entropy (CE) loss and balanced data
far into the zero training-error regime. The NC phenomenon produces a remarkably simple
description of a particularly symmetric geometry: (i) The embeddings of each class collapse
to their class mean (see (NC) property); and (ii) The class means align with the classifier
weights and they form a simplex equiangular tight frame (see (ETF) property). Importantly,
as noted by Papyan et al. [26], this simple geometry appears to be “cross-situational invariant”
across different architectures and different balanced datasets.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
∗

Supported by an NSERC Undergraduate Student Research Grant, an NSERC Discovery Grant,
NSF CCF-2009030, a CRG8-KAUST award, and by UBC Advanced Research Computing services.

