FLAIR: Federated Learning Annotated Image
Repository
Congzheng Song⇤
Apple
csong4@apple.com

Filip Granqvist⇤
Apple
fgranqvist@apple.com

Kunal Talwar
Apple
ktalwar@apple.com

Abstract
Cross-device federated learning is an emerging machine learning (ML) paradigm
where a large population of devices collectively train an ML model while the data
remains on the devices. This research field has a unique set of practical challenges,
and to systematically make advances, new datasets curated to be compatible with
this paradigm are needed. Existing federated learning benchmarks in the image
domain do not accurately capture the scale and heterogeneity of many real-world
use cases. We introduce FLAIR, a challenging large-scale annotated image dataset
for multi-label classification suitable for federated learning. FLAIR has 429,078
images from 51,414 Flickr users and captures many of the intricacies typically
encountered in federated learning, such as heterogeneous user data and a long-tailed
label distribution. We implement multiple baselines in different learning setups
for different tasks on this dataset. We believe FLAIR can serve as a challenging
benchmark for advancing the state-of-the art in federated learning. Dataset access
and the code for the benchmark are available at https://github.com/apple/
ml-flair.

1

Introduction

Remote devices connected to the internet, such as mobile phones, can capture data about their
environment. Machine learning algorithms trained on such data can help improve user experience
on these devices. However, it is often infeasible to upload this data to servers because of privacy,
bandwidth, or other concerns.
Federated learning [40] has been proposed as an approach to collaboratively train a machine learning
model with coordination by a central server while keeping all the training data on device. Coupled
with differential privacy, it can allow learning of a model with strong privacy guarantees. Models
trained via private federated learning have successfully improved existing on-device applications
while preserving users’ privacy [18, 19, 41].
This has led to many ongoing research on designing better algorithms for federated learning applications. Centralized (non-federated) machine learning has benefited tremendously from standardized
datasets and benchmarks, such as Imagenet [10]. To evaluate and accelerate progress in (private)
federated learning research, the community needs similarly high quality large-scale datasets, with
benchmarks. Ideally, the dataset would be representative of the challenges identified as important by
the community [28]. Additionally, the benchmark should provide common, agreed-upon metrics to
allow comparison of privacy, utility, and efficiency of various approaches.
Federated data may have various non-IID characteristics that are seldom encountered in traditional
ML [28]. These include shifts in feature and label distribution, imbalanced user dataset sizes, drift in
feature distribution conditioned on the labels and shift in the labeling function itself. This is caused
⇤

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

