Fairness Reprogramming
Guanhua Zhang∗
UC Santa Barbara
guanhua@ucsb.edu

Yihua Zhang∗
Michigan State University
zhan1908@msu.edu

Wenqi Fan
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
wenqifan@polyu.edu.hk

Yang Zhang
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
yang.zhang2@ibm.com

Qing Li
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
csqli@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Sijia Liu
Michigan State University & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
liusiji5@msu.edu

Shiyu Chang
UC Santa Barbara
chang87@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Despite a surge of recent advances in promoting machine Learning (ML) fairness, the existing mainstream approaches mostly require training or finetuning
the entire weights of the neural network to meet the fairness criteria. However,
this is often infeasible in practice for those large-scale trained models due to
large computational and storage costs, low data efficiency, and model privacy
issues. In this paper, we propose a new generic fairness learning paradigm,
called FAIR R EPROGRAM, which incorporates the model reprogramming technique. Specifically, FAIR R EPROGRAM considers the case where models can not
be changed and appends to the input a set of perturbations, called the fairness
trigger, which is tuned towards the fairness criteria under a min-max formulation.
We further introduce an information-theoretic framework that explains why and
under what conditions fairness goals can be achieved using the fairness trigger.
We show both theoretically and empirically that the fairness trigger can effectively obscure demographic biases in the output prediction of fixed ML models
by providing false demographic information that hinders the model from utilizing the correct demographic information to make the prediction. Extensive
experiments on both NLP and CV datasets demonstrate that our method can
achieve better fairness improvements than retraining-based methods with far less
data dependency under two widely-used fairness criteria. Codes are available at
https://github.com/UCSB-NLP-Chang/Fairness-Reprogramming.git.

1

Introduction

Fairness in machine learning (ML) has become a critical concern. Due to the biases in data collection,
the output prediction is often spuriously correlated with some demographic attributes, which are
thus undesirably incorporated into the decision-making process of machine learning models. For
example, it is found that some abusive language detection systems tend to classify texts that contain
mere mentioning of certain minority groups, e.g., homosexual groups, as abusive content, even
though the texts themselves are not abusive at all [1, 2]. Despite the recent advances in fairness
promoting learning methods [3–7], the existing mainstreaming approaches mostly require retraining
or finetuning the entire model parameters towards an extra fairness objective. However, this is
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

