Differentiable hierarchical and surrogate gradient
search for spiking neural networks
Kaiwei Che1,2 ∗ , Luziwei Leng1,2∗ , Kaixuan Zhang1,2 , Jianguo Zhang1 ,
Max Q.-H. Meng1 , Jie Cheng2 , Qinghai Guo2 , Jiangxing Liao2
1
Southern University of Science and Technology, China
2
ACS Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Spiking neural network (SNN) has been viewed as a potential candidate for the next
generation of artificial intelligence with appealing characteristics such as sparse
computation and inherent temporal dynamics. By adopting architectures of deep
artificial neural networks (ANNs), SNNs are achieving competitive performances
in benchmark tasks such as image classification. However, successful architectures
of ANNs are not necessary ideal for SNN and when tasks become more diverse
effective architectural variations could be critical. To this end, we develop a spikebased differentiable hierarchical search (SpikeDHS) framework, where spike-based
computation is realized on both the cell and the layer level search space. Based
on this framework, we find effective SNN architectures under limited computation
cost. During the training of SNN, a suboptimal surrogate gradient function could
lead to poor approximations of true gradients, making the network enter certain
local minima. To address this problem, we extend the differential approach to
surrogate gradient search where the SG function is efficiently optimized locally.
Our models achieve state-of-the-art performances on classification of CIFAR10/100
and ImageNet with accuracy of 95.50%, 76.25% and 68.64%. On event-based
deep stereo, our method finds optimal layer variation and surpasses the accuracy
of specially designed ANNs meanwhile with 26× lower energy cost (6.7mJ),
demonstrating the advantage of SNN in processing highly sparse and dynamic
signals. Codes are available at https://github.com/Huawei-BIC/SpikeDHS.

1

Introduction

Inspired from biological neural networks, spiking neural network (SNN) [41] has been viewed as a
potential candidate for the next generation of artificial intelligence, with appealing characteristics
such as asynchronous computation, sparse activation and inherent temporal dynamics. However, the
training of deep SNNs is challenging due to the binary spike which is incompatible with gradientbased backpropagation. To solve this problem, various surrogate gradient (SG) methods were
proposed [5, 65, 48] where soft relaxed functions were used to approximate the original discontinuous
gradient. Based on these methods, SNNs have achieved high level performances on benchmark image
classification tasks such as CIFAR and ImageNet [58, 66, 74, 54, 76]. However, the accuracy of SNN
often drops when directly adopting ANN architectures , such as ResNet [21] and VGG networks
[59]. With recent improved SNN training methods [35, 15, 13] the performance gap is decreasing but
remains. This gap is more evident in tasks where the network architecture requires more variation,
such as dense image prediction [81, 20, 25].
Directly inheriting sophisticated ANN architectures might not be ideal for SNN and there is a lack
of study of optimal architectures for spiking neurons given a particular task. Intuitively, topology
∗

Equal Contributions.

Corresponding author. lengluziwei@huawei.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

