Beyond spectral gap:
The role of the topology in decentralized learning
Thijs Vogels⇤
EPFL

Hadrien Hendrikx⇤
EPFL

Martin Jaggi
EPFL

Abstract
In data-parallel optimization of machine learning models, workers collaborate
to improve their estimates of the model: more accurate gradients allow them to
use larger learning rates and optimize faster. We consider the setting in which
all workers sample from the same dataset, and communicate over a sparse graph
(decentralized). In this setting, current theory fails to capture important aspects of
real-world behavior. First, the ‘spectral gap’ of the communication graph is not predictive of its empirical performance in (deep) learning. Second, current theory does
not explain that collaboration enables larger learning rates than training alone. In
fact, it prescribes smaller learning rates, which further decrease as graphs become
larger, failing to explain convergence in infinite graphs. This paper aims to paint an
accurate picture of sparsely-connected distributed optimization when workers share
the same data distribution. We quantify how the graph topology influences convergence in a quadratic toy problem and provide theoretical results for general smooth
and (strongly) convex objectives. Our theory matches empirical observations in
deep learning, and accurately describes the relative merits of different graph topologies. Code: github.com/epfml/topology-in-decentralized-learning

1

Introduction

Distributed data-parallel optimization algorithms help us tackle the increasing complexity of machine
learning models and of the data on which they are trained. We can classify those training algorithms as
either centralized or decentralized, and we often consider those settings to have different benefits over
training ‘alone’. In the centralized setting, workers compute gradients on independent mini-batches
of data, and they average those gradients between all workers. The resulting lower variance in the
updates enables larger learning rates and faster training. In the decentralized setting, workers average
their models with only a sparse set of ‘neighbors’ in a graph instead of all-to-all, and they may have
private datasets sampled from different distributions. As the benefit of decentralized learning, we
usually focus only on the (indirect) access to other worker’s datasets, and not of faster training.
While decentralized learning is typically studied with heterogeneous datasets across workers, sparse
(decentralized) averaging between is also useful when worker’s data is identically distributed
(i.i.d.) [15]. As an example, sparse averaging is used in data centers to mitigate communication bottlenecks [1]. In fact the D-SGD algorithm [11], on which we focus in this work, performs well mainly
in this setting, while algorithmic modifications [14, 21, 22] are required to yield good performance
on heterogeneous objectives. When the data is i.i.d., the goal of sparse averaging is to optimize faster,
just like in centralized (all-to-all) graphs.
Yet, current decentralized learning theory poorly explains the i.i.d. case. Analyses typically show that,
for small enough learning rates, training with sparse averaging behaves the same as with all-to-all
averaging [11, 8]. Compared to training alone with the same small learning rate, all-to-all averaging
⇤

Equal contribution. Corresponding authors thijs.vogels@epfl.ch and hadrien.hendrikx@epfl.ch.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

