Coresets for Vertical Federated Learning: Regularized
Linear Regression and K-Means Clustering

Lingxiao Huang∗
Nanjing University
huanglingxiao1990@126.com

Zhize Li∗
Carnegie Mellon University
zhizeli@cmu.edu

Jialin Sun∗
Fudan University
sunjl20@fudan.edu.cn

Haoyu Zhao∗
Princeton Univeristy
haoyu@princeton.edu

Abstract
Vertical federated learning (VFL), where data features are stored in multiple parties
distributively, is an important area in machine learning. However, the communication complexity for VFL is typically very high. In this paper, we propose a unified
framework by constructing coresets in a distributed fashion for communicationefficient VFL. We study two important learning tasks in the VFL setting: regularized linear regression and k-means clustering, and apply our coreset framework
to both problems. We theoretically show that using coresets can drastically alleviate the communication complexity, while nearly maintain the solution quality.
Numerical experiments are conducted to corroborate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [54, 40, 44, 36, 68] is a learning framework where multiple clients/parties
collaboratively train a machine learning model under the coordination of a central server without
exposing their raw data (i.e., each party’s raw data is stored locally and not transferred). There are
two large categories of FL, horizontal federated learning (HFL) and vertical federated learning (VFL),
based on the distribution characteristics of the data. In HFL, different parties usually hold different
datasets but all datasets share the same features; while in VFL, all parties use the same dataset but
different parties hold different subsets of the features (see Figure 1a).
Compared to HFL, VFL [74, 50, 71] is generally harder and requires more communication: as a
single party cannot observe the full features, it requires communication with other parties to compute
the loss and the gradient of a single data. This will result in two potential problems: (i) it may require
a huge amount of communication to jointly train the machine learning model when the dataset is large;
and (ii) the procedure of VFL transfers the information of local data and may cause privacy leakage.
Most of the VFL literature focus on the privacy issue, and designing secure training procedure for
different machine learning models in the VFL setting [28, 74, 72, 10]. However, the communication
efficiency of the training procedure in VFL is somewhat underexplored. For unsupervised clustering
problems, Ding et al. [19] propose constant approximation schemes for k-means clustering, and their
communication complexity is linear in terms of the dataset size. For linear regression, although the
communciaiton complexity can be improved to sublinear via sampling, such as SGD-type uniform
sampling for the dataset [50, 74], the final performance is not comparable to that using the whole
∗

Alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

