Self-supervised Amodal Video Object Segmentation

Jian Yao1∗ Yuxin Hong2* Chiyu Wang3* Tianjun Xiao4† Tong He4
Francesco Locatello4 David Wipf4 Yanwei Fu2† Zheng Zhang4
1
School of Management, Fudan University
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
University of California, Berkeley
4
Amazon Web Services
{jianyao20, yxhong20, yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn, wcy_james@berkeley.edu
{tianjux, htong, locatelf, daviwipf, zhaz}@amazon.com

Abstract
Amodal perception requires inferring the full shape of an object that is partially
occluded. This task is particularly challenging on two levels: (1) it requires more
information than what is contained in the instant retina or imaging sensor, (2) it
is difficult to obtain enough well-annotated amodal labels for supervision. To this
end, this paper develops a new framework of Self-supervised amodal Video object
segmentation (SaVos). Our method efficiently leverages the visual information of
video temporal sequences to infer the amodal mask of objects. The key intuition
is that the occluded part of an object can be explained away if that part is visible
in other frames, possibly deformed as long as the deformation can be reasonably
learned. Accordingly, we derive a novel self-supervised learning paradigm that
efficiently utilizes the visible object parts as the supervision to guide the training
on videos. In addition to learning type prior to complete masks for known types,
SaVos also learns the spatiotemporal prior, which is also useful for the amodal
task and could generalize to unseen types. The proposed framework achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on the synthetic amodal segmentation benchmark
FISHBOWL and the real world benchmark KINS-Video-Car. Further, it lends
itself well to being transferred to novel distributions using test-time adaptation,
outperforming existing models even after the transfer to a new distribution. The
experiment code is available at https://github.com/amazon-science/self-supervisedamodal-video-object-segmentation.

1

Introduction

Cognitive scientists have found human vision system contains several hierarchies. Visual perception [27] first carves a scene at its physical joints, decomposing it into initial object representation by
grouping and simple completion. At this point, the representation is tethered into the retina sensor
[13]. Then, correspondence or motion on the temporal dimension is built to form the object representation that is untethered from the retinal reference frame through operations like spatiotemporal
aggregation, tracking, inference and prediction [6]. The more stable untethered representation is
ready to be raised from the perception system to the cognitive system for higher level action and
symbolic cognition [23]. Machine learning, especially with artificial neural networks, has progressed
tremendously on tethered vision tasks like detection and modal segmentation. The natural next step
is to go the higher rung of the ladder by tackling untethered vision.
∗
†

Work completed during internship at AWS Shanghai AI Labs.
Correspondence authors are Tianjun Xiao and Yanwei Fu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

