Evolution of Neural Tangent Kernels under Benign
and Adversarial Training

Noel Loo, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, Daniela Rus
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab (CSAIL)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
{loo, rhasani, amini, rus} @mit.edu

Abstract
Two key challenges facing modern deep learning are mitigating deep networks’
vulnerability to adversarial attacks and understanding deep learning’s generalization
capabilities. Towards the first issue, many defense strategies have been developed,
with the most common being Adversarial Training (AT). Towards the second
challenge, one of the dominant theories that has emerged is the Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK) – a characterization of neural network behavior in the infinite-width
limit. In this limit, the kernel is frozen, and the underlying feature map is fixed. In
finite widths, however, there is evidence that feature learning happens at the earlier
stages of the training (kernel learning) before a second phase where the kernel
remains fixed (lazy training). While prior work has aimed at studying adversarial
vulnerability through the lens of the frozen infinite-width NTK, there is no work
that studies the adversarial robustness of the empirical/finite NTK during training.
In this work, we perform an empirical study of the evolution of the empirical
NTK under standard and adversarial training, aiming to disambiguate the effect of
adversarial training on kernel learning and lazy training. We find under adversarial
training, the empirical NTK rapidly converges to a different kernel (and feature
map) than standard training. This new kernel provides adversarial robustness, even
when non-robust training is performed on top of it. Furthermore, we find that
adversarial training on top of a fixed kernel can yield a classifier with 76.1% robust
accuracy under PGD attacks with ε = 4/255 on CIFAR-10.1

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning, while effective in tackling clean and curated datasets, is often very brittle
to domain and distribution shifts [76]. Perhaps the most notorious failure mode of deep learning
to domain shifts is adversarial examples [73]: images with small, bounded perturbations which
consistently fool state-of-the-art classifiers. While work has been dedicated to mitigating [25, 18, 51],
explaining [24, 39, 37], and harnessing [66, 54, 67] this peculiar behavior, the problem still remains
largely open, with the state-of-the-art robust classifiers still falling far behind in benign accuracy
compared to standard non-robust networks [18]. Indeed, tackling this idiosyncrasy of deep learning
seems almost impossible given that the behavior of deep models under benign data and training is
still largely unexplained [13, 62, 63], let alone adversarial training.
The community has tried developed numerous theories on better interpreting [77, 27, 43] and
understanding deep learning [74, 5, 38, 64, 28, 14, 31, 30]. One emerging theory is the notion of
deep learning as kernel learners [48, 21, 1]. That is, deep networks trained with gradient descent
learn a kernel whose feature map is embedded in the tangent space of the network outputs with
1

Code is available at https://github.com/yolky/adversarial_ntk_evolution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

