Tsetlin Machine for Solving Contextual Bandit
Problems
Raihan Seraj
Electrical and Computer Engineering
McGill University
Canada
raihan.seraj@mail.mcgill.ca

Jivitesh Sharma
Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAIR)
University of Agder
Norway
jivitesh.sharma@uia.no

Ole-Christoffer Granmo
Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAIR)
University of Agder
Norway
ole.granmo@uia.no

Abstract
This paper introduces an interpretable contextual bandit algorithm using Tsetlin
Machines, which is an inherently interpretable machine learning method that
solves complex pattern recognition tasks using propositional (Boolean) logic. The
proposed bandit learning algorithm relies on straightforward bit manipulation, thus
simplifying computation and interpretation. We then present a mechanism for
performing Thompson sampling with Tsetlin Machine, given its non-parametric
nature. Our empirical analysis shows that Tsetlin Machine as a base contextual
bandit learner outperforms other popular comparable base learners on eight out of
nine datasets. We further analyze the interpretability of our learner, investigating
how arms are selected based on propositional expressions that model the context1 .

1

Introduction

Contextual bandits play a fundamental role in many applications involving sequential decision making,
ranging from personalized recommendations [19] to designing effective treatment allocation strategies
in clinical trials [11, 7]. Algorithms for contextual bandits have additionally gained significant interest
because of their theoretical elegance. In brief, a decision-maker selects one of multiple bandit arms
over a sequence of rounds, taking into account an observed context. Each round, the arm chosen
elicits feedback in the form of a reward signal associated with the success of selecting that arm
(such as a user purchasing a recommended product). The contextual bandit problem is particularly
intriguing because the decision-maker must maximize the expected reward in as few rounds as
possible, trading exploitation against exploration to identify the optimal arm.
In this paper, we recast the Tsetlin Machine (TM) [14] as a contextual bandit algorithm and study
the resulting scheme empirically. TM is a recent machine learning approach to pattern recognition
that employs a team of non-contextual bandit algorithms, in the form of Tsetlin automata [27], to
learn patterns expressed in propositional logic. TMs have been shown to obtain competitive accuracy,
memory footprint, and learning speed on several benchmark datasets [3, 18]. They have been
particularly successful in natural language processing, including explainable aspect-based sentiment
analysis [28] and robust text classification with ANDed word negations [29]. Being based on finite
state automata, they further support Markov chain-based convergence analysis [30]. Leveraging the
non-linear pattern recognition capability of TMs, our proposed scheme thus addresses the contextual
1

The code is available online on: github

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

