On the Convergence Theory for Hessian-Free Bilevel
Algorithms

Daouda A. Sow
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
sow.53@osu.edu

Kaiyi Ji
Department of CSE
University at Buffalo
kaiyiji@buffalo.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has arisen as a powerful tool in modern machine learning.
However, due to the nested structure of bilevel optimization, even gradient-based
methods require second-order derivative approximations via Jacobian- or/and
Hessian-vector computations, which can be costly and unscalable in practice.
Recently, Hessian-free bilevel schemes have been proposed to resolve this issue,
where the general idea is to use zeroth- or first-order methods to approximate the
full hypergradient of the bilevel problem. However, we empirically observe that
such approximation can lead to large variance and unstable training, but estimating
only the response Jacobian matrix as a partial component of the hypergradient turns
out to be extremely effective. To this end, we propose a new Hessian-free method,
which adopts the zeroth-order-like method to approximate the response Jacobian
matrix via taking difference between two optimization paths. Theoretically, we
provide the convergence rate analysis for the proposed algorithms, where our key
challenge is to characterize the approximation and smoothness properties of the
trajectory-dependent estimator, which can be of independent interest. This is the
first known convergence rate result for this type of Hessian-free bilevel algorithms.
Experimentally, we demonstrate that the proposed algorithms outperform baseline
bilevel optimizers on various bilevel problems. Particularly, in our experiment on
few-shot meta-learning with ResNet-12 network over the miniImageNet dataset,
we show that our algorithm outperforms baseline meta-learning algorithms, while
other baseline bilevel optimizers do not solve such meta-learning problems within
a comparable time frame.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization has recently arisen as a powerful tool to capture various modern machine learning
problems, including meta-learning [4, 12, 49, 24, 36], hyperparamater optimization [12, 51], neural
architecture search [35, 58], signal processing [10], etc. Bilevel optimization generally takes the
following mathematical form:
min Φ(x) := f (x, y ∗ (x)),

x∈Rp

s.t.

y ∗ (x) = arg min g(x, y),

(1)

y∈Rd

where the outer objective f : Rp × Rd → R is continuously differentiable function and the inner
objective g : Rp × Rd → R is twice differentiable.
Gradient-based methods have served as a popular tool for solving bilevel optimization problems. Two
types of approaches have been widely used: the iterative differentiation (ITD) method [7, 11, 51] and
the approximate iterative differentiation (AID) method [7, 47, 42]. Due to the bilevel structure of
the problem, even such gradient-based methods typically involve second-order matrix computations,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

