Do Residual Neural Networks discretize Neural
Ordinary Differential Equations?

Michael E. Sander
ENS, CNRS
Paris, France
michael.sander@ens.fr

Pierre Ablin
Université Paris-Dauphine, CNRS
Paris, France
pierreablin@gmail.com

Gabriel Peyré
ENS, CNRS
Paris, France
gabriel.peyre@ens.fr

Abstract
Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Neural ODEs) are the continuous analog
of Residual Neural Networks (ResNets). We investigate whether the discrete
dynamics defined by a ResNet are close to the continuous one of a Neural ODE.
We first quantify the distance between the ResNet’s hidden state trajectory and the
solution of its corresponding Neural ODE. Our bound is tight and, on the negative
side, does not go to 0 with depth N if the residual functions are not smooth with
depth. On the positive side, we show that this smoothness is preserved by gradient
descent for a ResNet with linear residual functions and small enough initial loss. It
ensures an implicit regularization towards a limit Neural ODE at rate N1 , uniformly
with depth and optimization time. As a byproduct of our analysis, we consider the
use of a memory-free discrete adjoint method to train a ResNet by recovering the
activations on the fly through a backward pass of the network, and show that this
method theoretically succeeds at large depth if the residual functions are Lipschitz
with the input. We then show that Heun’s method, a second order ODE integration
scheme, allows for better gradient estimation with the adjoint method when the
residual functions are smooth with depth. We experimentally validate that our
adjoint method succeeds at large depth, and that Heun’s method needs fewer layers
to succeed. We finally use the adjoint method successfully for fine-tuning very
deep ResNets without memory consumption in the residual layers.

1

Introduction

Problem setup. Residual Neural Networks (ResNets) [20, 21] keep on outperforming state of the art
in computer vision [46, 6], and more generally skip connections are widely used in a various range of
applications [42, 14]. A ResNet of depth N iterates, starting from x0 ∈ Rd , xn+1 = xn + f (xn , θnN )
and outputs a final value xN ∈ Rd where f is a neural network called residual function. In this work,
we consider a simple modification of this forward rule by letting explicitly the residual mapping
depend on the depth of the network:
xn+1 = xn +

1
f (xn , θnN ).
N

(1)

On the other hand, a Neural ODE [8] uses a neural network φΘ (x, s), that takes time s into account,
to parameterise a vector field [24] in a differential equation, as follows,
dx
= φΘ (x(s), s) with x(0) = x0 ,
ds

(2)

and outputs a final value x(1) ∈ Rd , the solution of Eq.(2). The Neural ODE framework enables learning without storing activations (the xn ’s) using the adjoint state method, hence significantly reducing
the memory usage for backpropagation that can be a bottleneck during training [43, 34, 48, 16].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

