Adaptive Stochastic Variance Reduction
for Non-convex Finite-Sum Minimization
Ali Kavis∗
LIONS, EPFL
ali.kavis@epfl.ch

Stratis Skoulakis∗
LIONS, EPFL
efstratios.skoulakis@epfl.ch

Kimon Antonakopoulos
LIONS, EPFL
kimon.antonakopoulos@epfl.ch

Leello Tadesse Dadi
LIONS, EPFL
leello.dadi@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose an adaptive variance-reduction method, called A DA S PIDER, for minimization of L-smooth, non-convex functions with a finite-sum structure. In essence,
A DA S PIDER combines an A DAG RAD-inspired [16, 40], but a fairly distinct, adaptive step-size schedule with the recursive stochastic path integrated estimator
proposed in Fang et al. [19]. To our knowledge, A DA S PIDER is the first parameterfree non-convex variance-reduction method in the sense that it does not require
the knowledge of problem-dependent parameters, such as smoothness constant
L, target accuracy ϵ or any bound on gradient norms.
 In doing so, we are able to
√
compute an ϵ-stationary point with Õ n + n/ϵ2 oracle-calls, which matches
the respective lower bound up to logarithmic factors.

1

Introduction

This paper studies smooth, non-convex minimization problems with the following finite-sum structure:
n

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(Prob)

where each component function fi : Rd → R is L-smooth and is possibly non-convex, and we further
assume f is also non-convex. We seek to find an ϵ-approximate first-order stationary point x̂ of f ,
such that ∥∇f (x̂)∥ ≤ ϵ, where ϵ > 0 is the accuracy of the desired solution.
This structure captures many interesting learning problems from empirical risk minimization to
training of neural networks. First-order methods have been the standard choice for solving (Prob),
due to their efficiency and favorable practical behavior. In that regard, while gradient descent (G D)
requires O(n/ϵ2 ) gradient computations, stochastic gradient descent (S GD) requires O(1/ϵ4 ) overall
gradient computations. In many interesting machine learning applications n tends to be large, e.g.,
training a neural network for image classification with very big image datasets [14], hence S GD
typically leads to better practical performance.
∗

Joint first authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

