Federated Submodel Optimization for
Hot and Cold Data Features
Yucheng Ding1
Chaoyue Niu1⇤
Fan Wu1
Shaojie Tang2
3
4
Chengfei Lv
Yanghe Feng
Guihai Chen1
1

2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
University of Texas at Dallas
4
Alibaba Group
National University of Defense Technology

3

Abstract
We focus on federated learning in practical recommender systems and natural
language processing scenarios. The global model for federated optimization typically contains a large and sparse embedding layer, while each client’s local data
tend to interact with part of features, updating only a small submodel with the
feature-related embedding vectors. We identify a new and important issue that
distinct data features normally involve different numbers of clients, generating the
differentiation of hot and cold features. We further reveal that the classical federated averaging algorithm (FedAvg) or its variants, which randomly selects clients to
participate and uniformly averages their submodel updates, will be severely slowed
down, because different parameters of the global model are optimized at different
speeds. More specifically, the model parameters related to hot (resp., cold) features
will be updated quickly (resp., slowly). We thus propose federated submodel
averaging (FedSubAvg), which introduces the number of feature-related clients as
the metric of feature heat to correct the aggregation of submodel updates. We prove
that due to the dispersion of feature heat, the global objective is ill-conditioned,
and FedSubAvg works as a suitable diagonal preconditioner. We also rigorously
analyze FedSubAvg’s convergence rate to stationary points. We finally evaluate
FedSubAvg over several public and industrial datasets. The evaluation results
demonstrate that FedSubAvg significantly outperforms FedAvg and its variants.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [1] allows a large number of clients (e.g., millions of smartphone users) to
collaborate in the training of a global machine learning (ML) model under the coordination of a cloud
server without sharing raw data. For the production use on the top, Google has deployed FL among
the users of its Android keyboard, called Gboard, to polish language models [2]. As the default
optimization algorithm of FL at the bottom, federated averaging (FedAvg) averages the participating
clients’ local new models to update the global model. Much effort of existing work was devoted to
proving the convergence of FedAvg, and the key challenge is that the clients’ local data are normally
non-independent andpidentically distributed (non-i.i.d.) [3, 4, 5, 6]. One line of work [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]
established an O(1/ N T ) convergence, where N denotes the total number of clients and T denotes
the total number of iterations. However, these work required all the clients to participant in each
round of FL, which is not practical in cross-device FL. p
Another line of work [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]
allowed partial client participation and proved an O(1/ KT ) convergence of FedAvg, where K
denotes the number of chosen clients in each round. Some other work proposed variants of FedAvg
to better deal with data heterogeneity. For example, Li et al. [17] proposed FedProx by adding a
⇤

Chaoyue Niu (rvince@sjtu.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

