Misspecified Phase Retrieval with Generative Priors

Zhaoqiang Liu
National University of Singapore
dcslizha@nus.edu.sg

Xinshao Wang
University of Oxford
xinshao.wang@eng.ox.ac.uk

Jiulong Liu
Chinese Academy of Sciences
jiulongliu@lsec.cc.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study phase retrieval under model misspecification and generative
priors. In particular, we aim to estimate an n-dimensional signal x from m i.i.d. realizations of the single index model y = f (aT x), where f is an unknown and
possibly random nonlinear link function and a ∈ Rn is a standard Gaussian vector.
We make the assumption Cov[y, (aT x)2 ] 6= 0, which corresponds to the misspecified phase retrieval problem. In addition, the underlying signal x is assumed to
lie in the range of an L-Lipschitz continuous generative model with bounded kdimensional inputs. We propose a two-step approach, for which the first step plays
the role of spectral initialization and the second step refines the estimated vector
produced by p
the first step iteratively. We show that both steps enjoy a statistical
rate of order (k log L) · (log m)/m under suitable conditions. Experiments on
image datasets are performed to demonstrate that our approach performs on par
with or even significantly outperforms several competing methods.

1

Introduction

Compressed sensing (CS) is perhaps the most popular instance of high-dimensional inverse problems,
for which one has the linear measurement model
y = aT x + η,
n

(1)

n

where a ∈ R is the sensing vector, x ∈ R is the sparse signal to estimate, and η represents additive
noise. It has been well-known for CS that roughly m = O(s log(n/s)) i.i.d. Gaussian measurements
are sufficient to ensure the accurate recovery of a signal with s non-zero entries [88, 1, 23, 11, 77].
Phase retrieval (PR) arises in numerous scientific areas including X-ray crystallography, acoustics,
astronomy, microscopy, optics, wireless communications, and quantum information [13], where one
cannot measure aT x directly, and can only record its magnitude. For example, the following noisy
magnitude-only measurement model has been adopted in various prior works on sparse (real-valued)
PR [92, 39, 25, 36, 9, 7]:
y = |aT x| + η,
(2)
where the signal x is assumed to be sparse, and the sensing vector a is assumed to be a standard
Gaussian vector.
However, both the linear and magnitude-only measure models in (1) and (2) are idealized views
of the data generating process. To make the setup more general, one can utilize the following
semi-parametric single index model (SIM) for general nonlinear models:
y = f (aT x),
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(3)

