Optimal Learning Rates for Regularized Conditional
Mean Embedding
Zhu Li⇤
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
zhu.li@ucl.ac.uk

Dimitri Meunier⇤
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
dimitri.meunier.21@ucl.ac.uk

Mattes Mollenhauer
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Freie Universität Berlin
mattes.mollenhauer@fu-berlin.de

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We address the consistency of a kernel ridge regression estimate of the conditional
mean embedding (CME), which is an embedding of the conditional distribution of
Y given X into a target reproducing kernel Hilbert space HY . The CME allows us
to take conditional expectations of target RKHS functions, and has been employed
in nonparametric causal and Bayesian inference. We address the misspecified
setting, where the target CME is in the space of Hilbert-Schmidt operators acting
from an input interpolation space between HX and L2 , to HY . This space of
operators is shown to be isomorphic to a newly defined vector-valued interpolation
space. Using this isomorphism, we derive a novel and adaptive statistical learning
rate for the empirical CME estimator under the misspecified setting. Our analysis
reveals that our rates match the optimal O(log n/n) rates without assuming HY
to be finite dimensional. We further establish a lower bound on the learning rate,
which shows that the obtained upper bound is optimal.

1

Introduction

Approximation of the conditional expectation operator is a central issue in the statistical learning
community, and many approaches have been proposed [42, 20, 21, 22]. Given random variables X
and Y , the conditional expectation operator for a function f is defined
[P f ] (x) := E [f (Y )|X = x] .
Conventional parametric models to approximate P often involve density estimation and expensive
numerical analysis. Hence, recent studies attempt to explore a new framework to approximate
P via kernel methods. Specifically, given kernels kX and kY with corresponding reproducing
kernel Hilbert space HX and HY for X and Y respectively, we may define the conditional mean
embedding (CME) as F⇤ (x) := E[kY (·, Y )|X = x], and we may employ the reproducing property
to obtain [P f ](x) = hf, F⇤ (x)iHY for any f 2 HY . The advantage of the CME framework is that it
allows the straightforward evaluation of conditional expectations of any function in HY . The CME
framework has been applied successfully to many learning problems such as probabilistic inference
[35], reinforcement learning [28, 16] and causal inference [25, 31].
⇤

denotes equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

