Graph Learning Assisted Multi-Objective Integer
Programming

Yaoxin Wu1 , Wen Song2 , Zhiguang Cao3,∗, Jie Zhang1 ,
Abhishek Gupta3 and Mingyan Simon Lin3
1

Nanyang Technological University
Institute of Marine Science and Technology, Shandong University, China
3
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, A*STAR
wuyaoxin@ntu.edu.sg, wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn, zhiguangcao@outlook.com
zhangj@ntu.edu.sg, {abhishek_gupta, simon_lin}@simtech.a-star.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Objective-space decomposition algorithms (ODAs) are widely studied for solving
multi-objective integer programs. However, they often encounter difficulties in
handling scalarized problems, which could cause infeasibility or repetitive nondominated points and thus induce redundant runtime. To mitigate the issue, we present
a graph neural network (GNN) based method to learn the reduction rule in the ODA.
We formulate the algorithmic procedure of generic ODAs as a Markov decision
process, and parameterize the policy (reduction rule) with a novel two-stage GNN
to fuse information from variables, constraints and especially objectives for better
state representation. We train our model with imitation learning and deploy it on
a state-of-the-art ODA. Results show that our method significantly improves the
solving efficiency of the ODA. The learned policy generalizes fairly well to larger
problems or more objectives, and the proposed GNN outperforms existing ones for
integer programming in terms of test and generalization accuracy.

1

Introduction

Practical combinatorial optimization often involves multiple objectives that conflict with each other.
Such problems can be termed as multi-objective combinatorial optimization (MOCO), which are
widely studied in operations research and computer science [1], and also have broad applications
in energy [2], engineering [3], biology [4], etc. In contrast to the single-objective optimization,
MOCO centers on searching solutions with nondominated images (points) in the objective space,
which constitute the Pareto front. These solutions reflect different preferences on the objectives, so
that decision makers could select from them according to practical use. In this paper, we focus on
multi-objective integer programming (MOIP), which provides a unified modeling framework for
MOCOs, and is convenient in handling complex constraints which could be difficult for heuristic
methods [5]. However, MOIP problems are extremely difficult to be solved optimally (i.e. enumerate
the whole Pareto front) [6, 7]. Therefore, accelerating the computation of MOIPs to ameliorate the
partial Pareto front in reasonable time is a critical and challenging issue [8, 9, 10].
Recently, deep learning has been extensively explored in solving single-objective combinatorial
optimization problems such as vehicle routing, scheduling, and bin packing [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18]. As a general modeling and solving framework, single-objective integer programming (IP)
has also received increasing attention, and this line of works mostly attempt to improve ingredients in
the branch and bound (BnB) paradigm [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. In contrast, research on applying deep
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

