Weakly supervised causal representation learning

Johann Brehmer∗
Qualcomm AI Research†
jbrehmer@qti.qualcomm.com

Pim de Haan∗
Qualcomm AI Research†
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam
pim@qti.qualcomm.com

Phillip Lippe
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam
p.lippe@uva.nl

Taco Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research†
tacos@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Learning high-level causal representations together with a causal model from
unstructured low-level data such as pixels is impossible from observational data
alone. We prove under mild assumptions that this representation is however
identifiable in a weakly supervised setting. This involves a dataset with paired
samples before and after random, unknown interventions, but no further labels. We
then introduce implicit latent causal models, variational autoencoders that represent
causal variables and causal structure without having to optimize an explicit discrete
graph structure. On simple image data, including a novel dataset of simulated
robotic manipulation, we demonstrate that such models can reliably identify the
causal structure and disentangle causal variables.

1

Introduction

The dynamics of many systems can be described in terms of
some high-level variables and causal relations between them.
Often, these causal variables are not known but only observed
in some unstructured, low-level representation, such as the pixels of a camera feed. Learning the causal representations together with the causal structure between them is a challenging
problem and may be important for instance for applications in
robotics and autonomous driving [1]. Without prior assumptions on the data-generating process or supervision, it is impossible to uniquely identify the causal variables and their causal
structure [2, 3].
In this work, we show that a weak form of supervision is sufficient to identify both the causal representations and the structural causal model between them. We consider a setting in
which we have access to data pairs, representing the system before and after a randomly chosen, unknown intervention while
preserving the noise. This may approximate the generative process of data collected from a video feed of an external agent or
demonstrator interacting with a system. Neither labels on the
intervention targets nor active control of the interventions are
∗
†

𝑥

𝑧

Interven'on
𝑥"

𝑧̃

Figure 1: We learn to represent pixels x as causal variables z. The bottom shows the effect of intervening
on one variable. We prove that variables and causal model can be identified from samples (x, x̃).

Equal contribution
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

