Hedging as Reward Augmentation in Probabilistic
Graphical Models

Debarun Bhattacharjya
IBM Research
debarunb@us.ibm.com

Radu Marinescu
IBM Research
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com

Abstract
Most people associate the term ‘hedging’ exclusively with financial applications,
particularly the use of financial derivatives. We argue that hedging is an activity
that human and machine agents should engage in more broadly, even when the
agent’s value is not necessarily in monetary units. In this paper, we propose a
decision-theoretic view of hedging based on augmenting a probabilistic graphical
model – specifically a Bayesian network or an influence diagram – with a reward.
Hedging is therefore posed as a particular kind of graph manipulation, and can
be viewed as analogous to control/intervention and information gathering related
analysis. Effective hedging occurs when a risk-averse agent finds opportunity to
balance uncertain rewards in their current situation. We illustrate the concepts
with examples and counter-examples, and conduct experiments to demonstrate the
properties and applicability of the proposed computational tools that enable agents
to proactively identify potential hedging opportunities in real-world situations.

1

Introduction

Hedging is mostly synonymous with the financial industry. Wikipedia defines a (financial) hedge
as “an investment position intended to offset potential losses or gains that may be incurred by a
companion investment.” Various relevant financial instruments are noted, including stocks, exchangetraded funds, insurance, forward contracts, swaps, options, etc. The notion of a hedge is however
also occasionally used in other contexts; for instance, a hedge in linguistics refers to a phrase that
signifies caution or uncertainty, or has an intended effect of dampening the strength of a claim. The
fundamental hedging idea that is so widely applied in finance can however be generalized. Informally,
hedging can be viewed as minimizing the ‘risk’ that arises from uncertainty in existing potential
gains/losses along some measure of value. It may be possible and indeed prudent for a risk-averse
decision maker to try to balance the uncertainty in their existing situation in some fashion.
Behavioral experiments indicate that people are occasionally risk-seeking while making decisions,
particularly when losses are involved [22]. However, such behavior is often associated with contextual
cognitive biases that they are typically unaware of [26]; when they truly understand the implications of
risk-seeking behavior and its meaning in utility theory as opposed to common parlance, most people
are quick to reject it and adopt risk-averse behavior instead. Thus, from a prescriptive perspective,
most real-world situations should involve risk-averse decision makers, and therefore there can be real
practical benefits around investigating hedging opportunities. Indeed, we argue that hedging is an
activity that human and machine agents should engage in more broadly, in the appropriate situations,
regardless of whether the agent’s value is in monetary units.
Probabilistic graphical models such as Bayesian networks [35] and influence diagrams [21] are
effective at representing a wide variety of real-world uncertain situations – where the latter model
explicitly represents decisions by a decision maker – and they are powerful modeling paradigms
in practice since they can be learned through a combination of expert opinion and data [17]. In
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

