A Fast Post-Training Pruning Framework for
Transformers
Woosuk Kwon⇤
UC Berkeley
woosuk.kwon@berkeley.edu

Sehoon Kim⇤
UC Berkeley
sehoonkim@berkeley.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
UC Berkeley, ICSI, & LBNL
mahoneymw@berkeley.edu

Joseph Hassoun
Samsung Semiconductor, Inc.
j.hassoun@samsung.com

Kurt Keutzer
UC Berkeley
keutzer@berkeley.edu

Amir Gholami
UC Berkeley
amirgh@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Pruning is an effective way to reduce the huge inference cost of Transformer models.
However, prior work on pruning Transformers requires retraining the models. This
can add high training cost and high complexity to model deployment, making it
difficult to use in many practical situations. To address this, we propose a fast posttraining pruning framework for Transformers that does not require any retraining.
Given a resource constraint and a sample dataset, our framework automatically
prunes the Transformer model using structured sparsity methods. To retain high
accuracy without retraining, we introduce three novel techniques: (i) a lightweight
mask search algorithm that finds which heads and filters to prune based on the
Fisher information; (ii) mask rearrangement that complements the search algorithm;
and (iii) mask tuning that reconstructs the output activations for each layer. We
apply our method to BERTBASE and DistilBERT, and we evaluate its effectiveness
on GLUE and SQuAD benchmarks. Our framework achieves up to 2.0⇥ reduction
in FLOPs and 1.56⇥ speedup in inference latency, while maintaining < 1% loss in
accuracy. Importantly, our framework prunes Transformers in less than 3 minutes
on a single GPU, which is over two orders of magnitude faster than existing pruning
approaches that retrain the models.1

1

Introduction

In recent years, Transformer [76] has become a de facto standard model architecture in Natural
Language Processing [4, 12, 46], and it is becoming common in many domains including Computer
Vision [14, 48, 75] and Speech Recognition [2, 7, 26]. However, efficient deployment of Transformer
architectures has been challenging due to their large model size and high inference latency. As a
promising way to tackle this challenge, structured pruning of Transformers has been widely studied.
While prior work on pruning Transformers substantially reduces the inference time, it is often difficult
to use in practice for several reasons. First, previous approaches require retraining the pruned model
and/or jointly learning the pruning configurations during training. This increases the training time by
up to 10⇥ [38, 88], adding significant computational overhead. Second, previous methods add many
moving parts to the model deployment process. That is, the pruning pipelines are often complex and
require additional hyperparameter tuning. Such techniques demand significant engineering efforts
for implementation and debugging, which impedes their adoption in production pipelines. Third,
⇤

1

Equal contribution.
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/WoosukKwon/retraining-free-pruning

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

