Improved Feature Distillation via Projector Ensemble

Yudong Chen1

Sen Wang1∗ Jiajun Liu2∗ Xuwei Xu1 Frank de Hoog2
1
The University of Queensland 2 CSIRO Data61
{yudong.chen,sen.wang,xuwei.xu}@uq.edu.au
{jiajun.liu,frank.dehoog}@csiro.au
huang@itee.uq.edu.au

Zi Huang1

Abstract
In knowledge distillation, previous feature distillation methods mainly focus on
the design of loss functions and the selection of the distilled layers, while the
effect of the feature projector between the student and the teacher remains underexplored. In this paper, we first discuss a plausible mechanism of the projector
with empirical evidence and then propose a new feature distillation method based
on a projector ensemble for further performance improvement. We observe that
the student network benefits from a projector even if the feature dimensions of
the student and the teacher are the same. Training a student backbone without a
projector can be considered as a multi-task learning process, namely achieving
discriminative feature extraction for classification and feature matching between
the student and the teacher for distillation at the same time. We hypothesize and
empirically verify that without a projector, the student network tends to overfit the
teacher’s feature distributions despite having different architecture and weights
initialization. This leads to degradation on the quality of the student’s deep features
that are eventually used in classification. Adding a projector, on the other hand,
disentangles the two learning tasks and helps the student network to focus better on
the main feature extraction task while still being able to utilize teacher features as
a guidance through the projector. Motivated by the positive effect of the projector
in feature distillation, we propose an ensemble of projectors to further improve the
quality of student features. Experimental results on different datasets with a series
of teacher-student pairs illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Code
is available at https://github.com/chenyd7/PEFD.

1

Introduction

The last decade has witnessed the rapid development of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
[19, 29, 9, 20]. The resulting increases in performance however, have come with substantial increases
in network size and this largely limits the applications of CNNs on edge devices [13]. To alleviate
this problem, knowledge distillation has been proposed for network compression. The key idea of
distillation is to use the knowledge obtained by the large network (teacher) to guide the optimization
of the lightweight network (student) [12, 24, 31].
Existing methods can be roughly categorized into logit-based, feature-based and similarity-based
distillation [7]. Recent research shows that feature-based methods generally distill a better student
network compared to the other two groups [30, 4]. We conjecture that the process of mimicking the
teacher’s features provides a clearer optimization direction for the training of the student network.
Despite the promising performance of feature distillation, it is still challenging to narrow the gap
between the student and teacher’s feature spaces. To improve the feature learning ability of the
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

