EvenNet: Ignoring Odd-Hop Neighbors Improves
Robustness of Graph Neural Networks

Runlin Lei
Renmin University of China
runlin_lei@ruc.edu.cn

Zhen Wang
Alibaba Group
jones.wz@alibaba-inc.com

Bolin Ding
Alibaba Group
bolin.ding@alibaba-inc.com

Yaliang Li
Alibaba Group
yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com

Zhewei Wei ∗
Renmin University of China
zhewei@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have received extensive research attention for their
promising performance in graph machine learning. Despite their extraordinary predictive accuracy, existing approaches, such as GCN and GPRGNN, are not robust
in the face of homophily changes on test graphs, rendering these models vulnerable
to graph structural attacks and with limited capacity in generalizing to graphs of
varied homophily levels. Although many methods have been proposed to improve
the robustness of GNN models, the majority of these techniques are restricted to
the spatial domain and employ complicated defense mechanisms, such as learning
new graph structures or calculating edge attention. In this paper, we study the
problem of designing simple and robust GNN models in the spectral domain. We
propose EvenNet, a spectral GNN corresponding to an even-polynomial graph
filter. Based on our theoretical analysis in both spatial and spectral domains, we
demonstrate that EvenNet outperforms full-order models in generalizing across
homophilic and heterophilic graphs, implying that ignoring odd-hop neighbors
improves the robustness of GNNs. We conduct experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of EvenNet. Notably, EvenNet
outperforms existing defense models against structural attacks without introducing
additional computational costs and maintains competitiveness in traditional node
classification tasks on homophilic and heterophilic graphs. Our code is available in
https://github.com/Leirunlin/EvenNet.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained widespread interest for their excellent performance in
graph representation learning tasks [10, 13, 17, 26, 28]. GCN is known to be equivalent to a low-pass
filter [2, 21], which leverages the homophily assumption that “connected nodes are more likely to
have the same label” as the inductive bias. Such assumptions fail in heterophilic settings [37], where
connected nodes tend to have different labels, encouraging research into heterophilic GNNs [1, 22, 37].
Among them, spectral GNNs with learnable polynomial filters [3, 9, 14] adaptively learn suitable
graph filters from training graphs and achieve promising performance on both homophilic and
heterophilic graphs. If the training graph is heterophilic, a high-pass or composite-shaped graph filter
is empirically obtained.
∗
Zhewei Wei is the corresponding author. The work was partially done at Gaoling School of Artificial
Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
and MOE Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

