Invertible Monotone Operators for Normalizing Flows

Byeongkeun Ahn1 , Chiyoon Kim1 , Youngjoon Hong2∗ , Hyunwoo J. Kim1∗
Korea University1 , Sungkyunkwan University2
{byeongkeunahn, kimchiyoon, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr
hongyj@skku.edu

Abstract
Normalizing flows model probability distributions by learning invertible
transformations that transfer a simple distribution into complex distributions.
Since the architecture of ResNet-based normalizing flows is more flexible than
that of coupling-based models, ResNet-based normalizing flows have been
widely studied in recent years. Despite their architectural flexibility, it is wellknown that the current ResNet-based models suffer from constrained Lipschitz
constants. In this paper, we propose the monotone formulation to overcome
the issue of the Lipschitz constants using monotone operators and provide an
in-depth theoretical analysis. Furthermore, we construct an activation function
called Concatenated Pila (CPila) to improve gradient flow. The resulting model,
Monotone Flows, exhibits an excellent performance on multiple density estimation
benchmarks (MNIST, CIFAR-10, ImageNet32, ImageNet64). Code is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/MonotoneFlows.

1

Introduction

Normalizing flows [1, 2] are a method for constructing complex distributions by transforming a
probability density through a series of invertible transformations. Normalizing flows are trained using
a plain log-likelihood function, and they are capable of exact density evaluation and efficient sampling.
Applications include image generation [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], image super-resolution [9, 10, 11], image
noise modelling [12, 13], audio synthesis [14, 15], anomaly detection [16, 17], and computational
physics [18, 19, 20, 21], highlighting the importance of developing expressive normalizing flows.
However, a major hurdle to designing normalizing flow architectures is that not only should each
transformation be invertible but also its Jacobian determinant needs to be tractable [22, 23]. Despite
multiple efforts to satisfy the aforementioned constraints [2, 3, 4, 24, 25], the expressive power of the
normalizing flow transformations stays limited due to the adoption of specialized architectures [5].
In this regard, ResNet-based normalizing flows [5, 6, 7] are a compelling alternative since they do not
impose any structural restrictions. However, they keep the Lipschitz constant of the residual branch
less than 1 in order to ensure invertibility. As a result, the Lipschitz constant of each residual block is
less than 2. This causes a serious issue on the expressive power since a large Lipschitz constant is
often required in converting between distributions. A recent work [26] tackled this problem, but as
we show in this paper, their method is equivalent to a simple rescaling of ResNet-based normalizing
flows, which has a similar expressive power.
In this work, we propose the approach of monotone operators to alleviate the Lipschitz constraint.
More precisely, in order to parameterize monotone operators, we use the well-known fact from
monotone operator theory: the Cayley operator of maximally monotone operators (MMOs) is a 1Lipschitz function. The residual branch of ResNet-based normalizing flows can be used to parameterize
the Cayley operators.
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

