N EU F ORM:
Adaptive Overfitting for Neural Shape Editing

Connor Z. Lin
Stanford University

Niloy J. Mitra
Adobe / UCL

Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University
Paul Guerrero
Adobe

Abstract
Neural representations are popular for representing shapes, as they can be learned
form sensor data and used for data cleanup, model completion, shape editing,
and shape synthesis. Current neural representations can be categorized as either
overfitting to a single object instance, or representing a collection of objects.
However, neither allows accurate editing of neural scene representations: on the
one hand, methods that overfit objects achieve highly accurate reconstructions, but
do not generalize to unseen object configurations and thus cannot support editing;
on the other hand, methods that represent a family of objects with variations do
generalize but produce only approximate reconstructions. We propose N EU F ORM
to combine the advantages of both overfitted and generalizable representations by
adaptively using the one most appropriate for each shape region: the overfitted
representation where reliable data is available, and the generalizable representation
everywhere else. We achieve this with a carefully designed architecture and an
approach that blends the network weights of the two representations, avoiding
seams and other artifacts. We demonstrate edits that successfully reconfigure parts
of human-designed shapes, such as chairs, tables, and lamps, while preserving
semantic integrity and the accuracy of an overfitted shape representation. We
compare with two state-of-the-art competitors and demonstrate clear improvements
in terms of plausibility and fidelity of the resultant edits.

1

Introduction

Neural formulations have emerged as an efficient and scalable representation of complex spatial
signals, such as radiance fields, 3D occupancy fields, or signed distance functions. These representations are popular as they allow a uniform formulation that can support a range of applications
including denoising, data completion, and editing. In the context of shapes, two main types of neural
representations have emerged. Starting from an input description (e.g., point clouds, meshes, or
distance/occupancy fields), current representations either overfit to a single shape or learn a model
that generalizes over a collection of varying shapes. However, neither of the representations alone
allows effective shape editing.
Overfitted models [9, 35, 32, 22, 26, 20, 26] reproduce a single shape with high fidelity. While this
allows for operations like efficient rendering, surface-based optimization, and data compression, such
a representation does not support shape editing or synthesis, since it does not generalize to novel
shape configurations.
In contrast, generalizable representations [28, 15, 21, 6] are trained on a large collection of shapes
and learn shape priors allowing the representation to adapt to previously unseen shape configurations.
Thus, they can be used for shape editing and novel shape synthesis [16, 15, 34, 24, 19, 23]. However,
this comes at the cost of a lower-fidelity representation, as the network needs to represent a full dataset
and its variations, instead of a single shape. Specifically, these models typically require ‘projecting’ a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

