Visual Clues: Bridging Vision and Language
Foundations for Image Paragraph Captioning

Yujia Xie, Luowei Zhou∗, Xiyang Dai, Lu Yuan, Nguyen Bach, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng
Microsoft
{yujiaxie, luowei.zhou, xiyang.dai, luyuan, nguyenbach, ce.liu, nzeng}microsoft.com

Abstract
People say, “A picture is worth a thousand words”. Then how can we get the
rich information out of the image? We argue that by using visual clues to bridge
large pretrained vision foundation models and language models, we can do so
without any extra cross-modal training. Thanks to the strong zero-shot capability
of foundation models, we start by constructing a rich semantic representation of
the image (e.g., image tags, object attributes / locations, captions) as a structured
textual prompt, called visual clues, using a vision foundation model. Based on
visual clues, we use large language model to produce a series of comprehensive
descriptions for the visual content, which is then verified by the vision model again
to select the candidate that aligns best with the image. We evaluate the quality of
generated descriptions by quantitative and qualitative measurement. The results
demonstrate the effectiveness of such a structured semantic representation.

1

Introduction
This image is of a family celebrating Christmas. They are
all gathered around a dinner table, with a turkey and other
food on it. The family is smiling and seems to be enjoying
themselves. There is a Christmas tree in the background and
some Christmas lights on the walls.
This image features a horse and buggy travelling down a
road in the town of Holguin, Cuba. The horse is harnessed to
the buggy and is pulling it along, while a farmworker rides
behind. This image captures the everyday life of Cubans,
with their traditional horse-drawn carts still in use.
Figure 1: Examples of generated image paragraph.
“Vision is a process that produces from images of the external world a description
that is useful to the viewer and not cluttered with irrelevant information.”
—David Marr, Vision, p31

What makes a good “description” for vision? Over the past several decades, computer vision pioneers
drew inspiration from neural science, cognitive science, and psychophysics (Marr, 2010), pointing
us to the North Stars (Fei-Fei and Krishna, 2022), some among them being image classification and
object detection. Despite the tremendous progress that has been made, much of these object-centric
works remain a proxy for an eventual task or application that requires a holistic view of the visual
content, involving concepts beyond objects: actions, attributes, and relations, to name a few.
∗

Currently at Google Brain.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

