MoCapAct: A Multi-Task Dataset for
Simulated Humanoid Control
Nolan Wagener∗1 Andrey Kolobov2 Felipe Vieira Frujeri2
Ricky Loynd2 Ching-An Cheng2 Matthew Hausknecht∗2
1
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines, Georgia Institute of Technology
2
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Simulated humanoids are an appealing research domain due to their physical
capabilities. Nonetheless, they are also challenging to control, as a policy must
drive an unstable, discontinuous, and high-dimensional physical system. One
widely studied approach is to utilize motion capture (MoCap) data to teach the
humanoid agent low-level skills (e.g., standing, walking, and running) that can then
be re-used to synthesize high-level behaviors. However, even with MoCap data,
controlling simulated humanoids remains very hard, as MoCap data offers only
kinematic information. Finding physical control inputs to realize the demonstrated
motions requires computationally intensive methods like reinforcement learning.
Thus, despite the publicly available MoCap data, its utility has been limited to
institutions with large-scale compute. In this work, we dramatically lower the
barrier for productive research on this topic by training and releasing high-quality
agents that can track over three hours of MoCap data for a simulated humanoid
in the dm_control physics-based environment. We release MoCapAct (Motion
Capture with Actions), a dataset of these expert agents and their rollouts, which
contain proprioceptive observations and actions. We demonstrate the utility of
MoCapAct by using it to train a single hierarchical policy capable of tracking
the entire MoCap dataset within dm_control and show the learned low-level
component can be re-used to efficiently learn downstream high-level tasks. Finally,
we use MoCapAct to train an autoregressive GPT model and show that it can
control a simulated humanoid to perform natural motion completion given a motion
prompt. Videos of the results and links to the code and dataset are available at the
project website.

1

Introduction

The wide range of human physical capabilities makes simulated humanoids a compelling platform
for studying motor intelligence. Learning and utilization of motor skills is a prominent research
topic in machine learning, with advances ranging from emergence of learned locomotion skills in
traversing an obstacle course [Heess et al., 2017] to the picking up and carrying of objects to desired
locations [Merel et al., 2020, Peng et al., 2019a] to team coordination in simulated soccer [Liu et al.,
2022]. Producing natural and physically plausible human motion animation [Harvey et al., 2020,
Kania et al., 2021, Yuan and Kitani, 2020] is an active research topic in the game and movie industries.
However, while physical simulation of human capabilities is a useful research domain, it is also very
challenging from a control perspective. A controller must contend with an unstable, discontinuous,
and high-dimensional system that requires a high degree of coordination to execute a desired motion.
∗

Correspondence to nolan.wagener@gatech.edu and matthew.hausknecht@gmail.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

