Human-AI Collaborative Bayesian Optimisation

Arun Kumar A V, Santu Rana, Alistair Shilton, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University
Waurn Ponds, Geelong, Australia
{aanjanapuravenk,santu.rana,alistair.shilton,
svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Human-AI collaboration looks at harnessing the complementary strengths of
both humans and AI. We propose a new method for human-AI collaboration in
Bayesian optimisation where the optimum is mainly pursued by the Bayesian optimisation algorithm following complex computation, whilst getting occasional
help from the accompanying expert having a deeper knowledge of the underlying
physical phenomenon. We expect experts to have some understanding of the correlation structures of the experimental system, but not the location of the optimum.
The expert provides feedback by either changing the current recommendation or
providing her belief on the good and bad regions of the search space based on
the current observations. Our proposed method takes such feedback to build a
model that aligns with the expert’s model and then uses it for optimisation. We
provide theoretical underpinning on why such an approach may be more efficient
than the one without expert’s feedback. The empirical results show the robustness
and superiority of our method with promising efficiency gains.

1

Introduction

The deep penetration of AI systems into wider society demonstrates its ability to deal with complex
real-world tasks. However, there still exists a plethora of complicated real-world problems [Roccetti
et al., 2020, Hechler et al., 2020] that AI systems are unable to properly address. In such complex
real-world tasks, human-AI collaborative systems can provide a viable alternative. Through appropriate collaboration strategy we can supplement the speed, scalability and quantitative abilities of
AI systems with the reasoning and abstraction ability of human users and make the combination
exceedingly capable [Carroll et al., 2019, Maadi et al., 2021].
Recent studies, mostly proposed in supervised learning setting, used either AI requesting help of
human experts if its prediction lacks confidence [Madras et al., 2017] or as guided by a meta-policy
that focuses on the joint performance [Wilder et al., 2020]. Mozannar and Sontag [2020], De et al.
[2020] considered also the cost associated with human decision making while learning a joint policy.
Bayesian optimisation (BO) [Brochu et al., 2010], an efficient tool for global optimisation that can
potentially play a much bigger role in scientific experimentation and product design, provides a rich
playground for human-AI collaboration paradigm because the nature of applications ensures that
there would be an expert running the optimisation process. There are some works on incorporating
expert’s knowledge in Bayesian optimisation procedure. However, nearly all of the work relies on
expert articulating a static type of knowledge in the beginning of the optimisation process either in
terms of trends [Li et al., 2018, Riihimäki and Vehtari, 2010], shapes of functions [Andersen et al.,
2017, Venkatesh et al., 2019] or suggesting a similar experimental system for transfer learning [Joy
et al., 2016, Shilton et al., 2017]. In reality, most of the time experts may not be able to reveal
knowledge in terms of such explicit specifications. Expert’s knowledge will also more likely evolve
over the course of optimisation process through assimilation of the new data points. Unfortunately,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

