3DILG: Irregular Latent Grids for 3D Generative
Modeling

Biao Zhang
KAUST
biao.zhang@kaust.edu.sa

Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich
niessner@tum.de

Peter Wonka
KAUST
pwonka@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a new representation for encoding 3D shapes as neural fields. The
representation is designed to be compatible with the transformer architecture and
to benefit both shape reconstruction and shape generation. Existing works on
neural fields are grid-based representations with latents defined on a regular grid.
In contrast, we define latents on irregular grids, enabling our representation to be
sparse and adaptive. In the context of shape reconstruction from point clouds, our
shape representation built on irregular grids improves upon grid-based methods in
terms of reconstruction accuracy. For shape generation, our representation promotes
high-quality shape generation using auto-regressive probabilistic models. We show
different applications that improve over the current state of the art. First, we show
results for probabilistic shape reconstruction from a single higher resolution image.
Second, we train a probabilistic model conditioned on very low resolution images.
Third, we apply our model to category-conditioned generation. All probabilistic
experiments confirm that we are able to generate detailed and high quality shapes
to yield the new state of the art in generative 3D shape modeling.

1

Introduction
(1) SR

(2) HRICG

(3) LRICG

(4) PCCG

(5) CCG

Figure 1: Irregular Latent Grids enable many applications: (1) shape reconstruction, (2) highresolution-image-conditioned generation, (3) low-resolution-image-conditioned generation, (4) pointcloud-conditioned generation, and (5) category-conditioned generation. The data structure is especially suited for auto-regressive modeling (applications 2-5). For each of these applications the
probabilistic approach enables sampling of many plausible models for a single query.
Neural fields for 3D shapes are popular in machine learning because they are generally easier to
process with neural networks than other alternative representations, e.g., triangle meshes or spline
surfaces. Earlier works represent a shape with a single global latent [29, 13, 7, 36, 66]. This already
gives promising results in shape autoencoding and shape reconstruction. However, shape details
are often missing and hard to recover from a global latent. Later, local latent grids for shapes
were proposed [39, 23, 3, 48]. A local latent mainly influences the shape (surface) in a local 3D
neighborhood, thus perceiving shape details. However, in contrast to global latents, local latents
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

