Decentralized Local Stochastic Extra-Gradient for
Variational Inequalities
Aleksandr Beznosikov
Innopolis University⇤, MIPT†, HSE University and Yandex
anbeznosikov@gmail.com
Pavel Dvurechensky
WIAS‡
pavel.dvurechensky@wias-berlin.de
Valentin Samokhin
IITP RAS§
samohin.vyu@phystech.edu

Sebastian U. Stich
CISPA¶
stich@cispa.de

Anastasia Koloskova
EPFL
anastasia.koloskova@epfl.ch
Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT, HSE University and IITP RAS
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Abstract
We consider distributed stochastic variational inequalities (VIs) on unbounded
domains with the problem data that is heterogeneous (non-IID) and distributed
across many devices. We make a very general assumption on the computational
network that, in particular, covers the settings of fully decentralized calculations
with time-varying networks and centralized topologies commonly used in Federated Learning. Moreover, multiple local updates on the workers can be made
for reducing the communication frequency between the workers. We extend the
stochastic extragradient method to this very general setting and theoretically analyze its convergence rate in the strongly-monotone, monotone, and non-monotone
(when a Minty solution exists) settings. The provided rates explicitly exhibit the
dependence on network characteristics (e.g., mixing time), iteration counter, data
heterogeneity, variance, number of devices, and other standard parameters. As a
special case, our method and analysis apply to distributed stochastic saddle-point
problems (SPP), e.g., to the training of Deep Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) for which decentralized training has been reported to be extremely challenging. In experiments for the decentralized training of GANs we demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed approach.

1

Introduction

In large-scale machine learning (ML) scenarios the training data is often split between many devices,
such as geographically distributed datacenters or mobile devices [38]. Decentralized training methods
can learn an ML model with the same accuracy as if all the data would be aggregated on one single
server [54, 5]. At the same time, training in a decentralized fashion has many advantages over
traditional centralized approaches in such core aspects as data ownership, privacy, fault tolerance,
⇤

Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Innopolis University
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
‡
Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics
§
Institute for Information Transmission Problems RAS
¶
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

