Planning for Sample Efficient Imitation Learning

Zhao-Heng Yin∗ Weirui Ye† Qifeng Chen∗ Yang Gao†‡§
∗

HKUST

†

Tsinghua University

‡

Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
Imitation learning is a class of promising policy learning algorithms that is free
from many practical issues with reinforcement learning, such as the reward design
issue and the exploration hardness. However, the current imitation algorithm struggles to achieve both high performance and high in-environment sample efficiency
simultaneously. Behavioral Cloning (BC) does not need in-environment interactions, but it suffers from the covariate shift problem which harms its performance.
Adversarial Imitation Learning (AIL) turns imitation learning into a distribution
matching problem. It can achieve better performance on some tasks but it requires
a large number of in-environment interactions. Inspired by the recent success of
EfficientZero in RL, we propose EfficientImitate (EI), a planning-based imitation
learning method that can achieve high in-environment sample efficiency and performance simultaneously. Our algorithmic contribution in this paper is two-fold.
First, we extend AIL into the MCTS-based RL. Second, we show the seemingly
incompatible two classes of imitation algorithms (BC and AIL) can be naturally
unified under our framework, enjoying the benefits of both. We benchmark our
method not only on the state-based DeepMind Control Suite, but also on the image
version which many previous works find highly challenging. Experimental results
show that EI achieves state-of-the-art results in performance and sample efficiency.
EI shows over 4x gain in performance in the limited sample setting on state-based
and image-based tasks and can solve challenging problems like Humanoid, where
previous methods fail with a small amount of interactions. Our code is available at
https://github.com/zhaohengyin/EfficientImitate.

1

Introduction

The real-world sequential decision process in robotics is highly challenging. Robots have to handle
high dimensional input such as images, need to solve long horizon problems, some critical timesteps
need highly accurate maneuver, and the learning process on the real robot has to be sample efficient.
Imitation learning is a promising approach to solving those problems, given a small dataset of expert
demonstrations. However, current imitation algorithms struggle to achieve these goals simultaneously.
There are two kinds of popular imitation learning algorithms, Behavior Cloning (BC) and Adversarial
Imitation Learning (AIL). BC formulates imitation learning as a supervised learning problem. It
needs no in-environment samples, but it suffers from the covariate shift issue [37], often leading
to test time performance degradation. Adversarial Imitation Learning (AIL) [16, 6] casts imitation
learning as a distribution matching problem. Though AIL suffers less from the covariate shift problem
and can perform better than BC on some domains, it requires an impractical number of online
interactions [19, 22] and can perform badly on image inputs [34]. These drawbacks heavily limit its
application in fields like robotics, where physical robot time matters. In summary, current imitation
∗

zhaoheng.yin@connect.ust.hk, cqf@ust.hk
ywr20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gaoyangiiis@tsinghua.edu.cn
§
Corresponding author.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

