Bayesian Inference via Sparse Hamiltonian Flows

Naitong Chen

Zuheng Xu
Trevor Campbell
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
[naitong.chen | zuheng.xu | trevor]@stat.ubc.ca

Abstract
A Bayesian coreset is a small, weighted subset of data that replaces the full dataset
during Bayesian inference, with the goal of reducing computational cost. Although
past work has shown empirically that there often exists a coreset with low inferential
error, efficiently constructing such a coreset remains a challenge. Current methods
tend to be slow, require a secondary inference step after coreset construction,
and do not provide bounds on the data marginal evidence. In this work, we
introduce a new method—sparse Hamiltonian flows—that addresses all three of
these challenges. The method involves first subsampling the data uniformly, and
then optimizing a Hamiltonian flow parametrized by coreset weights and including
periodic momentum quasi-refreshment steps. Theoretical results show that the
method enables an exponential compression of the dataset in a representative
model, and that the quasi-refreshment steps reduce the KL divergence to the target.
Real and synthetic experiments demonstrate that sparse Hamiltonian flows provide
accurate posterior approximations with significantly reduced runtime compared
with competing dynamical-system-based inference methods.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference provides a coherent approach to learning from data and uncertainty assessment in
a wide variety of complex statistical models. Two standard methodologies for performing Bayesian
inference in practice are Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [1; 2; 3, Ch. 11,12] and variational
inference (VI) [4, 5]. MCMC simulates a Markov chain that targets the posterior distribution. In the
increasingly common setting of large-scale data, most exact MCMC methods are intractable. This
is essentially because simulating each MCMC step requires an (expensive) computation involving
each data point, and many steps are required to obtain inferential results of a reasonable quality. To
reduce cost, a typical approach is to perform the computation for a random subsample of the data,
rather than the full dataset, at each step [6–10] (see [11] for a recent survey). However, recent work
shows that the speed benefits are outweighed by the drawbacks; uniformly subsampling at each step
causes MCMC to either mix slowly or provide poor inferential approximation quality [11–15]. VI,
on the other hand, posits a family of approximations to the posterior and uses optimization to find the
closest member, enabling the use of scalable stochastic optimization algorithms [16, 17]. While past
work involved simple parametric families, recent work has developed flow families based on Markov
chains [18, 19]—and in particular, those based on Langevin and Hamiltonian dynamics [20–25].
However, because these Markov chains are typically designed to target the posterior distribution,
each step again requires a computation involving all the data, making KL minimization and sampling
slow. Repeated subsampling to reduce cost has the same issues that it does in MCMC.
Although repeated subsampling in each step of a Markov chain (for MCMC or VI) is not generally
helpful, recent work on Bayesian coresets [26] has provided empirical evidence that there often exists
a fixed small, weighted subset of the data—a coreset—that one can use to replace the full dataset in
a standard MCMC or VI inference method [27]. In order for the Bayesian coreset approach to be
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

