Pyramid Attention For Source Code Summarization
Lei Chai and Ming Li∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{chail, lim}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a multi-granularity method for source code summarization,
which generates a concise functional description for the given code snippet. We
notice that skilled programmers write and read source codes hierarchically and
pay close attention to conceptual entities like statements, tokens, sub-tokens,
and the mapping relations between them. The entities have specific emphasis according to their granularities, e.g., statements in coarse-granularity reveal
the global logical semantics of code, and the sub-tokens in fine-granularity are
more related to the textual semantics. Driven by this observation, we demonstrate that a multi-granularity formulation incorporating these conceptual entities benefit the code summarization task. Concretely, the source code is transformed into a pyramidal representation, and then a pyramid attention mechanism is applied for efficient feature aggregation among different hierarchies in
it. We instantiate our multi-granularity method using the proposed pyramid attention and name it PA-former (Pyramid Attention transformer). We evaluated
it on two source code summarization benchmarks where it surpasses the prior
works and achieves new state-of-the-art results. Our code and data are available
at https://github.com/leichainju/pa-former.

1

Introduction

Automatic source code summarization is drawing increasing attention to its promising application
prospects in software development and maintenance. This task is challenging due to the complex
syntax structure in programs and the arbitrariness of variable naming. Summarization methods
need to take advantage of textual and grammatical information in programs to learn a meaningful
representation for concise description generation. Following the early stage works [12, 30] that
treated the code as a sequence of text and directly adopted the well-developed seq2seq [28] models
for this task, recent leading methods [27, 25] further exploit the explicit structure (i.e., abstract
syntax tree or pair-wise relations extracted from it) in programs to boost the model performance.
Current structure-based code summarization methods are either in a hybrid way [27, 1, 13, 3] or in a
structure-guided way [25, 35, 9, 19]. Works in hybrid fashion encode the AST-based structure using
structure-aware models like GGNN [16] or TreeLSTM [29], and then combine the structural representation with the textual representation learned by sequential models for the decoding process. The
structure-guided approaches use the pair-wise relations between tokens (or sub-tokens) extracted
from code structure as inductive biases to guide the learning process. While these methods achieve
excellent results, they only model the source code from a single-granularity perspective, which can
be further improved in a multi-granularity manner.
To understand a given code snippet, a skilled programmer hierarchically breaks it down into finegrained entities (i.e., sub-tokens) and builds up conceptual semantics gradually from fine-grained
∗

Ming Li is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

