ST-Adapter: Parameter-Efficient Image-to-Video
Transfer Learning

Junting Pan1∗, Ziyi Lin1∗ , Xiatian Zhu2 , Jing Shao1 , Hongsheng Li1,3
1
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Surrey Institute for People-Centred Artificial Intelligence, CVSSP, University of Surrey
3
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence Limited

Abstract
Capitalizing on large pre-trained models for various downstream tasks of interest
have recently emerged with promising performance. Due to the ever-growing
model size, the standard full fine-tuning based task adaptation strategy becomes
prohibitively costly in terms of model training and storage. This has led to a
new research direction in parameter-efficient transfer learning. However, existing
attempts typically focus on downstream tasks from the same modality (e.g., image
understanding) of the pre-trained model. This creates a limit because in some
specific modalities, (e.g., video understanding) such a strong pre-trained model
with sufficient knowledge is less or not available. In this work, we investigate
such a novel cross-modality transfer learning setting, namely parameter-efficient
image-to-video transfer learning. To solve this problem, we propose a new SpatioTemporal Adapter (ST-Adapter) for parameter-efficient fine-tuning per video task.
With a built-in spatio-temporal reasoning capability in a compact design, STAdapter enables a pre-trained image model without temporal knowledge to reason
about dynamic video content at a small (∼8%) per-task parameter cost, requiring
approximately 20 times fewer updated parameters compared to previous work.
Extensive experiments on video action recognition tasks show that our ST-Adapter
can match or even outperform the strong full fine-tuning strategy and state-of-theart video models, whilst enjoying the advantage of parameter efficiency. Code and
model are available at https://github.com/linziyi96/st-adapter

1

Introduction

In the NLP field, almost all the state-of-arts across a wide range of downstream tasks have been
achieved by adapting from large pretrained models (a.k.a. foundation models [7]) such as BERT [15]
and GPT [54, 8]. The de facto standard approach to adapting a pretrained model to down-stream tasks
is fine-tuning either fully or partially (e.g., linear probing by training the newly added multi-layer
perceptron layers on the top alone), subject to the condition of adopting a similar network architecture
as the pretrained model. Nonetheless, given increasingly larger whilst ever stronger foundation
models (e.g., GPT-3 with 175B parameters), fully fine-tuning the whole model for every single
downstream task would become prohibitively expensive and infeasible in terms of training cost
and model storage. This could significantly restrict their deployment and usability in real-world
applications. In this context, a series of NLP works has been introduced towards efficient transfer
learning with better trade-offs between parameter and accuracy [25, 24, 39, 36].
This trend has recently motivated the computer vision community. For example, the CLIP model
[55], trained with 400 million web image-text pairs, achieves promising performances on a variety of
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

