Adaptive Oracle-Efficient Online Learning
Guanghui Wang† , Zihao Hu† , Vidya Muthukumar‡,! , Jacob Abernethy†
College of Computing†
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering‡
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering!
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30339
{gwang369,zihaohu,vmuthukumar8,prof}@gatech.edu

Abstract
The classical algorithms for online learning and decision-making have the benefit of achieving the optimal performance guarantees, but suffer from computational complexity limitations when implemented at scale. More recent sophisticated techniques, which we refer to as oracle-efficient methods, address this problem by dispatching to an offline optimization oracle that can search through an
exponentially-large (or even infinite) space of decisions and select that which performed the best on any dataset. But despite the benefits of computational feasibility, oracle-efficient algorithms exhibit one major limitation: while performing
well in worst-case settings, they do not adapt well to friendly environments. In this
paper we consider two such friendly scenarios, (a) “small-loss” problems and (b)
IID data. We provide a new framework for designing follow-the-perturbed-leader
algorithms that are oracle-efficient and adapt well to the small-loss environment,
under a particular condition which we call approximability (which is spiritually related to sufficient conditions provided in (Dudík et al., 2020)). We identify a series
of real-world settings, including online auctions and transductive online classification, for which approximability holds. We also extend the algorithm to an IID data
setting and establish a “best-of-both-worlds” bound in the oracle-efficient setting.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a fundamental paradigm for modeling sequential decision making problems (CesaBianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Shalev-Shwartz, 2011; Hazan, 2016). Online learning is usually formulated
as a zero-sum game between a learner and an adversary. In each round t = 1, . . . , T , the learner
first picks an action xt from a (finite) set X = {x(1) , . . . , x(K) } with cardinality equal to K. In
the meantime, an adversary reveals its action yt ∈ Y. As a consequence, the learner observes
yt , and suffers a loss f (xt , yt ), where f : X × Y #→ [0, 1]. The goal is to minimize the regret,
!T
which is defined as the difference between the cumulative loss of the learner t=1 f (xt , yt ), and
!
T
the cumulative loss of the best action in hindsight L∗T = minx∈X t=1 f (x, yt ).
A wide variety of algorithms have been proposed for the goal of minimizing worst-case regret
(without any consideration of computational complexity per iteration); see (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Shalev-Shwartz, 2011; Hazan, 2016) for representative
√ surveys of this literature. These
algorithms all obtain a worst-case regret bound of the order O( T log K), which is known to be
minimax-optimal (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). Over the last two decades, sophisticated adaptive
algorithms have been designed that additionally enjoy problem-dependent performance guarantees,
which can automatically lead to better results in friendly environments. One of the most important
example for this kind of guarantees is the so-called “small-loss” bound (Hutter & Poland, 2005;
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

