Tight Lower Bounds on Worst-Case Guarantees for
Zero-Shot Learning with Attributes
Alessio Mazzetto⇤
Brown University
Andrew Yuan
Brown University

Cristina Menghini⇤
Brown University
Eli Upfal
Brown University

Stephen H. Bach
Brown University

Abstract
We develop a rigorous mathematical analysis of zero-shot learning with attributes.
In this setting, the goal is to label novel classes with no training data, only detectors
for attributes and a description of how those attributes are correlated with the
target classes, called the class-attribute matrix. We develop the first non-trivial
lower bound on the worst-case error of the best map from attributes to classes for
this setting, even with perfect attribute detectors. The lower bound characterizes
the theoretical intrinsic difficulty of the zero-shot problem based on the available
information—the class-attribute matrix—and the bound is practically computable
from it. Our lower bound is tight, as we show that we can always find a randomized
map from attributes to classes whose expected error is upper bounded by the
value of the lower bound. We show that our analysis can be predictive of how
standard zero-shot methods behave in practice, including which classes will likely
be confused with others.

1

Introduction

Labeled training data is often scarce or unavailable, and it can be very costly to obtain. For this
reason, there is a growing interest in developing methods that can exploit source of information
other than labeled data, such as zero-shot learning (ZSL). In ZSL, we want to recognize items of
unseen classes, for which labeled data is not available. A ZSL model is trained on a disjoint set of
similar classes, called seen classes, for which labeled data is available instead. The model is trained
to map examples to auxiliary information describing the seen classes. Then, at test time, predictions
can be made using only descriptions of the unseen classes. While ZSL is increasingly common in
practice, from a theoretical perspective ZSL is a hard problem that defies analysis, because in the
worst case there can be an arbitrary shift between the distributions of the seen and unseen classes.
In this work, we take a step towards a better theoretical understanding of ZSL. We investigate the
question: Given only auxiliary information in the form of attributes describing unseen classes, what
is the smallest worst-case error than any method can guarantee? We provide the first non-trivial
answer to this question by developing a framework based on adversarial optimization. We also show
that this framework has practical application as a method for identifying when the predictions of ZSL
methods on certain unseen classes are more likely to be incorrect.
ZSL models have obtained impressive accuracy in practice, both for vision (Xian et al., 2018a)
and language domains (Sanh et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022), but they come with no theoretical
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

