Are Two Heads the Same as One? Identifying
Disparate Treatment in Fair Neural Networks

Michael Lohaus∗
University of Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany
mlohaus@yahoo.com
Krishnaram Kenthapadi
Fiddler AI
Palo Alto, USA
krishnaram@fiddler.ai

Matthäus Kleindessner
Amazon Web Services
Tübingen, Germany
matkle@amazon.com

Francesco Locatello
Amazon Web Services
Tübingen, Germany
locatelf@amazon.com

Chris Russell
Amazon Web Services
Tübingen, Germany
cmruss@amazon.com

Abstract
We show that deep networks trained to satisfy demographic parity often do so
through a form of race or gender awareness, and that the more we force a network
to be fair, the more accurately we can recover race or gender from the internal state
of the network. Based on this observation, we investigate an alternative fairness
approach: we add a second classification head to the network to explicitly predict
the protected attribute (such as race or gender) alongside the original task. After
training the two-headed network, we enforce demographic parity by merging the
two heads, creating a network with the same architecture as the original network.
We establish a close relationship between existing approaches and our approach
by showing (1) that the decisions of a fair classifier are well-approximated by our
approach, and (2) that an unfair and optimally accurate classifier can be recovered
from a fair classifier and our second head predicting the protected attribute. We use
our explicit formulation to argue that the existing fairness approaches, just as ours,
demonstrate disparate treatment and that they are likely to be unlawful in a wide
range of scenarios under US law.

1

Introduction

Autonomous systems that make substantive decisions about people must conform to relevant antidiscrimination legislation. Within the US legal system, two common tests of anti-discrimination
legislation are referred to as disparate treatment and disparate impact [37]. Disparate treatment
corresponds to the idea that people should not be treated differently because of their membership of a
protected group (such as race or gender), while disparate impact refers to the idea that seemingly
neutral practices should not cause a substantial adverse impact to a protected group. Importantly, it
has been argued [7] that there are a large range of scenarios where disparate treatment is unlawful
even when performed as a remedy to disparate impact. This is in departure from the EU where more
latitude exists when rectifying indirect discrimination (analogous to disparate impact) [67].
Consequentially, disparate treatment doctrine prevents a wide range of actions intended to address
sustained inequality [9]. Of particular relevance to our work is a 1991 amendment to Title VII
[60]. This amendment explicitly prohibits the “use [of] different cutoff scores for . . . employment
related tests on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin”, even if done for reasons of
∗

Work done during an internship at Amazon Web Services.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

