High-dimensional limit theorems for SGD:
Effective dynamics and critical scaling
Gérard Ben Arous
Department of Mathematics
Courant Institute
New York University
New York, NY
benarous@cims.nyu.edu

Reza Gheissari
Miller Institute
Departments of EECS and Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkely, CA
gheissari@berkeley.edu

Aukosh Jagannath
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, ON a.jagannath@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We study the scaling limits of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with constant stepsize in the high-dimensional regime. We prove limit theorems for the trajectories
of summary statistics (i.e., finite-dimensional functions) of SGD as the dimension
goes to infinity. Our approach allows one to choose the summary statistics that
are tracked, the initialization, and the step-size. It yields both ballistic (ODE) and
diffusive (SDE) limits, with the limit depending dramatically on the former choices.
We find a critical scaling regime for the step-size below which this “effective
dynamics" matches gradient flow for the population loss, but at which, a new
correction term appears which changes the phase diagram. About the fixed points
of this effective dynamics, the corresponding diffusive limits can be quite complex
and even degenerate. We demonstrate our approach on popular examples including
estimation for spiked matrix and tensor models and classification via two-layer
networks for binary and XOR-type Gaussian mixture models. These examples
exhibit surprising phenomena including multimodal timescales to convergence as
well as convergence to sub-optimal solutions with probability bounded away from
zero from random (e.g., Gaussian) initializations.

1

Introduction

Background. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the go-to method for large-scale optimization
problems in data science. It is used to train complex parametric models on high-dimensional data.
Since its introduction in [39], there has been a tremendous amount of work in analyzing its evolution.
In fixed dimensions, the asymptotic theory of SGD, and stochastic approximations more broadly, is
by now classical. There have been works on path-wise limit theorems, such as functional central limit
theorems and even large deviations principles [39, 31, 28, 22, 17, 7, 16, 6]. At the core of this line of
work is the idea that in the limit where the step-size, or learning rate, tends to zero, the trajectory of
SGD with a fixed loss function (appropriately rescaled in time) converges to the solution of gradient
flow for the population loss with the same initialization. Recently there has been considerable interest
in quantifying the rate of this trajectory-wise convergence to higher order, in terms of a diffusion
approximation. Namely, there are many works developing asymptotic expansions of the trajectory in
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

