Adversarial Attack on Attackers: Post-Process to
Mitigate Black-Box Score-Based Query Attacks

Sizhe Chen1 , Zhehao Huang1 , Qinghua Tao2 , Yingwen Wu1 , Cihang Xie3 , Xiaolin Huang1
1
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
ESAT-STADIUS, KU Leuven
3
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz

Abstract
The score-based query attacks (SQAs) pose practical threats to deep neural networks by crafting adversarial perturbations within dozens of queries, only using
the model’s output scores. Nonetheless, we note that if the loss trend of the outputs
is slightly perturbed, SQAs could be easily misled and thereby become much less
effective. Following this idea, we propose a novel defense, namely Adversarial Attack on Attackers (AAA), to confound SQAs towards incorrect attack directions by
slightly modifying the output logits. In this way, (1) SQAs are prevented regardless
of the model’s worst-case robustness; (2) the original model predictions are hardly
changed, i.e., no degradation on clean accuracy; (3) the calibration of confidence
scores can be improved simultaneously. Extensive experiments are provided to
verify the above advantages. For example, by setting ℓ∞ = 8/255 on CIFAR-10,
our proposed AAA helps WideResNet-28 secure 80.59% accuracy under Square
attack (2500 queries), while the best prior defense (i.e., adversarial training) only
attains 67.44%. Since AAA attacks SQA’s general greedy strategy, such advantages
of AAA over 8 defenses can be consistently observed on 8 CIFAR-10/ImageNet
models under 6 SQAs, using different attack targets, bounds, norms, losses, and
strategies. Moreover, AAA calibrates better without hurting the accuracy.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial examples (AEs), where humanimperceptible perturbations added to clean samples can fool DNNs to give wrong predictions [1, 2].
Recently, such a threat is made practically feasible by the black-box score-based query attacks (SQAs)
[3, 4, 5], as they only require the same information as users to craft efficient AEs. Users, for better
judgments, need the model’s prediction confidence indicated by DNNs’ output scores, which is the
only knowledge needed by SQAs to perform attacks. In contrast, white-box attacks [6, 7, 8] or
transfer-based attacks [9, 10] require the gradients or training data of DNNs. Moreover, it has been
shown that SQAs can achieve a non-trivial attack success rate by a reasonable number of queries,
e.g., dozens, compared to thousands of queries for decision-based query attacks [11, 12, 13]. Thus,
such feasibility and effectiveness of SQAs are attracting increasing attention from defenders [14].
Defending against SQAs is a different goal compared to improving the worst-case robustness as
commonly studied [15, 16, 17]. Because in real-world scenarios which SQAs are designed for,
DNNs are treated as black boxes, in which the only interaction between models and users/attackers
is the model’s output scores. Thus, altering the scores is all defenders could do here, either in
direct or indirect ways. Most existing defenses indirectly change outputs by optimizing the model
[8, 18, 19] or pre-processing the inputs [14, 20], which, however, severely affect models’ normal
performance for different reasons. Training a robust model, e.g., by adversarial training [8, 21, 22],
diverts the model’s attention to learning AEs, yielding the so-called accuracy-robustness trade-off
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

