Geometric Knowledge Distillation:
Topology Compression for Graph Neural Networks
Chenxiao Yang, Qitian Wu, Junchi Yan⇤
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{chr26195,echo740,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We study a new paradigm of knowledge transfer that aims at encoding graph topological information into graph neural networks (GNNs) by distilling knowledge
from a teacher GNN model trained on a complete graph to a student GNN model
operating on a smaller or sparser graph. To this end, we revisit the connection
between thermodynamics and the behavior of GNN, based on which we propose
Neural Heat Kernel (NHK) to encapsulate the geometric property of the underlying
manifold concerning the architecture of GNNs. A fundamental and principled
solution is derived by aligning NHKs on teacher and student models, dubbed as
Geometric Knowledge Distillation. We develop non-parametric and parametric
instantiations and demonstrate their efficacy in various experimental settings for
knowledge distillation regarding different types of privileged topological information and teacher-student schemes.

1

Introduction

Modern graph neural networks (GNNs) [28; 49; 53] have shown remarkable performance in learning
representations for structured instances. From the perspective of geometric deep learning [5; 4; 38],
part of the achievement of GNNs can be attributed to their implementation of the permutation
invariance property as geometric priors 2 into the architecture design. Nevertheless, in practice, GNNs
highly rely on graph topology, as essential input information, to explore the relational knowledge
implicit in interactions of instance pairs throughout the entire message passing process, termed
as geometric knowledge in this paper. As advances in generalized distillation [33; 47] reveal the
possibility of encoding input features into model construction, natural questions arise as to:
Is it possible, and if so, how can we encode graph topology as a special type of ‘geometric prior’ into
a GNN model, such that the model could precisely capture the underlying geometric knowledge even
without full graph topology as input?
In specific, we are interested in the following geometric knowledge transfer problem: a GNN model
(with node-specific outputs for node-level prediction [23]) is exposed with a partial graph, which is a
subset of the complete graph. Formally speaking, we have notations:
G = {V, E} (partial graph), G̃ = {Ṽ, Ẽ} (complete graph), where V ✓ Ṽ, E ✓ {V ⇥ V} \ Ẽ. (1)

Our goal is to transfer or encode geometric knowledge extracted from G̃ to the target GNN model
that is only aware of G. Studying this problem is also of much practical value. As a non-exhaustive
⇤

Junchi Yan is the correspondence author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Geometric priors originally refer to the geometric principles naturally encoded in deep learning architectures,
e.g., translational symmetry for CNNs, permutation invariance for GNNs.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

