Multi-Objective Deep Learning
with Adaptive Reference Vectors

Weiyu Chen James T. Kwok
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong
{wchenbx, jamesk}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Many deep learning models involve optimizing multiple objectives. Since objectives are often conflicting, we aim to get diverse and representative trade-off
solutions among these objectives. Gradient-based multi-objective optimization
(MOO) algorithms using reference vectors have shown promising performance.
However, they may still produce undesirable solutions due to mismatch between
the pre-specified reference vectors and the problem’s underlying Pareto front. In
this paper, we propose a novel gradient-based MOO algorithm with adaptive reference vectors. We formulate reference vector adaption as a bilevel optimization
problem, and solve it with an efficient solver. Theoretical convergence analysis is
also provided. Experiments on an extensive set of learning scenarios demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed algorithm over the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are often evaluated under multiple, potentially conflicting, criteria. For example,
in multi-task learning [6], a single model is required to perform well on multiple tasks. In some
scenarios, besides accuracy, model fairness is also important so as to ensure that the model is not
biased against gender and race. These problems can all be formulated as multi-objective optimization
(MOO) [39] problems, and have attracted attention from various fields such as energy resource
optimization [9] and signal processing [4].
Since the multiple objectives usually cannot be optimized simultaneously by a single solution, the
goal of MOO is to find a set of solutions with different trade-offs to approximate the true Pareto front
(PF). The past decades have witnessed the birth of a large number of gradient-free MOO algorithms,
such as evolutionary multi-objective optimization algorithms [11, 52] and Bayesian multi-objective
algorithms [26, 3]. These algorithms perform well on small-scale problems but fail to provide useful
solutions when facing the huge number of parameters in deep learning models.
Recently, gradient-based MOO algorithms [14] have demonstrated promising performance in deep
learning. Following the pioneering work in [45], Lin et al. [31] and Mahapatra et al. [37] propose
to use a set of reference vectors (RV), and generate multiple solutions on the PF each of which
is closest to an RV. Later, strategies are further proposed to improve the efficiency by training a
hypernetwork [40, 30] or reference-vector-conditioned network [44]. However, note that a set of
uniformly distributed RVs may not lead to a set of uniformly distributed solutions. Hence, an
important limitation of these algorithms is that solutions generated using fixed RVs may not cover
some parts of the PF, thus failing to provide enough information about the PF. As an illustration, in
Figure 1a, solutions obtained by the fixed RVs are close to the ends of the PF. If the RVs are properly
positioned, it is possible that the obtained solution set can uniformly cover the PF (Figure 1b).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

