Phase diagram of Stochastic Gradient Descent in
high-dimensional two-layer neural networks

Rodrigo Veiga
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne
IFUSP, USP, São Paulo

Ludovic Stephan
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne

Florent Krzakala
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne

Bruno Loureiro
IdePHICS, EPFL, Lausanne

Lenka Zdeborová
SPOC, EPFL, Lausanne

Abstract
Despite the non-convex optimization landscape, over-parametrized shallow networks are able to achieve global convergence under gradient descent. The picture
can be radically different for narrow networks, which tend to get stuck in badlygeneralizing local minima. Here we investigate the cross-over between these two
regimes in the high-dimensional setting, and in particular investigate the connection
between the so-called mean-field/hydrodynamic regime and the seminal approach
of Saad & Solla. Focusing on the case of Gaussian data, we study the interplay
between the learning rate, the time scale, and the number of hidden units in the
high-dimensional dynamics of stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Our work builds
on a deterministic description of SGD in high-dimensions from statistical physics,
which we extend and for which we provide rigorous convergence rates.

Descent-based algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants are the workhorse
of modern machine learning. They are simple to implement, efficient to run and most importantly:
they work well in practice. A detailed understanding of the performance of SGD is a major topic
in machine learning. Quite recently, significant progress was achieved in the context of learning in
shallow neural networks. In a series of works, it was shown that the optimisation of wide two-layer
neural networks can be mapped to a convex problem in the space of probability distributions over
the weights [1–4]. This remarkable result implies global convergence of two-layer networks towards
perfect learning provided that the number of hidden neurons is large, the learning rate is sufficiently
small and enough data is at disposition. This line of work is commonly referred to as the mean-field
or the hydrodynamic limit of neural networks. Mathematically, these works showed that one could
describe the entire dynamics using a partial differential equation (PDE) in d dimensions.
In a different, and older, line of work, one-pass SGD for two-layer neural networks with a finite
number p of hidden units, synthetic Gaussian input data and teacher-generated labels has been widely
studied starting with the seminal work of [5]. These works consider the limit of high-dimensional data
and show, in particular, that the stochastic process driven by gradient updates converge to a set of p2
deterministic ordinary differential equations (ODEs) as the input dimension d → ∞ and the learning
rate is proportional to 1/d. The validity of these ODEs in this limit was proven by [6]. However, the
picture drawn from the analysis of these ODEs is slightly different from the mean-field/hydrodynamic
picture: in this case SGD can get stuck for long time in minima associated to no specialization of the
hidden units to the teacher hidden units, and even when it converges to specializing minima, it fails to
perfectly learn (i.e. to achieve zero population risk). In fact, in this analysis, the interplay between
the limit of the learning rate going to zero and d → ∞ appeared to be fundamental.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

