Stochastic Window Transformer
for Image Restoration

Jie Xiao, Xueyang Fu∗, Feng Wu, Zheng-Jun Zha
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
ustchbxj@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu,fengwu,zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Thanks to the powerful representation capabilities, transformers have made impressive progress in image restoration. However, existing transformers-based methods
do not carefully consider the particularities of image restoration. In general, image restoration requires that an ideal approach should be translation-invariant to
the degradation, i.e., the undesirable degradation should be removed irrespective
of its position within the image. Furthermore, the local relationships also play
a vital role, which should be faithfully exploited for recovering clean images.
Nevertheless, most transformers either adopt local attention with the fixed local
window strategy or global attention, which unfortunately breaks the translation
invariance and causes huge loss of local relationships. To address these issues, we
propose an elegant stochastic window strategy for transformers. Specifically, we
first introduce the window partition with stochastic shift to replace the original
fixed window partition for training. Then, we design a new layer expectation
propagation algorithm to efficiently approximate the expectation of the induced
stochastic transformer for testing. Our stochastic window transformer not only
enjoys powerful representation but also maintains the desired property of translation invariance and locality. Experiments validate the stochastic window strategy
consistently improves performance on various image restoration tasks (deraining, denoising and deblurring) by significant margins. The code is available at
https://github.com/jiexiaou/Stoformer.

1

Introduction

Image restoration aims to recover latent clean images from their noise-polluted counterparts, which
lays the foundation for various vision tasks. Generally, image restoration methods should satisfy a
constraint: an ideal approach should remove undesirable degradation irrespective of its position
within the image. In other words, maintaining the translation invariance is the fundamental requirement for image restoration, which makes convolutional neural networks (CNNs) well-suited for
this specific vision task [56, 23, 9, 73, 70, 61, 66, 58, 72, 6, 15]. In comparison with multi-layer
perceptrons (MLPs), the distinct characteristics of CNNs [26, 22, 17] are their built-in locality and
weight sharing, resulting in the desirable property of translation invariance. These two priors play
a vital role in image restoration, i.e., pixels within local regions tend to exhibit strong correlations
while translation invariance is one of the desiderata for the potential image restoration method.
On the other hand, transformer-based image restoration methods [2, 54, 33, 63] are not compatible
with the translation invariance and locality. The patterns that transformers adopted for recovering
high-resolution images can be summarized as small patch with global attention (e.g., 48 × 48 for IPT
[2]) and large patch with local attention (e.g., Uformer [54] and SwinIR [33]). Nevertheless, neither
of these two patterns can meet the requirements of translation invariance or locality. Here we detail
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

