LOG: Active Model Adaptation for Label-Efficient
OOD Generalization
Jie-Jing Shao, Lan-Zhe Guo, Xiao-Wen Yang, Yu-Feng Li∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{shaojj, guolz, yangxw, liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
This work discusses how to achieve worst-case Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) generalization for a variety of distributions based on a relatively small labeling cost.
The problem has broad applications, especially in non-i.i.d. open-world scenarios.
Previous studies either rely on a large amount of labeling cost or lack of guarantees
about the worst-case generalization. In this work, we show for the first time that
active model adaptation could achieve both good performance and robustness based
on the invariant risk minimization principle. We propose L OG, an interactive model
adaptation framework, with two sub-modules: active sample selection and causal
invariant learning. Specifically, we formulate the active selection as a mixture
distribution separation problem and present an unbiased estimator, which could
find the samples that violate the current invariant relationship, with a provable
guarantee. The theoretical analysis supports that both sub-modules contribute to
generalization. A large number of experimental results confirm the promising
performance of the new algorithm.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are typically trained and tested on the same data distribution. However,
when these models are deployed in real task scenarios, they face much inapplicability, because the data
distribution of the target task usually deviates from that of training. For example, the financial data
prediction model based on local users is often inaccurate in predicting user behavior in other regions.
Similar examples include self-driving [42], speech recognition [16], influenza detection [30], etc.
To this problem, the recent research on OOD
Testing Distributions
Training Distribution
(Out-Of-Distribution) Generalization [23, 7, 1,
13, 40, 19, 5] has given a series of technoloDeploy
Develop
gies, trying to obtain models with robustness,
Model
which have certain worst-case generalization
guarantees on a variety of unseen distributions.
Data
Although they do not access target data, they
need a large number of high-quality source data
to remove the source-specific spurious correlaRectify model
Actively annotate a few samples
Expert
tion and obtain the generalizable invariant relationship, i.e., sufficient multi-source labeled
data and accurate source information. However, Figure 1: Example of model adaptation to a variety
these two requirements are still difficult to sat- of distributions. We would like to annotate a few
samples from target testing distributions to rectify
isfy in most practical tasks.
the model in the source iteratively.
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

