Deep Combinatorial Aggregation

Yuesong Shen 1,2 Daniel Cremers 1,2
Technical University of Munich, Germany
2
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany
{yuesong.shen, cremers}@tum.de
1

Abstract
Neural networks are known to produce poor uncertainty estimations, and a variety of approaches have been proposed to remedy this issue. This includes deep
ensemble, a simple and effective method that achieves state-of-the-art results for
uncertainty-aware learning tasks. In this work, we explore a combinatorial generalization of deep ensemble called deep combinatorial aggregation (DCA). DCA
creates multiple instances of network components and aggregates their combinations to produce diversified model proposals and predictions. DCA components can
be defined at different levels of granularity. And we discovered that coarse-grain
DCAs can outperform deep ensemble for uncertainty-aware learning both in terms
of predictive performance and uncertainty estimation. For fine-grain DCAs, we discover that an average parameterization approach named deep combinatorial weight
averaging (DCWA) can improve the baseline training. It is on par with stochastic
weight averaging (SWA) but does not require any custom training schedule or
adaptation of BatchNorm layers. Furthermore, we propose a consistency enforcing
loss that helps the training of DCWA and modelwise DCA. We experiment on
in-domain, distributional shift, and out-of-distribution image classification tasks,
and empirically confirm the effectiveness of DCWA and DCA approaches. 1

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved groundbreaking progress and neural networks are now widely used in
various domains [24]. However, they are known to produce poor uncertainty estimations [9, 37, 10],
which can be problematic for challenges like safety-critical applications [17, 26] or active learning
[35]. Numerous approaches have been proposed to tackle this issue, among which an effective yet
simple method is deep ensemble [23]. Deep ensemble yields state-of-the-art results for uncertainty
aware learning [37, 10], and it does not require elaborate architectural design and hyperparameter
search. However, while it aggregates multiple separately trained models, it can neither generate new
samples from the posterior to obtain more diverse predictions, nor produce a summarizing average
model which improves on the individual models in the ensemble.
Motivated by the success of deep ensemble, in this paper, we propose deep combinatorial aggregation
(DCA), which generalizes via a combinatorial perspective: given the hierarchical structure of neural
networks, we explore the idea of ensembling components of the network architecture and combining
them to form an enriched collection of model proposals. DCA inherits the simplicity and effectiveness
of deep ensemble, and additionally leads to several new possibilities: Apart from generating a
diversified set of model proposals, we discover that fine-grain DCA can lead to a new average
proposal via deep combinatorial weight averaging (DCWA). Furthermore, DCA training can benefit
from a consistency enforcing loss, which can produce DCA models that surpass standard deep
ensemble both in classification performance and uncertainty estimation.
1

Source code is available at https://github.com/tum-vision/dca.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

