Text-Adaptive Multiple Visual Prototype Matching for
Video-Text Retrieval
Chengzhi Lin1 , Ancong Wu1∗, Junwei Liang2
Jun Zhang3 , Wenhang Ge1 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,4,5 , Chunhua Shen6
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
AI Thrust, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
Tencent Youtu Lab
4
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security, PR China
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
6
Zhejiang University
Email: linchzh3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wuanc@mail.sysu.edu.cn, junweiliang@hkust-gz.edu.cn,
bobbyjzhang@tencent.com, gewh@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org, chunhua@me.com

Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval between videos and texts has gained increasing research interest due to the rapid emergence of videos on the web. Generally, a video contains
rich instance and event information and the query text only describes a part of the
information. Thus, a video can correspond to multiple different text descriptions
and queries. We call this phenomenon the “Video-Text Correspondence Ambiguity”
problem. Current techniques mostly concentrate on mining local or multi-level
alignment between contents of a video and text (e.g., object to entity and action to
verb). It is difficult for these methods to alleviate the video-text correspondence
ambiguity by describing a video using only one single feature, which is required to
be matched with multiple different text features at the same time. To address this
problem, we propose a Text-Adaptive Multiple Visual Prototype Matching model,
which automatically captures multiple prototypes to describe a video by adaptive
aggregation of video token features. Given a query text, the similarity is determined by the most similar prototype to find correspondence in the video, which
is termed text-adaptive matching. To learn diverse prototypes for representing
the rich information in videos, we propose a variance loss to encourage different
prototypes to attend to different contents of the video. Our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on four public video retrieval datasets.

1

Introduction

Cross-modal retrieval has gained popularity as a means of matching semantically similar samples
across multiple modalities [1, 2, 3, 4]. With the rapid increase in the number of videos, Text-Video
Retrieval (TVR) has garnered a lot of interest. Given a text description/video, we aim to retrieve the
corresponding video/text description in the gallery. TVR remains a challenging task since the video
and text have different semantical descriptions which results in modality gap.
To overcome the modality gap issue, most existing methods generally follow a dual encoding network
paradigm which encodes video and text through a visual encoder and a language encoder into the
same embedding space, respectively [1, 2, 3, 5, 6]. And then they focus on learning a similarity
function between the representations of text and video, which provides the basis for ranking the
gallery video/text. However, the modality gap issue is still not well solved due to the misalignment.
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

