S-Prompts Learning with Pre-trained Transformers:
An Occam’s Razor for Domain Incremental Learning

Yabin Wang1,2∗, Zhiwu Huang2†, Xiaopeng Hong3, 4, 1‡
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, P. R. China
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, P. R. China
4
Pengcheng Laboratory, P. R. China
iamwangyabin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, zzhiwu.huang@gmail.com, hongxiaopeng@ieee.org

Abstract
State-of-the-art deep neural networks are still struggling to address the catastrophic
forgetting problem in continual learning. In this paper, we propose one simple
paradigm (named as S-Prompting) and two concrete approaches to highly reduce
the forgetting degree in one of the most typical continual learning scenarios, i.e.,
domain increment learning (DIL). The key idea of the paradigm is to learn prompts
independently across domains with pre-trained transformers, avoiding the use
of exemplars that commonly appear in conventional methods. This results in a
win-win game where the prompting can achieve the best for each domain. The
independent prompting across domains only requests one single cross-entropy loss
for training and one simple K-NN operation as a domain identifier for inference.
The learning paradigm derives an image prompt learning approach and a novel
language-image prompt learning approach. Owning an excellent scalability (0.03%
parameter increase per domain), the best of our approaches achieves a remarkable
relative improvement (an average of about 30%) over the best of the state-of-the-art
exemplar-free methods for three standard DIL tasks, and even surpasses the best of
them relatively by about 6% in average when they use exemplars. Source code is
available at https://github.com/iamwangyabin/S-Prompts.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art deep neural networks are capable of performing impressively on a wide variety of
individual machine learning tasks. However, learning multiple tasks in sequence, generally called
continual learning, remains a substantial challenge for deep learning. When trained on a new task,
standard neural networks typically forget most of the knowledge related to previously learned tasks.
This is a well-known phenomenon named as catastrophic forgetting.
There are three common continual learning scenarios. Task-incremental learning (TIL) is provided
with task indexes for inference and thus using task-specific neural networks could overcome forgetting.
Class-incremental learning (CIL) increases classes in sequence with task indexes being unknown
for inference. Nevertheless, the classes are generally from the same domain, which more or less
decreases the challenge. In this paper, we focus on exploring domain-incremental learning (DIL),
where classes keep the same but the involved domains commonly vary a lot in sequence, with task
indexes being not provided for inference. The larger domain gaps result in more severe forgetting.
∗

This work is done when Yabin Wang visits Singapore Management University
Corresponding Author
‡
Corresponding Author
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

