FairVFL: A Fair Vertical Federated Learning
Framework with Contrastive Adversarial Learning
Tao Qi
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
taoqi.qt@gmail.com
Lingjuan Lyu
Sony AI
Tokyo, Japan
Lingjuan.Lv@sony.com
Zhongliang Yang
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
yangzl15@tsinghua.org.cn

Fangzhao Wu⇤
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing China
wufangzhao@gmail.com

Chuhan Wu
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
wuchuhan15@gmail.com

Tong Xu
USTC
Hefei, China
tongxu@ustc.edu.cn

Hao Liao
Shenzhen University
Shenzhen, China
haoliao@szu.edu.cn

Yongfeng Huang
Tsinghua University
& Zhongguancun Laboratory
yfhuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Xing Xie
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing China
xingx@microsoft.com

Abstract
Vertical federated learning (VFL) is a privacy-preserving machine learning
paradigm that can learn models from features distributed on different platforms in
a privacy-preserving way. Since in real-world applications the data may contain
bias on fairness-sensitive features (e.g., gender), VFL models may inherit bias
from training data and become unfair for some user groups. However, existing
fair machine learning methods usually rely on the centralized storage of fairnesssensitive features to achieve model fairness, which are usually inapplicable in
federated scenarios. In this paper, we propose a fair vertical federated learning
framework (FairVFL), which can improve the fairness of VFL models. The core
idea of FairVFL is to learn unified and fair representations of samples based on the
decentralized feature fields in a privacy-preserving way. Specifically, each platform
with fairness-insensitive features first learns local data representations from local
features. Then, these local representations are uploaded to a server and aggregated
into a unified representation for the target task. In order to learn a fair unified representation, we send it to each platform storing fairness-sensitive features and apply
adversarial learning to remove bias from the unified representation inherited from
the biased data. Moreover, for protecting user privacy, we further propose a contrastive adversarial learning method to remove private information from the unified
representation in server before sending it to the platforms keeping fairness-sensitive
features. Experiments on three real-world datasets validate that our method can
effectively improve model fairness with user privacy well-protected.

1

INTRODUCTION

In recent years, the explosion of data volume has enhanced the performance of machine learning (ML)
models on many tasks, e.g., personalized recommendation and search [41, 50, 2]. In many real-world
⇤

The corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

