A Multi-Resolution Framework for U-Nets
with Applications to Hierarchical VAEs
Fabian Falck ⇤ 1,3,4 Christopher Williams ⇤,1 Dominic Danks 2,4 George Deligiannidis 1
Christopher Yau 1,3,4 Chris Holmes 1,3,4 Arnaud Doucet 1 Matthew Willetts 4
1
University of Oxford 2 University of Birmingham
3
Health Data Research UK 4 The Alan Turing Institute
{fabian.falck, williams, deligian, cholmes, doucet}@stats.ox.ac.uk,
{ddanks, cyau, mwilletts}@turing.ac.uk}

Abstract
U-Net architectures are ubiquitous in state-of-the-art deep learning, however their
regularisation properties and relationship to wavelets are understudied. In this
paper, we formulate a multi-resolution framework which identifies U-Nets as
finite-dimensional truncations of models on an infinite-dimensional function space.
We provide theoretical results which prove that average pooling corresponds to
projection within the space of square-integrable functions and show that U-Nets
with average pooling implicitly learn a Haar wavelet basis representation of the
data. We then leverage our framework to identify state-of-the-art hierarchical
VAEs (HVAEs), which have a U-Net architecture, as a type of two-step forward
Euler discretisation of multi-resolution diffusion processes which flow from a
point mass, introducing sampling instabilities. We also demonstrate that HVAEs
learn a representation of time which allows for improved parameter efficiency
through weight-sharing. We use this observation to achieve state-of-the-art HVAE
performance with half the number of parameters of existing models, exploiting the
properties of our continuous-time formulation.

1

Introduction

U-Net architectures are extensively utilised in modern deep learning models. First developed for
image segmentation in biomedical applications [1], U-Nets have been widely applied for text-toimage models [2], image-to-image translation [3], image restoration [4, 5], super-resolution [6],
and multiview learning [7], amongst other tasks [8]. They also form a core building block as the
neural architecture of choice in state-of-the-art generative models, particularly for images, such as
HVAEs [9, 10, 11, 12] and diffusion models [2, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. In spite of their
empirical success, it is poorly understood why U-Nets work so well, and what regularisation they
impose.
In likelihood-based generative modelling, various model classes are competing for superiority, including normalizing flows [21, 22], autoregressive models [23, 24], diffusion models, and hierarchical
variational autoencoders (HVAEs), the latter two of which we focus on in this work. HVAEs form
groups of latent variables with a conditional dependence structure, use a U-Net neural architecture,
and are trained with the typical VAE ELBO objective (for a detailed introduction to HVAEs, see
Appendix B). HVAEs show impressive synthesis results on facial images, and yield competitive likelihood performance, consistently outperforming the previously state-of-the-art autoregressive models,
VAEs and flow models on computer vision benchmarks [9, 10]. HVAEs have undergone a journey
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

