Grounded Video Situation Recognition

Zeeshan Khan

C. V. Jawahar
Makarand Tapaswi
CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad

https://zeeshank95.github.io/grvidsitu

Abstract
Dense video understanding requires answering several questions such as who is
doing what to whom, with what, how, why, and where. Recently, Video Situation
Recognition (VidSitu) is framed as a task for structured prediction of multiple
events, their relationships, and actions and various verb-role pairs attached to
descriptive entities. This task poses several challenges in identifying, disambiguating, and co-referencing entities across multiple verb-role pairs, but also faces
some challenges of evaluation. In this work, we propose the addition of spatiotemporal grounding as an essential component of the structured prediction task in
a weakly supervised setting, and present a novel three stage Transformer model,
VideoWhisperer, that is empowered to make joint predictions. In stage one, we
learn contextualised embeddings for video features in parallel with key objects
that appear in the video clips to enable fine-grained spatio-temporal reasoning.
The second stage sees verb-role queries attend and pool information from object
embeddings, localising answers to questions posed about the action. The final
stage generates these answers as captions to describe each verb-role pair present
in the video. Our model operates on a group of events (clips) simultaneously and
predicts verbs, verb-role pairs, their nouns, and their grounding on-the-fly. When
evaluated on a grounding-augmented version of the VidSitu dataset, we observe a
large improvement in entity captioning accuracy, as well as the ability to localize
verb-roles without grounding annotations at training time.

1

Introduction

At the end of The Dark Knight, we see a short intense sequencethat involves Harvey Dent toss a coin
while holding a gun followed by sudden action. Holistic understanding of such a video sequence,
especially one that involves multiple people, requires predicting more than the action label (what
verb). For example, we may wish to answer questions such as who performed the action (agent),
why they are doing it (purpose / goal), how are they doing it (manner), where are they doing it
(location), and even what happens after (multi-event understanding). While humans are able to
perceive the situation and are good at answering such questions, many works often focus on building
tools for doing single tasks, e.g. predicting actions [8] or detecting objects [2, 4] or image/video
captioning [18, 28]. We are interested in assessing how some of these advances can be combined for
a holistic understanding of video clips.
A recent and audacious step towards this goal is the work by Sadhu et al. [27]. They propose Video
Situation Recognition (VidSitu), a structured prediction task over five short clips consisting of three
sub-problems: (i) recognizing the salient actions in the short clips; (ii) predicting roles and their
entities that are part of this action; and (iii) modelling simple event relations such as enable or
cause. Similar to the predecessor image situation recognition (imSitu [39]), VidSitu is annotated
using Semantic Role Labelling (SRL) [21]. A video (say 10s) is divided into multiple small events
(∼2s) and each event is associated with a salient action verb (e.g. hit). Each verb has a fixed set
of roles or arguments, e.g. agent-Arg0, patient-Arg1, tool-Arg2, location-ArgM(Location), manner36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

