Efficient Meta Reinforcement Learning for
Preference-based Fast Adaptation

Zhizhou Ren12 , Anji Liu3 , Yitao Liang45 , Jian Peng126 , Jianzhu Ma6
1
Helixon Ltd. 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
3
University of California, Los Angeles
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
6
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
zhizhour@helixon.com, liuanji@cs.ucla.edu
yitaol@pku.edu.cn, jianpeng@illinois.edu
majianzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning new task-specific skills from a few trials is a fundamental challenge for
artificial intelligence. Meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL) tackles this problem
by learning transferable policies that support few-shot adaptation to unseen tasks.
Despite recent advances in meta-RL, most existing methods require the access to
the environmental reward function of new tasks to infer the task objective, which
is not realistic in many practical applications. To bridge this gap, we study the
problem of few-shot adaptation in the context of human-in-the-loop reinforcement
learning. We develop a meta-RL algorithm that enables fast policy adaptation
with preference-based feedback. The agent can adapt to new tasks by querying
human’s preference between behavior trajectories instead of using per-step numeric
rewards. By extending techniques from information theory, our approach can
design query sequences to maximize the information gain from human interactions
while tolerating the inherent error of non-expert human oracle. In experiments, we
extensively evaluate our method, Adaptation with Noisy OracLE (ANOLE), on
a variety of meta-RL benchmark tasks and demonstrate substantial improvement
over baseline algorithms in terms of both feedback efficiency and error tolerance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success in learning complex behaviors and strategies
in a variety of sequential decision-making problems, including Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015),
board game Go (Silver et al., 2016), MOBA games (Berner et al., 2019), and real-time strategy
games (Vinyals et al., 2019). However, most these breakthrough accomplishments are limited in
simulation environments due to the sample inefficiency of RL algorithms. Training a policy using
deep reinforcement learning usually requires millions of interaction samples with the environment,
which is not practicable in real-world applications. One promising methodology towards breaking
this practical barrier is meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL Finn et al., 2017). The goal of metaRL is to enable fast policy adaptation to unseen tasks with a small amount of samples. Such an
ability of few-shot adaptation is supported by meta-training on a suite of tasks drawn from a prior
task distribution. Meta-RL algorithms can extract transferable knowledge from the meta-training
experiences by exploiting the common structures among the prior training tasks. A series of recent
works have been developed to improve the efficiency of meta-RL in several aspects, e.g., using
off-policy techniques to improve the sample efficiency of meta-training (Rakelly et al., 2019; Fakoor
et al., 2020), and refining the exploration-exploitation trade-off during adaptation (Zintgraf et al.,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

