Partial Identification of Treatment Effects with
Implicit Generative Models
Vahid Balazadeh1 Vasilis Syrgkanis2 Rahul G. Krishnan1
1
University of Toronto, Vector Institute 2 Stanford University
{vahid, rahulgk}@cs.toronto.edu
vsyrgk@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of partial identification, the estimation of bounds on
the treatment effects from observational data. Although studied using discrete
treatment variables or in specific causal graphs (e.g., instrumental variables), partial
identification has been recently explored using tools from deep generative modeling.
We propose a new method for partial identification of average treatment effects
(ATEs) in general causal graphs using implicit generative models comprising
continuous and discrete random variables. Since ATE with continuous treatment
is generally non-regular, we leverage the partial derivatives of response functions
to define a regular approximation of ATE, a quantity we call uniform average
treatment derivative (UATD). We prove that our algorithm converges to tight
bounds on ATE in linear structural causal models (SCMs). For nonlinear SCMs,
we empirically show that using UATD leads to tighter and more stable bounds than
methods that directly optimize the ATE. 1

1

Introduction

Estimating average treatment effects (ATEs) is a common task that arises in fields involving decisionmaking, such as healthcare and economics. In the presence of the gold-standard randomized controlled
trial (RCT) data, one can compare the outcome variable between treated and control groups to make
decisions. But RCTs can be costly to set up and run and are, in many circumstances, infeasible.
Consequently, communities are using observational data to assist in decision-making.
Identification of treatment effects from observational data is tied to the structure of the causal graph.
For example, the treatment T and outcome Y in Figure 1b are confounded by an unobserved random
variable, making it impossible to find the causal effect of T on Y only from observational data. On
the other hand, Figure 1c is identifiable, and one can adjust for confounders using the Back-door
formula [Pearl, 2009]. Even in identifiable settings, non-parametric estimations such as Back-door
adjustment formula can point-identify the ATE only with additional assumptions such as positivity,
i.e., P (T = t|X) > 0 for all values of covariate X. Observational data is finite, high-dimensional,
and consequently can suffer from severe violations of such assumptions [D’Amour et al., 2021].
In lieu of the challenges of point-identification, there has been a recognition that decisions can be
justified using reliable bounds on the ATE rather than its exact value. For an oncologist treating
a cancer patient, knowing that a drug has a significant, positive reduction in the patient’s risk of
progression may suffice as a rationale to prescribe that drug. This problem is known as partial
identification [Manski, 2003]. Most existing methods for bounding the ATEs are only applicable
in discrete/binary treatment variables [Makar et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2021, Duarte et al., 2021,
Guo et al., 2022]. There has been recent interest in continuous treatment settings. However, such
1

Our code is accessible at https://github.com/rgklab/partial_identification

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

