Toward Understanding Privileged Features Distillation
in Learning-to-Rank
Shuo Yang⇤
UT Austin
yangshuo ut@utexas.edu

Sujay Sanghavi
Amazon
sujayrs@amazon.com

Jan Bakus
Amazon
jbakus@amazon.com

Holakou Rahmanian
Amazon
holakou@amazon.com

S.V.N. Vishwanathan
Amazon
vishy@amazon.com

Abstract
In learning-to-rank problems, a privileged feature is one that is available during
model training, but not available at test time. Such features naturally arise in
merchandised recommendation systems; for instance, “user clicked this item” as a
feature is predictive of “user purchased this item” in the offline data, but is clearly
not available during online serving. Another source of privileged features is those
that are too expensive to compute online but feasible to be added offline. Privileged
features distillation (PFD) refers to a natural idea: train a “teacher” model using all
features (including privileged ones) and then use it to train a “student” model that
does not use the privileged features.
In this paper, we first study PFD empirically on three public ranking datasets
and an industrial-scale ranking problem derived from Amazon’s logs. We show
that PFD outperforms several baselines (no-distillation, pretraining-finetuning,
self-distillation, and generalized distillation) on all these datasets. Next, we analyze why and when PFD performs well via both empirical ablation studies and
theoretical analysis for linear models. Both investigations uncover an interesting
non-monotone behavior: as the predictive power of a privileged feature increases,
the performance of the resulting student model initially increases but then decreases.
We show the reason for the later decreasing performance is that a very predictive
privileged teacher produces predictions with high variance, which lead to high
variance student estimates and inferior testing performance.

1

Introduction

For recommendation systems, the features at test time are typically a subset of features available
during training. Those missing features at test time are either too expensive to compute in real-time,
or they are post-event features. For instance, for an e-commerce website, “click” is a strong feature
for predicting “purchase”, but “click” exists as a feature only in the offline training data, but not
during online serving (i.e., one cannot observe “click” before recommendations are generated). Those
features that exist only during training are called privileged features. Those that exist during both
training and testing are called regular features [XLG+ 20].
The naive approach is to ignore the privileged features and train a model that only takes regular
features. Such methods inevitably miss the information in the privileged features and lead to inferior
⇤

This work was done while Shuo Yang was interning at Amazon.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

