The Neural Testbed:
Evaluating Joint Predictions

Ian Osband∗, Zheng Wen, Seyed Mohammad Asghari,
Brendan O’Donoghue, Botao Hao, Dieterich Lawson, Morteza Ibrahimi,
Xiuyuan Lu, Vikranth Dwaracherla, and Benjamin Van Roy
DeepMind, Efficient Agent Team, Mountain View

Abstract
Predictive distributions quantify uncertainties ignored by point estimates.
This paper introduces The Neural Testbed: an open-source benchmark for
controlled and principled evaluation of agents that generate such predictions.
Crucially, the testbed assesses agents not only on the quality of their
marginal predictions per input, but also on their joint predictions across
many inputs. We evaluate a range of agents using a simple neural network
data generating process. Our results indicate that some popular Bayesian
deep learning agents do not fare well with joint predictions, even when they
can produce accurate marginal predictions. We also show that the quality of
joint predictions drives performance in downstream decision tasks. We find
these results are robust across choice a wide range of generative models, and
highlight the practical importance of joint predictions to the community.

1

Introduction

Most work on supervised learning has focused on marginal predictions. Marginal predictions
predict one label given one input, but do not model the dependence between multiple
predictions. For decision making, it is not enough to have good marginal predictions; the
quality of joint predictions drives decision performance (Wen et al., 2022). Joint predictions
predict multiple labels given multiple inputs, and may capture some correlation between
outcomes. This distinction can be particularly important in learning settings where joint
predictions allow an agent to distinguish what it knows from what it does not know (Li
et al., 2011; Lu et al., 2021).

Figure 1: Two coins with identical marginal predictions, but distinguished by joint predictions.
∗

Contact iosband@deepmind.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

