Regret Bounds for Risk-Sensitive
Reinforcement Learning

Osbert Bastani
University of Pennsylvania
obastani@seas.upenn.edu

Yecheng Jason Ma
University of Pennsylvania
jasonyma@seas.upenn.edu

Estelle Shen
University of Pennsylvania
pixna@sas.upenn.edu

Wanqiao Xu
Stanford University
wanqiaox@stanford.edu

Abstract
In safety-critical applications of reinforcement learning such as healthcare and
robotics, it is often desirable to optimize risk-sensitive objectives that account for
tail outcomes rather than expected reward. We prove the first regret bounds for
reinforcement learning under a general class of risk-sensitive objectives including
the popular CVaR objective. Our theory is based on a novel characterization of the
CVaR objective as well as a novel optimistic MDP construction.

1

Introduction

There has been recent interest in risk-sensitive reinforcement learning, which replaces the usual
expected reward objective with one that accounts for variation in possible outcomes. One of the
most popular risk-sensitive objectives is the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) objective [1, 2, 3, 4],
which is the average risk at some tail of the distribution of returns (i.e., cumulative rewards) under a
given policy [5, 6]. More generally, we consider a broad class of objectives in the form of a weighted
integral of quantiles of the return distribution, of which CVaR is a special case.
A key question is providing regret bounds for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. While there has
been some work studying this question, it has focused on a specific objective called the entropic risk
measure [7, 8], leaving open the question of bounds for more general risk-sensitive objectives. There
has also been work on optimistic exploration for CVaR [9], but without any regret bounds.
We provide the first regret bounds for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning with objectives of form
Z 1
Φ(π) =
FZ† (π) (τ ) · dG(τ ),
(1)
0

(π)

where Z
is the random variable encoding the return of policy π, FZ (π) is its quantile function
(roughly speaking, the inverse CDF), and G is a weighting function over the quantiles. This class
captures a broad range of useful objectives, and has been studied in prior work [10, 4].
We focus on the episodic setting, where the agent interacts with the environment, modeled by a
Markov decision process (MDP), over a fixed sequence of episodes. Its goal is to minimize the
regret—i.e., the gap between the objective value it achieves compared to the optimal policy. Our
approach is based on the upper confidence bound strategy [11, 12], which makes decisions according
to an optimistic estimate of the MDP. We prove that this algorithm (denoted A) has regret

√ 
regret(A) = Õ T 2 · LG · |S|3/2 · |A| · K ,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

