MinVIS: A Minimal Video Instance Segmentation
Framework without Video-based Training

De-An Huang
NVIDIA
deahuang@nvidia.com

Zhiding Yu
NVIDIA
zhidingy@nvidia.com

Anima Anandkumar
Caltech, NVIDIA
anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
We propose MinVIS, a minimal video instance segmentation (VIS) framework that
achieves state-of-the-art VIS performance with neither video-based architectures
nor training procedures. By only training a query-based image instance segmentation model, MinVIS outperforms the previous best result on the challenging
Occluded VIS dataset by over 10% AP. Since MinVIS treats frames in training
videos as independent images, we can drastically sub-sample the annotated frames
in training videos without any modifications. With only 1% of labeled frames, MinVIS outperforms or is comparable to fully-supervised state-of-the-art approaches
on YouTube-VIS 2019/2021. Our key observation is that queries trained to be discriminative between intra-frame object instances are temporally consistent and can
be used to track instances without any manually designed heuristics. MinVIS thus
has the following inference pipeline: we first apply the trained query-based image
instance segmentation to video frames independently. The segmented instances are
then tracked by bipartite matching of the corresponding queries. This inference is
done in an online fashion and does not need to process the whole video at once.
MinVIS thus has the practical advantages of reducing both the labeling costs and
the memory requirements, while not sacrificing the VIS performance. Code is
available at: https://github.com/NVlabs/MinVIS

1

Introduction

Video instance segmentation (VIS) aims to simultaneously detect, segment, and track object instances
in videos [1]. The requirement to accurately track object instances through an entire video makes
VIS much more challenging than image instance segmentation. Most of the early approaches for VIS
build on image instance segmentation models, and process videos on a per-frame basis [1, 2]. The
segmented object instances for each frame are then matched temporally with a post-processing step.
This post-processing step often involves manually designed heuristics that do not generalize well to
challenging scenarios like occlusions and large appearance deformations.
Recent VIS works address this issue by taking a per-clip approach, where the spatial-temporal
volume of a video is processed as a whole to directly predict the spatial-temporal mask for each
object instance [3–5]. Many of these end-to-end VIS approaches are built upon the recent advances
of Transformers for end-to-end object detection [6]. Given learned embeddings called queries,
Transformers process the queries jointly with the input video using cross-attention, so that each of the
processed queries can be used to predict the spatial-temporal mask for an object instance in the video.
While these per-clip methods have led to considerable improvements for VIS, using attention to
process the whole video, especially longer ones, requires large memory and computation. It is
also not straightforward to adapt per-clip methods from offline to online processing to reduce the
computational requirements. This limits their practical application, and maintaining the effectiveness
of these per-clip methods while improving their efficiency remains an active research direction [7, 8].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

