VisCo Grids: Surface Reconstruction
with Viscosity and Coarea Grids

Albert Pumarola∗1 , Artsiom Sanakoyeu∗1 , Lior Yariv2 , Ali Thabet1 , Yaron Lipman1,2
1
Meta AI, 2 Weizmann Institute of Science

Abstract
Surface reconstruction has been seeing a lot of progress lately by utilizing Implicit
Neural Representations (INRs). Despite their success, INRs often introduce hard
to control inductive bias (i.e., the solution surface can exhibit unexplainable behaviours), have costly inference, and are slow to train. The goal of this work is to
show that replacing neural networks with simple grid functions, along with two
novel geometric priors achieve comparable results to INRs, with instant inference,
and improved training times. To that end we introduce VisCo Grids: a grid-based
surface reconstruction method incorporating Viscosity and Coarea priors. Intuitively, the Viscosity prior replaces the smoothness inductive bias of INRs, while
the Coarea favors a minimal area solution. Experimenting with VisCo Grids on a
standard reconstruction baseline provided comparable results to the best performing
INRs on this dataset.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing 3D surfaces from sparse
point clouds is a long standing problem in both computer vision and graphics [7]. Methods tackling this problem aim to estimate 3D surfaces given
as input unordered point sets (point
clouds), with or without corresponding
normals. Surface representations can
be divided to two groups: parametric
and implicit. Parametric methods represents the surface using some parametric domain, while implicit methods
represent
 the surface as some level-set,
S = p ∈ R3 |f (p) = c , of a volumetric function f : R3 → R. While para- Figure 1: The VisCo prior (left) is incorporating viscosity
metric methods can easily sample the sur- and Coarea; Middle and right shows ablations on each.
face, implicit methods can readily adapt
to topological changes of the reconstructed surface. Parametric methods include, e.g., meshes and
spline surfaces, while implicit methods use, e.g., volumetric data structures such as voxel grids,
Radial Basis Functions (RBFs), or (recently) neural networks.
Implicit Neural Representation (INR) [29, 35, 13, 3, 16, 18, 4, 37] is categorized as an implicit method
using a neural networks to define the implicit function f . INRs build upon the inherit inductive
bias in neural networks and their optimization process to provide smooth yet flexible and expressive
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

