SizeShiftReg: a Regularization Method for Improving
Size-Generalization in Graph Neural Networks

Davide Buffelli
Department of Information Engineering
University of Padova
Padova, Italy 35131
davide.buffelli@unipd.it

Pietro Liò
Department of Computer Science and Technology
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom CB3 0FD
pietro.lio@cl.cam.ac.uk

Fabio Vandin
Department of Information Engineering
University of Padova
Padova, Italy 35131
fabio.vandin@unipd.it

Abstract
In the past few years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have become the de facto
model of choice for graph classification. While, from the theoretical viewpoint,
most GNNs can operate on graphs of any size, it is empirically observed that
their classification performance degrades when they are applied on graphs with
sizes that differ from those in the training data. Previous works have tried to
tackle this issue in graph classification by providing the model with inductive
biases derived from assumptions on the generative process of the graphs, or by
requiring access to graphs from the test domain. The first strategy is tied to the
quality of the assumptions made for the generative process, and requires the use of
specific models designed after the explicit definition of the generative process of
the data, leaving open the question of how to improve the performance of generic
GNN models in general settings. On the other hand, the second strategy can be
applied to any GNN, but requires access to information that is not always easy
to obtain. In this work we consider the scenario in which we only have access to
the training data, and we propose a regularization strategy that can be applied to
any GNN to improve its generalization capabilities from smaller to larger graphs
without requiring access to the test data. Our regularization is based on the idea of
simulating a shift in the size of the training graphs using coarsening techniques, and
enforcing the model to be robust to such a shift. Experimental results on standard
datasets show that popular GNN models, trained on the 50% smallest graphs in the
dataset and tested on the 10% largest graphs, obtain performance improvements of
up to 30% when trained with our regularization strategy.

1

Introduction

Graph structured data are found in a large variety of domains, ranging from social networks, to
molecules and transportation networks. When dealing with graph data in machine learning settings,
it is common to resort to graph representation learning [29]. Graph representation learning is the task
of learning to generate vector representations of the nodes, or of entire graphs, that encode structural
and feature-related information that can be used for downstream tasks. In this area, Graph Neural
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

