Learning to Reason with Neural Networks:
Generalization, Unseen Data and Boolean Measures
Emmanuel Abbe⇤
EPFL

Samy Bengio
Apple

Aryo Lotfi
EPFL

Elisabetta Cornacchia
EPFL

Maithra Raghu
Google Research

Jon Kleinberg
Cornell University

Chiyuan Zhang
Google Research

Abstract
This paper considers the Pointer Value Retrieval (PVR) benchmark introduced
in [ZRKB21], where a ‘reasoning’ function acts on a string of digits to produce
the label. More generally, the paper considers the learning of logical functions
with gradient descent (GD) on neural networks. It is first shown that in order
to learn logical functions with gradient descent on symmetric neural networks,
the generalization error can be lower-bounded in terms of the noise-stability of
the target function, supporting a conjecture made in [ZRKB21]. It is then shown
that in the distribution shift setting, when the data withholding corresponds to
freezing a single feature (referred to as canonical holdout), the generalization
error of gradient descent admits a tight characterization in terms of the Boolean
influence for several relevant architectures. This is shown on linear models and
supported experimentally on other models such as MLPs and Transformers. In
particular, this puts forward the hypothesis that for such architectures and for
learning logical functions such as PVR functions, GD tends to have an implicit
bias towards low-degree representations, which in turn gives the Boolean influence
for the generalization error under quadratic loss.

1

Introduction

Recently [ZRKB21] introduced the pointer value retrieval (PVR) benchmark. This benchmark
consists of a supervised learning task on MNIST [LCB10] digits with a ‘logical’ or ‘reasoning’
component in the label generation. More specifically, the functions to be learned are defined on
MNIST digits organized either sequentially or on a grid, and the label is generated by applying some
‘reasoning’ on these digits, with a specific digit acting as a pointer on a subset of other digits from
which a logical/Boolean function is computed to generate the label.
For instance, consider the PVR setting for binary digits in the string format, where a string of MNIST
digits is used as input. Consider in particular the case where only 0 and 1 digits are used, such as
in the example of Figure 1. The label of this string is defined as follows: the first 3 bits 101 define
the pointer in binary expansion, and the pointer points to a window of a given length, say 2 in this
example. Specifically, the pointer points at the first bit of the window. To generate the label, one has
⇤

Authors are in alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

