Concrete Score Matching: Generalized Score
Matching for Discrete Data

Chenlin Meng∗
Stanford University
chenlin@cs.stanford.edu
Jiaming Song
NVIDIA
jiamings@nvidia.com

Kristy Choi∗
Stanford University
kechoi@cs.stanford.edu
Stefano Ermon
Stanford University, CZ Biohub
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Representing probability distributions by the gradient of their density functions has
proven effective in modeling a wide range of continuous data modalities. However,
this representation is not applicable in discrete domains where the gradient
is undefined. To this end, we propose an analogous score function called the
“Concrete score”, a generalization of the (Stein) score for discrete settings. Given
a predefined neighborhood structure, the Concrete score of any input is defined
by the rate of change of the probabilities with respect to local directional changes
of the input. This formulation allows us to recover the (Stein) score in continuous
domains when measuring such changes by the Euclidean distance, while using the
Manhattan distance leads to our novel score function in discrete domains. Finally,
we introduce a new framework to learn such scores from samples called Concrete
Score Matching (CSM), and propose an efficient training objective to scale our
approach to high dimensions. Empirically, we demonstrate the efficacy of CSM on
density estimation tasks on a mixture of synthetic, tabular, and high-dimensional
image datasets, and demonstrate that it performs favorably relative to existing
baselines for modeling discrete data.

1

Introduction

When estimating a statistical model, the representation of the underlying probability distribution has
profound implications on the downstream modeling task. Likelihood-based model families such as
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [1–4], normalizing flows [5–13], and diffusion models [14–16]
are forced to either approximate the intractable normalizing constant or utilize restrictive model
architectures; implicit models [17–20] try to capture the underlying sampling process by relying
on unstable adversarial training procedures. On the other hand, representing the distribution as
the gradient of the log probability density function—also known as the (Stein) score—allows us to
circumvent such issues. This is key to score matching’s success on a wide range of continuous data
modalities [21–25]. In fact, its recent resurgence has led to significant advances in machine learning
applications of density estimation, such as image generation [26, 16, 27, 15] and audio synthesis
[28, 29], among others.
However, score matching approaches that rely on modeling the gradient of the data distribution are
inherently designed for continuous data; such methods hinge on the existence of the gradient, which
is undefined for discrete domains [22]. Given the ubiquitous nature of structured, discrete data in
∗

Joint first author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

