The Missing Invariance Principle Found –
the Reciprocal Twin of Invariant Risk Minimization
Dongsung Huh⇤
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
Cambridge, MA 02142
huh@ibm.com

Avinash Baidya⇤
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
aavinash@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models often generalize poorly to out-of-distribution (OOD)
data as a result of relying on features that are spuriously correlated with the label
during training. Recently, the technique of Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM)
was proposed to learn predictors that only use invariant features by conserving the
feature-conditioned label expectation Ee [y|f (x)] across environments. However,
more recent studies have demonstrated that IRM-v1, a practical version of IRM,
can fail in various settings. Here, we identify a fundamental design flaw of IRM
formulation that causes the failure. We then introduce a complementary notion of
invariance, MRI, based on conserving the label-conditioned feature expectation
Ee [f (x)|y], which is free of this flaw. Further, we introduce a simplified, practical
version of the MRI formulation called MRI-v1. We prove that for general linear
problems, MRI-v1 guarantees invariant predictors given sufficient number of environments. We also empirically demonstrate that MRI-v1 strongly out-performs
IRM-v1 and consistently achieves near-optimal OOD generalization in image-based
nonlinear problems.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have shown tremendous success over the past decade. These models show
great generalization properties when tested on the same distribution as the training dataset (indistribution generalization). However, these models often show catastrophic failure when tested on
out-of-distribution dataset, revealing that they learned features that are spuriously correlated to the
label in the given training domains but do not generalize to the testing domains. For example, deep
networks trained on pictures of cow with only grassy backgrounds in the training domain will use the
background color as the predictive feature which is easier to learn and generalize poorly to pictures
of cow with a dessert background.
Recently, there has been a growing interest in developing models that generalize well across multiple
domains. In particular, there has been a recent body of works that focus on developing algorithms
that attempt to learn invariant predictors (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Ahuja et al., 2021; Peters et al.,
2016; Rojas-Carulla et al., 2018; Heinze-Deml et al., 2018). Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) and
its practical version, IRM-v1, have garnered significant attention as one of the initial methods that
are compatible with deep learning techniques. However, several follow-up studies have empirically
demonstrated that IRM-v1 is unreliable at learning invariant representations (Kamath et al., 2021;
Rosenfeld et al., 2020; Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz, 2020; Ahuja et al., 2020, 2021). Here, we identify a
fundamental flaw of IRM formulation that causes this limitation and propose a new method that is
free of this flaw.
⇤

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

