Are AlphaZero-like Agents Robust to
Adversarial Perturbations?
1

2

Li-Cheng Lan
4

Meng-Yu Tsai
1

UCLA

2

CMU

Ti-Rong Wu

3, 4

Cho-Jui Hsieh

I-Chen Wu
3

3

Huan Zhang

Academia Sinica, Taiwan

1

4

NYCU

lclan@cs.ucla.edu huan@huan-zhang.com tirongwu@iis.sinica.edu.tw
adam0923686343@gmail.com icwu@cs.nctu.edu.tw chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The success of AlphaZero (AZ) has demonstrated that neural-network-based Go
AIs can surpass human performance by a large margin. However, do these superhuman AZ agents truly learn some general basic knowledge that can be applied to
any legal state? In this paper, we first extend the concept of adversarial examples
to the game of Go: we generate perturbed states that are “semantically” equivalent
to the original state by adding meaningless actions to the game, and an adversarial
state is a perturbed state leading to an undoubtedly inferior action that is obvious
even for amateur players. However, searching the adversarial state is challenging due to the large, discrete, and non-differentiable search space. To tackle this
challenge, we develop the first adversarial attack on Go AIs that can efficiently
search for adversarial states by strategically reducing the search space. This method
can also be extended to other board games such as NoGo. Experimentally, we
show that both Policy-Value neural network (PV-NN) and Monte Carlo tree search
(MCTS) can be misled by adding one or two meaningless stones; for example,
on 58% of the AlphaGo Zero self-play games, our method can make the widely
used KataGo agent with 50 simulations of MCTS plays a losing action by adding
two meaningless stones. We additionally evaluated the adversarial examples found
by our algorithm with amateur human Go players, and 90% of examples indeed
lead the Go agent to play an obviously inferior action. Our code is available at
https://PaperCode.cc/GoAttack.

1

Introduction

AlphaZero (AZ) [1] like algorithms have achieved state-of-the-art in Go – one of the most challenging
games for artificial intelligence. The success of Go AIs like AZ can be contributed to the use
of Policy-Value Neural Networks (PV-NN), and Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) [2, 3]. Silver
et al. [4] demonstrated that pure PV-NN can achieve human professional level (Elo 3055) even
without any lookahead using MCTS. It has been widely believed that AZ-based agents significantly
outperform humans, and even professional Go players can often learn novel strategies from these Go
AIs. However, we question if the agents truly learn some basic but general knowledge that can be
applied to any legal state.
On the other hand, it is well-known that deep neural networks can be easily fooled by “adversarial
examples”, which are created by adding small and semantically invariant perturbations to benign
inputs [5, 6]. This naturally leads to the following question: are AZ-like Go agents robust to
adversarial perturbations? Although adversarial examples have been well-studied in many applications
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

