Functional Indirection Neural Estimator
for Better Out-of-distribution Generalization
Kha Pham1 Hung Le1 Man Ngo2 Truyen Tran1
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute, Deakin University
2
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, VNUHCM-University of Science
1

1

{phti, thai.le, truyen.tran}@deakin.edu.au
2
nmman@hcmus.edu.vn

Abstract
The capacity to achieve out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is a hallmark of
human intelligence and yet remains out of reach for machines. This remarkable
capability has been attributed to our abilities to make conceptual abstraction and
analogy, and to a mechanism known as indirection, which binds two representations
and uses one representation to refer to the other. Inspired by these mechanisms,
we hypothesize that OOD generalization may be achieved by performing analogymaking and indirection in the functional space instead of the data space as in
current methods. To realize this, we design FINE (Functional Indirection Neural
Estimator), a neural framework that learns to compose functions that map data
input to output on-the-fly. FINE consists of a backbone network and a trainable
semantic memory of basis weight matrices. Upon seeing a new input-output
data pair, FINE dynamically constructs the backbone weights by mixing the basis
weights. The mixing coefficients are indirectly computed through querying a
separate corresponding semantic memory using the data pair. We demonstrate
empirically that FINE can strongly improve out-of-distribution generalization on
IQ tasks that involve geometric transformations. In particular, we train FINE
and competing models on IQ tasks using images from the MNIST, Omniglot
and CIFAR100 datasets and test on tasks with unseen image classes from one or
different datasets and unseen transformation rules. FINE not only achieves the best
performance on all tasks but also is able to adapt to small-scale data scenarios.

1

Introduction
Every computer science problem can be solved with a higher level of indirection.
—Andrew Koenig, Butler Lampson, David J. Wheeler

Generalizing to new circumstances is a hallmark of intelligence [16, 4, 11]. In some Intelligence
Quotient (IQ) tests–a popular benchmark for human intelligence–one must leverage their prior
experience to identify the hidden abstract rules out of a concrete example (e.g., a transformation
of an image) and then apply the rules to the next (e.g., a new set of images of totally different
appearance). These tasks necessitate several key capabilities, including conceptual abstraction and
analogy-making [22]. Abstraction allows us to extend a concept to novel situations. It is also driven
by analogy-making, which maps the current situation to the previous experience stored in the memory.
Indeed, analogy-making has been argued to be one of the most important abilities of human cognition,
or even further, “a concept is a package of analogies” [12]. The ability for humans to traverse
seamlessly across concrete and abstraction levels suggests another mechanism known as indirection
to bind two representations and use one representation to refer to the other [16, 20].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

