Uncertainty-Aware Reinforcement Learning for
Risk-Sensitive Player Evaluation in Sports Game

1

Guiliang Liu1,2,3 , Yudong Luo1,3 , Oliver Schulte4 , Pascal Poupart1,3
University of Waterloo, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
3
Vector Institute, 4 Simon Fraser University
liuguiliang@cuhk.edu.cn,yudong.luo@uwaterloo.ca,
oschulte@cs.sfu.ca,ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
A major task of sports analytics is player evaluation. Previous methods commonly
measured the impact of players’ actions on desirable outcomes (e.g., goals or
winning) without considering the risk induced by stochastic game dynamics. In this
paper, we design an uncertainty-aware Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework to
learn a risk-sensitive player evaluation metric from stochastic game dynamics. To
embed the risk of a player’s movements into the distribution of action-values, we
model their 1) aleatoric uncertainty, which represents the intrinsic stochasticity in
a sports game, and 2) epistemic uncertainty, which is due to a model’s insufficient
knowledge regarding Out-of-Distribution (OoD) samples. We demonstrate how a
distributional Bellman operator and a feature-space density model can capture these
uncertainties. Based on such uncertainty estimation, we propose a Risk-sensitive
Game Impact Metric (RiGIM) that measures players’ performance over a season
by conditioning on a specific confidence level. Empirical evaluation, based on over
9M play-by-play ice hockey and soccer events, shows that RiGIM correlates highly
with standard success measures and has a consistent risk sensitivity.

1

Introduction

The advancement of player tracking and object detection systems enables data-driven analytics for
professional sports players. A common approach to evaluating the contribution of players is to
quantify their action impacts. Previous performance metrics [1, 2, 3, 4] computed the expected
impact of an action on scoring or winning a game. However, actions with significantly different
distributions of impact can have the same expectations. As a result, the expectation-based metrics
cannot differentiate the risk-seeking actions from the risk-averse ones. How to distinguish these
actions and assign proper credits to the players remains a fundamental challenge in sports analytics.
An important step toward a risk-sensitive evaluation metric is to model the distributions of action
values. To achieve this goal, distributional Reinforcement Learning (RL) [5] predicts the supporting
quantiles of action-value distributions. Previous distributional RL methods [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] mainly
studied the virtual environments with deterministic transitions (e.g., Atari [11] or Mujoco [12]),
whereas sports games are real environments with stochastic game dynamics and complex context
features. Moreover, player evaluation, as a data-driven task, requires learning from a fixed dataset
without exploration. The model must be able to handle the distribution shift experienced at test time.
To mitigate the impact of distribution shift, Offline RL algorithms [13] typically strive for conservative
policies that discourage visits to Out-of-Distribution (OoD) states by penalizing corresponding values.
However, this approach cannot be scaled to player evaluation since 1) our goal is not control (i.e.,
improving players’ policy), but to use RL as an analytical tool to evaluate observed actions in
professional games, and 2) penalizing actions in OoD states distorts the evaluation.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

