FIRE: Semantic Field of Words Represented as
Nonlinear Functions
Xin Du
The University of Tokyo
duxin@cl.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii
The University of Tokyo
kumiko@cl.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
State-of-the-art word embeddings presume a linear vector space, but this approach
does not easily incorporate the nonlinearity that is necessary to represent polysemy. We thus propose a novel semantic FIeld REepresentation, called FIRE,
which is a D-dimensional field in which every word is represented as a set of its
locations and a nonlinear function covering the field. The strength of a word’s
relation to another word at a certain location is measured as the function value
at that location. With FIRE, compositionality is represented via functional additivity, whereas polysemy is represented via the set of points and the function’s
multimodality. By implementing FIRE for English and comparing it with previous
representation methods via word and sentence similarity tasks, we show that FIRE
produces comparable or even better results. In an evaluation of polysemy to predict
the number of word senses, FIRE greatly outperformed BERT and Word2vec,
providing evidence of how FIRE represents polysemy. The code is available at
https://github.com/kduxin/firelang.

1

Introduction

Word representations have become an important basic technique in NLP. The most important semantic requirement for a word representation, above all, is that similar words are mapped to similar
embeddings. Furthermore, the next two most important properties are compositionality [27], i.e.,
the representation of two composed words matches the composition of the two representations,
and polysemy, the representation of semantic ambiguity. Intuitively, compositionality is a linear
quality [27, 1], whereas polysemy is nonlinear and thus requires a representation via mathematical
multimodality, which is difficult to represent within a linear space.
State-of-the-art word representations are based on a linear vector space. The linearity of vectors
naturally accommodates compositionality, but the question of how to incorporate polysemy has been
an issue. Indeed, recent random-variable representations [29, 23, 25, 18, 10] represent polysemy but
at the cost of losing compositionality.
The most important previous work that seems to incorporate polysemy in addition to compositionality
could be BERT [8]; however, it is a contextual embedding that represents one vector only under a
given context that disambiguates the meaning. In contrast, a polysemous word has multiple meanings
even without context. Moreover, disambiguation (e.g., with BERT) is also hard, because semantics is
often continuous: the word “bank” has 18 meanings in WordNet [17], which are hard to disambiguate
even for humans. Our idea was thus to devise an entirely new representation that is nonlinear but
naturally represents linearity as well.
Hence, FIeld REpresentation, which we call FIRE, is a non-contextual representation of words. It is
realized in a D-dimensional space in which every point has a quantity, called a semantic strength,
that is generated by interactions among words. Every word is represented by a pair consisting of a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

