Fairness in Federated Learning via Core-Stability

Bhaskar Ray Chaudhury Linyi Li Mintong Kang Bo Li
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign

Ruta Mehta

Abstract
Federated learning provides an effective paradigm to jointly optimize a model
benefited from rich distributed data while protecting data privacy. Nonetheless, the
heterogeneity nature of distributed data, especially in the non-IID setting, makes it
challenging to define and ensure fairness among local agents. For instance, it is
intuitively “unfair" for agents with data of high quality to sacrifice their performance
due to other agents with low quality data. Currently popular egalitarian and
weighted equity-based fairness measures suffer from the aforementioned pitfall. In
this work, we aim to formally represent this problem and address these fairness
issues using concepts from co-operative game theory and social choice theory. We
model the task of learning a shared predictor in the federated setting as a fair public
decision making problem, and then define the notion of core-stable fairness: Given
N agents, there is no subset of agents S that can benefit significantly by forming a
coalition among themselves based on their utilities UN and US (i.e., |S|
N US ≥ UN ).
Core-stable predictors are robust to low quality local data from some agents, and
additionally they satisfy Proportionality (each agent gets at least 1/n fraction of
the best utility that she can get from any predictor) and Pareto-optimality (there
exists no model that can increase the utility of an agent without decreasing the
utility of another), two well sought-after fairness and efficiency notions within
social choice. We then propose an efficient federated learning protocol CoreFed to
optimize a core stable predictor. CoreFed determines a core-stable predictor when
the loss functions of the agents are convex. CoreFed also determines approximate
core-stable predictors when the loss functions are not convex, like smooth neural
networks. We further show the existence of core-stable predictors in more general
settings using Kakutani’s fixed point theorem. Finally, we empirically validate our
analysis on two real-world datasets, and we show that CoreFed achieves higher
core-stable fairness than FedAvg while maintaining similar accuracy.

1

Introduction

The success of many deployed machine learning (ML) systems crucially hinges on the availability of
high-quality data. However, a single entity might not own all the data it needs to train the ML model
it wants; instead, valuable data instances or features might be scattered in different organizations or
entities. Distributed learning schemes such as federated learning (FL) [15] provide a training scheme
that focuses on training a single ML model using all the data available in a cooperative way without
moving the training data across the organizational or personal boundaries to protect data privacy.
On the other hand, given the heterogeneity in the local data distributions of different clients participating in FL, it has become quite challenging to design a classifier that performs reasonably across
all of them. In fact, such an objective directly transfers to ensuring a fair performance of the classifier
across all local data distributions. Therefore, fairness in FL has attracted substantial interest in the
recent past [32, 22, 19, 13, 35].
In this work, we ask: Is it possible to jointly optimize a centralized model with fairness guarantees
regarding the heterogeneity of local agents? How to define such fairness such that no agents would
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

