ALMA: Hierarchical Learning
for Composite Multi-Agent Tasks
Shariq Iqbal∗
Deepmind

Robby Costales
University of Southern California

Fei Sha
Google Research

Abstract
Despite significant progress on multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) in
recent years, coordination in complex domains remains a challenge. Work in
MARL often focuses on solving tasks where agents interact with all other agents
and entities in the environment; however, we observe that real-world tasks are
often composed of several isolated instances of local agent interactions (subtasks),
and each agent can meaningfully focus on one subtask to the exclusion of all else
in the environment. In these composite tasks, successful policies can often be
decomposed into two levels of decision-making: agents are allocated to specific
subtasks and each agent acts productively towards their assigned subtask alone.
This decomposed decision making provides a strong structural inductive bias,
significantly reduces agent observation spaces, and encourages subtask-specific
policies to be reused and composed during training, as opposed to treating each
new composition of subtasks as unique. We introduce ALMA, a general learning
method for taking advantage of these structured tasks. ALMA simultaneously
learns a high-level subtask allocation policy and low-level agent policies. We
demonstrate that ALMA learns sophisticated coordination behavior in a number of
challenging environments, outperforming strong baselines. ALMA’s modularity
also enables it to better generalize to new environment configurations. Finally,
we find that while ALMA can integrate separately trained allocation and action
policies, the best performance is obtained only by training all components jointly.
Our code is available at https://github.com/shariqiqbal2810/ALMA

1

Introduction

A certain set of real-world multi-agent tasks increase in complexity in proportion to the inter-agent
coordination required rather than any inherent difficulty in the low-level skills. Take the example
of firefighting (Figure 1): while coordinating firefighters across a large city is more complex than
in a small one, the individual sub-task of putting out a fire remains similar across cities of all sizes.
Despite the recent success of cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) methods on a
wide range of domains [2, 16, 35, 5], they still struggle to learn sophisticated coordination behavior
in a sample-efficient manner on tasks of real-world complexity. And this is no surprise—not only do
these tasks require that agents learn complex low-level skills to execute sub-tasks, they must also
incorporate coherent high-level strategies into their policies. Integrating both strategies and skills into
the same action-level policy makes learning difficult.
Fortunately, for many relevant multi-agent tasks, while there may exist many different objectives
that the agent population as a whole must attend to, individual agents need only focus on isolated
aspects of the environment at any given time. Consider again the setting of firefighting in a city given
a distributed set of resources. While there may be many fires occurring in the city at once, each
firefighter can realistically only fight one at a time. Thus, the optimal behavior in this setting can be
∗

Work performed while at USC.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

