Coordinate Linear Variance Reduction
for Generalized Linear Programming

Chaobing Song∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
chaobing.song@wisc.edu

Cheuk Yin Lin∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
cylin@cs.wisc.edu

Stephen J. Wright
University of Wisconsin-Madison
swright@cs.wisc.edu

Jelena Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jelena@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study a class of generalized linear programs (GLP) in a large-scale setting,
which includes a simple, possibly nonsmooth convex regularizer and simple convex
set constraints. By reformulating (GLP) as an equivalent convex-concave min-max
problem, we show that the linear structure in the problem can be used to design
an efficient, scalable first-order algorithm, to which we give the name Coordinate
Linear Variance Reduction (CLVR; pronounced “clever”). CLVR yields improved
complexity results for (GLP) that depend on the max row norm of the linear
constraint matrix in (GLP) rather than the spectral norm. When the regularization
terms and constraints are separable, CLVR admits an efficient lazy update strategy
that makes its complexity bounds scale with the number of nonzero elements of
the linear constraint matrix in (GLP) rather than the matrix dimensions. Further,
for the special case of linear programs and by exploiting sharpness, we propose
a restart scheme for CLVR to obtain empirical linear convergence. Finally, we
show that Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) problems with ambiguity
sets based on both f -divergence and Wasserstein metrics can be reformulated as
(GLPs) by introducing sparsely connected auxiliary variables. We complement
our theoretical guarantees with numerical experiments that verify our algorithm’s
practical effectiveness in terms of wall-clock time and number of data passes.

1

Introduction

We study the following generalized linear program (GLP):

min cT x + r(x) : Ax = b, x ∈ X ,
x

(GLP)

where x, c ∈ Rd , A ∈ Rn×d , b ∈ Rn , r : Rd → R is a convex regularizer, and X ⊆ Rd is a closed
convex set, such that a proximal/projection operator involving r and X can be computed efficiently.
When X is the nonnegative orthant {x : xi ≥ 0, i ∈ [d]} and r ≡ 0, (GLP) reduces to the standard
form of a linear program (LP). When X is a convex cone and r ≡ 0, (GLP) reduces to a conic linear
program. (GLP) is an important paradigm in traditional engineering disciplines such as transportation,
energy, telecommunications, and manufacturing. In modern data science, we note the renaissance of
(GLP) due to its modeling power in such areas as reinforcement learning [19], optimal transport [57],
and neural network verification [39]. For traditional engineering disciplines with moderate scale or
exploitable sparsity, off-the-shelf interior point methods that form and factorize matrices in each
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

