On Batch Teaching with Sample Complexity Bounded
by VCD

Farnam Mansouri
University of Toronto
frnm.mansouri@gmail.com

Hans U. Simon
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
hsimon@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Adish Singla
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Sandra Zilles
University of Regina
zilles@cs.uregina.ca

Abstract
In machine teaching, a concept is represented by (and inferred from) a small
number of labeled examples. Various teaching models in the literature cast the
interaction between teacher and learner in a way to obtain a small complexity (in
terms of the number of examples required for teaching a concept) while obeying
certain constraints that are meant to prevent unfair collusion between teacher and
learner. In recent years, one major research goal has been to show interesting
relationships between teaching complexity and the VC-dimension (VCD). So far,
the only interesting relationship known from batch teaching settings is an upper
bound quadratic in the VCD, on a parameter called recursive teaching dimension.
The only known upper bound on teaching complexity that is linear in VCD was
obtained in a model of teaching with sequences rather than batches. This paper
is the first to provide an upper bound of VCD on a batch teaching complexity
parameter. This parameter, called STDmin , is introduced here as a model of
teaching that intuitively incorporates a notion of “importance” of an example for
a concept. In designing the STDmin teaching model, we argue that the standard
notion of collusion-freeness from the literature may be inadequate for certain
applications; we hence propose three desirable properties of teaching complexity
and demonstrate that they are satisfied by STDmin .

1

Introduction

The notion of machine teaching refers to the selection of helpful training examples that aid the learner
in identifying a target concept [Zhu et al., 2018]. Such processes can make machine learning feasible
or economical in situations when it is difficult or expensive to acquire large amounts of training data.
Human-in-the-loop settings [Wang et al., 2020] or inverse reinforcement learning [Kamalaruban et al.,
2019] are potential application areas of machine teaching. Formal studies of teaching consider various
teaching models, each of which has a corresponding complexity parameter referring to the worst-case
number of examples required to teach any concept in a given concept class [Goldman and Kearns,
1995, Shinohara and Miyano, 1991, Zilles et al., 2011, Gao et al., 2017b, Kirkpatrick et al., 2019,
Mansouri et al., 2019]. Each model has to adhere to rules that prevent teacher and learner from using
unwanted “coding tricks”, such as, for instance, agreeing on an indexing of concepts and an indexing
of data points, and then allowing the teacher to simply teach the concept indexed i using the data
point with index i. While no general notion of coding trick is agreed upon in the literature, Goldman
and Mathias [1996] provided a notion of collusion-freeness (which we call GM-collusion-freeness
for short) that is often used as an underlying constraint in teaching models.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

