Mismatched No More:
Joint Model-Policy Optimization for Model-Based RL

Benjamin Eysenbach∗ 1 2 Alexander Khazatsky∗ 3 Sergey Levine2 3 Ruslan Salakhutdinov1
1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Google Brain, 3 UC Berkeley
beysenba@cs.cmu.edu, khazatsky@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Many model-based reinforcement learning (RL) methods follow a similar template:
fit a model to previously observed data, and then use data from that model for RL
or planning. However, models that achieve better training performance (e.g., lower
MSE) are not necessarily better for control: an RL agent may seek out the small
fraction of states where an accurate model makes mistakes, or it might act in ways
that do not expose the errors of an inaccurate model. As noted in prior work, there
is an objective mismatch: models are useful if they yield good policies, but they are
trained to maximize their accuracy, rather than the performance of the policies that
result from them. In this work, we propose a single objective for jointly training the
model and the policy, such that updates to either component increase a lower bound
on expected return. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first lower bound for
model-based RL that holds globally and can be efficiently estimated in continuous
settings; it is the only lower bound that mends the objective mismatch problem. A
version of this bound becomes tight under certain assumptions. Optimizing this
bound resembles a GAN: a classifier distinguishes between real and fake transitions,
the model is updated to produce transitions that look realistic, and the policy is
updated to avoid states where the model predictions are unrealistic. Numerical
simulations demonstrate that optimizing this bound yields reward maximizing
policies and yields dynamics that (perhaps surprisingly) can aid in exploration. We
also show that a deep RL algorithm loosely based on our lower bound can achieve
performance competitive with prior model-based methods, and better performance
on certain hard exploration tasks.

1

Introduction

Much of the appeal of model-based RL is that model learning is a simple and scalable supervised
learning problem. However, even after learning a very accurate model, it is hard to say whether that
model will actually be useful for model-based RL [17, 29]. For example, a model might make small
mistakes in critical states that cause a policy to take suboptimal actions. Alternatively, a model with
large errors may yield a policy that attains high return if the model errors occur in states that the
policy never visits.
The underlying problem is that dynamics models are trained differently from how they are used.
Typical model-based methods train a model using data sampled from the real dynamics (e.g., using
maximum likelihood), but apply these models by using data sampled from the learned dynamics [11,
23, 24, 48]. Prior work has identified this objective mismatch issue [17, 29, 30]: the model is trained
using one objective, but the policy is trained using a different objective. Designing an objective
for model training that is guaranteed to improve the expected reward remains an open problem.
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

