On the Effectiveness of Lipschitz-Driven
Rehearsal in Continual Learning

Lorenzo Bonicelli1 Matteo Boschini1 Angelo Porrello1
Concetto Spampinato2 Simone Calderara1
1

AImageLab - University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
2
PeRCeiVe Lab - University of Catania

Abstract
Rehearsal approaches enjoy immense popularity with Continual Learning (CL)
practitioners. These methods collect samples from previously encountered data
distributions in a small memory buffer; subsequently, they repeatedly optimize
on the latter to prevent catastrophic forgetting. This work draws attention to a
hidden pitfall of this widespread practice: repeated optimization on a small pool
of data inevitably leads to tight and unstable decision boundaries, which are a
major hindrance to generalization. To address this issue, we propose LipschitzDrivEn Rehearsal (LiDER), a surrogate objective that induces smoothness in the
backbone network by constraining its layer-wise Lipschitz constants w.r.t. replay
examples. By means of extensive experiments, we show that applying LiDER
delivers a stable performance gain to several state-of-the-art rehearsal CL methods
across multiple datasets, both in the presence and absence of pre-training. Through
additional ablative experiments, we highlight peculiar aspects of buffer overfitting
in CL and better characterize the effect produced by LiDER. Code is available at
https://github.com/aimagelab/LiDER.

1

Introduction

The last few years have seen a renewed interest in aiding Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to acquire
new knowledge and, at the same time, retain high performance on previously encountered data. In
this regard, the mitigation of catastrophic forgetting [52] has driven the recent research towards novel
incremental methods [42, 68], often framed under the field of Continual Learning (CL). Among other
valid CL strategies, rehearsal approaches caught the attention of a large body of literature [62, 21, 15]
thanks to their advantages. Simply, they maintain a small fixed-size buffer containing a fraction
of examples from previous tasks; afterward, these examples are mixed together with the ones of
the current task, hence provided continuously as training data. In this respect, different approaches
establish different regularization strategies on top of the retained examples [63, 49], as well as which
kind of information to store (e.g. model responses [15, 12], explanations [25], etc.).
In spite of their widespread application, these approaches fall into a common pitfall: as the memory
buffer holds only a small fraction of past examples, there is a high risk of overfitting on that
memory [75], thus harming generalization. Several approaches mitigate such an issue through dataaugmentation techniques, either by generating different versions of the same buffer datapoint [7, 15]
or by combining different examples into a single one [14, 11]. Other works [3, 4, 16, 85], instead,
select carefully the valuable samples that should be inserted into the buffer: they argue that random
selection may pick non-informative and noisy instances, affecting the model generalization.
This work tackles the issue described above from a different perspective, viewing catastrophic
forgetting in the light of the progressive deterioration of decision boundaries between classes.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

