Kernel Interpolation with Sparse Grids

Mohit Yadav
University of Massachusetts Amherst
ymohit@cs.umass.edu

Daniel Sheldon
University of Massachusetts Amherst
sheldon@cs.umass.edu

Cameron Musco
University of Massachusetts Amherst
cmusco@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Structured kernel interpolation (SKI) accelerates Gaussian process (GP) inference
by interpolating the kernel covariance function using a dense grid of inducing
points, whose corresponding kernel matrix is highly structured and thus amenable
to fast linear algebra. Unfortunately, SKI scales poorly in the dimension of the
input points, since the dense grid size grows exponentially with the dimension. To
mitigate this issue, we propose the use of sparse grids within the SKI framework.
These grids enable accurate interpolation, but with a number of points growing
more slowly with dimension. We contribute a novel nearly linear time matrixvector multiplication algorithm for the sparse grid kernel matrix. We also describe
how sparse grids can be combined with an efficient interpolation scheme based
on simplices. With these modifications, we demonstrate that SKI can be scaled to
higher dimensions while maintaining accuracy.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are popular prior distributions over continuous functions for use in Bayesian
inference [14]. Due to their simple mathematical structure, closed form expressions can be given
for posterior inference [20]. Unfortunately, a well-established limitation of GPs is that they are
difficult to scale to large datasets. In particular, for both exact posterior inference and the exact
log-likelihood computation for hyperparameter learning, one must invert a dense kernel covariance
matrix K ∈ Rn×n , where n is the number of training points. Naively, this operation requires O(n3 )
time and O(n2 ) memory.
Structured Kernel Interpolation. Many techniques have been proposed to mitigate this scalability
issue [23, 19, 24, 9]. Recently, structured kernel interpolation (SKI) has emerged as a promising
approach [9]. In SKI, the kernel matrix is approximated via interpolation onto a dense rectilinear
grid of m inducing points. In particular, K is approximated as W KG W T , where KG ∈ Rm×m is
the kernel matrix on the inducing points and W ∈ Rn×m is an interpolation weight matrix mapping
training points to nearby grid points. Typically, W is sparse, and KG is highly structured — e.g., for
shift invariant kernels, KG is multi-level Toeplitz. Thus, W , KG , and in turn the approximate kernel
matrix W KG W T admit fast matrix-vector multiplication. This allows fast approximate inference and
log-likelihood computation via the use of iterative methods, e.g., the conjugate gradient algorithm.
SKI’s Curse of Dimensionality. Unfortunately, SKI does not scale well to high-dimensional input
data: the number of points in the dense grid, and hence the size of KG , grows exponentially in
the dimension d. Moreover, SKI typically employs local cubic interpolation, which leads to an
interpolation weight matrix W with row sparsity that also scales exponentially in d. This curse of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

