Receding Horizon Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Yiqing Xu1

Wei Gao1

David Hsu1,2

1

School of Computing
Smart Systems Insitute
National University of Singapore
{xuyiqing,gaowei90,dyhsu}@comp.nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) seeks to infer a cost function that explains
the underlying goals and preferences of expert demonstrations. This paper presents
receding-horizon inverse reinforcement learning (RHIRL), an IRL algorithm for
high-dimensional, noisy, continuous systems with black-box dynamic models.
RHIRL addresses two key challenges of IRL: scalability and robustness. To handle high-dimensional continuous systems, RHIRL matches the induced optimal
trajectories with expert demonstrations locally in a receding horizon manner and
“stitches” together the local solutions to learn the cost; it thereby avoids the “curse
of dimensionality”. This contrasts with earlier algorithms that match with expert
demonstrations globally over the entire high-dimensional state space. To be robust against imperfect expert demonstrations and control noise, RHIRL learns a
state-dependent cost function “disentangled” from system dynamics under mild
conditions. Experiments on benchmark tasks show that RHIRL outperforms several
leading IRL algorithms in most instances. We also prove that the cumulative error
of RHIRL grows linearly with the task duration.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made exciting progress in a range of complex tasks, including
real-time game playing [24], visuo-motor control of robots [35], and many other works. The success,
however, often hinges on a carefully crafted cost function [17, 25], which is a major impediment to
the wide adoption of RL in practice. Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [26] addresses this need by
learning a cost function that explains the underlying goals and preferences of expert demonstrations.
This work focuses on two key challenges in IRL, scalability and robustness.
Classic IRL algorithms commonly consist of two nested loops. The inner loop approximates the
optimal control policy for a hypothesized cost function, while the outer loop updates the cost
function by comparing the behavior of the induced policy with expert demonstrations. The inner
loop must solve the (forward) reinforcement learning or optimal control problem, which is in itself a
challenge for complex high-dimensional systems. Many interesting ideas have been proposed for
IRL, including, e.g., maximum entropy learning [39, 41], guided cost learning [7], and adversarial
learning [8]. See Figure 1 for illustrations. They try to match a globally optimal approximate policy
with expert demonstrations over the entire system state space or a sampled approximation of it. This is
impractical for high-dimensional continuous systems and is a fundamental impediment to scalability.
Like RL, IRL suffers from the same “curse of dimensionality”. To scale up, receding-horizon IRL
(RHIRL) computes locally optimal policies with receding horizons rather than a globally optimal
policy and then matches them with expert demonstrations locally in succession (Figure 1d). The
local approximation and matching substantially mitigate the impact of high-dimensional space and
improve the sample efficiency of RHIRL, at the cost of a local rather than a global solution. So
RHIRL trades off optimality for scalability and provides an alternative to current approaches.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

