Towards Optimal Communication Complexity in
Distributed Non-Convex Optimization

Kumar Kshitij Patel∗
TTIC
kkpatel@ttic.edu

Lingxiao Wang∗
TTIC
lingxw@ttic.edu

Brian Bullins†
Purdue University
bbullins@purdue.edu

Blake Woodworth
SIERRA, INRIA
blakewoodworth@gmail.com
Nati Srebro
TTIC
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of distributed stochastic non-convex optimization with intermittent communication. We consider the full participation setting where M
machines work in parallel over R communication rounds and the partial participation setting where M machines are sampled independently every round from some
meta-distribution over machines. We propose and analyze a new algorithm that
improves existing methods by requiring fewer and lighter variance reduction operations. We also present lower bounds, showing our algorithm is either optimal or
almost optimal in most settings. Numerical experiments demonstrate the superior
performance of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

We consider the following distributed optimization problem with M machines:
M

min F (x) :=

x∈Rd

1 X
Fm (x),
M m=1

(1.1)

where Fm , which denotes the objective on machine m, is a non-convex function for all m, as is the
average objective F . We want to solve this problem in the intermittent communication (IC) setting
[1, 2] where the machines work in parallel and are allowed to make K oracle calls between two
communication rounds for R consecutive rounds. The IC setting has been widely studied [3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 2, 12] over the past decade. Many recent works have focused on the problem with
non-convex and heterogeneous objectives [13, 14, 15] which are common in cross-device federated
learning (FL) [16, 17]. Towards this end, several algorithms [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23], all involving local
updates (à la local-SGD [3, 16]), have been proposed and analyzed under assumptions bounding the
heterogeneity of machines’ objectives. Although these algorithms demonstrate promising empirical
performances, it remains elusive whether these algorithms provably dominate the embarrassingly
parallelizable alternatives, i.e., mini-batch variants of the optimal sequential algorithms [24, 25, 26]
(a.k.a. centralized algorithms).
Until very recently, the situation was similar even in the simpler convex homogeneous setting where
Fm ’s are all identical and convex, and Woodworth et al. [2] showed that the optimal algorithm
often does not require local updates at all. Even when Fm ’s are not identical, for high levels of
∗

Equal contribution.

†

This work was done while BB was a research assistant professor at TTIC.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

