One-shot Neural Backdoor Erasing via Adversarial
Weight Masking

Shuwen Chai ∗
Renmin University of China
chaishuwen@ruc.edu.cn

Jinghui Chen †
Pennsylvania State University
jzc5917@psu.edu

Abstract
Recent studies show that despite achieving high accuracy on a number of realworld applications, deep neural networks (DNNs) can be backdoored: by injecting
triggered data samples into the training dataset, the adversary can mislead the
trained model into classifying any test data to the target class as long as the trigger
pattern is presented. Various methods have been proposed to nullify such backdoor
threats. Notably, a line of research aims to purify the potentially compromised
model. However, one major limitation of this line of work is the requirement to
access sufficient original training data: the purifying performance is much worse
when the available training data is limited. In this work, we propose Adversarial
Weight Masking (AWM), a novel method capable of erasing the neural backdoors
even in the one-shot setting. The key idea behind our method is to formulate
this into a min-max optimization problem: first, adversarially recover the trigger
patterns and then (soft) mask the network weights that are sensitive to the recovered
patterns. Comprehensive evaluations of several benchmark datasets suggest that
AWM can largely improve the purifying effects over other state-of-the-art methods
on various available training dataset sizes.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely applied in a variety of critical applications, such
as image classification [17], object detection [48, 63] , natural language processing [9], and speech
recognition [19], with tremendous success. The training of modern DNN models usually relies
on large amount of training data and computation, therefore, it is common to collect data over the
Internet or directly use pretrained models from third-party platforms. However, this also gives room
for potential training-time attacks [43, 11, 21, 38, 40]. Particularly, backdoor attack [15, 32, 6, 43,
1, 33, 37, 45, 30] is among one of the biggest threats to the safety of the current DNN models: the
adversary could inject triggered data samples into the training dataset and cause the learned DNN
model to misclassify any test data to the target class as long as the trigger pattern is presented. In the
meantime, the model still enjoy decent performances on clean tasks thus the backdoors can be hard
to notice. Recent advanced backdoor attacks also adopt invisible [27], or even sample-specific [29]
triggers to make it even stealthier.
Facing the immediate threat from backdoor adversaries, many backdoor defense or detection methods
[31, 35, 16, 52, 58, 60] have been proposed. Particularly, we focus on a line of research which aims
to purifying the potentially compromised model without any access to the model’s training process.
This is actually a quite realistic setting as the large-scale machine learning model nowadays [9, 2] can
hardly be trained by individuals. Earlier works in this line usually purify the backdoored model via
model fine-tuning [54, 7] or distillation [28, 14]. The problem is fine-tuning and distillation procedure
∗
†

This work was done when the author was remotely interned at Pennsylvania State University.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

