IMED-RL: Regret optimal learning of ergodic Markov
decision processes

Fabien Pesquerel*
fabien.pesquerel@inria.fr

Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
odalric.maillard@inria.fr

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9198-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

Abstract
We consider reinforcement learning in a discrete, undiscounted, infinite-horizon
Markov Decision Problem (MDP) under the average reward criterion, and focus on
the minimization of the regret with respect to an optimal policy, when the learner
does not know the rewards nor the transitions of the MDP. In light of their success
at regret minimization in multi-armed bandits, popular bandit strategies, such as
the optimistic UCB, KL-UCB or the Bayesian Thompson sampling strategy, have
been extended to the MDP setup. Despite some key successes, existing strategies
for solving this problem either fail to be provably asymptotically optimal, or suffer
from prohibitive burn-in phase and computational complexity when implemented
in practice. In this work, we shed a novel light on regret minimization strategies,
by extending to reinforcement learning the computationally appealing Indexed
Minimum Empirical Divergence (IMED) bandit algorithm. Traditional asymptotic
problem-dependent lower bounds on the regret are known under the assumption
that the MDP is ergodic. Under this assumption, we introduce IMED-RL and prove
that its regret upper bound asymptotically matches the regret lower bound. We
discuss both the case when the supports of transitions are unknown, and the more
informative but a priori harder-to-exploit-optimally case when they are known.
Rewards are assumed light-tailed, semi-bounded from above. Last, we provide
numerical illustrations on classical tabular MDPs, ergodic and communicating only,
showing the competitiveness of IMED-RL in finite-time against state-of-the-art
algorithms. IMED-RL also benefits from a light complexity.

1

Introduction

We study Reinforcement Learning (RL) with an unknown finite Markov Decision Problem (MDP)
under the average-reward criterion in which a learning algorithm interacts sequentially with the
dynamical system, without any reset, in a single and infinite sequence of observations, actions, and
rewards while trying to maximize its total accumulated rewards over time. Formally, we consider a
finite MDP M = (S, A, p, r) where S is the finite set of states, A = (As )s∈S specifies the set of
actions available in each state and we introduce the set of pairs XM = {(s, a) : s ∈ S, a ∈ As } for
convenience. Further1 , p : XM → P(S) is the transition distribution function and r : XM → P(R)
the reward distribution function, with corresponding mean reward function denoted by m : XM → R.
An agent interacts with the MDP at discrete time steps t ∈ N∗ and yields a random sequence
(st , at , rt )t of states, actions, and rewards in the following way. At each time step t, the agent observes
the current state st and decides the action at to take based on st and possibly past information, i.e.
previous elements of the sequence. After playing at , it observes a reward rt ∼ r (st , at ), the current
state of the MDP changes to st+1 ∼ p (·|st , at ) and the agent proceeds sequentially. In the average1

Given a set E, P (E) denotes the set of probability distributions on E.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

