Fair Ranking with Noisy Protected Attributes

Anay Mehrotra
Yale University

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
Yale University

Abstract
The fair-ranking problem, which asks to rank a given set of items to maximize
utility subject to group fairness constraints, has received attention in the fairness,
information retrieval, and machine learning literature. Recent works, however,
observe that errors in socially-salient (including protected) attributes of items can
significantly undermine fairness guarantees of existing fair-ranking algorithms
and raise the problem of mitigating the effect of such errors. We study the fairranking problem under a model where socially-salient attributes of items are
randomly and independently perturbed. We present a fair-ranking framework that
incorporates group fairness requirements along with probabilistic information about
perturbations in socially-salient attributes. We provide provable guarantees on the
fairness and utility attainable by our framework and show that it is informationtheoretically impossible to significantly beat these guarantees. Our framework
works for multiple non-disjoint attributes and a general class of fairness constraints
that includes proportional and equal representation. Empirically, we observe that,
compared to baselines, our algorithm outputs rankings with higher fairness, and
has a similar or better fairness-utility trade-off compared to baselines.

1

Introduction

Given a query and a set of m items, ranking problems require one to output an ordering of a small
subset of items in decreasing order of relevance to the query. Such ranking problems have been
extensively studied in the information retrieval [46] and the machine learning [45] literature, and
algorithms for them are used in applications such as search engines, personalized feed generators, and
online recruiting platforms [44, 12, 8]. Several studies have observed that when the outputs of ranking
algorithms are consumed by end-users, e.g., image results for occupation-related queries, articles with
different political leanings, and job applicants in online recruiting, the outputs can mislead or alter their
perceptions about socially-salient groups [38], polarize their opinions [24, 50], and affect economic
opportunities available to individuals [32]. A reason is that relevance (or utilities) input to ranking algorithms may be influenced by human or societal biases, leading to output rankings that skew representations of socially-salient, and often legally-protected, groups such as women and Black people [55].
A growing number of works aim to make the output of ranking algorithms fair with respect to sociallysalient attributes [74, 75, 58]. As for notions of fairness, in the case when each item belongs to one
of two socially-salient groups (G1 or G2 ), equal representation requires that, for every k, (roughly)
k
2 items from each of G1 and G2 appear in the first k positions of the output ranking. Proportional
representation requires that at most k · |Gmℓ | items from each Gℓ appear in the first k positions. Fairness
criteria that generalize proportional representation and involve p ≥ 2 groups G1 , . . . , Gp , where each
item may belong to multiple groups, have also been considered: Given values Ukℓ , they require that
at most Ukℓ items from Gℓ appear in the first k positions of the output ranking [61, 18]. One set
of works in the fair-ranking literature tries to improve fairness in utility-estimation [72, 62, 73, 51].
Such approaches have the benefit that no changes to the existing ranking algorithm are necessary
but they may be unable to guarantee that the output ranking satisfies the required fairness criteria
[27]. Another set of works use the given utilities as-it-is and change the ranking algorithm to output
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

