Cross-Image Context for Single Image Inpainting

Tingliang Feng, Wei Feng, Weiqi Li, Di Lin∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{fengtl, wicky}@tju.edu.cn, wfeng@ieee.org, Ande.lin1988@gmail.com

Abstract
Visual context is of crucial importance for image inpainting. The contextual
information captures the appearance and semantic correlation between the image
regions, helping to propagate the information of the complete regions for reasoning
the content of the corrupted regions. Many inpainting methods compute the visual
context based on the regions within a single image. In this paper, we propose
the Cross-Image Context Memory (CICM) for learning and using the cross-image
context to recover the corrupted regions. CICM consists of multiple sets of the
cross-image features learned from the image regions with different visual patterns.
The regional features are learned across different images, thus providing richer
context that benefits the inpainting task. The experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness and generalization of CICM, which achieves state-of-the-art
performances on various datasets for single image inpainting.

1

Introduction

Image inpainting requires understanding the object appearances and semantic categories in the images.
The recent success of image inpainting lies in the end-to-end training of the deep networks, which are
good at learning the appearance and semantic features from large-scale data.
Generally, the inpainting networks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] yield the regional features that capture the
appearance and semantic correlation between the image regions, thus providing the visual context.
Based on the visual context, the relevant information of the complete regions can be propagated
to the corrupted regions, whose contents are consequently reasoned. Conventionally, the context
propagation takes place between the regions within the isolated image. However, the existing methods,
which heavily rely on the visual context, face a dilemma, where the corrupted regions naturally lack
the visual information for computing the reliable context. It lets the learned context lose the critical
relationships between the image regions, eventually degrading the inpainting performance.
In this paper, we advocate the idea of learning the cross-image context to recover the corrupted image
regions. Alongside the inpainting network, we construct an external memory, where we store the
regional features of the complete regions across different images. For inpainting, we search CICM to
achieve the regional features, which are potentially relevant to the corrupted regions. Rather than
depending on the regional features learned from a single image, we employ external memory to
provide richer cross-image context. It allows the regional information from different images to be
propagated to the corrupted regions in an image, where the lost contents are better restored.
Specifically, we propose the external memory, Cross-Image Context Memory (CICM), which can be
equipped with popular inpainting networks. CICM consists of multiple feature sets. Each set contains
the cross-image features. Context Generalization injects the regional features, which are learned from
different images, into the cross-image features. We let the cross-image features in different sets have
diversity. Thus, we allow different sets capture a richer cross-image context. In the same set, we
∗

Di Lin is the corresponding author of this paper.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

