AutoMTL: A Programming Framework for
Automating Efficient Multi-Task Learning

Lijun Zhang
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA, 01003
lijunzhang@cs.umass.edu

Xiao Liu
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA, 01003
xiaoliu1990@cs.umass.edu

Hui Guan
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA, 01003
huiguan@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Multi-task learning (MTL) jointly learns a set of tasks by sharing parameters among
tasks. It is a promising approach for reducing storage costs while improving task
accuracy for many computer vision tasks. The effective adoption of MTL faces two
main challenges. The first challenge is to determine what parameters to share across
tasks to optimize for both memory efficiency and task accuracy. The second challenge is to automatically apply MTL algorithms to an arbitrary CNN backbone without requiring time-consuming manual re-implementation and significant domain
expertise. This paper addresses the challenges by developing the first programming
framework AutoMTL that automates efficient MTL model development for vision
tasks. AutoMTL takes as inputs an arbitrary backbone convolutional neural network
(CNN) and a set of tasks to learn, and automatically produces a multi-task model
that achieves high accuracy and small memory footprint simultaneously. Experiments on three popular MTL benchmarks (CityScapes, NYUv2, Tiny-Taskonomy)
demonstrate the effectiveness of AutoMTL over state-of-the-art approaches as well
as the generalizability of AutoMTL across CNNs. AutoMTL is open-sourced and
available at https://github.com/zhanglijun95/AutoMTL.

1

Introduction

AI-powered applications increasingly adopt Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for solving
many vision-related tasks (e.g., semantic segmentation, object detection), leading to more than one
CNNs running on resource-constrained devices. Supporting many models simultaneously on a device
is challenging due to the linearly increased computation, energy, and storage costs. An effective
approach to address the problem is multi-task learning (MTL) where a set of tasks are learned
jointly to allow some parameter sharing among tasks. MTL creates multi-task models based on
CNN architectures called backbone models, and has shown significantly reduced inference costs and
improved generalization performance in many computer vision applications [24, 37].
The effective adoption of MTL faces two main challenges. The first challenge is the resource-efficient
architecture design–that is, to determine what parameters of a backbone model to share across tasks
to optimize for both resource efficiency and task accuracy. Many prior works [20, 22, 13, 24, 36] rely
on manually-designed MTL model architectures which share several initial layers and then branch
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

