Posterior Refinement Improves Sample Efficiency
in Bayesian Neural Networks

Agustinus Kristiadi
University of Tübingen
agustinus.kristiadi@uni-tuebingen.de

Runa Eschenhagen
University of Tübingen
runa.eschenhagen@uni-tuebingen.de

Philipp Hennig
University of Tübingen and MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Monte Carlo (MC) integration is the de facto method for approximating the predictive distribution of Bayesian neural networks (BNNs). But, even with many MC
samples, Gaussian-based BNNs could still yield bad predictive performance due to
the posterior approximation’s error. Meanwhile, alternatives to MC integration tend
to be more expensive and biased. In this work, we experimentally show that the
key to good MC-approximated predictive distributions is the quality of the approximate posterior itself. However, previous methods for obtaining accurate posterior
approximations are expensive and non-trivial to implement. We, therefore, propose
to refine Gaussian approximate posteriors with normalizing flows. When applied
to last-layer BNNs, it yields a simple post hoc method for improving pre-existing
parametric approximations. We show that the resulting posterior approximation is
competitive with even the gold-standard full-batch Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

1

Introduction

Predictive uncertainty is crucial in safety-critical systems [1]. Yet, commonly-used neural network
(NN) predictive systems are overconfident [2, 3]. Approximate Bayesian inference of NNs, resulting
in Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), is a principled way of mitigating this issue [4]. Indeed, even
crude approximations of BNNs’ posteriors, such as the Laplace approximation [5], can lead to good
predictive uncertainty quantification (UQ) performance [6], provided the predictive distributions are
correctly computed [7].
A prediction in a BNN amounts to an integration of the likelihood w.r.t. the (approximate) posterior
measure. Due to the non-linearity of NNs, no analytic solution to the integral exists, even when
the likelihood and the approximate posterior are both Gaussian. A low-cost, unbiased, stochastic
approximation can be obtained via Monte Carlo (MC) integration: obtain S samples from the
approximate posterior and then compute the empirical expectation of the likelihood w.r.t. these
samples. While MC integration is accurate for large S, because of the sheer size of modern (B)NNs,
virtually all BNNs
√ use small S (typically 10 to 30, see [8–14, etc.]). Due to its well-known error
scaling of Θ(1/ S), intuitively, MC integration with a small S is inadequate for an accurate
prediction—yet, this has not been studied in depth for BNNs. Furthermore, while linearization of an
NN around a point estimate in the parameter space is an alternative to MC integration [7, 15–17], it
is generally costly due to the computation of per-example Jacobian matrices.
In this work, we study the quality of MC integration for making predictions in BNNs. We show that
few-sample MC integration is inaccurate for even an “easy” integral such as when the domain of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

