SafeBench: A Benchmarking Platform for Safety
Evaluation of Autonomous Vehicles
Chejian Xu1 , ⇤ Wenhao Ding2 , Weijie Lyu1 , Zuxin Liu2 ,
Shuai Wang2 , Yihan He2 , Hanjiang Hu2 , Ding Zhao2 , Bo Li1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Carnegie Mellon University
⇤

{chejian2,wlyu3,lbo}@illinois.edu, dingzhao@cmu.edu
{wenhaod,zuxinl,shuaiwa2,yihanhe,hanjianh}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
As shown by recent studies, machine intelligence-enabled systems are vulnerable
to test cases resulting from either adversarial manipulation or natural distribution
shifts. This has raised great concerns about deploying machine learning algorithms for real-world applications, especially in safety-critical domains such as
autonomous driving (AD). On the other hand, traditional AD testing on naturalistic
scenarios requires hundreds of millions of driving miles due to the high dimensionality and rareness of the safety-critical scenarios in the real world. As a result, several
approaches for autonomous driving evaluation have been explored, which are
usually, however, based on different simulation platforms, types of safety-critical
scenarios, scenario generation algorithms, and driving route variations. Thus, despite a large amount of effort in autonomous driving testing, it is still challenging
to compare and understand the effectiveness and efficiency of different testing
scenario generation algorithms and testing mechanisms under similar conditions.
In this paper, we aim to provide the first unified platform SafeBench to integrate different types of safety-critical testing scenarios, scenario generation algorithms, and
other variations such as driving routes and environments. In particular, we consider
8 safety-critical testing scenarios following National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and develop 4 scenario generation algorithms considering
10 variations for each scenario. Meanwhile, we implement 4 deep reinforcement
learning-based AD algorithms with 4 types of input (e.g., bird’s-eye view, camera)
to perform fair comparisons on SafeBench. We find our generated testing scenarios
are indeed more challenging and observe the trade-off between the performance
of AD agents under benign and safety-critical testing scenarios. We believe our
unified platform SafeBench for large-scale and effective autonomous driving testing will motivate the development of new testing scenario generation and safe AD
algorithms. SafeBench is available at https://safebench.github.io.

1

Introduction

Innovations driven by recent progress in machine learning (ML) have shown human-competitive
performance in sensing [1], decision-making [2], and manipulation [3]. However, several studies have
shown that when such powerful ML models are exposed to adversarial attacks they can be fooled,
evaded, and misled in ways that would have profound security implications: image recognition,
natural language processing, and audio recognition systems have all been attacked [4, 5, 6, 7]. As
ML-based models and approaches have expanded to real-world safety-critical applications, such as
Autonomous Driving (AD), the question of safety is becoming a crux for the transition from theories
⇤

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

