Efficient Training of
Low-Curvature Neural Networks
Suraj Srinivas∗1
Harvard University
ssrinivas@seas.harvard.edu
Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu

Kyle Matoba∗
Idiap Research Institute & EPFL
kyle.matoba@epfl.ch
François Fleuret
University of Geneva
francois.fleuret@unige.ch

Abstract
Standard deep neural networks often have excess non-linearity, making them susceptible to issues such as low adversarial robustness and gradient instability. Common methods to address these downstream issues, such as adversarial training, are
expensive and often sacrifice predictive accuracy.
In this work, we address the core issue of excess non-linearity via curvature, and
demonstrate low-curvature neural networks (LCNNs) that obtain drastically lower
curvature than standard models while exhibiting similar predictive performance.
This leads to improved robustness and stable gradients, at a fraction of the cost of
standard adversarial training. To achieve this, we decompose overall model curvature in terms of curvatures and slopes of its constituent layers. To enable efficient
curvature minimization of constituent layers, we introduce two novel architectural
components: first, a non-linearity called centered-softplus that is a stable variant
of the softplus non-linearity, and second, a Lipschitz-constrained batch normalization layer.
Our experiments show that LCNNs have lower curvature, more stable gradients
and increased off-the-shelf adversarial robustness when compared to standard neural networks, all without affecting predictive performance. Our approach is easy
to use and can be readily incorporated into existing neural network architectures.
Code to implement our method and replicate our experiments is available at
https://github.com/kylematoba/lcnn.

1

Introduction

The high degree of flexibility present in deep neural networks is critical to achieving good performance in complex tasks such as image classification, language modelling and generative modelling
of images [1–3]. However, excessive flexibility is undesirable as this can lead to model underspecification [4] which results in unpredictable behaviour on out-of-domain inputs, such as vulnerability to adversarial examples. Such under-specification can be avoided in principle via Occam’s
razor, which requires training models that are as simple as possible for the task at hand, and not any
more. Motivated by this principle, in this work we focus on training neural network models without
excess non-linearity in their input-output map (e.g.: see Fig 1b), such that predictive performance
remains unaffected.
*
1

Equal Contribution
Work done partially at Idiap Research Institute

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

