Thinking Outside the Ball: Optimal Learning with
Gradient Descent for Generalized Linear Stochastic
Convex Optimization

Idan Amir
Tel Aviv University
idanamir@mail.tau.ac.il

Roi Livni
Tel Aviv University
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We consider linear prediction with a convex Lipschitz loss, or more generally,
stochastic convex optimization problems of generalized linear form, i.e. where
each instantaneous loss is a scalar convex function of a linear function. We show
that in this setting, early stopped Gradient Descent (GD), without any explicit
regularization or projection, ensures excess error at most ε (compared to the best
possible with unit Euclidean norm) with an optimal, up to logarithmic factors,
sample complexity of 𝑂˜ (1/ε2 ) and only 𝑂˜ (1/ε2 ) iterations. This contrasts with
general stochastic convex optimization, where Ω (1/ε4 ) iterations are needed Amir
et al. [2]. The lower iteration complexity is ensured by leveraging uniform convergence rather than stability. But instead of uniform convergence in a norm ball,
which we show can guarantee suboptimal learning using Θ (1/ε4 ) samples, we rely
on uniform convergence in a distribution-dependent ball.

1

Introduction

The recent success of learning using deep networks, with many more parameters than training
points, and even without any explicit regularization, has brought back interest in how biases and
“implicit regularization” due to the optimization method used, can ensure good generalization, even
in situations where minimizing the optimization objective itself cannot [28]. Alongside interest in
understanding the algorithmic biases of optimization in non-convex, deep models, and how they
can yield good generalization [e.g. 3, 6, 8, 13–15, 21, 23–25, 29, 30, 39], there has also been
renewed interest in understanding the fundamentals of algorithmic regularization in convex models
[1, 2, 9, 10, 31, 33], both as an interesting and important setting in its own right, and even more so
as a basis for understanding the situation in more complex models (how can we hope to understand
phenomena in deep, non-convex models, if we can’t even understand them in convex models?). In
particular, these fundamental questions include the relationship between algorithmic regularization,
explicit regularization, uniform convergence and stability; and the importance of stochasticity and
early stopping.
In this paper we focus on the algorithmic bias of deterministic (full batch) optimization methods, and
in particular of full-batch gradient descent (i.e. gradient descent on the empirical risk, or “training
error”). Even when gradient descent (GD) is run to convergence, it affords some bias that can ensure
generalization. E.g. in linear regression (and even slightly more general settings) where interpolation
is possible, it can be shown to converge to the minimum norm interpolating solution. This can be
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

