Reconstruction on Trees and Low-Degree Polynomials
Frederic Koehler⇤
Stanford University
fkoehler@stanford.edu

Elchanan Mossel†
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
elmos@mit.edu

Abstract
The study of Markov processes and broadcasting on trees has deep connections
to a variety of areas including statistical physics, graphical models, phylogenetic
reconstruction, Markov Chain Monte Carlo, and community detection in random graphs. Notably, the celebrated Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm achieves
Bayes-optimal performance for the reconstruction problem of predicting the value
of the Markov process at the root of the tree from its values at the leaves.
Recently, the analysis of low-degree polynomials has emerged as a valuable tool
for predicting computational-to-statistical gaps. In this work, we investigate the
performance of low-degree polynomials for the reconstruction problem on trees.
Perhaps surprisingly, we show that there are simple tree models with N leaves and
bounded arity where (1) nontrivial reconstruction of the root value is possible with
a simple polynomial time algorithm and with robustness to noise, but not with any
polynomial of degree N c for c > 0 a constant depending only on the arity, and
(2) when the tree is unknown and given multiple samples with correlated root
assignments, nontrivial reconstruction of the root value is possible with a simple
Statistical Query algorithm but not with any polynomial of degree N c . These
results clarify some of the limitations of low-degree polynomials vs. polynomial
time algorithms for Bayesian estimation problems. They also complement recent
work of Moitra, Mossel, and Sandon who studied the circuit complexity of Belief
Propagation. As a consequence of our main result, we are able to prove a result
of independent interest regarding the performance of RBF kernel ridge regression
for learning to predict the root coloration: for some c0 > 0 depending only on
0
the arity, exp(N c ) many samples are needed for the kernel regression to obtain
nontrivial correlation with the true regression function (BP). We pose related open
questions about low-degree polynomials and the Kesten-Stigum threshold.

1

Introduction

Understanding the computational complexity of random instances has been the goal of an extensive
line of research spanning multiple decades and different research areas such as cryptography, highdimensional statistics, complexity theory, and statistical physics. In particular, this includes work
on satisfiability and refutation of random constraint satisfaction problems and on computationalto-statistical gaps. In much of this work, evidence for computational hardness is indirect because
there are well-known barriers to proving hardness from classical worst-case assumptions such as
⇤

Supported in part by E. Mossel’s Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship ONR-N00014-20-1-2826, NSF award
CCF-1704417, NSF Award IIS-1908774, and N. Anari’s Sloan Research Fellowship. Part of this work was
completed while at MIT and while participating in the program Computational Complexity of Statistical Inference at the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
†
Supported by Simons-NSF collaboration on deep learning NSF DMS-2031883, by Vannevar Bush Faculty
Fellowship award ONR-N00014-20-1-2826 and by a Simons Investigator Award in Mathematics (622132)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

