SPD: Synergy Pattern Diversifying Oriented
Unsupervised Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning

Yuhang Jiang∗, Jianzhun Shao∗, Shuncheng He, Hongchang Zhang, Xiangyang Ji
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{jiangyh19, sjz18, hesc16, hc-zhang19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement learning typically relies heavily on a well-designed reward signal,
which gets more challenging in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning.
Alternatively, unsupervised reinforcement learning (URL) has delivered on its
promise in the recent past to learn useful skills and explore the environment
without external supervised signals. These approaches mainly aimed for the single
agent to reach distinguishable states, insufficient for multi-agent systems due to
that each agent interacts with not only the environment, but also the other agents.
We propose Synergy Pattern Diversifying Oriented Unsupervised Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning (SPD) to learn generic coordination policies for agents
with no extrinsic reward. Specifically, we devise the Synergy Pattern Graph (SPG),
a graph depicting the relationships of agents at each time step. Furthermore, we
propose an episode-wise divergence measurement to approximate the discrepancy
of synergy patterns. To overcome the challenge of sparse return, we decompose
the discrepancy of synergy patterns to per-time-step pseudo-reward. Empirically,
we show the capacity of SPD to acquire meaningful coordination policies, such
as maintaining specific formations in Multi-Agent Particle Environment and passand-shoot in Google Research Football. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the
same instructive pretrained policy’s parameters can serve as a good initialization
for a series of downstream tasks’ policies, achieving higher data efficiency and
outperforming state-of-the-art approaches in Google Research Football.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has exhibited excellent capabilities in tackling complex tasks,
including Go [40, 36], poker [27] and simulated robotic tasks [37, 13]. However, one of the key
challenges in deploying RL algorithms is to devise an elaborate reward signal for eliciting desired
behaviour of agents [14]. Due to the sharing of the team reward, the situation gets more complicated
for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), especially in real-world applications
such as coordination of robot swarms [16] and autonomous vehicle teams [52], where verifying the
effectiveness of the designed reward can be prohibitively costly.
As for the single agent, unsupervised learning has been incorporated into RL to acquire diverse
skills for the agent without extrinsic reward from the environment, and this scenario is known as
unsupervised reinforcement learning (URL). Recent advances in URL [10, 15, 20, 31, 38] have
demonstrated the potential of the agent to explore the environment and learn useful skills with
no supervision. Moreover, when endowed with the task-related extrinsic reward in downstream
tasks, these skills exhibit significant generalizability, leading to efficient adaptation. An important
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

