ZIN: When and How to Learn Invariance Without
Environment Partition?
Yong Lin
HKUST
ylindf@connect.ust.hk

Shengyu Zhu∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
zhushyu@outlook.com

Lu Tan
Tsinghua University
tanl21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Peng Cui
Tsinghua University
cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
It is commonplace to encounter heterogeneous data, of which some aspects of
the data distribution may vary but the underlying causal mechanisms remain
constant. When data are divided into distinct environments according to the
heterogeneity, recent invariant learning methods have proposed to learn robust
and invariant models using this environment partition. It is hence tempting to
utilize the inherent heterogeneity even when environment partition is not provided.
Unfortunately, in this work, we show that learning invariant features under this
circumstance is fundamentally impossible without further inductive biases or
additional information. Then, we propose a framework to jointly learn environment
partition and invariant representation, assisted by additional auxiliary information.
We derive sufficient and necessary conditions for our framework to provably
identify invariant features under a fairly general setting. Experimental results on
both synthetic and real world datasets validate our analysis and demonstrate an
improved performance of the proposed framework. Our findings also raise the
need of making the role of inductive biases more explicit when learning invariant
models without environment partition in future works. Codes are available at
https://github.com/linyongver/ZIN_official.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms with empirical risk minimization (ERM) generally assume independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data in training and test sets. Due to changing circumstances,
selection bias, or time shifts, data distributions are often heterogeneous across different environments
in practical applications. When the distributions of training and test data are indeed different, model
performance can severely degrade [47, 17, 38], as ERM based algorithms may exploit the spurious
correlations that are particularly useful to ERM in the training data but do not exist in the test data.
To tackle the distribution-shift or out-of-distribution generalization problem, a recent line of methods
propose to utilize the causally invariant mechanisms (rather than the spurious correlations in the
training data) that are supposed to be stable across different environments. For example, Peters et al.
[36] proposes to exploit the invariance principle to learn a linear model that merely relies on the direct
causes of the target. Such a model is shown to be robust to potential interventions on any variable
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

