Riemannian Neural SDE: Learning Stochastic
Representations on Manifolds

Sung Woo Park1 , Hyomin Kim2 , Kyungjae Lee3 , Junseok Kwon4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chung-Ang University, Korea
1,3,4
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, Chung-Ang University, Korea
1
LG AI Research
1
pswkiki@gmail.com, 2 icecream126@cau.ac.kr
3
kyungjae.lee@ai.cau.ac.kr, 4 jskwon@cau.ac.kr

1,2,4

Abstract
In recent years, the neural stochastic differential equation (NSDE) has gained
attention for modeling stochastic representations with great success in various
types of applications. However, it typically loses expressivity when the data
representation is manifold-valued. To address this issue, we suggest a principled
method for expressing the stochastic representation with the Riemannian neural
SDE (RNSDE), which extends the conventional Euclidean NSDE. Empirical results
for various tasks demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms
baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been a great success in modeling stochastic
dynamical systems for complex data representations with spatially high stochasticity. Particularly, recent studies have utilized the stochastic differential equation (SDE) as a fundamental probabilistic model to express the transition of stochastic
states. The pioneering work, Latent SDE (14), introduced the
deep-learning framework to utilize SDE for modeling spatiotemporal representations. Following their work, parameterized
reverse-SDE (1) was adopted to model score-based generative
models (27). Recently, a controlled SDE combined with a
Figure 1: Brownian motions on torus
stochastic optimal control theoretical framework was intro- T2 (black) and R3 (red).
duced to model time series (21). These studies provided a new
method for describing stochastic representations and illustrated the superiority of neural SDE models
in various real-world applications. Although remarkable progress has been recorded in recent studies,
the primary interest in using SDE has focused on Euclidean geometry (i.e., Rd ). Thus, conventional
approaches inevitably lose their expressivity when data representation is defined in generic geometry,
such as Riemannian manifolds (i.e., M). In this paper, we solve the aforementioned problem by
introducing the Riemannian neural SDE (RNSDE), which can model the stochastic representation on
manifolds. The proposed RNSDE is a natural extension of conventional Euclidean SDEs that defines
intrinsic stochastic transitions while fully considering the geometric structure. Specifically, we follow
the Eells-Elworthy-Malliavin interpretation of the diffusion Riemannian SDE, where the stochastic
representation is expressed on the frame bundle.
Example. To illustrate the problem mentioned above, we represent the stochastic trajectories of
Riemannian (black) and Euclidean (red) Brownian motions on 2-Torus in Fig.1. As shown in the
figure, the Euclidean SDE is unaware of the underlying geometry (i.e., torus) and its trajectory easily
steps out of the curved surface. Accordingly, the use of Euclidean SDE is problematic and lacks
geometry-awareness. In contrast, the proposed Riemannian SDE respects its underlying geometry
and yields a trajectory that clearly lies on the manifold.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

