Are You Stealing My Model? Sample Correlation for
Fingerprinting Deep Neural Networks

Jiyang Guan1,2 , Jian Liang1,2 , Ran He1,2∗
NLPR &CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
1

guanjiyang2020@ia.ac.cn, liangjian92@gmail.com, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
An off-the-shelf model as a commercial service could be stolen by model stealing
attacks, posing great threats to the rights of the model owner. Model fingerprinting
aims to verify whether a suspect model is stolen from the victim model, which
gains more and more attention nowadays. Previous methods always leverage
the transferable adversarial examples as the model fingerprint, which is sensitive
to adversarial defense or transfer learning scenarios. To address this issue, we
consider the pairwise relationship between samples instead and propose a novel
yet simple model stealing detection method based on SAmple Correlation (SAC).
Specifically, we present SAC-w that selects wrongly classified normal samples as
model inputs and calculates the mean correlation among their model outputs. To
reduce the training time, we further develop SAC-m that selects CutMix Augmented
samples as model inputs, without the need for training the surrogate models or
generating adversarial examples. Extensive results validate that SAC successfully
defends against various model stealing attacks, even including adversarial training
or transfer learning, and detects the stolen models with the best performance in
terms of AUC across different datasets and model architectures. The codes are
available at https://github.com/guanjiyang/SAC.

1

Introduction

Over the past years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have played an important role in many critical
fields, e.g., face recognition [1], medical diagnosis [2, 3] and autonomous driving [4]. As a popular
option, the model owners always provide their models as a cloud service or client-sided software to
the clients. But, training a deep neural network is costly and involves expensive data collection and
large computation resource consumption, and thus, models trained for inference constitute valuable
intellectual property and should be protected [5, 6]. However, model stealing attacks can steal the
valuable model with only API access to the model owner’s well-performed model (source model) [7],
causing serious threats to the model owner’s intellectual property (IP).
Model stealing attacks aim to illegally steal functionally equivalent copies of the source model with
white-box or even black-box access to the model. As for the white-box case, the attacker can access
all the inner parameters of the source model and evade the model owner’s detection by source model
modification such as pruning [8, 9] or fine-tuning the source model. By contrast, model extraction
attack [10, 11] as a more powerful attack, has been proposed with the black-box access to the model.
That is to say, the model extraction attack only requires model outputs rather than the inner parameters
to steal the function of the source model, and thus is more threatening.
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

