C2FAR: Coarse-to-Fine Autoregressive Networks for
Precise Probabilistic Forecasting

Shane Bergsma

Timothy Zeyl Javad Rahimipour Anaraki Lei Guo
Huawei Cloud, Alkaid Lab Canada
{shane.bergsma,timothy.zeyl,javad.anaraki,leiguo}@huawei.com

Abstract
We present coarse-to-fine autoregressive networks (C2FAR), a method for modeling the probability distribution of univariate, numeric random variables. C2FAR
generates a hierarchical, coarse-to-fine discretization of a variable autoregressively;
progressively finer intervals of support are generated from a sequence of binned distributions, where each distribution is conditioned on previously-generated coarser
intervals. Unlike prior (flat) binned distributions, C2FAR can represent values with
exponentially higher precision, for only a linear increase in complexity. We use
C2FAR for probabilistic forecasting via a recurrent neural network, thus modeling
time series autoregressively in both space and time. C2FAR is the first method to
simultaneously handle discrete and continuous series of arbitrary scale and distribution shape. This flexibility enables a variety of time series use cases, including
anomaly detection, interpolation, and compression. C2FAR achieves improvements
over the state-of-the-art on several benchmark forecasting datasets.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic forecasting is the task of estimating a joint distribution over future values of a time
series, given a sequence of historical values. As an important problem with many applications and an
abundance of real-world data, probabilistic forecasting has unsurprisingly come to be dominated by
deep learning methods [7]. Such methods typically fit a global sequence model to a dataset of related
time series. To forecast a given series, future values are iteratively generated from one-step-ahead
univariate output distributions. In this paper, we propose coarse-to-fine autoregressive networks
(C2FAR), a general method for modeling distributions of univariate numeric data, and we show how
C2FAR enables improved output distributions for probabilistic forecasting.
Such improvements are needed because time series offer challenges not present in applications like
text and image modeling. First, dynamic range or scale of real-world time series can vary widely
within a single dataset [55]. The typical solution is to normalize the data based on input historical
values, but many time series have heavy tails [19], meaning even after normalization, future values
must be modeled via distributions with unbounded support. Second, even within one dataset, time
series may be discrete, continuous, or mixed, and each of these may be distributed in arbitrary,
multi-modal ways, which vary over time. All of this makes it difficult for practitioners to encode
input values and to select appropriate parametric forms for output distributions.
C2FAR allows efficient modeling of any univariate numeric output (§3). C2FAR extends prior work
using categorical output distributions over binned representations [49, 19]. While the precision of
prior methods is limited by the number of bins in the discretization, C2FAR achieves an exponential
increase in precision through only a linear increase in the number of bin parameters. Like digits in the
decimal number system (and unlike, say, roman numerals or simple tally marks), C2FAR represents
scalar quantities hierarchically, treating numbers as multidimensional objects, with each successive
dimension or level representing the original value at a progressively finer resolution (Fig. 1).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

