Local Linear Convergence of Gradient Methods for
Subspace Optimization via Strict Complementarity
Ron Fisher
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003
ronfisher@campus.technion.ac.il

Dan Garber
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003
dangar@technion.ac.il

Abstract
We consider optimization problems in which the goal is to find a k-dimensional
subspace of Rn , k << n, which minimizes a convex and smooth loss. Such
problems generalize the fundamental task of principal component analysis (PCA)
to include robust and sparse counterparts, and logistic PCA for binary data, among
others. This problem could be approached either via nonconvex gradient methods
with highly-efficient iterations, but for which arguing about fast convergence
to a global minimizer is difficult or, via a convex relaxation for which arguing
about convergence to a global minimizer is straightforward, but the corresponding
methods are often inefficient in high dimensions. In this work we bridge these
two approaches under a strict complementarity assumption, which in particular
implies that the optimal solution to the convex relaxation is unique and is also
the optimal solution to the original nonconvex problem. Our main result is a
proof that a natural nonconvex gradient method which is SVD-free and requires
only a single QR-factorization of an n ⇥ k matrix per iteration, converges locally
with a linear rate. We also establish linear convergence results for the nonconvex
projected gradient method, and the Frank-Wolfe method when applied to the convex
relaxation.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of finding a k-dimensional subspace of Rn , k << n, which minimizes a
given objective function, where we identify a subspace with its corresponding projection matrix. That
is, we consider the following optimization problem:
min f (X)

subject to X 2 Pn,k := {QQ> | Q 2 Rn⇥k , Q> Q = I}.

(1)

Throughout this work and unless stated otherwise, we assume that f (·) is convex, -smooth (gradient
Lipschitz) and, for ease of presentation, we also assume that the gradient rf (·) is a symmetric matrix
over the space of n ⇥ n symmetric matrices Sn1 .

Problems of interest that fall into this model include among others robust counterparts of PCA,
which are based on the smooth and convex Huber loss (see concrete examples in Section 4), logistic
PCA [15], and sparse PCA [26]. Note that in Problem (1) we are interested in the low-dimensional
subspace itself (as opposed to the projection of the data onto it, as in many other formulations), which
is important for instance when the end goal is to perform dimension reduction, which is one of the
most important applications of PCA-style methods.
1

in case the gradient is not a symmetric matrix at some point X 2 Sn , then denoting it by rnonsym f (X),
we can always take its symmetric counterpart rf (X) = 12 (rnonsym f (X) + rnonsym f (X)> ) and, unless stated
otherwise, our derivations throughout this work will remain the same
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

