Learning Causally Invariant Representations for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization on Graphs

Yongqiang Chen1∗, Yonggang Zhang2 , Yatao Bian3 , Han Yang1 , Kaili Ma1 , Binghui Xie1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Hong Kong Baptist University
{yqchen,hyang,klma,bhxie21,jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk yatao.bian@gmail.com
Tongliang Liu4 , Bo Han2 , James Cheng1
3
Tencent AI Lab 4 TML Lab, The University of Sydney
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au {csygzhang,bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Despite recent success in using the invariance principle for out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization on Euclidean data (e.g., images), studies on graph data are
still limited. Different from images, the complex nature of graphs poses unique
challenges to adopting the invariance principle. In particular, distribution shifts on
graphs can appear in a variety of forms such as attributes and structures, making it
difficult to identify the invariance. Moreover, domain or environment partitions,
which are often required by OOD methods on Euclidean data, could be highly
expensive to obtain for graphs. To bridge this gap, we propose a new framework,
called Causality Inspired Invariant Graph LeArning (CIGA), to capture the invariance of graphs for guaranteed OOD generalization under various distribution shifts.
Specifically, we characterize potential distribution shifts on graphs with causal
models, concluding that OOD generalization on graphs is achievable when models
focus only on subgraphs containing the most information about the causes of labels.
Accordingly, we propose an information-theoretic objective to extract the desired
subgraphs that maximally preserve the invariant intra-class information. Learning
with these subgraphs is immune to distribution shifts. Extensive experiments on 16
synthetic or real-world datasets, including a challenging setting – DrugOOD,from
AI-aided drug discovery, validate the superior OOD performance of CIGA1 .

1

Introduction

Graph representation learning with graph neural networks (GNNs) has gained great success in tasks
involving relational information [45, 35, 99, 106, 107]. However, it assumes that the training and
test graphs are drawn from the same distribution, which is often violated in reality [37, 47, 38, 40].
The mismatch between training and test distributions, i.e., distribution shifts, introduced by some
underlying environmental factors related to data collection or processing, could seriously degrade
the performance of deployed models [7, 24]. Such out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization failures
become the major roadblock for practical applications of graph representation learning [40].
Meanwhile, enabling OOD generalization on regular Euclidean data has received surging attention
and several solutions were proposed [4, 81, 10, 49, 23, 48, 2]. In particular, the invariance principle
from causality is at the heart of those works [76, 74, 79]. The principle leverages the Independent
Causal Mechanism (ICM) assumption [74, 77] and implies that, model predictions that only focus on
the causes of the label can stay invariant to a large class of distribution shifts [76, 4, 2].
∗
1

Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
Code is available at https://github.com/LFhase/CIGA.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

