Trajectory Inference via
Mean-field Langevin in Path Space

Lénaïc Chizat∗,†

Stephen Zhang∗,‡

Matthieu Heitz§

Geoffrey Schiebinger§

Abstract
Trajectory inference aims at recovering the dynamics of a population from snapshots of its temporal marginals. To solve this task, a min-entropy estimator relative
to the Wiener measure in path space was introduced in Lavenant et al. [1], and
shown to consistently recover the dynamics of a large class of drift-diffusion
processes from the solution of an infinite dimensional convex optimization problem. In this paper, we introduce a grid-free algorithm to compute this estimator.
Our method consists in a family of point clouds (one per snapshot) coupled via
Schrödinger bridges which evolve with noisy gradient descent. We study the meanfield limit of the dynamics and prove its global convergence to the desired estimator.
Overall, this leads to an inference method with end-to-end theoretical guarantees
that solves an interpretable model for trajectory inference. We also present how
to adapt the method to deal with mass variations, a useful extension when dealing
with single cell RNA-sequencing data where cells can branch and die.

1

Introduction

Trajectory inference aims at recovering the dynamics of a population of particles given samples from
its temporal marginals at various time-points. This problem arises notably in the analysis of single-cell
RNA-sequencing data [2–4], where one has access—via a destructive measurement process—to the
cell state of samples from a large population of cells that evolve in time. In this application, one would
like to recover the overall dynamics of the population as well as the trajectories of individual cells so
as to improve our understanding of certain biological processes, such as embryonic development or
tumor progression.
Trajectory inference can be cast as a regression problem where the unknown is the law of a continuous
stochastic process. Let X be the ambient space containing the particles and Ω := C([0, 1], X) the
path-space, i.e. the set of all possible continuous trajectories over the time interval [0, 1]. We consider
the problem of recovering a probability distribution over paths P ∈ P(Ω), i.e. the law of a continuous
stochastic process (Xt )t∈[0,1] . For the inference to be well-behaved, one should look for a distribution
P such that its time marginals are consistent with the observed snapshots and such that the overall
dynamics it represents satisfies some notion of regularity.
The problem of trajectory inference has received significant attention over the past several years.
However, while pioneering work has focused on creating new methods, the theoretical treatment
has remained limited. One class of methods focuses on recovering a potential energy landscape
that best fits the observed marginals. For example, Hashimoto et al. [5] encode the potential with a
neural network, TrajectoryNet [3] encodes the potential as a neural ODE, and JKOnet [6] encodes the
potential with a neural network architecture based on the JKO scheme [7] and input convex neural
∗

Joint first authors.
Institute of mathematics, EPFL, Switzerland
‡
University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
§
University of British Columbia, Canada
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

