Recall Distortion in Neural Network Pruning
and the Undecayed Pruning Algorithm

Aidan Good∗
Bucknell University

Jiaqi Lin∗
Bucknell University

Xin Yu∗
University of Utah

Hannah Sieg
Bucknell University

Mikey Ferguson
Bucknell University

Shandian Zhe
University of Utah

Jerzy Wieczorek
Colby College

Thiago Serra†
Bucknell University

Abstract
Pruning techniques have been successfully used in neural networks to trade accuracy for sparsity. However, the impact of network pruning is not uniform: prior
work has shown that the recall for underrepresented classes in a dataset may be
more negatively affected. In this work, we study such relative distortions in recall
by hypothesizing an intensification effect that is inherent to the model. Namely,
that pruning makes recall relatively worse for a class with recall below accuracy
and, conversely, that it makes recall relatively better for a class with recall above accuracy. In addition, we propose a new pruning algorithm aimed at attenuating such
effect. Through statistical analysis, we have observed that intensification is less
severe with our algorithm but nevertheless more pronounced with relatively more
difficult tasks, less complex models, and higher pruning ratios. More surprisingly,
we conversely observe a de-intensification effect with lower pruning ratios, which
indicates that moderate pruning may have a corrective effect to such distortions.

1

Introduction

Back in the old days, network pruning was important to reduce the size of neural networks [23, 53,
33, 41, 24, 25]. With new advances being increasingly reliant on overwhelmingly large and costly
models [3, 64, 10], network pruning is back to the game despite the gains in computing power.
Network pruning reduces the complexity of large models by setting a substantial number of parameters
to zero and then using gradient descent to fine-tune the sparser model. There is typically a trade-off
between making the model sparser—i.e., having fewer parameters, since those set to zero can simply
be discarded—and keeping the model as accurate as possible [9], although moderate gains in sparsity
may be obtained with little impact to accuracy [28]. However, recent studies have found that the side
effects of network pruning on model performance are not evenly distributed [30, 55, 31, 1, 63, 69].
Those studies have considered the impact of network pruning on recall—i.e., the number of correct
predictions per class—based on dataset representability. Namely, they have found that the degradation
in performance is influenced by the uneven representation of classes [30, 55, 69] and features [31]
as well as class complexity [55]. Hence, they corroborate long-standing concerns that unbalanced
datasets yield models that are less accurate in and potentially harmful to minoritized groups [11, 7].
In this work, we complement those prior studies by posing recall distortion as inherent to network
pruning even when the networks are trained and fine-tuned on datasets that are seemingly balanced;
hence investigating when and how such distortions manifest, as well as how to reduce their effect.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: thiago.serra@bucknell.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

