Independence Testing for Bounded Degree Bayesian
Networks
Arnab Bhattacharyya
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
arnabb@nus.edu.sg

Clément L. Canonne
School of Computer Science
University of Sydney
clement.canonne@sydney.edu.au

Joy Qiping Yang
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
joy.yang@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We study the following independence testing problem: given access to samples
from a distribution P over {0, 1}n , decide whether P is a product distribution or
whether it is "-far in total variation distance from any product distribution. For
arbitrary distributions, this problem requires exp(n) samples. We show in this
work that if P has a sparse structure, then in fact only linearly many samples are
required. Specifically, if P is Markov with respect to a Bayesian network whose
underlying DAG has in-degree bounded by d, then ˜
⇥(2d/2 · n/"2 ) samples are
necessary and sufficient for independence testing.

1

Introduction

It is often convenient to model high-dimensional datasets as probability distributions. An important
reason is that the language of probability formalizes what we intuitively mean by two features of
the data being independent: the marginal distributions along the two corresponding coordinates are
statistically independent. Independence is a basic probabilistic property that, when true, enables
better interpretability of data as well as computationally fast inference algorithms.
In this work, we study the problem of testing whether a collection of n binary random variables
are mutually independent. Independence testing is an old and foundational problem in hypothesis
testing [Neyman and Pearson, 1933, Lehmann et al., 2005], and we consider it from the perspective
of property testing [Rubinfeld and Sudan, 1996, Goldreich et al., 1998]. Our goal is to design a tester
that accepts product distributions on n variables and rejects distributions that have statistical distance
at least " from every product distribution. The tester gets access to i.i.d. samples from the input
distribution and can fail (in either case) with probability at most 1/3. The objective is to minimize
the number of samples as a function of n and ".
Previous work [Diakonikolas and Kane, 2016] shows1 that testing independence of a distribution on
{0, 1}n requires 2⌦(n) queries which is intractable. However, there is an aspect of this proof that
is unsatisfying. The “hard distributions”, which are shown to require many queries to distinguish
from product distributions, cannot be described succinctly, as they require exponentially many bits to
describe. Thus, a natural question arises: can we test independence efficiently for distributions on
{0, 1}n that have a sparse description?
1

See Appendix D for a more general result.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

