Dynamics of SGD with Stochastic Polyak Stepsizes:
Truly Adaptive Variants and Convergence
to Exact Solution
Antonio Orvieto⇤
Department of Computer Science,
ETH Zürich

Simon Lacoste-Julien†
Mila and DIRO,
Université de Montréal

Nicolas Loizou
AMS and MINDS,
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Recently Loizou et al. [22], proposed and analyzed stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) with stochastic Polyak stepsize (SPS). The proposed SPS comes with strong
convergence guarantees and competitive performance; however, it has two main
drawbacks when it is used in non-over-parameterized regimes: (i) It requires a
priori knowledge of the optimal mini-batch losses, which are not available when
the interpolation condition is not satisfied (e.g., regularized objectives), and (ii) it
guarantees convergence only to a neighborhood of the solution. In this work, we
study the dynamics and the convergence properties of SGD equipped with new
variants of the stochastic Polyak stepsize and provide solutions to both drawbacks
of the original SPS. We first show that a simple modification of the original SPS
that uses lower bounds instead of the optimal function values can directly solve
issue (i). On the other hand, solving issue (ii) turns out to be more challenging
and leads us to valuable insights into the method’s behavior. We show that if
interpolation is not satisfied, the correlation between SPS and stochastic gradients
introduces a bias, which effectively distorts the expectation of the gradient signal
near minimizers, leading to non-convergence - even if the stepsize is scaled down
during training. To fix this issue, we propose DecSPS, a novel modification of SPS,
which guarantees convergence to the exact minimizer - without a priori knowledge
of the problem parameters. For strongly-convex optimization problems, DecSPS
is the first stochastic adaptive optimization method that converges to the exact
solution without restrictive assumptions like bounded iterates/gradients.

1

Introduction

We consider the stochastic optimization problem:
"

#
n
1X
min f (x) =
fi (x) ,
n i=1
x2Rd

(1)

where each fi is convex and lower bounded. We denote by X ⇤ the non-empty set of optimal points
x⇤ of equation (1). We set f ⇤ := minx2Rd f (x), and fi⇤ := inf x2Rd fi (x).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
⇤

Corresponding author: antonio.orvieto@inf.ethz.ch. Part of this work was done while interning at
Mila, Université de Montréal under the supervision of Nicolas Loizou and Simon Lacoste-Julien.
†
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

