Align then Fusion: Generalized Large-scale Multi-view
Clustering with Anchor Matching Correspondences

Siwei Wang1 , Xinwang Liu1,∗ , Suyuan Liu1 , Jiaqi Jin1 , Wenxuan Tu1 , Xinzhong Zhu2 , En Zhu1
1
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Zhejiang Normal University
{wangsiwei13, xinwangliu, suyuanliu, jinjiaqi, twx, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view anchor graph clustering selects representative anchors to avoid full
pair-wise similarities and therefore reduce the complexity of graph methods. Although widely applied in large-scale applications, existing approaches do not
pay sufficient attention to establishing correct correspondences between the anchor sets across views. To be specific, anchor graphs obtained from different
views are not aligned column-wisely. Such an Anchor-Unaligned Problem (AUP)
would cause inaccurate graph fusion and degrade the clustering performance. Under multi-view scenarios, generating correct correspondences could be extremely
difficult since anchors are not consistent in feature dimensions. To solve this
challenging issue, we propose the first study of the generalized and flexible anchor graph fusion framework termed Fast Multi-View Anchor-Correspondence
Clustering (FMVACC). Specifically, we show how to find anchor correspondence
with both feature and structure information, after which anchor graph fusion is
performed column-wisely. Moreover, we theoretically show the connection between FMVACC and existing multi-view late fusion [18] and partial view-aligned
clustering [7], which further demonstrates our generality. Extensive experiments
on seven benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our
proposed method. Moreover, the proposed alignment module also shows significant performance improvement applying to existing multi-view anchor graph
competitors indicating the importance of anchor alignment. Our code is available
at https://github.com/wangsiwei2010/NeurIPS22-FMVACC.

1

Introduction

As an effective unsupervised multi-view learning technology, multi-view graph clustering (MVGC)
comprehensively utilizes multiple pair-wise instance similarities into optimal flexible graph structures
[26, 23, 5, 41]. In general, MVGC firstly constructs graph structures for every single view and then
refines individual graphs with ideal fused graph [44, 40, 43, 45]. For example, Zhang et al. explore
latent representation from multiple views with linear models and nonlinear networks in [44]. [40]
optimizes the consensus graph by minimizing disagreement of individual graphs and then reach an
agreement with rank constraint. [45] further proposes to utilize partition level information rather than
graph structure agreement and achieve promising performance.
Although massive MVGC approaches have been proposed, one major issue is scalability in real
large-scale applications [26, 23, 5]. For existing MVGC approaches, the complexity is quadratic or
cubic respecting to instance number n, which is unbearable for big data [9, 36]. As an effective way
for large-scale problem, anchor graph strategy firstly selects m individual anchors to represent full
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

