COLD Decoding: Energy-based
Constrained Text Generation with Langevin Dynamics

1

Lianhui Qin1 Sean Welleck1 2 Daniel Khashabi3⇤ Yejin Choi1 2
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Many applications of text generation require incorporating different constraints
to control the semantics or style of generated text. These constraints can be hard
(e.g., ensuring certain keywords are included in the output) and soft (e.g., contextualizing the output with the left- or right-hand context). In this paper, we
present Energy-based Constrained Decoding with Langevin Dynamics (C OLD), a
decoding framework which unifies constrained generation as specifying constraints
through an energy function, then performing efficient differentiable reasoning over
the constraints through gradient-based sampling. C OLD decoding is a flexible
framework that can be applied directly to off-the-shelf left-to-right language models without the need for any task-specific fine-tuning, as demonstrated through
three challenging text generation applications: lexically-constrained generation,
abductive reasoning, and counterfactual reasoning. Our experiments on these constrained generation tasks point to the effectiveness of our approach, both in terms
of automatic and human evaluation.1

1

Introduction

Many text generation applications require producing text that is not only fluent, but also satisfies
various constraints which control the semantics or style of the generated text. For example (Figure 1),
for knowledge-grounded or keyword-guided generation, we might want to ensure that certain keywords are included in the generated output as hard lexical constraints [29, 52]. For other types of text
generation, we often wish to incorporate soft topical constraints to contextualize the desired output,
e.g., abductively [43] reasoning about what happened in the middle of a story given the past and the
future story context [1]. Yet another class of text generation applications requires revising an input
based on a new counterfactual condition [13], which simultaneously requires semantic coherence as
well as minimal-edit constraints with respect to the input text [44].
The dominant paradigm to various text generation applications has been supervised learning with
task-specific training data. However, different applications require varied and potentially evolving
constraints, and annotating a large amount of task-specific training data for each different combination
of constraints can be costly. Recent work has explored incorporating constraints through energy-based
text modeling that alleviates the need of supervised data [23, 7, 41]. Yet those approaches still require
expensive training of specific generation models. In addition, training might not even be feasible with
recent models that are extreme in scale, like GPT-3 [3]. This motivates the need to enrich decoding
algorithms that can work directly with pretrained language models without task-specific fine-tuning,
and support complex combinations of hard and soft constraints to control the generated text on the fly.
⇤

1

Work done while working at Allen Institute for AI.
Code is available at https://github.com/qkaren/COLD_decoding

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

