PAC: Assisted Value Factorisation with Counterfactual
Predictions in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Hanhan Zhou
The George Washington University
hanhan@gwu.edu

Tian Lan
The George Washington University
tlan@gwu.edu

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University
vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has witnessed significant progress
with the development of value function factorization methods. It allows optimizing
a joint action-value function through the maximization of factorized per-agent
utilities. In this paper, we show that in partially observable MARL problems, an
agent’s ordering over its own actions could impose concurrent constraints (across
different states) on the representable function class, causing significant estimation
errors during training. We tackle this limitation and propose PAC, a new framework
leveraging Assistive information generated from Counterfactual Predictions of
optimal joint action selection, which enable explicit assistance to value function
factorization through a novel counterfactual loss. A variational inference-based
information encoding method is developed to collect and encode the counterfactual
predictions from an estimated baseline. To enable decentralized execution, we
also derive factorized per-agent policies inspired by a maximum-entropy MARL
framework. We evaluate the proposed PAC on multi-agent predator-prey and a set
of StarCraft II micromanagement tasks. Empirical results demonstrate improved
results of PAC over state-of-the-art value-based and policy-based multi-agent
reinforcement learning algorithms on all benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Many real-world reinforcement learning (RL) problems, such as autonomous vehicle coordination [1]
and network packet delivery [2], often involve coordination among multiple entities and are naturally
formulated as multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). Factorization-based methods have greatly
progressed in dealing with the exponentially growing joint state-action space in MARL. Under the
notion of Centralized Training and Decentralized Execution (CTDE), algorithms like VDN [3] and
QMIX [4] learn a centralized joint action-value function Qtot through a monotonic factorization
into local per-agent value functions so that Qtot can be maximized as long as each per-agent value
function is maximized by local action selection. Even conditioned on joint state information, a
monotonic mixing network for Qtot is shown to restrict the representable function class. Despite
efforts to mitigate this, e.g., QTRAN [5] and WQMIX [6], in practice, they empirically perform
poorly in complex MARL environments with partial observability [7, 8, 9].
In this paper, we show that in partially observable MARL problems (as exemplified by a multi-state
matrix game), an agent’s ordering over its own actions could impose concurrent constraints on the
representable action-value Qtot in different states. This restriction causes large estimation errors of
Qtot during training. It cannot be addressed by existing methods, e.g., adding a state-value correction
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

