Re-Analyze Gauss: Bounds for Private Matrix
Approximation via Dyson Brownian Motion
Oren Mangoubi
Worcester Polytechnic Institute

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
Yale University

Abstract
Given a symmetric matrix M and a vector ⁄, we present new bounds on
the Frobenius-distance utility of the Gaussian mechanism for approximating M by a matrix whose spectrum is ⁄, under (Á, ”)-differential privacy.
Our bounds depend on both ⁄ and the gaps in the eigenvalues of M , and
hold whenever the top k + 1 eigenvalues of M have sufficiently large gaps.
When applied to the problems of private rank-k covariance matrix approximation and subspace recovery, our bounds yield improvements over previous bounds. Our bounds are obtained by viewing the addition of Gaussian noise as a continuous-time matrix Brownian motion. This viewpoint
allows us to track the evolution of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix, which are governed by stochastic differential equations discovered by
Dyson. These equations allow us to bound the utility as the square-root of
a sum-of-squares of perturbations to the eigenvectors, as opposed to a sum
of perturbation bounds obtained via Davis-Kahan-type theorems.

1

Introduction

Given a dataset A œ Rm◊d , which consists of m individuals with d-dimensional features,
methods for preprocessing or prediction from A often use the covariance matrix M := A€ A
of A. In many such applications one computes a rank-k approximation to M , or finds a
matrix close to M with a specified set of eigenvalues ⁄ = (⁄1 , . . . , ⁄d ) [37, 28, 36]. Examples
include the rank-k covariance matrix approximation problem where one seeks to compute a
rank-k matrix which minimizes a given distance to M , and the subspace recovery problem
where the goal is to compute a rank k-projection matrix H = Vk Vk€ , where Vk is the
d ◊ k matrix whose columns are the top-k eigenvectors of M . These matrix approximation
problems are ubiquitous in ML and have a rich algorithmic history; see [29, 45, 10, 8].
In some cases, the rows of A correspond to sensitive features of individuals and the release
of solutions to aforementioned matrix approximation problems may reveal their private
information, e.g., as in the case of the Netflix prize problem [5]. Differential privacy (DP)
has become a popular notion to quantify the extent to which an algorithm preserves privacy
of individuals [15]. Algorithms for solving low-rank matrix approximation problems have
been widely studied under DP constraints [30, 7, 19, 17]. Notions of DP studied in the
literature include (Á, ”)-DP [17, 25, 26, 19] which is the notion we study in this paper,
as well as pure (Á, 0)-DP [17, 30, 2, 32]. To define a notion of DP in problems involving
covariance matrices, following [7, 17], two matrices M = A€ A and M Õ = AÕ€ AÕ are said to
be neighbors if they arise from A, AÕ which differ by at most one row and as, is oftentimes
done, require that each row of the datasets A, AÕ has norm at most 1. For any Á, ” Ø 0, a
randomized mechanism A is (Á, ”)-differentially private if for all neighbors M, M Õ œ Rd◊d ,
and any measurable subset S of outputs of A, we have P(A(M ) œ S) Æ eÁ P(A(M Õ ) œ S) + ”.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

