AZ-whiteness test: a test for signal uncorrelation on
spatio-temporal graphs

Daniele Zambon
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA
Università della Svizzera italiana
Lugano, Switzerland
daniele.zambon@usi.ch

Cesare Alippi
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA
Università della Svizzera italiana
Politecnico di Milano
Lugano, Switzerland
cesare.alippi@usi.ch

Abstract
We present the first whiteness hypothesis test for graphs, i.e., a whiteness test for
multivariate time series associated with the nodes of a dynamic graph; as such,
the test represents an important model assessment tool for graph deep learning,
e.g., in forecasting setups. The statistical test aims at detecting existing serial
dependencies among close-in-time observations, as well as spatial dependencies
among neighboring observations given the underlying graph. The proposed AZtest can be intended as a spatio-temporal extension of traditional tests designed
for system identification to graph signals. The AZ-test is versatile, allowing the
underlying graph to be dynamic, changing in topology and set of nodes over time,
and weighted, thus accounting for connections of different strength, as it is the
case in many application scenarios like sensor and transportation networks. The
asymptotic distribution of the designed test can be derived under the null hypothesis
without assuming identically distributed data. We show the effectiveness of the test
on both synthetic and real-world problems, and illustrate how it can be employed to
assess the quality of spatio-temporal forecasting models by analyzing the prediction
residuals appended to the graph stream.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, machine learning methods based on graph-structured data have largely contributed
to the field of multivariate time-series analysis with major achievements, e.g., in forecasting and
missing values imputation [7, 25]. In this paper, we focus on spatio-temporal time series xv [t], t =
1, 2, . . . , positioned1 at the vertices v ∈ V of a graph; the functional/structural dependency existing
among nodes — say, over space — is modeled by a set E ∈ V × V of relations. We denote
with G = (V, E, X) the resulting (directed or undirected) graph whose nodes v are associated
with stochastic time series xv [t] ∈ X, and name X = {xv [t] | ∀ v, t} as a graph signal, to be
intuitively intended as a set of measurements appended to the graph nodes. The framework can
be naturally extended to deal with graphs seen as a realization of a random variable. Graph G can
be static, meaning that vertex and edge sets are constant over time, or dynamic, hence modeling
frameworks where topology and number of nodes can change. Dynamic graphs appear frequently
in cyber-physical systems where sensors can be added or removed, or node data are missing either
pointwise or for lapses of time, e.g., following communication or sensor readout faults. Another
example is provided by social networks where users expand their set of friends or change preferences
and interests over time. Indeed, we account for graphs with weighted edges encoding, for instance,
1

Known as time-vertex signals too, e.g., see [21].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

