Eliciting Thinking Hierarchy without a Prior

Yunqi Li†
CFCS and School of EECS
Peking University
liyunqi@pku.edu.cn

Yuqing Kong∗
CFCS and School of Computer Science
Peking University
yuqing.kong@pku.edu.cn
Yubo Zhang
CFCS and School of Computer Science
Peking University
falsyta@pku.edu.cn

Zhihuan Huang
CFCS and School of Computer Science
Peking University
zhihuan.huang@pku.edu.cn

Jinzhao Wu‡
CFCS and School of EECS
Peking University
jinzhao.wu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
When we use the wisdom of the crowds, we usually rank the answers according to
their popularity, especially when we cannot verify the answers. However, this can
be very dangerous when the majority make systematic mistakes. A fundamental
question arises: can we build a hierarchy among the answers without any prior
where the higher-ranking answers, which may not be supported by the majority,
are from more sophisticated people? To address the question, we propose 1) a
novel model to describe people’s thinking hierarchy; 2) two algorithms to learn
the thinking hierarchy without any prior; 3) a novel open-response based crowdsourcing approach based on the above theoretic framework. In addition to theoretic
justifications, we conduct four empirical crowdsourcing studies and show that a)
the accuracy of the top-ranking answers learned by our approach is much higher
than that of plurality voting (In one question, the plurality answer is supported by
74 respondents but the correct answer is only supported by 3 respondents. Our
approach ranks the correct answer the highest without any prior); b) our model
has a high goodness-of-fit, especially for the questions where our top-ranking
answer is correct. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose a
thinking hierarchy model with empirical validations in the general problem-solving
scenarios; and the first to propose a practical open-response based crowdsourcing
approach that beats plurality voting without any prior.

1

Introduction

The wisdom of the crowds has been proved to lead to better decision-making and problem-solving
than that of an individual, especially when we do not have sufficient prior knowledge to identify
individual experts [26, 2, 28]. Plurality is one of the most popular ways to aggregate the crowd’s
opinions. The opinions are usually ranked according to their popularity. However, it can be very
∗

Corresponding Author
This author is currently at Stanford University
‡
This author is currently at Yale University
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

