Universality of Group Convolutional Neural Networks
Based on Ridgelet Analysis on Groups

Sho Sonoda
RIKEN AIP

Isao Ishikawa
Ehime University

Masahiro Ikeda
RIKEN AIP

sho.sonoda@riken.jp

ishikawa.isao.zx@ehime-u.ac.jp

masahiro.ikeda@riken.jp

Abstract
We show the universality of depth-2 group convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) in a unified and constructive manner based on the ridgelet theory. Despite
widespread use in applications, the approximation property of (G)CNNs has not
been well investigated. The universality of (G)CNNs has been shown since the
late 2010s. Yet, our understanding on how (G)CNNs represent functions is incomplete because the past universality theorems have been shown in a case-by-case
manner by manually/carefully assigning the network parameters depending on the
variety of convolution layers, and in an indirect manner by converting/modifying
the (G)CNNs into other universal approximators such as invariant polynomials
and fully-connected networks. In this study, we formulate a versatile depth-2 continuous GCNN Srγs as a nonlinear mapping between group representations, and
directly obtain an analysis operator, called the ridgelet trasform, that maps a given
function f to the network parameter γ so that Srγs “ f . The proposed GCNN
covers typical GCNNs such as the cyclic convolution on multi-channel images, networks on permutation-invariant inputs (Deep Sets), and Epnq-equivariant networks.
The closed-form expression of the ridgelet transform can describe how the network
parameters are organized to represent a function. While it has been known only
for fully-connected networks, this study is the first to obtain the ridgelet transform
for GCNNs. By discretizing the closed-form expression, we can systematically
generate a constructive proof of the cc-universality of finite GCNNs. In other words,
our universality proofs are more unified and constructive than previous proofs.

1

Introduction

In the research field of geometric deep learning [1], group convolutional neural networks (GCNNs)
have been developed to capture the inductive bias behind a variety of datasets such as sets and
point clouds [2, 3], graphs [4, 5], manifolds, groups, and homogeneous spaces [6–8, 4]. Despite
the rapid growth of diversity, the approximation property of CNNs is less investigated than that of
fully-connected neural networks (FNNs). To this date, several authors have shown the universality of
(G)CNNs. That is, they can approximate some class of continuous maps with any precision [9–16].
These studies are still limited because the proofs are shown (1) in a case-by-case manner by manually
assigning the parameters for a network to approximate a given function f , which means that once the
network architecture is modified, then we need to reassign the parameters from scratch, and (2) in an
indirect manner by converting/modifying the (G)CNNs into other universal approximators such as
invariant polynomials and FNNs, which means that we know only indirectly about (G)CNNs.
The approximation property of FNNs has been investigated in the 1990s, with gradually increasing
the resolution of proofs from abstract to concrete, starting from purely existential proofs based on
the Hahn-Banach theorem [17] and the Stone-Weierstrass theorem [18], indirect proofs based on the
Fourier transform [19, 20], the Radon transform [21, 22], B-splines [23, 24], to more constructive
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

