Shadow Knowledge Distillation: Bridging Offline and
Online Knowledge Transfer

Lujun Li1,2, , Jin Zhe1,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, China
Chinese Academy of Science, China
lilujunai@gmail.com; jinzhe@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge distillation can be generally divided into offline and online categories according to whether teacher model is pre-trained and persistent during the distillation
process. Offline distillation can employ existing models yet always demonstrates
inferior performance than online ones. In this paper, we first empirically show that
the essential factor for their performance gap lies in the reversed distillation from
student to teacher, rather than the training fashion. Offline distillation can achieve
competitive performance gain by fine-tuning pre-trained teacher to adapt student
with such reversed distillation. However, this fine-tuning process still costs lots
of training budgets. To alleviate this dilemma, we propose SHAKE, a simple yet
effective SHAdow KnowlEdge transfer framework to bridge offline and online
distillation, which trades the accuracy with efficiency. Specifically, we build an
extra shadow head on the backbone to mimic the predictions of pre-trained teacher
as its shadow. Then, this shadow head is leveraged as a proxy teacher to perform
bidirectional distillation with student on the fly. In this way, SHAKE not only
updates this student-aware proxy teacher with the knowledge of pre-trained model,
but also greatly optimizes costs of augmented reversed distillation. Extensive
experiments on classification and object detection tasks demonstrate that our technique achieves state-of-the-art results with different CNNs and Vision Transformer
models. Additionally, our method shows strong compatibility with multi-teacher
and augmentation strategies by gaining additional performance improvement. Code
is made publicly available at https://lilujunai.github.io/SHAKE/.

1

Introduction

Even though Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have great success in tackling a variety of challenges
over computer vision [27, 13] and natural language processing [2], they usually have large numbers of
parameters, bringing heavy computation costs. To alleviate this problem, many network compression
methods [29, 46, 6, 21, 9] have been proposed, among which Knowledge Distillation (KD) [19, 58, 14]
has recently attracted increased attention.
KD aims to transfer knowledge from a high-capacity large model (i.e., teacher) to a low-capacity
lightweight model (i.e., student). Numerous offline methods [1, 19] use a two-stage training process
that begins with training a teacher model and then keeping it fixed to distill student model (see KD in
Figure 1 (a)). Besides offline fashion, recent online methods [28, 5] adopt a one-stage training process,
jointly training the student and teacher/peer models using bidirectional distillation like DML [66] in
Figure 1 (b). These online distillations always surpass the offline distillations under the same teacher
model. However, some large teacher models trained from scratch would bring some difficulties (e.g.,
high computational resources and unstable optimizations) for distillation, especially for tasks that
rely on large transformers (e.g., BERT [57], GPT-3 [2] and ViT-MoE [48]). Therefore, two questions
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

