Unsupervised Learning of Shape Programs with
Repeatable Implicit Parts

Boyang Deng1,∗

Sumith Kulal1,∗

Zhengyang Dong1

Yonglong Tian2
1

Stanford University,

2

MIT,

Congyue Deng1

Jiajun Wu1
∗

equal contributions

Abstract
Shape programs encode shape structures by representing object parts as subroutines
and constructing the overall shape by composing these subroutines. This usually
involves the reuse of subroutines for repeatable parts, enabling the modeling of
correlations among shape elements such as geometric similarity. However, existing learning-based shape programs suffer from limited representation capacity,
because they use coarse geometry representations such as geometric primitives
and low-resolution voxel grids. Further, their training requires manually annotated
ground-truth programs, which are expensive to attain. We address these limitations
by proposing Shape Programs with Repeatable Implicit Parts (ProGRIP). Using
implicit functions to represent parts, ProGRIP greatly boosts the representation capacity of shape programs while preserving the higher-level structure of repetitions
and symmetry. Meanwhile, we free ProGRIP from any inaccessible supervised
training via devising a matching-based unsupervised training objective. Our empirical studies show that ProGRIP outperforms existing structured representations in
both shape reconstruction fidelity and segmentation accuracy of semantic parts.

1

Introduction

Representing geometry and structure simultaneously has long been one of the central pursuits of 3D
shape modeling algorithms. The capability of preserving geometric details indicates the sufficient
shape capacity of an algorithm. Meanwhile, the prediction of plausible structures provides answers
to quests for more intelligent shape understanding — What are the parts constituting an object? How
are they assembled? What are the relationships among them?
Primitive-based representations have been extensively studied to address such queries. Specifically,
numerous shape primitives are designed to construct objects in a bottom-up manner, including
the use of oriented boxes [57], ellipsoids [20], convex polytopes [12, 9], superquadrics [43], and
invertible implicit functions [45]. Agnostic to the exact primitive used, these models all predict
primitives independently, where each primitive accounts for a unique part of the object. Yet, more
common in real world are recurrences of similar or even identical geometric parts, e.g., legs of a chair.
Consequently, the absence of recurring parts modeling handicaps the advances of these methods
towards human-level understanding of object shapes.
To enable the understanding of shape regularities including the repetition and symmetry of parts, a
few recent papers have proposed to cast shape reconstruction as prediction and execution of neural
shape programs [55, 25]. The designed domain specific language (DSL) of shape programs supports
the prediction of repeatable parts. These methods however suffer from two major limitations. First,
they often fail to achieve accurate geometry reconstruction due to the use of coarse geometric
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

