The Phenomenon of Policy Churn

Tom Schaul
DeepMind
London, UK

André Barreto
DeepMind
London, UK

John Quan
DeepMind
London, UK

Georg Ostrovski
DeepMind
London, UK

{tom,andrebarreto,johnquan,ostrovski}@deepmind.com

Abstract
We identify and study the phenomenon of policy churn, that is, the rapid change of
the greedy policy in value-based reinforcement learning. Policy churn operates at
a surprisingly rapid pace, changing the greedy action in a large fraction of states
within a handful of learning updates (in a typical deep RL set-up such as DQN
on Atari). We characterise the phenomenon empirically, verifying that it is not
limited to specific algorithm or environment properties. A number of ablations
help whittle down the plausible explanations on why churn occurs, the most likely
one being deep learning with high-variance updates. Finally, we hypothesise that
policy churn is a potentially beneficial but overlooked form of implicit exploration,
which casts ϵ-greedy exploration in a fresh light, namely that ϵ-noise plays a much
smaller role than expected.

1

The Phenomenon

Reinforcement learning (RL) involves agents that incrementally update their policy. This process is
driven by the objective of maximising reward, and based on experience that the agent generates via
exploration. The sequence of policies π0 , . . . , πk , . . . , πT usually starts from a randomly initialised
policy π0 and aims to end at a near-optimal policy πT ≈ π ∗ . Ideally, steps in that sequence
(πk → πk+1 ) are policy improvements that increase expected reward.
This paper studies the amount of policy change that goes along with such a policy update process
(for a definition, see Section 1.1). In particular, it makes the core observation that policy change in
practice (as illustrated in some typical deep RL settings) is orders of magnitude larger than could
have been expected, and stands in contrast to various reference algorithms (Sections 1.2 and 3.3).
Key observation 1: The greedy policy changes much more rapidly than you probably think.a
a
As a coarse magnitude for the impatient reader: in a typical run of DQN on Atari, the greedy
policy changes in ≈ 10% of all states after a single gradient update (Figure 1 and Section 1.2).

We dub this phenomenon “policy churn” to highlight that most of this policy change may be
unnecessary. We study the phenomenon in depth, determining the range of deep RL scenarios it
appears in, fleshing out its properties, and in the process narrowing the space of potential causes and
mechanisms involved using a set of ablations (Section 3).
Our second key message relates the phenomenon of churn to exploration, specifically in the context
of ϵ-greedy exploration (Section 2), with some more speculative ramifications in Section 4.
Key observation 2: Policy churn is a significant driver of exploration.a
a

This holds both in the sense that reducing churn can reduce performance, and in the sense that
explicitly adding noise becomes unnecessary in the presence of churn (i.e., ϵ = 0 is viable).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

