VLM O: Unified Vision-Language Pre-Training
with Mixture-of-Modality-Experts

Hangbo Bao1∗, Wenhui Wang2 , Li Dong2 , Qiang Liu2 , Owais Khan Mohammed2 ,
Kriti Aggarwal2 , Subhojit Som2 , Songhao Piao1 , Furu Wei2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Microsoft Corporation
https://aka.ms/msragi

Abstract
We present a unified Vision-Language pretrained Model (VLM O) that jointly
learns a dual encoder and a fusion encoder with a modular Transformer network.
Specifically, we introduce Multiway Transformer, where each block contains
a pool of modality-specific experts and a shared self-attention layer. Because
of the modeling flexibility of Multiway Transformer, pretrained VLM O can be
fine-tuned as a fusion encoder for vision-language classification tasks, or used
as a dual encoder for efficient image-text retrieval. Moreover, we propose a
stagewise pre-training strategy, which effectively leverages large-scale image-only
and text-only data besides image-text pairs. Experimental results show that VLM O
achieves state-of-the-art results on various vision-language tasks, including VQA,
NLVR2 and image-text retrieval. The code and pretrained models are available at
http://aka.ms/vlmo.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language (VL) pre-training [31, 42, 36, 27, 21, 24] learns generic cross-modal representations
from large-scale image-text pairs. Previous models usually employ image-text matching, image-text
contrastive learning, masked region classification/feature regression, word-region/patch alignment
and masked language modeling to aggregate and align visual and linguistic information. Then the
pretrained models can be directly fine-tuned on downstream vision-language tasks, such as VL
retrieval and classification (visual question answering, visual reasoning, etc.).
Two mainstream architectures are widely used in previous work. CLIP [36] and ALIGN [19] adopt a
dual-encoder architecture to encode images and text separately. Modality interaction is handled by
the cosine similarity of the image and text feature vectors. The dual-encoder architecture is effective
for retrieval tasks, especially for masses of images and text. Feature vectors of images and text can
be pre-computed and stored. However, the shallow interaction between images and text is not enough
to handle complex VL classification tasks. ViLT [21] finds that CLIP gives a relatively low accuracy
on visual reasoning task. Another line of work [31, 42, 44, 4, 21, 24] relies on a fusion encoder with
cross-modal attention to model image-text pairs. Multi-layer Transformer [46] networks are usually
employed to fuse image and text representations. The fusion-encoder architecture achieves superior
performance on VL classification tasks. But it requires to jointly encode all possible image-text pairs
to compute similarity scores for retrieval tasks. The quadratic time complexity leads to a much slower
inference speed than the dual-encoder models whose time complexity is linear.
In order to take advantage of the two types of architectures, we propose a unified Vision-Language
pretrained Model (VLM O) that can be used as either a dual encoder to separately encode images and
text for retrieval tasks, or used as a fusion encoder to model the deep interaction of image-text pairs for
∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

