Towards Learning Universal Hyperparameter
Optimizers with Transformers
Yutian Chen1 , Xingyou Song2 , Chansoo Lee2 , Zi Wang2 , Qiuyi Zhang2 ,
David Dohan2 , Kazuya Kawakami1 , Greg Kochanski2 ,
Arnaud Doucet1 , Marc’aurelio Ranzato1 , Sagi Perel2 , Nando de Freitas1
1
Deepmind, 2 Google Research, Brain Team

Abstract
Meta-learning hyperparameter optimization (HPO) algorithms from prior experiments is a promising approach to improve optimization efficiency over objective
functions from a similar distribution. However, existing methods are restricted to
learning from experiments sharing the same set of hyperparameters. In this paper,
we introduce the O PT F ORMER, the first text-based Transformer HPO framework
that provides a universal end-to-end interface for jointly learning policy and function prediction when trained on vast tuning data from the wild, such as Google’s
Vizier database, one of the world’s largest HPO datasets. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate that the O PT F ORMER can simultaneously imitate at least 7 different
HPO algorithms, which can be further improved via its function uncertainty estimates. Compared to a Gaussian Process, the O PT F ORMER also learns a robust
prior distribution for hyperparameter response functions, and can thereby provide
more accurate and better calibrated predictions. This work paves the path to future
extensions for training a Transformer-based model as a general HPO optimizer.

1

Introduction

The emergence of public machine learning data platforms such as OpenML [1] and hyperparameter
optimization (HPO) services such as Google Vizier [2], Amazon SageMaker [3] and Microsoft
Azure [4] have made large-scale datasets containing hyperparameter evaluations accessible. For our
use-case in this paper, Google Vizier is the de-facto HPO service across Google, having optimized
some of Google’s largest products and research efforts, and contains a collection of valuable tuning
data within the last 5 years. While there is growing interest in leveraging such data to meta-learn
hyperparameter optimization algorithms [5–8], dealing with large datasets consisting of experimental
trials in the wild can be challenging, due to large variations in HPO problems and their associated
text metadata (e.g. shown later in Table 1).
Thus, most meta and transfer-learning HPO methods [7–16] consider a restrictive setting where
all tasks must share the same set of hyperparameters so that the input data can be represented as
fixed-sized vectors. Consequently, such methods only exploit a small portion of the available data to
learn priors. This drawback is more severe for large datasets which contain significant amounts of
useful information.
To overcome these limitations, we introduce the O PT F ORMER, a general hyperparameter optimization
framework based on Transformers [17]. Transformers have demonstrated excellent performance
in many data tasks, ranging from natural language [18], images [19, 20], biological data [21, 22],
code [23, 24], and control [25, 26]. Here, we investigate how to use a Transformer as a universal
interface for modelling experimental data and learn HPO algorithms, as given a sufficient amount of
data, a Transformer can potentially learn a more complex prior distribution than standard Bayesian
Optimization (BO) with Gaussian Processes (GPs), especially as the Transformer possesses certain
computational advantages over GPs for large datasets.
Code: https://github.com/google-research/optformer. Google AI Blog: https://
ai.googleblog.com/2022/08/optformer-towards-universal.html.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

