Adapting Self-Supervised Vision Transformers by
Probing Attention-Conditioned Masking Consistency

Viraj Prabhu∗

Sriram Yenamandra∗
Aaditya Singh
Judy Hoffman
{virajp,sriramy,asingh,judy}@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Visual domain adaptation (DA) seeks to transfer trained models to unseen, unlabeled domains across distribution shift, but approaches typically focus on adapting
convolutional neural network architectures initialized with supervised ImageNet
representations. In this work, we shift focus to adapting modern architectures for
object recognition – the increasingly popular Vision Transformer (ViT) – initialized
with modern pretraining based on self-supervised learning (SSL). Inspired by the
design of recent SSL approaches based on learning from partial image inputs generated via masking or cropping – either by learning to predict the missing pixels, or
learning representational invariances to such augmentations – we propose PACMAC,
a two-stage adaptation algorithm for self-supervised ViTs. PACMAC first performs
in-domain SSL on pooled source and target data to learn task-discriminative features, and then probes the model’s predictive consistency across a set of partial
target inputs generated via a novel attention-conditioned masking strategy, to identify reliable candidates for self-training. Our simple approach leads to consistent
performance gains over competing methods that use ViTs and self-supervised
initializations on standard object recognition benchmarks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/virajprabhu/PACMAC.

1

Introduction

Deep models struggle to generalize to visual domains that deviate from the ones on which they were
trained [1]. Unsupervised domain adaptation [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] seeks to adapt models trained on
labeled source domains to unseen and unlabeled target domains, but most existing approaches focus on
adapting convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures initialized with supervised representations,
typically from ImageNet [10]. In this work, we seek to “modernize” domain adaptation by focusing
on adapting state-of-the-art architectures for object recognition – Vision Transformers (ViTs) [11]
– initialized with modern pretraining strategies based on self-supervised learning (SSL).
Vision Transformer (ViT) [11] architectures have recently gained traction as an effective alternative
to CNNs for computer vision tasks [12], achieving impressive performance despite fewer inductive
biases. With their in-built self-attention mechanisms and improved calibration under distribution shift
over their CNN counterparts [13], ViTs may be particularly well-suited to domain adaptation [14, 15].
Similarly, self-supervised representation learning (SSL) is rapidly replacing supervised learning
as the de-facto pretraining strategy for deep networks, due to improved scalability (unlabeled
data is easier to collect) and generality (domain-specific SSL is often preferable to one-fits-all
ImageNet pretraining [16, 17]). Many successful methods that optimize proxy objectives based on
pretext tasks [18, 19, 20], instance discrimination [21, 22, 23, 24], self-distillation [25], and image
reconstruction [26], have been proposed.
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

