Faster Deep Reinforcement Learning with
Slower Online Network
Kavosh Asadi
Amazon Web Services

Rasool Fakoor
Amazon Web Services

Omer Gottesman
Brown University

Taesup Kim
Seoul National University

Michael L. Littman
Brown University

Alexander J. Smola
Amazon Web Services

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning algorithms often use two networks for value function optimization: an online network, and a target network that tracks the online
network with some delay. Using two separate networks enables the agent to
hedge against issues that arise when performing bootstrapping. In this paper we
endow two popular deep reinforcement learning algorithms, namely DQN and
Rainbow, with updates that incentivize the online network to remain in the proximity of the target network. This improves the robustness of deep reinforcement
learning in presence of noisy updates. The resultant agents, called DQN Pro and
Rainbow Pro, exhibit significant performance improvements over their original
counterparts on the Atari benchmark demonstrating the effectiveness of this simple
idea in deep reinforcement learning. The code for our paper is available here:
Github.com/amazon-research/fast-rl-with-slow-updates.

1

Introduction

An important competency of reinforcement-learning (RL) agents is learning in environments with
large state spaces like those found in robotics (Kober et al., 2013), dialog systems (Williams et al.,
2017), and games (Tesauro, 1994; Silver et al., 2017). Recent breakthroughs in deep RL have
demonstrated that simple approaches such as Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) can surpass
human-level performance in challenging environments when equipped with deep neural networks for
function approximation (Mnih et al., 2015).
Two components of a gradient-based deep RL agent are its objective function and optimization
procedure. The optimization procedure takes estimates of the gradient of the objective with respect to
network parameters and updates the parameters accordingly. In DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), for example,
the objective function is the empirical expectation of the temporal difference (TD) error (Sutton,
1988) on a buffered set of environmental interactions (Lin, 1992), and variants of stochastic gradient
descent are employed to best minimize this objective function.
A fundamental difficulty in this context stems from the use of bootstrapping. Here, bootstrapping
refers to the dependence of the target of updates on the parameters of the neural network, which is
itself continuously updated during training. Employing bootstrapping in RL stands in contrast to
supervised-learning techniques and Monte-Carlo RL (Sutton & Barto, 2018), where the target of our
gradient updates does not depend on the parameters of the neural network.
Mnih et al. (2015) proposed a simple approach to hedging against issues that arise when using
bootstrapping, namely to use a target network in value-function optimization. The target network
is updated periodically, and tracks the online network with some delay. While this modification
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

