Toward Robust Spiking Neural Network Against
Adversarial Perturbation
Ling Liang
UC Santa Barbara
lingliang@ucsb.edu

Kaidi Xu
Drexel University
kx46@drexel.edu

Xing Hu
SKL of Processors
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
huxing@ict.ac.cn

Lei Deng
Tsinghua University
leideng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yuan Xie
Alibaba Group
yuanxie@gmail.edu

Abstract
As spiking neural networks (SNNs) are deployed increasingly in real-world efficiency critical applications, the security concerns in SNNs attract more attention.
Currently, researchers have already demonstrated an SNN can be attacked with adversarial examples. How to build a robust SNN becomes an urgent issue. Recently,
many studies apply certified training in artificial neural networks (ANNs), which
can improve the robustness of an NN model promisely. However, existing certifications cannot transfer to SNNs directly because of the distinct neuron behavior and
input formats for SNNs. In this work, we first design S-IBP and S-CROWN that
tackle the non-linear functions in SNNs’ neuron modeling. Then, we formalize the
boundaries for both digital and spike inputs. Finally, we demonstrate the efficiency
of our proposed robust training method in different datasets and model architectures. Based on our experiment, we can achieve a maximum 37.7% attack error
reduction with 3.7% original accuracy loss. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first analysis on robust training of SNNs.

1

Introduction

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are a class of models that have the potential ability to simulate the
behavior of neuron circuits in the brain. Among the rich biological characters of SNNs, the eventdriven information propagation mechanism makes SNNs easy to deploy with limited computation
resources. Many neuromorphic chips are designed to achieve low-power SNN inference, such as
TrueNorth [1], Loihi[8], SpinalFlow [23] and H2Learn [20].
With more attention to the study of SNNs, the security issues also raise concerns in the community.
Adversarial attack [27, 7, 2, 34] is one of the most intuitive ways to evaluate the robustness of a
model. In adversarial attacks, the attacker generates adversarial examples to fool a model that has
wrong prediction. Currently, SNNs are demonstrated can be attacked through adversarial examples
[26, 19, 6, 21]. It is urgent to explore an efficient way to improve the robustness of SNN models.
Previously, researchers have investigated the impact of hyperparameter selection [10] and input
filtering [21] on the adversarial attack in SNNs. However, these methods do not directly promote
the classification behavior of a given SNN model. [5] proposes a robust training method that relies
on the adversarial attack in parameter space. Unlike SNNs, how to improve the robustness of
an artificial neural network (ANN) has been well studied. Recently, trianing a neural network
model with certified defense methods [30, 22, 38, 33] show remarkable guarantee to improve the
model’s robustness. CROWN-IBP [38] is one of the most promising certified training methods with
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

