Neural Sheaf Diffusion: A Topological Perspective on
Heterophily and Oversmoothing in GNNs

Cristian Bodnar∗
University of Cambridge
cristian.bodnar@cl.cam.ac.uk
Benjamin P. Chamberlain
Twitter

Francesco Di Giovanni†
Twitter
fdigiovanni@twitter.com

Pietro Liò
University of Cambridge

Michael Bronstein
University of Oxford & Twitter

Abstract
Cellular sheaves equip graphs with a “geometrical” structure by assigning vector
spaces and linear maps to nodes and edges. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
implicitly assume a graph with a trivial underlying sheaf. This choice is reflected
in the structure of the graph Laplacian operator, the properties of the associated
diffusion equation, and the characteristics of the convolutional models that discretise this equation. In this paper, we use cellular sheaf theory to show that
the underlying geometry of the graph is deeply linked with the performance of
GNNs in heterophilic settings and their oversmoothing behaviour. By considering
a hierarchy of increasingly general sheaves, we study how the ability of the sheaf
diffusion process to achieve linear separation of the classes in the infinite time limit
expands. At the same time, we prove that when the sheaf is non-trivial, discretised
parametric diffusion processes have greater control than GNNs over their asymptotic behaviour. On the practical side, we study how sheaves can be learned from
data. The resulting sheaf diffusion models have many desirable properties that
address the limitations of classical graph diffusion equations (and corresponding
GNN models) and obtain competitive results in heterophilic settings. Overall, our
work provides new connections between GNNs and algebraic topology and would
be of interest to both fields.

Figure 1: A sheaf (G, F) shown for a single edge
of the graph. The stalks are isomorphic to R2 . The
restriction maps Fv⊴e , Fu⊴e and their adjoints
move the vector features between these spaces. In
practice, we learn the sheaf (i.e. the restrictions
maps) from data via a parametric function Φ.
∗
†

Figure 2: Analogy between parallel transport on a sphere and transport on a discrete
vector bundle (cellular sheaf). A tangent vector is moved from F(w) → F(v) → F(u)
and back. Because the vector returns in a
different position, the transport is not pathindependent.

Work done as a research intern at Twitter.
Proved the results in Section 3.1.
Our code is available at https://github.com/twitter-research/neural-sheaf-diffusion.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

