Probing Classifiers are Unreliable for Concept
Removal and Detection
Abhinav Kumar
Microsoft Research
t-abkumar@microsoft.com

Chenhao Tan
University of Chicago
chenhao@uchicago.edu

Amit Sharma
Microsoft Research
amshar@microsoft.com

Abstract
Neural network models trained on text data have been found to encode undesirable
linguistic or sensitive concepts in their representation. Removing such concepts is
non-trivial because of a complex relationship between the concept, text input, and
the learnt representation. Recent work has proposed post-hoc and adversarial methods to remove such unwanted concepts from a model’s representation. Through an
extensive theoretical and empirical analysis, we show that these methods can be
counter-productive: they are unable to remove the concepts entirely, and in some
cases may fail severely by destroying all task-relevant features. The reason is the
methods’ reliance on a probing classifier as a proxy for the concept. Even under
the most favorable conditions for learning a probing classifier when a concept’s relevant features in representation space alone can provide 100% accuracy, we prove
that a probing classifier is likely to use non-concept features and thus post-hoc or
adversarial methods will fail to remove the concept correctly. These theoretical implications are confirmed by experiments on models trained on synthetic, Multi-NLI,
and Twitter datasets. For sensitive applications of concept removal such as fairness,
we recommend caution against using these methods and propose a spuriousness
metric to gauge the quality of the final classifier.

1

Introduction

Neural models in text classification have been shown to learn spuriously correlated features [16, 27]
or embed sensitive attributes like gender or race [8, 7, 6] in their representation layer. Classifiers that
use such sensitive or spurious concepts (henceforth concepts) raise concerns of model unfairness and
out-of-distribution generalization failure [39, 2, 15]. Removing the influence of these concepts is
non-trivial because the classifiers are based on hard-to-interpret deep neural networks. Moreover,
since many concepts cannot be modified at the input tokens level, removal methods that work at the
representation layer have been proposed: 1) post-hoc removal [7, 49, 14] on a pre-trained model (e.g.,
null space projection [32]), and 2) adversarial removal [15, 48, 12] by jointly training the main task
classifier with an (adversarial) classifier for the concept.
In this paper, we theoretically show that both these classes of methods can be counter-productive
in real-world settings where the main task label is often correlated with the concept. Examples
include natural language inference (main task) where the presence of negation (spurious concept)
may be correlated with the “contradicts” label; or tweet sentiment classification (main task) where the
author’s gender (sensitive concept) maybe correlated with the sentiment label. Our key result is based
on the observation that both these methods internally use an auxiliary (or probing) classifier [1, 42]
that aims to predict the spurious concept based on the representation learnt by the main classifier.
We show that an auxiliary classifier cannot be a reliable signal on whether the representation includes
features that are causally derived from the concept. As previous work has argued [4, 44, 40, 2], if
the representation features causally derived from the concept are not predictive enough, the probing
classifier for the concept can be expected to rely on correlated features to obtain a higher accuracy.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

