Hierarchical classification
at multiple operating points

Jack Valmadre
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
jack.valmadre@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Many classification problems consider classes that form a hierarchy. Classifiers
that are aware of this hierarchy may be able to make confident predictions at a
coarse level despite being uncertain at the fine-grained level. While it is generally possible to vary the granularity of predictions using a threshold at inference
time, most contemporary work considers only leaf-node prediction, and almost
no prior work has compared methods at multiple operating points. We present an
efficient algorithm to produce operating characteristic curves for any method that
assigns a score to every class in the hierarchy. Applying this technique to evaluate
existing methods reveals that top-down classifiers are dominated by a naïve flat
softmax classifier across the entire operating range. We further propose two novel
loss functions and show that a soft variant of the structured hinge loss is able to
significantly outperform the flat baseline. Finally, we investigate the poor accuracy
of top-down classifiers and demonstrate that they perform relatively well on unseen
classes. Code is available online at https://github.com/jvlmdr/hiercls.

1

Introduction

Many classification problems involve classes that can be recursively grouped into a hierarchy of
progressively larger superclasses. This hierarchy can be represented by a directed graph where the
nodes are classes and the edges define a superset-of relation. Knowledge of the hierarchy can be
useful in many different respects. For example, mistake severity can be quantified using distance in
the graph [9, 2], classifiers can make predictions at a coarse level to avoid an error at the fine-grained
level [11, 39], classes with few labels in a long-tailed distribution can benefit from the examples of
similar classes [39], and a cascade can be used to reduce inference time [26, 16, 14].
Whereas many recent works consider only leaf-node prediction, we are interested in the setting where
the classifier may predict any class in the hierarchy, including internal nodes. In this setting, prediction
involves an inherent trade-off between specificity and correctness: more general predictions contain
less information but have a greater chance of being correct. The trade-off can typically be controlled
using an inference threshold, analogous to the trade-off between sensitivity and specificity in binary
classification or that between precision and recall in detection. However, while it is standard to
evaluate these problems using trade-off curves, most works on hierarchical classification consider
only a single operating point. It is important to consider the full trade-off curve in order to ensure a
fair comparison and enable the selection of classifiers according to design specifications. This paper
presents an efficient algorithm to obtain trade-off curves for existing hierarchical metrics.
The proposed technique is subsequently used to compare the trade-offs realised by different methods.
Given the effectiveness of deep learning, we focus on loss functions for training differentiable models.
Experiments on the iNat21 [36] and ImageNet-1k [10] datasets for image classification reveal that
a naïve flat softmax classifier dominates the more elegant top-down classifiers, obtaining better
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

