Beyond Mahalanobis-Based Scores for
Textual OOD Detection
Pierre Colombo
Mathématiques et Informatique pour la Complexité et les Systèmes
CentraleSupelec, Université Paris Saclay
pierre.colombo@centralesupelec.fr
Eduardo D. C. Gomes
Laboratoire des signaux et systemes
CentraleSupelec, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay
eduardo.dadalto@centralesupelec.fr

Guillaume Staerman
Inria, CEA, Universite Paris-Saclay
guillaume.staerman@inria.fr

Nathan Noiry
althiqua.io
noirynathan@gmail.com
Pablo Piantanida
International Laboratory on Learning Systems
McGill - ETS - MILA - CNRS - CentraleSupélec, Université Paris-Saclay
pablo.piantanida@centralesupelec.fr

Abstract
Deep learning methods have boosted the adoption of NLP systems in real-life
applications. However, they turn out to be vulnerable to distribution shifts over
time which may cause severe dysfunctions in production systems, urging practitioners to develop tools to detect out-of-distribution (OOD) samples through the
lens of the neural network. In this paper, we introduce TRUSTED, a new OOD
detector for classifiers based on Transformer architectures that meets operational
requirements: it is unsupervised and fast to compute. The efficiency of TRUSTED
relies on the fruitful idea that all hidden layers carry relevant information to detect
OOD examples. Based on this, for a given input, TRUSTED consists in (i) aggregating this information and (ii) computing a similarity score by exploiting the
training distribution, leveraging the powerful concept of data depth. Our extensive
numerical experiments involve 51k model configurations, including various checkpoints, seeds, and datasets, and demonstrate that TRUSTED achieves state-of-the-art
performances. In particular, it improves previous AUROC over 3 points.

1

Introduction

The number of AI systems put into production has steadily increased over the last few years. This
is because advanced techniques of Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) have brought
significant improvements over previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in many areas such as
finance [17, 57], transportation [59], and medicine [14, 77]. However, the increasing use of black-box
models has raised concerns about their societal impact: privacy [33, 64, 74, 29], security [6, 3, 20],
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

