A Combinatorial Perspective on the Optimization of
Shallow ReLU Networks
Michael Matena
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
mmatena@cs.unc.edu

Colin Raffel
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
craffel@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
The NP-hard problem of optimizing a shallow ReLU network can be characterized
as a combinatorial search over each training example’s activation pattern followed
by a constrained convex problem given a fixed set of activation patterns. We explore
the implications of this combinatorial aspect of ReLU optimization in this work.
We show that it can be naturally modeled via a geometric and combinatoric object
known as a zonotope with its vertex set isomorphic to the set of feasible activation
patterns. This assists in analysis and provides a foundation for further research. We
demonstrate its usefulness when we explore the sensitivity of the optimal loss to
perturbations of the training data. Later we discuss methods of zonotope vertex
selection and its relevance to optimization. Overparameterization assists in training
by making a randomly chosen vertex more likely to contain a good solution. We
then introduce a novel polynomial-time vertex selection procedure that provably
picks a vertex containing the global optimum using only double the minimum
number of parameters required to fit the data. We further introduce a local greedy
search heuristic over zonotope vertices and demonstrate that it outperforms gradient
descent on underparameterized problems.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have become commonplace in a variety of applications. They are typically trained to
minimize a loss on a given dataset of labeled examples using a variant of stochastic gradient descent.
However, our theoretical knowledge of neural networks and their training lags behind their practical
developments.
Single-layer ReLU networks are an appealing subject for theoretical study. The universal approximation theorem guarantees their expressive power while their relative simplicity makes analysis
tractable (Hornik, 1991). We restrict ourselves in this paper to studying empirical risk minimization
(ERM) as was done in previous works (Du et al., 2018; Oymak & Soltanolkotabi, 2020), which is
justified since the train set performance tends to upper bound the test set performance. Furthermore,
modern neural networks achieve zero training loss but nevertheless generalize well (Kaplan et al.,
2020; Nakkiran et al., 2021). Minimizing the training loss of a shallow ReLU network is a nonconvex
optimization problem. Finding its global minima is difficult and can in fact be shown to be NP-hard
in general (Goel et al., 2020). Arora et al. (2016) provide an explicit algorithm for finding the global
minima by solving a set of convex optimization problems; however, the size of this set is exponential
in both the input dimension d and the number of hidden units m.
In this paper, we explore the combinatorial structure implicit in the global optimization algorithm of
Arora et al. (2016). We start by using tools from polyhedral geometry to characterize the set of convex
optimization problems and describe the relationships between the subproblems. Notably, we are
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

