Embed and Emulate: Learning to estimate parameters
of dynamical systems with uncertainty quantification
Ruoxi Jiang
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
roxie62@uchicago.edu

Rebecca Willett
Department of Statistics and Computer Science
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
willett@uchicago.edu

Abstract
This paper explores learning emulators for parameter estimation with uncertainty
estimation of high-dimensional dynamical systems. We assume access to a computationally complex simulator that inputs a candidate parameter and outputs a
corresponding multichannel time series. Our task is to accurately estimate a range
of likely values of the underlying parameters. Standard iterative approaches necessitate running the simulator many times, which is computationally prohibitive. This
paper describes a novel framework for learning feature embeddings of observed
dynamics jointly with an emulator that can replace high-cost simulators for parameter estimation. Leveraging a contrastive learning approach, our method exploits
intrinsic data properties within and across parameter and trajectory domains. On a
coupled 396-dimensional multiscale Lorenz 96 system, our method significantly
outperforms a typical parameter estimation method based on predefined metrics
and a classical numerical simulator, and with only 1.19% of the baseline’s computation time. Ablation studies highlight the potential of explicitly designing learned
emulators for parameter estimation by leveraging contrastive learning.

1

Introduction

Physics-based simulators play a vital role in many domains of science and engineering, from energy
infrastructure to atmospheric sciences. They are frequently critical for assessing risk and exploring
“what if” scenarios, which require running models many times [Snyder et al., 2019, Beusch et al.,
2020, Helgeson et al., 2021, Zhao et al., 2021]. However, the increasing complexity of operational
computer models makes running such simulators a major challenge. Emulators (also known as
surrogate models) are models trained to mimic numerical simulations at a much lower computational
cost, particularly for parameters or inputs that have not been simulated.
This paper considers the problem of estimating the parameters of a physics simulation that provide
the best fit to data. The estimation problem can generally be thought of as a nonlinear inverse problem
in which our goal is to estimate parameters 2 Rk from a noisy multichannel time series Z 2 RT ⇥d .
Z = H( ; Z0 ) + ⌘, where H( ; Z0 ) represents running is a physics simulator with parameters
and initial condition Z0 for T time steps, and ⌘ ⇠ N (0, ) is observation noise. To ease the notation,
we drop the initial condition Z0 in H( ; Z0 ). We are particularly interested in complex simulators
for which we do not have analytic expressions for H, evaluating H( ) is a computational bottleneck
and we cannot readily compute its gradients.
One important application of this problem arises in climate science, where climate scientists have
spent decades developing sophisticated physics-based models corresponding to H, often implemented
using large-scale software systems that solve complex systems of differential equations [Kay et al.,
2015]. In this case, evaluating H can be computationally demanding. Furthermore, tools like
physics-informed neural networks [Raissi et al., 2019] are inapplicable because we cannot compute
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

