FinRL-Meta: Market Environments and Benchmarks
for Data-Driven Financial Reinforcement Learning
Xiao-Yang Liu1⇤ , Ziyi Xia1⇤, Jingyang Rui2 , Jiechao Gao3 , Hongyang Yang1 ,
Ming Zhu4 , Christina Dan Wang5† , Zhaoran Wang6 , Jian Guo7†
1
Columbia University; 2 The University of Hongkong; 3 University of Virginia;
4
SIAT CAS; 5 New York University (Shanghai); 6 Northwestern University;
7
IDEA Research, International Digital Economy Academy
{xl2427, zx2325, hy2500}@columbia.edu, christina.wang@nyu.edu,
zhaoranwang@northwestern.edu, guojian@idea.edu.cn

Abstract
Finance is a particularly challenging playground for deep reinforcement learning.
However, establishing high-quality market environments and benchmarks for financial reinforcement learning is challenging due to three major factors, namely,
low signal-to-noise ratio of financial data, survivorship bias of historical data, and
backtesting overfitting. In this paper, we present an openly accessible FinRL-Meta
library that has been actively maintained by the AI4Finance community. First,
following a DataOps paradigm, we will provide hundreds of market environments
through an automatic data curation pipeline that processes dynamic datasets from
real-world markets into gym-style market environments. Second, we reproduce popular papers as stepping stones for users to design new trading strategies. We also deploy the library on cloud platforms so that users can visualize their own results and
assess the relative performance via community-wise competitions. Third, FinRLMeta provides tens of Jupyter/Python demos organized into a curriculum and a
documentation website to serve the rapidly growing community. FinRL-Meta is
available at: https://github.com/AI4Finance-Foundation/FinRL-Meta

1

Introduction

Finance is a particularly challenging playground for deep reinforcement learning (DRL) [1, 2],
including investigating market fragility [3], designing profitable strategies [4, 5, 6], and assessing portfolio risk [7, 8]. However, establishing near-real market environments and benchmarks
on financial reinforcement learning are difficult due to three major factors, namely, low signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) of financial data, survivorship bias of historical data, and backtesting overfitting.
Such a simulation-to-reality gap [9, 10] degrades the performance of DRL strategies in real markets. Therefore, high-quality market environments and benchmarks are crucial for the research and
industrialization of data-driven financial reinforcement learning.
Existing works have applied various DRL algorithms in financial applications [7, 11, 12, 13]. Many
of them have reported better trading performance in terms of cumulative return and Sharpe ratio.
Several recent works [7, 14, 12, 15] showed the great potential of DRL-based market simulators.
However, these works are difficult to reproduce. The FinRL library [16, 11] provided an opensource framework for financial reinforcement learning. However, it focused on the reproducibility
of backtesting performance by providing several market environments. A workshop version of
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

