GAMA: Generative Adversarial Multi-Object
Scene Attacks
Abhishek Aich∗, Calvin-Khang Ta∗ , Akash Gupta, Chengyu Song,
Srikanth V. Krishnamurthy, M. Salman Asif, Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury
University of California, Riverside, CA, USA

Abstract
The majority of methods for crafting adversarial attacks have focused on scenes
with a single dominant object (e.g., images from ImageNet). On the other hand,
natural scenes include multiple dominant objects that are semantically related.
Thus, it is crucial to explore designing attack strategies that look beyond learning
on single-object scenes or attack single-object victim classifiers. Due to their
inherent property of strong transferability of perturbations to unknown models,
this paper presents the first approach of using generative models for adversarial
attacks on multi-object scenes. In order to represent the relationships between
different objects in the input scene, we leverage upon the open-sourced pre-trained
vision-language model CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training), with the
motivation to exploit the encoded semantics in the language space along with the
visual space. We call this attack approach Generative Adversarial Multi-object
Attacks (GAMA). GAMA demonstrates the utility of the CLIP model as an
attacker’s tool to train formidable perturbation generators for multi-object scenes.
Using the joint image-text features to train the generator, we show that GAMA can
craft potent transferable perturbations in order to fool victim classifiers in various
attack settings. For example, GAMA triggers ∼16% more misclassification than
state-of-the-art generative approaches in black-box settings where both the classifier
architecture and data distribution of the attacker are different from the victim. Our
code is available here: https://abhishekaich27.github.io/gama.html

1

Introduction

Despite attaining significant results, decision-making of deep neural network models is brittle and can
be surprisingly manipulated with adversarial attacks that add highly imperceptible perturbations to
the system inputs [1, 2]. This has led to dedicated research in designing diverse types of adversarial
attacks that lead to highly incorrect decisions on diverse state-of-the-art classifiers [2–13]. The
majority of such adversarial attacks [2, 8–18] has focused on scenes with a single dominant object
(e.g., images from ImageNet [19]). However, natural scenes consist of multiple dominant objects
that are semantically associated [20–25]. This calls for attack methods that are effective in such
multi-object scenes.
A recent body of work in adversarial attacks [26–30] has shown the importance of exploring attack
methodologies for real-world scenes (although designed for attacking object detectors). However,
such methods are image-specific approaches that are known to have poor time complexity when
perturbing large batches of images, as well as poor transferability to unknown models (more details
in Section 2) due to their inherent property of perturbing images independently from one another.
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding author: AA (aaich001@ucr.edu). AG is currently with Vimaan AI, USA.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

