Self-Supervised Image Restoration
with Blurry and Noisy Pairs

Zhilu Zhang1 , Rongjian Xu1 , Ming Liu1 , Zifei Yan1,∗, Wangmeng Zuo1,2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China;
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
cszlzhang@outlook.com, ronjon.xu@gmail.com,
csmliu@outlook.com, yanzifei@hit.edu.cn, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
When taking photos under an environment with insufficient light, the exposure
time and the sensor gain usually require to be carefully chosen to obtain images
with satisfying visual quality. For example, the images with high ISO usually
have inescapable noise, while the long-exposure ones may be blurry due to camera
shake or object motion. Existing solutions generally suggest to seek a balance
between noise and blur, and learn denoising or deblurring models under either fullor self-supervision. However, the real-world training pairs are difficult to collect,
and the self-supervised methods merely rely on blurry or noisy images are limited
in performance. In this work, we tackle this problem by jointly leveraging the
short-exposure noisy image and the long-exposure blurry image for better image
restoration. Such setting is practically feasible due to that short-exposure and longexposure images can be either acquired by two individual cameras or synthesized by
a long burst of images. Moreover, the short-exposure images are hardly blurry, and
the long-exposure ones have negligible noise. Their complementarity makes it feasible to learn restoration model in a self-supervised manner. Specifically, the noisy
images can be used as the supervision information for deblurring, while the sharp
areas in the blurry images can be utilized as the auxiliary supervision information
for self-supervised denoising. By learning in a collaborative manner, the deblurring
and denoising tasks in our method can benefit each other. Experiments on synthetic
and real-world images show the effectiveness and practicality of the proposed
method. Codes are available at https://github.com/cszhilu1998/SelfIR.

1

Introduction

It is a common yet challenging task to acquire visually appealing photos with appropriate brightness
under a low light environment. Traditional ways to increase the image brightness include enlarging
the aperture, adopting a higher ISO, and reducing the shutter speed (i.e., lengthening exposure time).
As for smartphone cameras with fixed aperture, brightness can only be adjusted by setting the sensor
gain (i.e., ISO) and exposure time. Nonetheless, they are negatively correlated to maintain the
appropriate brightness level of the image, i.e., the shorter-exposure image generally adopts a higher
ISO, while the longer-exposure image usually has a lower ISO. Moreover, high ISO configuration
introduces inevitable and complex noise due to the limited photon amount and the process of camera
image signal processing (ISP) pipeline, while long-exposure is prone to produce blurry images due to
the camera shake and scene variations. Consequently, photographers have to make a compromise
between noise and blur.
∗

Correspondence author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

