How Would The Viewer Feel?
Estimating Wellbeing From Video Scenarios

Mantas Mazeika∗
UIUC
Dawn Song
UC Berkeley

Eric Tang*
UC Berkeley
David Forsyth
UIUC

Andy Zou
UC Berkeley

Steven Basart
UChicago

Jacob Steinhardt
UC Berkeley

Jun Shern Chan
UC Berkeley
Dan Hendrycks
UC Berkeley

Abstract
In recent years, deep neural networks have demonstrated increasingly strong abilities to recognize objects and activities in videos. However, as video understanding
becomes widely used in real-world applications, a key consideration is developing
human-centric systems that understand not only the content of the video but also
how it would affect the wellbeing and emotional state of viewers. To facilitate
research in this setting, we introduce two large-scale datasets with over 60,000
videos manually annotated for emotional response and subjective wellbeing. The
Video Cognitive Empathy (VCE) dataset contains annotations for distributions of
fine-grained emotional responses, allowing models to gain a detailed understanding
of affective states. The Video to Valence (V2V) dataset contains annotations of relative pleasantness between videos, which enables predicting a continuous spectrum
of wellbeing. In experiments, we show how video models that are primarily trained
to recognize actions and find contours of objects can be repurposed to understand
human preferences and the emotional content of videos. Although there is room for
improvement, predicting wellbeing and emotional response is on the horizon for
state-of-the-art models. We hope our datasets can help foster further advances at the
intersection of commonsense video understanding and human preference learning.

1

Introduction

Videos are a rich source of data that depict vast quantities of information about humans and the
world. As deep learning has progressed, models have begun to reliably exhibit various aspects of
video understanding, including action recognition (Kay et al., 2017a), object tracking (Zhao et al.,
2021), segmentation (Huang et al., 2019; He et al., 2020), and more. However, vision models do not
exist in a vacuum and will eventually require social perception abilities, so models need to begin
understanding how humans interpret and respond to visual inputs. As video models become more
widely used in real-world applications, they should be able to reliably predict not only “what is where”
in a visual input but also predict how it would make a human feel.
The subjective experience of human viewers on video data is broadly valuable to characterize and
predict. When humans pursue goals in the world, their actions are often driven by intuitive processes
(Kahneman, 2011), a significant part of which is the experience of emotions or affective states (Oatley
et al., 2006). Emotions can be thought of as evaluations of events in relation to goals (Scherer et al.,
2001; Frijda, 1988), and hence are important to study in relation to behavior in diverse settings.
However, they are also important to understand in their own right, as they are strong indicators of
what people value (Hume, 1739). For example, if a situation makes one feel happy, then that is
often preferred to a situation that induces feelings of fear. Additionally, emodiversity—the variety
∗

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

