SCONE: Surface Coverage Optimization in Unknown
Environments by Volumetric Integration

Antoine Guédon
Pascal Monasse
Vincent Lepetit
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
{antoine.guedon,pascal.monasse,vincent.lepetit}@enpc.fr

Abstract
Next Best View computation (NBV) is a long-standing problem in robotics, and
consists in identifying the next most informative sensor position(s) for reconstructing a 3D object or scene efficiently and accurately. Like most current methods,
we consider NBV prediction from a depth sensor like Lidar systems. Learningbased methods relying on a volumetric representation of the scene are suitable
for path planning, but have lower accuracy than methods using a surface-based
representation. However, the latter do not scale well with the size of the scene
and constrain the camera to a small number of poses. To obtain the advantages
of both representations, we show that we can maximize surface metrics by Monte
Carlo integration over a volumetric representation. In particular, we propose an
approach, SCONE, that relies on two neural modules: The first module predicts
occupancy probability in the entire volume of the scene. Given any new camera
pose, the second module samples points in the scene based on their occupancy
probability and leverages a self-attention mechanism to predict the visibility of the
samples. Finally, we integrate the visibility to evaluate the gain in surface coverage
for the new camera pose. NBV is selected as the pose that maximizes the gain in
total surface coverage. Our method scales to large scenes and handles free camera
motion: It takes as input an arbitrarily large point cloud gathered by a depth sensor
as well as camera poses to predict NBV. We demonstrate our approach on a novel
dataset made of large and complex 3D scenes.

1

Introduction

Next Best View computation (NBV) is a long-standing problem in robotics [6, 29], which consists
in identifying the next most informative sensor position(s) for reconstructing a 3D object or scene
efficiently and accurately. Typically, a position is evaluated on how much it can increase the total
coverage of the scene surface. Few methods have relied on Deep Learning (DL) for the NBV
problem, even though DL can provide useful geometric prior to obtain a better prediction of the
surface coverage [33, 16, 25]. Like most current methods, we consider NBV prediction from a depth
sensor. Existing methods based on a depth sensor rely either on a volumetric or on a surface-based
representation of the scene geometry. Volumetric mapping-based methods can compute collision
efficiently, which is practical for path planning in real case scenarios [20, 23, 24, 14, 1, 7]. However,
they typically rely on voxels or a global embedding [12, 3, 21, 22, 27, 5] for the scene, which results
in poor accuracy in reconstruction and poor performance in NBV selection for complex 3D objects.
On the contrary, surface mapping-based methods that process directly a dense point cloud of the
surface as gathered by the depth sensor are efficient for NBV prediction with high-detailed geometry.
They are however limited to very specific cases, generally a single, small-scale, isolated object with
the camera constrained to stay on a sphere centered on the object [15, 24, 8, 4, 13, 14, 14, 33, 16, 25].
Thus, they cannot be applied to the exploration of 3D scenes.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

