Wasserstein K-means for clustering
probability distributions

Yubo Zhuang, Xiaohui Chen, Yun Yang
Department of Statistics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yubo2,xhchen,yy84}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Clustering is an important exploratory data analysis technique to group objects
based on their similarity. The widely used K-means clustering method relies
on some notion of distance to partition data into a fewer number of groups. In
the Euclidean space, centroid-based and distance-based formulations of the Kmeans are equivalent. In modern machine learning applications, data often arise
as probability distributions and a natural generalization to handle measure-valued
data is to use the optimal transport metric. Due to non-negative Alexandrov
curvature of the Wasserstein space, barycenters suffer from regularity and nonrobustness issues. The peculiar behaviors of Wasserstein barycenters may make the
centroid-based formulation fail to represent the within-cluster data points, while the
more direct distance-based K-means approach and its semidefinite program (SDP)
relaxation are capable of recovering the true cluster labels. In the special case
of clustering Gaussian distributions, we show that the SDP relaxed Wasserstein
K-means can achieve exact recovery given the clusters are well-separated under
the 2-Wasserstein metric. Our simulation and real data examples also demonstrate
that distance-based K-means can achieve better classification performance over
the standard centroid-based K-means for clustering probability distributions and
images.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a major tool for unsupervised machine learning problems and exploratory data analysis
in statistics. Suppose we observe a sample of data points X1 , . . . , Xn taking values in a metric
space (X , ∥ · ∥). Suppose there exists a clustering structure G∗1 , . . . , G∗K such that each data point
Xi belongs to exactly one of the unknown cluster G∗k . The goal of clustering analysis is to recover
the true clusters G∗1 , . . . , G∗K given the input data X1 , . . . , Xn . In the Euclidean space X = Rp ,
the K-means clustering is a widely used method that achieves the empirical success in many
applications [MacQueen, 1967]. In modern machine learning and data science problems such
as computer graphics [Solomon et al., 2015], data exhibits complex geometric features and traditional
clustering methods developed for Euclidean data may not be well suited to analyze such data.
In this paper, we consider the clustering problem of probability measures µ1 , . . . , µn into K groups.
As a motivating example, the MNIST dataset contains images of handwritten digits 0-9. Normalizing
the greyscale images into histograms as probability measures, a common task is to cluster the images.
One can certainly apply the Euclidean K-means to the vectorized images. However, this would
lose important geometric information of the two-dimensional data. On the other hand, theory of
optimal transport [Villani, 2003] provides an appealing framework to model measure-valued data as
probabilities in many statistical tasks [Domazakis et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2021, Bigot et al., 2017,
Seguy and Cuturi, 2015, Rigollet and Weed, 2019, Hütter and Rigollet, 2019, Cazelles et al., 2018].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

