Kernel similarity matching with Hebbian Networks

Kyle Luther
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
kluther@princeton.edu

H. Sebastian Seung
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton Computer Science Department
sseung@princeton.edu

Abstract
Recent works have derived neural networks with online correlation-based learning rules to perform kernel similarity matching. These works applied existing
linear similarity matching algorithms to nonlinear features generated with random
Fourier methods. In this paper we attempt to perform kernel similarity matching
by directly learning the nonlinear features. Our algorithm proceeds by deriving
and then minimizing an upper bound for the sum of squared errors between output
and input kernel similarities. The construction of our upper bound leads to online
correlation-based learning rules which can be implemented with a 1 layer recurrent
neural network. In addition to generating high-dimensional linearly separable
representations, we show that our upper bound naturally yields representations
which are sparse and selective for specific input patterns. We compare the approximation quality of our method to neural random Fourier method and variants of the
popular but non-biological “Nyström” method for approximating the kernel matrix.
Our method appears to be comparable or better than randomly sampled Nyström
methods when the outputs are relatively low dimensional (although still potentially
higher dimensional than the inputs) but less faithful when the outputs are very high
dimensional.

1

Introduction

Brain inspired learning algorithms have a long history in the field of neural networks and machine
learning [Rosenblatt, 1958, Olshausen and Field, 1996, Lee and Seung, Riesenhuber and Poggio,
1999, Hinton, 2007, Lillicrap et al., 2016]. While many algorithms have diverged from their biological
roots, the motivation to study biology remains clear: the human brain is such a powerful learning
agent, there must be insights to be gained by making our algorithms look “brain-like”. This paper is
focused on merging biological constraints with the well-established field of kernel-based machine
learning.
A common assumption in brain-inspired models of learning is that synaptic update rules should be a)
online, meaning the algorithm only has access to a single input pattern at a time and b) local, meaning
synapses should only be modified using information immediately available to the synapse, often
just the pre- and post-firing rates of the neurons to which it is connected. Learning rules with these
properties are commonly referred to as Hebbian learning rules [Chklovskii, 2016].
Recent works have devised neural networks with Hebbian learning rules that perform linear similarity
matching. These networks map every input xt to a representation yt such that linear output similarities
match linear input similarities ys ·yt ≈ xs ·xt . These networks are interesting as models for real brains
because they display a number of interesting biological properties: they are recurrent networks with
correlation-based learning rules [Pehlevan et al., 2018] and can be modified to include non-negativity
[Pehlevan and Chklovskii, 2014], sparsity, and convolutional structure [Obeid et al., 2019].
However there is a problem if one believes these networks should ultimately generate representations
which are useful for downstream tasks. If similarities are actually matched, that is if ys · yt = xs · xt ,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

