LobsDICE: Offline Learning from Observation via
Stationary Distribution Correction Estimation

Geon-Hyeong Kim1,3,∗,† , Jongmin Lee4,∗ , Youngsoo Jang1,3,† ,
Hongseok Yang1,2,5 Kee-Eung Kim1,2
1
School of Computing, KAIST
2
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
3
LG AI Research
4
University of California, Berkeley
5
Discrete Mathematics Group, Institute for Basic Science (IBS)

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning from observation (LfO), in which the agent
aims to mimic the expert’s behavior from the state-only demonstrations by experts.
We additionally assume that the agent cannot interact with the environment but
has access to the action-labeled transition data collected by some agents with
unknown qualities. This offline setting for LfO is appealing in many real-world
scenarios where the ground-truth expert actions are inaccessible and the arbitrary
environment interactions are costly or risky. In this paper, we present LobsDICE,
an offline LfO algorithm that learns to imitate the expert policy via optimization
in the space of stationary distributions. Our algorithm solves a single convex
minimization problem, which minimizes the divergence between the two statetransition distributions induced by the expert and the agent policy. Through an
extensive set of offline LfO tasks, we show that LobsDICE outperforms strong
baseline methods.

1

Introduction

The ability to learn from experience is one of the core aspects of an intelligent agent. Reinforcement
learning (RL) [36] provides a framework to acquire such an intelligent behavior autonomously
through interactions with the environment while receiving reward feedback. However, the practical
applicability of RL to real-world domains has been limited for two reasons. First, designing a
suitable reward function for complex tasks can be extremely difficult. The RL agent learns behaviors
incentivized by the reward function rather than the ones intended, which can be nontrivial to specify
in terms of reward. Second, the need for online interaction with the environment during the RL
training loop has hindered its adoption in many real-world domains, where environment interactions
are costly or risky.
Imitation learning (IL) [1, 33, 34] circumvents the difficulty of reward design in RL by leveraging
demonstrations given by experts, where the goal is to mimic the expert’s behavior. However, the
standard IL requires the expert demonstrations to contain not only the state information (e.g. robot
joint angles) but also the precise action (e.g. robot joint torques) executed by the expert at each time
step. This demand for explicit action labels is in contrast to the way human imitates (e.g. learning
by watching videos) and precludes leveraging a massive amount of data in which the action label is
missing. Therefore, developing an imitation learning algorithm that can learn from observing the
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while the authors were students at KAIST.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

