Okapi: Generalising Better by
Making Statistical Matches Match
Myles Bartlett1∗ Sara Romiti1
1

Viktoriia Sharmanska1,2

Novi Quadrianto1,3,4

Predictive Analytics Lab, University of Sussex 2 Imperial College London
3
BCAM Severo Ochoa Strategic Lab on Trustworthy Machine Learning
4
Monash University, Indonesia

Abstract
We propose Okapi, a simple, efficient, and general method for robust semisupervised learning based on online statistical matching. Our method uses a
nearest-neighbours-based matching procedure to generate cross-domain views for
a consistency loss, while eliminating statistical outliers. In order to perform the
online matching in a runtime- and memory-efficient way, we draw upon the selfsupervised literature and combine a memory bank with a slow-moving momentum
encoder. The consistency loss is applied within the feature space, rather than
on the predictive distribution, making the method agnostic to both the modality
and the task in question. We experiment on the WILDS 2.0 datasets [63], which
significantly expands the range of modalities, applications, and shifts available for
studying and benchmarking real-world unsupervised adaptation. Contrary to [63],
we show that it is in fact possible to leverage additional unlabelled data to improve
upon empirical risk minimisation (ERM) results with the right method. Our method
outperforms the baseline methods in terms of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalisation on the iWildCam (a multi-class classification task) and PovertyMap (a regression task) image datasets as well as the CivilComments (a binary classification task)
text dataset. Furthermore, from a qualitative perspective, we show the matches
obtained from the learned encoder are strongly semantically related. Code for our
paper is publicly available at https://github.com/wearepal/okapi/.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models have been deployed for safety-critical applications such as disease diagnosis
[73] and self-driving cars [77], and in socially important contexts such as the allocation of healthcare,
education, and credit (e.g. [23, 35]). Many machine learning algorithms, however, rely on supervision
from a large amount of labelled data, and are typically trained to exploit complex relationships and
distant correlations present in the training dataset. This strategy has proven to be effective in the
setting when we have training (source) and test (target) data that are i.i.d.
In reality, machine learning models are often deployed on target data whose distribution is different
from the source distribution they were trained on. For example, in the task of classifying animal
species in a camera trap image, one aims to learn a model that can generalise to new camera
trap locations despite variations in illumination, background, and label frequencies, given training
examples from a limited set of camera trap locations. Exploiting correlations that only hold in these
limited locations but not in the new locations can hurt out-of-distribution (OOD) generalisation.
While we only have a small subset of camera traps that have their images labelled, we have a large
∗

Corresponding author: m.bartlett@sussex.ac.uk.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

