Batch Bayesian optimisation via density-ratio
estimation with guarantees

Rafael Oliveira1,2∗
rafael.oliveira@sydney.edu.au

Louis C. Tiao3
louis.tiao@sydney.edu.au

Fabio Ramos3,4
fabio.ramos@sydney.edu.au
1

2

Brain and Mind Centre, the University of Sydney, Australia
ARC Training Centre in Data Analytics for Resources and Environments, Australia
3
School of Computer Science, the University of Sydney, Australia
4
NVIDIA, USA

Abstract
Bayesian optimisation (BO) algorithms have shown remarkable success in applications involving expensive black-box functions. Traditionally BO has been
set as a sequential decision-making process which estimates the utility of query
points via an acquisition function and a prior over functions, such as a Gaussian
process. Recently, however, a reformulation of BO via density-ratio estimation
(BORE) allowed reinterpreting the acquisition function as a probabilistic binary
classifier, removing the need for an explicit prior over functions and increasing
scalability. In this paper, we present a theoretical analysis of BORE’s regret and
an extension of the algorithm with improved uncertainty estimates. We also show
that BORE can be naturally extended to a batch optimisation setting by recasting
the problem as approximate Bayesian inference. The resulting algorithms come
equipped with theoretical performance guarantees and are assessed against other
batch and sequential BO baselines in a series of experiments.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimisation (BO) algorithms provide flexible black-box optimisers for problems involving
functions which are noisy or expensive to evaluate [1]. Typical BO approaches place a probabilistic
model over the objective function which is updated with every new observation in a sequential
decision-making process. Most methods are based on Gaussian process (GP) surrogates [2], which
provide closed-form analytic expressions for the model’s posterior distribution and allow for a number
of theoretical performance guarantees [3–5]. However, GP surrogates have a number of limitations,
such as not easily scaling to high-dimensional domains, high computational complexity and requiring
a careful choice of covariance function and hyper-parameters [2]. Non-GP-based BO methods have
also been proposed in the literature, such as BO methods based on neural networks [6, 7] and random
forests [8] regression models.
As an alternative to improving the model, Tiao et al. [9] focus on the acquisition function, which
in BO frameworks represents the guide that takes the model predictions into account. They show
that one can derive the acquisition function directly without an implicit model by reinterpreting
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

