Meta-ticket: Finding optimal subnetworks for
few-shot learning within randomly initialized
neural networks
Daiki Chijiwa1⇤ Shin’ya Yamaguchi1,2
Atsutoshi Kumagai1
Yasutoshi Ida1
1
NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
2
Kyoto University

Abstract
Few-shot learning for neural networks (NNs) is an important problem that aims to
train NNs with a few data. The main challenge is how to avoid overfitting since
over-parameterized NNs can easily overfit to such small dataset. Previous work
(e.g. MAML by Finn et al. 2017) tackles this challenge by meta-learning, which
learns how to learn from a few data by using various tasks. On the other hand,
one conventional approach to avoid overfitting is restricting hypothesis spaces
by endowing sparse NN structures like convolution layers in computer vision.
However, although such manually-designed sparse structures are sample-efficient
for sufficiently large datasets, they are still insufficient for few-shot learning. Then
the following questions naturally arise: (1) Can we find sparse structures effective
for few-shot learning by meta-learning? (2) What benefits will it bring in terms
of meta-generalization? In this work, we propose a novel meta-learning approach,
called Meta-ticket, to find optimal sparse subnetworks for few-shot learning within
randomly initialized NNs. We empirically validated that Meta-ticket successfully
discover sparse subnetworks that can learn specialized features for each given
task. Due to this task-wise adaptation ability, Meta-ticket achieves superior metageneralization compared to MAML-based methods especially with large NNs.

1

Introduction

Recent neural networks (NNs) have achieved remarkable performance for solving complex recognition tasks such as image recognition and natural language understanding [20, 58]. These successful
performance are mainly due to carefully designed NN structures (inductive biases) and a large amount
of training data. However, it still takes significant cost for collecting such a large amount of data.
Thus, few-shot learning has been an important problem that aims to enable NNs to learn from a few
samples or experiences like humans can do. Since NNs have strong memorization capacity [67], the
main challenge of few-shot learning is how to avoid overfitting to a small number of data.
Meta-learning is one of the promising approaches for few-shot learning, which can automatically
learn how to learn without overfitting, by using a bunch of tasks from a so-called meta-training
dataset. Meta-learning consists of two optimizations: adapting to a given task (inner optimization)
and improving the inner optimization for each task (meta-optimization). Gradient-based metalearning [14] is an approach modeling the inner optimization as gradient descent steps, which leads
to sample-efficient meta-learning compared to black-box models like recurrent NNs [22]. ModelAgnostic Meta-Learning (MAML, proposed by Finn et al. [13]) is a representative method of the
gradient-based meta-learning. It optimizes initial parameters in a given NN with stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) so that it can adapt to a novel task by gradient descent starting from the meta-learned
initial parameters. However, Raghu et al. [50] pointed out that, in classification tasks with a NN,
⇤

Corresponding author: daiki.chijiwa@ntt.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

