Sample-Then-Optimize Batch Neural
Thompson Sampling

Zhongxiang Dai† , Yao Shu† , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low† , Patrick Jaillet§
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore†
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA§
{daizhongxiang,shuyao,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg† ,jaillet@mit.edu§

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO), which uses a Gaussian process (GP) as a surrogate to
model its objective function, is popular for black-box optimization. However, due
to the limitations of GPs, BO underperforms in some problems such as those with
categorical, high-dimensional or image inputs. To this end, recent works have used
the highly expressive neural networks (NNs) as the surrogate model and derived
theoretical guarantees using the theory of neural tangent kernel (NTK). However,
these works suffer from the limitations of the requirement to invert an extremely
large parameter matrix and the restriction to the sequential (rather than batch)
setting. To overcome these limitations, we introduce two algorithms based on the
Thompson sampling (TS) policy named Sample-Then-Optimize Batch Neural TS
(STO-BNTS) and STO-BNTS-Linear. To choose an input query, we only need
to train an NN (resp. a linear model) and then choose the query by maximizing
the trained NN (resp. linear model), which is equivalently sampled from the GP
posterior with the NTK as the kernel function. As a result, our algorithms sidestep
the need to invert the large parameter matrix yet still preserve the validity of the
TS policy. Next, we derive regret upper bounds for our algorithms with batch
evaluations, and use insights from batch BO and NTK to show that they are
asymptotically no-regret under certain conditions. Finally, we verify their empirical
effectiveness using practical AutoML and reinforcement learning experiments.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO), also called Gaussian process (GP) bandits, has become a celebrated
method for optimizing expensive-to-compute black-box functions, primarily thanks to its practical
sample efficiency and theoretically guaranteed convergence [11, 14, 21, 51]. However, there are
important problem settings where BO either underperforms or is not even applicable without sophisticated modifications, such as problems with categorical [18], high-dimensional [30], or images inputs.
These issues have arisen mainly because GPs (i.e., the surrogate used by BO to model the objective
function) are not able to effectively model these types of input space, which therefore calls for the use
of alternative surrogate models in BO. To this end, neural networks (NNs) serve as a natural candidate
owing to their remarkable expressivity [37]. NNs have repeatedly proven their ability to model
extremely complicated real-world functions such as those involving categorical, high-dimensional or
image inputs, whereas the development of GPs to effectively model these functions still represents
active areas of research. In this regard, [69] have adopted NNs as the surrogate model in contextual
bandit problems and employed the theoretical framework of neural tangent kernel (NTK) [27] to
construct a principled algorithm following the well-known policy of upper confidence bound (UCB),
hence introducing the Neural UCB algorithm. More recently, [66] have extended Neural UCB to
Correspondence to: Yao Shu <shuyao@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

