Laplacian Autoencoders for
Learning Stochastic Representations
Marco Miani1 , Frederik Warburg1 ,
Pablo Moreno-Muñoz, Nicke Skafte Detlefsen, Søren Hauberg
{mmia, frwa, pabmo, nsde, sohau}@dtu.dk
Technical University of Denmark
https://github.com/FrederikWarburg/LaplaceAE

Abstract
Established methods for unsupervised representation learning such as variational
autoencoders produce none or poorly calibrated uncertainty estimates making it
difficult to evaluate if learned representations are stable and reliable. In this work,
we present a Bayesian autoencoder for unsupervised representation learning, which
is trained using a novel variational lower bound of the autoencoder evidence. This
is maximized using Monte Carlo EM with a variational distribution that takes
the shape of a Laplace approximation. We develop a new Hessian approximation
that scales linearly with data size allowing us to model high-dimensional data.
Empirically, we show that our Laplacian autoencoder estimates well-calibrated
uncertainties in both latent and output space. We demonstrate that this results in
improved performance across a multitude of downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised representation learning is a brittle matter. Consider the classic autoencoder (AE)
(Rumelhart et al., 1986), which compresses data x to a low-dimensional representation z from which
data is approximately reconstructed. The nonlinearity of the model implies that sometimes small
changes to data x give a large change in the latent representation z (and sometimes not). Likewise,
for some data, reconstructions are of low quality, while for others it is near perfect. Unfortunately,
the model does not have a built-in quantification of its uncertainty, and we cannot easily answer when
the representation is reliable and accurately reflects data.
The celebrated variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014)
address this concern directly through an explicit likelihood model p(x|z) and a variational approximation of the representation posterior p(z|x). Both these distributions have parameters predicted by
neural networks that act similarly to the encoder–decoder pair of the classic autoencoder.
But is the VAE’s quantification of reliability reliable? To investigate, we fit a VAE with a twodimensional latent representation to the MNIST dataset (Lecun et al., 1998), and illustrate the predicted
uncertainty of p(x|z) in Fig. 1a. The model learns to assign high uncertainty to low-level image
features such as edges but predicts its smallest values far away from the data distribution. Not only
is such behavior counter-intuitive, but it is also suboptimal in terms of data likelihood (Sec. 1.1).
Retrospectively, this should not be surprising as the uncertainty levels away from the data are governed
by the extrapolatory behavior of the neural network determining p(x|z). This suggests that perhaps
uncertainty should be a derived quantity rather than a predicted one.
1

Denotes equal contribution; author order determined by a simulated coin toss.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

