Asymptotically Unbiased Instance-wise Regularized
Partial AUC Optimization: Theory and Algorithm
Huiyang Shao1,2
Qianqian Xu1∗
Zhiyong Yang2
3,4
Shilong Bao
Qingming Huang1,2,5,6∗
1

2

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
State Key Lab of Info. Security, Inst. of Info. Engineering, CAS
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory
shaohuiyang21@mails.ucas.ac.cn xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn baoshilong@iie.ac.cn qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
The Partial Area Under the ROC Curve (PAUC), typically including One-way
Partial AUC (OPAUC) and Two-way Partial AUC (TPAUC), measures the average
performance of a binary classifier within a specific false positive rate and/or true
positive rate interval, which is a widely adopted measure when decision constraints
must be considered. Consequently, PAUC optimization has naturally attracted
increasing attention in the machine learning community within the last few years.
Nonetheless, most of the existing methods could only optimize PAUC approximately, leading to inevitable biases that are not controllable. Fortunately, a recent
work presents an unbiased formulation of the PAUC optimization problem via distributional robust optimization. However, it is based on the pair-wise formulation
of AUC, which suffers from the limited scalability w.r.t. sample size and a slow
convergence rate, especially for TPAUC. To address this issue, we present a simpler
reformulation of the problem in an asymptotically unbiased and instance-wise
manner. For both OPAUC and TPAUC, we come to a nonconvex strongly concave
minimax regularized problem of instance-wise functions. On top of this, we employ an efficient solver enjoys a linear per-iteration computational complexity w.r.t.
the sample size and a time-complexity of O(ϵ−1/3 ) to reach a ϵ stationary point.
Furthermore, we find that the minimax reformulation also facilitates the theoretical
analysis of generalization error as a byproduct. Compared with the existing results,
we present new error bounds that are much easier to prove and could deal with
hypotheses with real-valued outputs. Finally, extensive experiments on several
benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

AUC refers to the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve [1], where the ROC
curve is obtained by plotting the True Positive Rate (TPR) against the False Positive Rate (FPR) of a
given classifier for all possible thresholds. Since it is insensitive to the class distribution, AUC has
become one of the standard metrics for long-tail, and imbalanced datasets [1, 22, 38]. Consequently,
AUC optimization has attracted increasing attention in the machine learning community ever since
the early 2000s [13, 5, 35, 17]. Over the last two decades, research on AUC optimization has
evolved from the simplest linear models and decision trees [27, 10, 29, 41] to state-of-the-art deep
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

