Discrete Factorial Representations as an
Abstraction for Goal Conditioned RL
Riashat Islam1,5,7∗, Hongyu Zang3 , Anirudh Goyal2,7,8 , Alex Lamb6,7 ,
Kenji Kawaguchi4 , Xin Li3 , Romain Laroche5 , Yoshua Bengio2,7 , Remi Tachet Des Combes5
1
McGill University, Montreal, Canada, 2 University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada
3
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, 4 Harvard University, Cambridge, USA
5
Microsoft Research, Montreal, Canada, 6 Microsoft Research, New York, USA
7
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, Canada 8 DeepMind

Abstract
Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising direction for training agents that are capable of solving multiple tasks and reach a diverse set of
objectives. How to specify and ground these goals in such a way that we can both
reliably reach goals during training as well as generalize to new goals during evaluation remains an open area of research. Defining goals in the space of noisy and
high-dimensional sensory inputs poses a challenge for training goal-conditioned
agents, or even for generalization to novel goals. We propose to address this by
learning factorial representations of goals and processing the resulting representation via a discretization bottleneck, for coarser goal specification, through an
approach we call DGRL. We show that applying a discretizing bottleneck can improve performance in goal-conditioned RL setups, by experimentally evaluating
this method on tasks ranging from maze environments to complex robotic navigation and manipulation. Additionally, we prove a theorem lower-bounding the
expected return on out-of-distribution goals, while still allowing for specifying
goals with expressive combinatorial structure.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning is a popular and highly general framework [25, 60] focusing on how to
select actions for an agent to yield high long-term sum of rewards. An important question is how
to control the desired behavior of an RL agent, both during training and evaluation [24]. One way
to control this behavior is by specifying a reward signal [52, 56]. While this approach is very
general, the reward signal can be hard to design and may not be the most informative form of
feedback. The credit assignment problem in RL can become difficult when the reward signal is
sparse [62, 63, 36, 37, 57], such as policy gradients becoming nearly flat in regions where reward is
almost never achieved. Generalization can also suffer if the agent only learns one way to achieve a
high reward rather than learning a diverse set of skills for coping with novel challenges [20].
One potential way to flexibly specify and ground the desired behavior of RL agents is by training
agents that receive a reward when they reach a goal specified explicitly to them [23]. In this approach, called Goal-Conditioned RL, a single agent is trained to reach a diverse set of goals, and is
given a reward only when it reaches the goal it was instructed to reach [61, 48, 44]. This provides
a richer signal for the agent than simply collecting more samples oriented around a single goal, as
reaching multiple goals requires the agent to learn a more diverse and robust set of skills. It also
allows for more flexible and tightly constrained control over its desired behavior [12, 5, 27]. Finally, the diversity of goals seen during training should help improve both credit assignment and
generalization [48, 43].
∗

Corresponding Author. E-mail: riashat.islam@mail.mcgill.ca, anirudhgoyal9119@gmail.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

