Neural Collapse with Normalized Features:
A Geometric Analysis over the Riemannian Manifold

Can Yaras∗
University of Michigan
cjyaras@umich.edu

Peng Wang∗
University of Michigan
pengwa@umich.edu

Laura Balzano
University of Michigan
girasole@umich.edu

Zhihui Zhu
Ohio State University
zhu.3440@osu.edu

Qing Qu
University of Michigan
qingqu@umich.edu

Abstract
When training overparameterized deep networks for classification tasks, it has
been widely observed that the learned features exhibit a so-called “neural collapse”
phenomenon. More specifically, for the output features of the penultimate layer,
for each class the within-class features converge to their means, and the means
of different classes exhibit a certain tight frame structure, which is also aligned
with the last layer’s classifier. As feature normalization in the last layer becomes a
common practice in modern representation learning, in this work we theoretically
justify the neural collapse phenomenon under normalized features. Based on an unconstrained feature model, we simplify the empirical loss function in a multi-class
classification task into a nonconvex optimization problem over the Riemannian
manifold by constraining all features and classifiers over the sphere. In this context,
we analyze the nonconvex landscape of the Riemannian optimization problem over
the product of spheres, showing a benign global landscape in the sense that the only
global minimizers are the neural collapse solutions while all other critical points
are strict saddle points with negative curvature. Experimental results on practical
deep networks corroborate our theory and demonstrate that better representations
can be learned faster via feature normalization. Code for our experiments can be
found at https://github.com/cjyaras/normalized-neural-collapse.

1

Introduction

Despite the tremendous success of deep learning in engineering and scientific applications over
the past decades, the underlying mechanism of deep neural networks (DNNs) still largely remains
mysterious. Towards the goal of understanding the learned deep representations, a recent line of
seminal works [1–5] presents an intriguing phenomenon that persists across a range of canonical
classification problems during the terminal phase of training. Specifically, it has been widely observed
that last-layer features (i.e., the output of the penultimate layer) and last-layer linear classifiers of a
trained DNN exhibit simple but elegant mathematical structures, in the sense that
• (NC1) Variability Collapse: the individual features of each class concentrate to their class-means.
• (NC2) Convergence to Simplex ETF: the class-means have the same length and are maximally
distant. In other words, they form a Simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF).
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

