Learning from Label Proportions by Learning with
Label Noise
Jianxin Zhang, Yutong Wang, and Clayton Scott
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{jianxinz, yutongw, clayscot}@umich.edu

Abstract
Learning from label proportions (LLP) is a weakly supervised classification problem where data points are grouped into bags, and the label proportions within
each bag are observed instead of the instance-level labels. The task is to learn a
classifier to predict the labels of future individual instances. Prior work on LLP
for multi-class data has yet to develop a theoretically grounded algorithm. In this
work, we propose an approach to LLP based on a reduction to learning with label
noise, using the forward correction (FC) loss of Patrini et al. [30]. We establish an
excess risk bound and generalization error analysis for our approach, while also
extending the theory of the FC loss which may be of independent interest. Our
approach demonstrates improved empirical performance in deep learning scenarios
across multiple datasets and architectures, compared to the leading methods.

1

Introduction

In the weakly supervised problem of learning from label proportions (LLP), the learner is presented
with bags of instances, where each bag is annotated with the proportions of the different classes in
the bag. The learner’s objective is to produce a classifier that accurately assigns labels to individual
instances in the future. LLP arises in various applications including high energy physics [7], election
prediction [45], computer vision [4, 20], medical image analysis [2], remote sensing [8], activity
recognition [32], and reproductive medicine [12].
To date, most methods for LLP have addressed the setting of binary classification [50, 36, 39, 34,
41, 44, 24, 37, 38], although multiclass methods have also recently been investigated [9, 22, 46].
The dominant approach to LLP in the literature is “label proportion matching”: train a classifier to
accurately reproduce the observed label proportions on the training data, perhaps with additional
regularization. In the multiclass setting, the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the observed
and predicted label proportions is adopted by the leading approaches to assess proportion matching.
Unfortunately, while matching the observed label proportions is intuitive and can work well in some
settings, it has little theoretical basis [50, 38], especially in the multiclass setting, and there are natural
settings where it fails [50, 39].
Recently, Scott and Zhang [39] demonstrated a principled approach to LLP with performance
guarantees based on a reduction to learning with label noise (LLN) in the binary setting. Their basic
strategy was to pair bags, and view each pair of bags as an LLN problem, where the observed label
proportions are related to the “label flipping” or “noise transition” probabilities. Using an existing
technique for LLN based on loss correction, which allows the learner to train directly on the noisy
data, they formulated an overall objective based on a (weighted) sum of objectives for each pair of
bags. They established generalization error analysis and consistency for the method, and also showed
that in the context of kernel methods, their approach outperformed the leading kernel methods.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

