Change Event Dataset for Discovery from
Spatio-temporal Remote Sensing Imagery

Utkarsh Mall

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

Kavita Bala

{utkarshm, bharathh, kb}@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Satellite imagery is increasingly available, high resolution, and temporally detailed.
Changes in spatio-temporal datasets such as satellite images are particularly interesting as they reveal the many events and forces that shape our world. However,
finding such interesting and meaningful change events from the vast data is challenging. In this paper, we present new datasets for such change events that include
semantically meaningful events like road construction created using Sentinel-2
satellite imagery (with 10m spatial and 1 month temporal resolution). Instead of
manually annotating the very large corpus of satellite images, we introduce a novel
unsupervised approach that takes a large spatio-temporal dataset from satellite
images and finds interesting change events. To evaluate the meaningfulness on
these datasets we create 2 benchmarks namely CaiRoad and CalFire which capture
the events of road construction and forest fires. The CaiRoad dataset has a total of
28015 change events with 2259 road construction events from the city of Cairo and
the CalFire dataset has 2172 change events with 204 labeled fire events in California. These new benchmarks can be used to evaluate semantic retrieval/classification
performance. We explore these benchmarks qualitatively and quantitatively by
using several methods and show that these new datasets are indeed challenging for
many existing methods. For example the best performing model has a retrieval
precision@25 of 0.46 on CaiRoad benchmark.

1

Introduction

At the turn of the century, there were about 30 earth observation satellites orbiting the planet. Today,
that number is close to 1500 and rising [6]. The massive trove of visual imagery from these satellites
cannot be more timely. Be it because of rapid human development or climate change, our world is
changing, and we need to understand what is changing across the planet and why.
Prior work on analyzing change in satellite imagery identifies changed pixels between two snapshots
of the same location (change detection). While this is a good first step, we need to understand not
just what has changed, but also why. For example, a climate scientist may be specifically interested
in changes that correspond to forest fires.
Thus, instead of simply detecting changed pixels, we want to identify change events. We define
a change event as a group of pixels over space and time that are all changed by a single event.
We are interested in developing systems that can automatically detect change events and assign to
each a semantic label that indicates the nature of the event, e.g., forest fires, road construction etc.
Identifying change events is a much more challenging problem than change detection. Multiple
events might be happening in the vicinity of each other, such as a road construction near a farm being
harvested. Furthermore, an event may span arbitrary time periods, so pairwise image analysis may
be insufficient. Detecting, characterizing and recognizing change events is thus a novel and difficult
research problem.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

