MExMI: Pool-based Active Model Extraction
Crossover Membership Inference

Yaxin Xiao
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
20034165r@connect.polyu.hk

Qingqing Ye
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
qqing.ye@polyu.edu.hk

Haibo Hu∗
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
haibo.hu@polyu.edu.hk

Huadi Zheng
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
huadi.zheng@connect.polyu.hk

Chengfang Fang
Huawei International, Singapore
fang.chengfang@huawei.com

Jie Shi
Huawei International, Singapore
shi.jie1@huawei.com

Abstract
With increasing popularity of Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS), ML models
trained from public and proprietary data are deployed in the cloud and deliver
prediction services to users. However, as the prediction API becomes a new
attack surface, growing concerns have arisen on the confidentiality of ML models.
Existing literatures show their vulnerability under model extraction (ME) attacks,
while their private training data is vulnerable to another type of attacks, namely,
membership inference (MI). In this paper, we show that ME and MI can reinforce
each other through a chained and iterative reaction, which can significantly boost
ME attack accuracy and improve MI by saving the query cost. As such, we build a
framework MExMI for pool-based active model extraction (PAME) to exploit MI
through three modules: “MI Pre-Filter”, “MI Post-Filter”, and “semi-supervised
boosting”. Experimental results show that MExMI can improve up to 11.14% from
the best known PAME attack and reach 94.07% fidelity with only 16k queries.
Furthermore, the accuracy, precision and recall of the MI attack in MExMI are on
par with state-of-the-art MI attack which needs 150k queries.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning (ML) has significantly shifted the paradigm in all walks of
life. Thanks to cloud computing, every business and individual can host black-box ML models in the
cloud (e.g., Microsoft Azure ML, Amazon AWS ML, and Google Cloud AI) to provide pay-per-query
predictive services, known as Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS). Obviously, ML models are
proprietary assets to the providers who spend great efforts training them [22]. However, by exploiting
the correspondence between queries and prediction results from an MLaaS model, an adversary
could learn the internals of that victim model to a large, or even full extent. Such attack on model’s
confidentiality is known as model extraction (ME) [43]. It is a fundamental attack in adversarial
machine learning because it enables follow-up attacks such as adversarial samples [19], model evasion
[7], and model inversion attacks that infer private information of the training set [16, 48].
State-of-the-art ME attacks can be categorized into direct recovery [23] and active-learning-based
ME attacks [6, 34]. Active learning (AL) refers to those semi-supervised training methods that aim to
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

