Graph Coloring via Neural Networks for Haplotype
Assembly and Viral Quasispecies Reconstruction

Hansheng Xue,1 Vaibhav Rajan,2 and Yu Lin1∗
School of Computing, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{hansheng.xue,yu.lin}@anu.edu.au, vaibhav.rajan@nus.edu.sg

1

Abstract
Understanding genetic variation, e.g., through mutations, in organisms is crucial to
unravel their effects on the environment and human health. A fundamental characterization can be obtained by solving the haplotype assembly problem, which
yields the variation across multiple copies of chromosomes. Variations among fast
evolving viruses that lead to different strains (called quasispecies) are also deciphered with similar approaches. In both these cases, high-throughput sequencing
technologies that provide oversampled mixtures of large noisy fragments (reads) of
genomes, are used to infer constituent components (haplotypes or quasispecies).
The problem is harder for polyploid species where there are more than two copies
of chromosomes. State-of-the-art neural approaches to solve this NP-hard problem
do not adequately model relations among the reads that are important for deconvolving the input signal. We address this problem by developing a new method,
called NeurHap, that combines graph representation learning with combinatorial
optimization. Our experiments demonstrate substantially better performance of
NeurHap in real and synthetic datasets compared to competing approaches.

1

Introduction

Our genetic material is organized as sequences of DNA or RNA molecules (nucleotides) which form
three-dimensional structures (chromosomes) within our cells. Most organisms have multiple highly
similar copies of chromosomes in their cells (e.g., humans have 2). Variations in genetic sequences
lead to the emergence of new species during evolution and are also known to be associated with many
diseases (e.g., cancer). There are many possible ways in which such variations can occur; the simplest
among them is a mutation or a change in the nucleotide at a specific location in the DNA or RNA
sequence. A Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) refers to a mutation in at least one of the copies
which renders the copies nonidentical at that point. An ordered list of SNPs on a single chromosome
is called a haplotype [Schwartz, 2010]. Haplotypes provide a signature of genetic variability and thus
inform us about disease susceptibilities and evolutionary patterns (e.g., of viruses). These studies in
turn pave the way for personalized medicine and effective drug development against viruses.
The problem of inferring haplotypes from high-throughput sequencing data is called haplotype
assembly or phasing, and is done in multiple stages (see Figure 1). Sequencing data yields multiple
copies of short fragments of the entire genomic sequence (called reads, Figure 1b). These reads are
noisy due to sequencing errors and their short lengths may span across limited number of SNPs.
This makes the problem of haplotype phasing challenging. The reads are first aligned to a reference
genome. This step indicates positions that are different across reads and thus infers the potential
locations of SNPs. All other positions are discarded to obtain the SNP matrix (Figure 1c). This
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

