Contextual Dynamic Pricing with Unknown Noise:
Explore-then-UCB Strategy and Improved Regrets

Yiyun Luo
Department of Statistics and Operations Research
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
yiyun851@ad.unc.edu

Will Wei Sun
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
sun244@purdue.edu

Yufeng Liu
Department of Statistics and Operations Research
Department of Genetics
Department of Biostatistics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
yfliu@email.unc.edu

Abstract
Dynamic pricing is a fast-moving research area in machine learning and operations
management. A lot of work has been done for this problem with known noise.
In this paper, we consider a contextual dynamic pricing problem under a linear
customer valuation model with an unknown market noise distribution F . This
problem is very challenging due to the difficulty in balancing three tangled tasks of
revenue-maximization, estimating the linear valuation parameter θ0 , and learning
the nonparametric F . To address this issue, we develop a novel Explore-then-UCB
(ExUCB) strategy that includes an exploration for θ0 -learning and a followed UCB
procedure of joint revenue-maximization and F -learning. Under Lipschitz and
2nd-order smoothness assumptions on F , ExUCB is the first approach to achieve
the Õ(T 2/3 ) regret rate. Under the Lipschitz assumption only, ExUCB matches the
best existing regret of Õ(T 3/4 ) and is computationally more efficient. Furthermore,
for regret lower bounds under the nonparametric F , not much work has been done
beyond only assuming Lipschitz. To fill this gap, we provide the first Ω̃(T 3/5 )
lower bound under Lipschitz and 2nd-order smoothness assumptions.

1

Introduction

Dynamic pricing is a process of continuously adjusting the prices by learning from the customers’
feedback. The feedback usually depends on the pricing action. To maximize the overall revenues
in a sales horizon, a pricing policy should well balance between learning the customers’ demands
(exploration) and setting revenue-maximizing prices based on the current knowledge (exploitation).
There is a rich literature on this information-regret tradeoff under different settings [7, 27, 16, 12, 19].
In this paper, we consider an important setting in dynamic pricing where some contextual information
is available in each time period. It is interesting and challenging to improve the revenues by well
exploiting the sales-relevant contextual information such as product features and market environments.
To model the influence of the contextual information, we adopt a binary feedback model which
incorporates a comparison between the customer’s valuation and the seller’s price [3, 25, 47, 35, 20].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

