S-PIFu: Integrating Parametric Human Models with
PIFu for Single-view Clothed Human Reconstruction

Kennard Yanting Chan
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
kenn0042@e.ntu.edu.sg
Haiyu Zhao
SenseTime Research
zhaohaiyu@sensetime.com

Guosheng Lin
Nanyang Technological University
gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Weisi Lin
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
wslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We present three novel strategies to incorporate a parametric body model into a
pixel-aligned implicit model for single-view clothed human reconstruction. Firstly,
we introduce ray-based sampling, a novel technique that transforms a parametric
model into a set of highly informative, pixel-aligned 2D feature maps. Next, we
propose a new type of feature based on blendweights. Blendweight-based labels
serve as soft human parsing labels and help to improve the structural fidelity
of reconstructed meshes. Finally, we show how we can extract and capitalize
on body part orientation information from a parametric model to further improve
reconstruction quality. Together, these three techniques form our S-PIFu framework,
which significantly outperforms state-of-the-arts methods in all metrics. Our code
is available at https://github.com/kcyt/SPIFu.

1

Introduction

Human digitization is an important topic that has application in areas like virtual reality, robot
navigation, and medical imaging. While there exist high-end, multi-view capturing systems that can
accurately digitalize and reconstruct 3D human bodies (4; 5; 13), they are largely inaccessible to
general consumers. In search of more accessible methods, the research community has delved into
human digitization approaches that use simple inputs such as a single image (2; 16; 22; 21).
Various methods have been proposed for single-image clothed human digitization, but one class
of approaches that has gained notable attention is pixel-aligned implicit models (20; 21; 3), which
are relatively lightweight and could capture fine-level geometric details such as clothes wrinkles.
But these models are prone to depth ambiguity (causing unnaturally elongated body parts) and to
producing human meshes with broken limbs (8; 18).
In order to overcome these two limitations, He et al. (7) designed ARCH++, a model which combines
a pixel-aligned implicit model with a parametric human body model. However, ARCH++ depends
heavily on having a near-perfect mapping between the canonical and posed spaces (especially during
training), which is often infeasible to attain due to the varied clothing of human meshes. Another
problem with ARCH++ is that it only uses the (x,y,z) coordinate information of the parametric model,
ignoring other information that could well prove useful.
In order to overcome these issues, we propose S-PIFu, a pixel-aligned implicit model that utilizes a
parametric human body model without requiring a mapping between the canonical and posed spaces.
S-PIFu transforms a parametric body model into a set of pixel-aligned 2D feature maps, which can
contain more information than just the (x,y,z) coordinate information. In its essence, S-PIFu is a new
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

