Understanding the Evolution of Linear Regions in
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Setareh Cohan
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
setarehc@cs.ubc.ca

Nam Hee Kim
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
namhee.kim@aalto.fi

David Rolnick
School of Computer Science
McGill University
drolnick@cs.mcgill.ca

Michiel van de Panne
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
van@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Policies produced by deep reinforcement learning are typically characterised by
their learning curves, but they remain poorly understood in many other respects.
ReLU-based policies result in a partitioning of the input space into piecewise linear
regions. We seek to understand how observed region counts and their densities
evolve during deep reinforcement learning using empirical results that span a
range of continuous control tasks and policy network dimensions. Intuitively, we
may expect that during training, the region density increases in the areas that are
frequently visited by the policy, thereby affording fine-grained control. We use
recent theoretical and empirical results for the linear regions induced by neural
networks in supervised learning settings for grounding and comparison of our
results. Empirically, we find that the region density increases only moderately
throughout training, as measured along fixed trajectories coming from the final
policy. However, the trajectories themselves also increase in length during training,
and thus the region densities decrease as seen from the perspective of the current
trajectory. Our findings suggest that the complexity of deep reinforcement learning
policies does not principally emerge from a significant growth in the complexity of
functions observed on-and-around trajectories of the policy.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) utilizes neural networks to represent the policy and to train this
network to optimize an objective, typically the expected value of time-discounted future rewards.
Deep RL algorithms have been successfully applied to diverse applications including robotics,
challenging games, and an increasing number of real-world decision-and-control problems [FrançoisLavet et al., 2018]. For a given choice of task, RL algorithm, and policy network configuration,
the performance is commonly characterised via the learning curves, which provide insight into the
learning efficiency and the final performance. However, little has been done to understand the detailed
structure of the state-to-action mappings induced by the control policies and how these evolve over
time.
In this work, we aim to further understand deep feed-forward neural network policies that use rectified
linear activation functions (rectifier linear units or ReLUs). ReLUs [Nair and Hinton, 2010] are
among the most popular choices of activation functions due to their practical successes [Montúfar
et al., 2014]. For RL, these activations induce a piecewise linear mapping from states to actions,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

