Learning interacting dynamical systems with
latent Gaussian process ODEs

Çağatay Yıldız∗
University of Tübingen
cagatay.yildiz@uni-tuebingen.de

Melih Kandemir
University of Southern Denmark
kandemir@imada.sdu.dk

Barbara Rakitsch
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
barbara.rakitsch@de.bosch.com

Abstract
We study uncertainty-aware modeling of continuous-time dynamics of interacting
objects. We introduce a new model that decomposes independent dynamics of
single objects accurately from their interactions. By employing latent Gaussian process ordinary differential equations, our model infers both independent dynamics
and their interactions with reliable uncertainty estimates. In our formulation, each
object is represented as a graph node and interactions are modeled by accumulating
the messages coming from neighboring objects. We show that efficient inference of such a complex network of variables is possible with modern variational
sparse Gaussian process inference techniques. We empirically demonstrate that
our model improves the reliability of long-term predictions over neural network
based alternatives and it successfully handles missing dynamic or static information. Furthermore, we observe that only our model can successfully encapsulate
independent dynamics and interaction information in distinct functions and show
the benefit from this disentanglement in extrapolation scenarios.

1

Introduction

A broad spectrum of dynamical systems consists of multiple interacting objects. Since their interplay
is typically a priori unknown, learning interaction dynamics of objects from data has become an
emerging field in dynamical systems [1, 2, 3]. The ever-growing interest in interaction modeling is
due to the diversity of real-world applications such as autonomous driving [4], physical simulators [5],
and human-robot interactions [6]. Standard time-series algorithms or deep learning approaches (e.g.
recurrent neural networks), that have been designed for single-object systems, do not scale to a large
number of interacting objects since they do not exploit the structural information of the data.
In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a promising tool for interactive
systems, where objects are represented as graph nodes. State-of-the-art methods learn interactions
by sending messages between objects in form of multi-layer perceptrons [1] or attention modules [7].
These methods yield highly flexible function approximators that achieve accurate predictions when
trained on large-scale datasets. However, their predictions come without calibrated uncertainties,
hindering their reliable implementation for uncertainty-aware applications.
In contrast, Gaussian processes (GPs) are well-known for providing calibrated uncertainty estimates.
They have been successfully employed on discrete time-series data [8, 9, 10] and, more recently,
∗

Work performed during internship at Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

