Unsupervised Learning of Group Invariant and
Equivariant Representations
Robin Winter⇤
Bayer AG
Freie Universität Berlin
robin.winter@bayer.com

Marco Bertolini⇤
Bayer AG
marco.bertolini@bayer.com

Frank Noé
Freie Universität Berlin
Microsoft Research
frank.noe@fu-berlin.de

Tuan Le
Bayer AG
Freie Universität Berlin
tuan.le2@bayer.com

Djork-Arné Clevert
Bayer AG
djork-arne.clevert@bayer.com

Abstract
Equivariant neural networks, whose hidden features transform according to representations of a group G acting on the data, exhibit training efficiency and an
improved generalisation performance. In this work, we extend group invariant and
equivariant representation learning to the field of unsupervised deep learning. We
propose a general learning strategy based on an encoder-decoder framework in
which the latent representation is separated in an invariant term and an equivariant
group action component. The key idea is that the network learns to encode and
decode data to and from a group-invariant representation by additionally learning
to predict the appropriate group action to align input and output pose to solve the
reconstruction task. We derive the necessary conditions on the equivariant encoder,
and we present a construction valid for any G, both discrete and continuous. We
describe explicitly our construction for rotations, translations and permutations.
We test the validity and the robustness of our approach in a variety of experiments
with diverse data types employing different network architectures.

1

Introduction

An increasing body of work has shown that incorporating knowledge about underlying symmetries in
neural networks as inductive bias can drastically improve the performance and reduce the amount of
data needed for training Cohen & Welling (2016a); Bronstein et al. (2021). For example, the equivariant design with respect to the translation symmetry of objects in images proper of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) has revolutionized the field of image analysis LeCun et al. (1995). Message Passing
neural networks, respecting permutation symmetries in graphs, have enabled powerful predictive
models on graph-structured data Gilmer et al. (2017); Defferrard et al. (2016). Recently, much work
has been done utilizing 3D rotation and translation equivariant neural networks for point clouds
and volumetric data, showing great success in predicting molecular ground state energy levels with
high fidelity Miller et al. (2020); Anderson et al. (2019); Klicpera et al. (2020); Schütt et al. (2021).
Invariant models take advantage of the fact that often properties of interest, such as the class label of
an object in an image or the ground state energy of a molecule, are invariant to certain group actions
(e.g., translations or rotations), while the data itself is not (e.g., pixel values, atom coordinates).
There are several approaches to incorporate invariance into the learned representation of a neural
network. The most common approach consists of teaching invariance to the model by data augmenta⇤

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

