TUSK: Task-Agnostic Unsupervised Keypoints
Yuhe Jin1 , Weiwei Sun1 , Jan Hosang2 , Eduard Trulls2 , Kwang Moo Yi1
1

The University of British Columbia,

2

Google Research

Abstract
Existing unsupervised methods for keypoint learning rely heavily on the assumption
that a specific keypoint type (e.g. elbow, digit, abstract geometric shape) appears
only once in an image. This greatly limits their applicability, as each instance
must be isolated before applying the method—an issue that is never discussed or
evaluated. We thus propose a novel method to learn Task-agnostic, UnSupervised
Keypoints (TUSK) which can deal with multiple instances. To achieve this, instead
of the commonly-used strategy of detecting multiple heatmaps, each dedicated to
a specific keypoint type, we use a single heatmap for detection, and enable unsupervised learning of keypoint types through clustering. Specifically, we encode
semantics into the keypoints by teaching them to reconstruct images from a sparse
set of keypoints and their descriptors, where the descriptors are forced to form
distinct clusters in feature space around learned prototypes. This makes our approach amenable to a wider range of tasks than any previous unsupervised keypoint
method: we show experiments on multiple-instance detection and classification,
object discovery, and landmark detection—all unsupervised—with performance on
par with the state of the art, while also being able to deal with multiple instances.

1

Introduction

Keypoint-based methods are a popular off-the-shelf building block for a wide array of computer
vision tasks, including city-scale 3D mapping and re-localization [39, 52], landmark detection on
human faces [53, 64, 23, 37], human pose detection [53, 64, 37], object detection [38, 32, 13, 46],
scene categorization [31, 15], image retrieval [26, 44], robot navigation [42, 12], and many others.
As elsewhere in computer vision, learning-based strategies have become the de-facto standard in
keypoint detection and description [53, 7, 44, 64, 23, 9, 37, 55]. This is accomplished by tailoring a
method to a specific task by means of domain-specific supervision signals—methods are often simply
not applicable outside the use case they were trained for. This is problematic, as many applications
require extensive amounts of labeled training data, which is often difficult or infeasible to collect.
Researchers have attempted to overcome the requirement for labelled data through unsupervised or
self-supervised learning [53, 64, 23, 37, 7, 48, 62], primarily using two families of techniques, often
in combination: (1) enforcing equivariant representations through synthetic image transformations,
such as homographies [7, 48] or non-rigid deformations [28, 53]; and (2) clustering features in a latent
space over a predetermined number of channels, where every channel is meant to represent a single
object or a single part of an object. The first objective ensures that keypoints can deal with changes
due to camera pose or body articulation, but synthetic transformations do not capture any high-level
semantics. The second objective can encode semantic information into the keypoints, but methods
assume that every keypoint (a specific object or part, such as the corner of the mouth) appears only
once in a given image, such that a ‘specialized’ heatmap can be learned for each semantic keypoint.
This is an effective way to constrain optimization, but is unrealistic in many scenarios, and restricts
the applicability of these methods to isolated instances—for example, a learned landmark detector for
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

