Faster Linear Algebra for Distance Matrices
Piotr Indyk
MIT
indyk@mit.edu

Sandeep Silwal
MIT
silwal@mit.edu

Abstract
The distance matrix of a dataset X of n points with respect to a distance function
f represents all pairwise distances between points in X induced by f . Due to their
wide applicability, distance matrices and related families of matrices have been
the focus of many recent algorithmic works. We continue this line of research
and take a broad view of algorithm design for distance matrices with the goal of
designing fast algorithms, which are specifically tailored for distance matrices, for
fundamental linear algebraic primitives. Our results include efficient algorithms
for computing matrix-vector products for a wide class of distance matrices, such
as the `1 metric for which we get a linear runtime, as well as an ⌦(n2 ) lower
bound for any algorithm which computes a matrix-vector product for the `1 case,
showing a separation between the `1 and the `1 metrics. Our upper bound results,
in conjunction with recent works on the matrix-vector query model, have many
further downstream applications, including the fastest algorithm for computing
a relative error low-rank approximation for the distance matrix induced by `1
and `22 functions and the fastest algorithm for computing an additive error lowrank approximation for the `2 metric, in addition to applications for fast matrix
multiplication among others. We also give algorithms for constructing distance
matrices and show that one can construct an approximate `2 distance matrix in
time faster than the bound implied by the Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma.

1

Introduction

Given a set of n points X = {x1 , . . . , xn }, the distance matrix of X with respect to a distance function
f is defined as the n ⇥ n matrix A satisfying Ai,j = f (xi , xj ). Distances matrices are ubiquitous
objects arising in various applications ranging from learning image manifolds [TSL00, WS06],
signal processing [SY07], biological analysis [HS93], and non-linear dimensionality reduction
[Kru64, Kru78, TSL00, CC08], to name a few1 . Unfortunately, explicitly computing and storing A
requires at least ⌦(n2 ) time and space. Such complexities are prohibitive for scaling to large datasets.
A silver lining is that in many settings, the matrix A is not explicitly required. Indeed in many
applications, it suffices to compute some underlying function or property of A, such as the eigenvalues
and eigenvectors of A or a low-rank approximation of A. Thus an algorithm designer can hope to use
the special geometric structure encoded by A to design faster algorithms tailored for such tasks.
Therefore, it is not surprising that many recent works explicitly take advantage of the underlying
geometric structure of distance matrices, and other related families of matrices, to design fast
algorithms (see Section 1.2 for a thorough discussion of prior works). In this work, we continue this
line of research and take a broad view of algorithm design for distance matrices. Our main motivating
question is the following:
1

We refer the reader to the survey [DPRV15] for a more thorough discussion of applications of distance
matrices.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

