Markov Chain Score Ascent:
A Unifying Framework of
Variational Inference with Markovian Gradients
Kyurae Kim∗
Sogang University
msca8h@sogang.ac.kr
Jacob R. Gardner
University of Pennsylvania
jacobrg@seas.upenn.edu

Jisu Oh†
Sogang University
jisuoh@sogang.ac.kr

Adji Bousso Dieng
Princeton University
adji@princeton.edu

Hongseok Kim‡
Sogang University
hongseok@sogang.ac.kr

Abstract
Minimizing the inclusive Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence with stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) is challenging since its gradient is defined as an integral over the posterior. Recently, multiple methods have been proposed to
run SGD with biased gradient estimates obtained from a Markov chain. This
paper provides the first non-asymptotic convergence analysis of these methods
by establishing their mixing rate and gradient variance. To do this, we demonstrate that these methods–which we collectively refer to as Markov chain score
ascent (MCSA) methods–can be cast as special cases of the Markov chain gradient descent framework. Furthermore, by leveraging this new understanding,
we develop a novel MCSA scheme, parallel MCSA (pMCSA), that achieves a
tighter bound on the gradient variance. We demonstrate that this improved
theoretical result translates to superior empirical performance.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference aims to analyze the posterior distribution of an unknown latent variable 𝐳
from which data 𝐱 is observed. By assuming a model 𝑝 (𝐱 | 𝐳), the posterior 𝜋 (𝐳) is given by
Bayes’ rule such that 𝜋 (𝐳) ∝ 𝑝 (𝐱 | 𝐳) 𝑝 (𝐳) where 𝑝 (𝐳) represents our prior belief on 𝐳. Instead
of working directly with 𝜋, variational inference (VI, Blei et al. 2017) seeks a variational approximation 𝑞 (𝐳; 𝛌) ∈ 𝒬, where 𝒬 is a variational family and 𝛌 are the variational parameters, that
is the most similar to 𝜋 according to a discrepancy measure 𝑑 (𝜋, 𝑞 (⋅; 𝛌)).
The apparent importance of choosing the right discrepancy measure has led to a quest spanning
a decade (Bamler et al., 2017; Dieng et al., 2017; Geffner & Domke, 2021b; Hernandez-Lobato
et al., 2016; Li & Turner, 2016; Regli & Silva, 2018; Ruiz & Titsias, 2019; Salimans et al., 2015;
Wan et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021). So far, the exclusive (or reverse,
backward) Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence 𝑑KL (𝑞 (⋅; 𝛌) ∥ 𝜋) has seen “exclusive” use, partly
because it is defined as an integral over 𝑞 (𝐳; 𝛌), which can be approximated efficiently. In
contrast, the inclusive (or forward) KL is defined as an integral over 𝜋 as
𝜋 (𝘇)
𝜋 (𝐳)
𝑑KL (𝜋 ∥ 𝑞 (⋅; 𝛌)) = ∫ 𝜋 (𝐳) log
𝑑𝐳 = 𝔼𝘇∼𝜋(⋅) [ log
].
𝑞 (𝐳; 𝛌)
𝑞 (𝘇; 𝛌)
∗

K. Kim is currently with the University of Pennsylvania.
J. Oh is currently with North Carolina State University.
‡
Corresponding author.

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

