Riemannian Diffusion Models
Chin-Wei Huang⇤ , Milad Aghajohari⇤ , Avishek Joey Bose
Prakash Panangaden, Aaron Courville
University of Montreal & McGill University & Mila
{chin-wei.huang, milad.aghajohari, aaron.courville}@umontreal.ca
joey.bose@mail.mcgill.ca, prakash@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Diffusion models are recent state-of-the-art methods for image generation and
likelihood estimation. In this work, we generalize continuous-time diffusion models to arbitrary Riemannian manifolds and derive a variational framework for likelihood estimation. Computationally, we propose new methods for computing the
Riemannian divergence which is needed for likelihood estimation. Moreover, in
generalizing the Euclidean case, we prove that maximizing this variational lowerbound is equivalent to Riemannian score matching. Empirically, we demonstrate
the expressive power of Riemannian diffusion models on a wide spectrum of
smooth manifolds, such as spheres, tori, hyperboloids, and orthogonal groups.
Our proposed method achieves new state-of-the-art likelihoods on all benchmarks.

1

Introduction

By learning to transmute noise, generative models seek to uncover the underlying generative
factors that give rise to observed data. These factors can often be cast as inherently geometric
quantities as the data itself need not lie on a flat Euclidean space. Indeed, in many scientific
domains such as high-energy physics (Brehmer & Cranmer, 2020), directional statistics (Mardia &
Jupp, 2009), geoscience (Mathieu & Nickel, 2020), computer graphics (Kazhdan et al., 2006), and
linear biopolymer modeling such as protein and RNA (Mardia et al., 2008; Boomsma et al., 2008;
Frellsen et al., 2009), data is best represented on a Riemannian manifold with a non-zero curvature.
Naturally, to effectively capture the generative factors of these data, we must take into account the
geometry of the space when designing a learning framework.
Recently, diffusion based generative models have emerged as an attractive model class that not
only achieve likelihoods comparable to state-of-the-art autogressive models (Kingma et al., 2021)
but match the sample quality of GANs without the pains of adversarial optimization (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021). Succinctly, a diffusion model consists of a fixed Markov chain that progressively
transforms data to a prior defined by the inference path, and a generative model which is another
Markov chain that is learned to invert the inference process (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b).
While conceptually simple, the learning framework can have a variety of perspectives and goals.
For example, Huang et al. (2021) provide a variational framework for general continuous-time
diffusion processes on Euclidean manifolds as well as a functional Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO)
that can be equivalently shown to be minimizing an implicit score matching objective. At present,
however, much of the success of diffusion based generative models and its accompanying variational
framework is purpose built for Euclidean spaces, and more specifically, image data. It does not
easily translate to general Riemannian manifolds.
In this paper, we introduce Riemannian Diffusion Models (RDM)—generalizing conventional
diffusion models on Euclidean spaces to arbitrary Riemannian manifolds. Departing from diffusion
models on Euclidean spaces, our approach uses the Stratonovich SDE formulation for which the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

