A Unified Model for Multi-class Anomaly Detection

Zhiyuan You1∗ Lei Cui2∗ Yujun Shen3 Kai Yang4 Xin Lu4 Yu Zheng1 Xinyi Le1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

Tsinghua University

3

CUHK

4

SenseTime

zhiyuanyou@foxmail.com, cuil19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, shenyujun0302@gmail.com
{yangkai, luxin}@sensetime.com, yuzheng@sjtu.edu.cn, lexinyi@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the rapid advance of unsupervised anomaly detection, existing methods
require to train separate models for different objects. In this work, we present
UniAD that accomplishes anomaly detection for multiple classes with a unified
framework. Under such a challenging setting, popular reconstruction networks
may fall into an “identical shortcut”, where both normal and anomalous samples
can be well recovered, and hence fail to spot outliers. To tackle this obstacle, we
make three improvements. First, we revisit the formulations of fully-connected
layer, convolutional layer, as well as attention layer, and confirm the important role
of query embedding (i.e., within attention layer) in preventing the network from
learning the shortcut. We therefore come up with a layer-wise query decoder to
help model the multi-class distribution. Second, we employ a neighbor masked
attention module to further avoid the information leak from the input feature to
the reconstructed output feature. Third, we propose a feature jittering strategy
that urges the model to recover the correct message even with noisy inputs. We
evaluate our algorithm on MVTec-AD and CIFAR-10 datasets, where we surpass
the state-of-the-art alternatives by a sufficiently large margin. For example, when
learning a unified model for 15 categories in MVTec-AD, we surpass the second
competitor on the tasks of both anomaly detection (from 88.1% to 96.5%) and
anomaly localization (from 89.5% to 96.8%). Code is available at https://
github.com/zhiyuanyou/UniAD.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection has found an increasingly wide utilization in manufacturing defect detection [4],
medical image analysis [17], and video surveillance [46]. Considering the highly diverse anomaly
types, a common solution is to model the distribution of normal samples and then identify anomalous
ones via finding outliers. It is therefore crucial to learn a compact boundary for normal data, as
shown in Fig. 1a. For this purpose, existing methods [6, 11, 25, 27, 48, 49, 52] propose to train
separate models for different classes of objects, like in Fig. 1c. However, such a one-class-one-model
scheme could be memory-consuming especially along with the number of classes increasing, and
also uncongenial to the scenarios where the normal samples manifest themselves in a large intra-class
diversity (i.e., one object consists of various types).
In this work, we target a more practical task, which is to detect anomalies from different object
classes with a unified framework. The task setting is illustrated in Fig. 1d, where the training data
covers normal samples from a range of categories, and the learned model is asked to accomplish
anomaly detection for all these categories without any fine-tuning. It is noteworthy that the categorical
information (i.e., class label) is inaccessible at both the training and the inference stages, considerably
∗

Contribute Equally.

†

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

