Structural Knowledge Distillation for Object Detection

Philip de Rijk1,2

Lukas Schneider2
1

TU Delft

2

Marius Cordts2

Dariu M. Gavrila1

Mercedes-Benz AG

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is a well-known training paradigm in deep neural
networks where knowledge acquired by a large teacher model is transferred to a
small student. KD has proven to be an effective technique to significantly improve
the student’s performance for various tasks including object detection. As such,
KD techniques mostly rely on guidance at the intermediate feature level, which is
typically implemented by minimizing an ℓp -norm distance between teacher and
student activations during training. In this paper, we propose a replacement for
the pixel-wise independent ℓp -norm based on the structural similarity (SSIM) [28].
By taking into account additional contrast and structural cues, feature importance,
correlation and spatial dependence in the feature space are considered in the loss
formulation. Extensive experiments on MSCOCO [16] demonstrate the effectiveness of our method across different training schemes and architectures. Our
method adds only little computational overhead, is straightforward to implement
and at the same time it significantly outperforms the standard ℓp -norms. Moreover,
more complex state-of-the-art KD methods [13, 33] using attention-based sampling
mechanisms are outperformed, including a +3.5 AP gain using a Faster R-CNN
R-50 [21] compared to a vanilla model.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have shown to be a very effective
tool in solving fundamental computer vision tasks [14]. One major application of CNNs includes
real-time perception systems found in e.g. autonomous vehicles, where object detection is often a
task of major importance. Deployment of CNNs into real-time applications, however, introduces
strict limitations on memory and latency. On the other hand, increased performance of state-of-the-art
detectors typically comes with an increase in memory requirements and inference time [12]. Thus,
the choice of network model and its according detection performance is strictly limited. Several
techniques have been proposed to tackle this problem, e.g. pruning [8], weight quantization [9],
parameter prediction [6] and Knowledge Distillation (KD) [11]. In this work we are particularly
interested in the latter, as it provides an intuitive way of performance improvement without the need
for architectural modifications to existing networks.
With KD, the knowledge acquired by a computationally expensive teacher model is transferred
to a smaller student model during training. KD has proven to be very effective in tasks such as
classification [11], segmentation [19], and in particular has seen considerable progress in detection
very recently [5, 7, 13, 33, 35]. Due to the complexity of the output space of a typical detection model,
it is necessary to apply KD at the intermediate feature level, as solely relying on output-based KD has
proven ineffective [3, 5, 7, 13, 15, 25, 33, 35]. In feature-based KD, in addition to existing objectives,
a training objective is introduced which minimizes the error between teacher and student activations
and is de-facto standard defined by the ℓp -norm distance between individual feature activations
[5, 7, 13, 25, 33, 35], as shown in fig. 1a. The ℓp -norm however ignores three important pieces of
information present in the feature maps: (i) spatial relationships between features, (ii) the correlation
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

