KSD Aggregated Goodness-of-fit Test
Antonin Schrab
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London & Inria London
a.schrab@ucl.ac.uk

Benjamin Guedj
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London & Inria London
b.guedj@ucl.ac.uk

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We investigate properties of goodness-of-fit tests based on the Kernel Stein Discrepancy (KSD). We introduce a strategy to construct a test, called KSDAGG,
which aggregates multiple tests with different kernels. KSDAGG avoids splitting
the data to perform kernel selection (which leads to a loss in test power), and rather
maximises the test power over a collection of kernels. We provide non-asymptotic
guarantees on the power of KSDAGG: we show it achieves the smallest uniform
separation rate of the collection, up to a logarithmic term. For compactly supported
densities with bounded model score function, we derive the rate for KSDAGG over
restricted Sobolev balls; this rate corresponds to the minimax optimal rate over
unrestricted Sobolev balls, up to an iterated logarithmic term. KSDAGG can be
computed exactly in practice as it relies either on a parametric bootstrap or on a
wild bootstrap to estimate the quantiles and the level corrections. In particular, for
the crucial choice of bandwidth of a fixed kernel, it avoids resorting to arbitrary
heuristics (such as median or standard deviation) or to data splitting. We find on
both synthetic and real-world data that KSDAGG outperforms other state-of-the-art
quadratic-time adaptive KSD-based goodness-of-fit testing procedures.

1

Introduction

Kernel selection remains a fundamental problem in kernel-based nonparametric hypothesis testing,
as it significantly impacts the test power. Kernel selection has attracted a significant interest in
the literature, and a number of methods have been proposed in the two-sample, independence and
goodness-of-fit testing frameworks, such as using heuristics (Gretton et al., 2012a), relying on data
splitting (Gretton et al., 2012b; Sutherland et al., 2017; Kübler et al., 2022), learning deep kernels
(Grathwohl et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020), working in the post-selection inference framework (Yamada
et al., 2019; Lim et al., 2019, 2020; Kübler et al., 2020; Freidling et al., 2021), to name but a few.
In this work, we focus on aggregated tests, which have been investigated for the two-sample problem
by Fromont et al. (2013), Kim et al. (2022) and Schrab et al. (2021) using the Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (MMD; Gretton et al., 2012a), and for the independence problem by Albert et al. (2022)
and Kim et al. (2022) using the Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC; Gretton et al., 2005).
We extend the use of aggregated tests to the goodness-of-fit setting, where we are given a model and
some samples, and test whether the samples have been drawn from the model. We employ the Kernel
Stein Discrepancy (KSD; Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016) as our test statistic, which is
an ideal measure of distance for this setting: it admits an estimator which can be computed without
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

