Evaluated CMI Bounds for Meta Learning:
Tightness and Expressiveness

Fredrik Hellström
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
frehells@chalmers.se

Giuseppe Durisi
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
durisi@chalmers.se

Abstract
Recent work has established that the conditional mutual information (CMI) framework of Steinke and Zakynthinou (2020) is expressive enough to capture generalization guarantees in terms of algorithmic stability, VC dimension, and related complexity measures for conventional learning (Harutyunyan et al., 2021, Haghifam
et al., 2021). Hence, it provides a unified method for establishing generalization
bounds. In meta learning, there has so far been a divide between informationtheoretic results and results from classical learning theory. In this work, we take a
first step toward bridging this divide. Specifically, we present novel generalization
bounds for meta learning in terms of the evaluated CMI (e-CMI). To demonstrate
the expressiveness of the e-CMI framework, we apply our bounds to a representation learning setting, with n samples from n̂ tasks parameterized by functions of
the form fi ◦ h. Here, each fi ∈ F is a task-specific function, and h ∈ H is the
shared representation.pFor this setup, we show that the e-CMI framework yields a
bound that scales as C(H)/(n n̂) + C(F)/n, where C(·) denotes a complexity
measure of the hypothesis class. This scaling behavior coincides with the one
reported in Tripuraneni et al. (2020) using Gaussian complexity.

1

Introduction

Meta learning, sometimes referred to as learning to learn, is a process by which performance on
a new machine learning task is increased by using knowledge acquired from separate, but related,
tasks [1, 2]. Concretely, the meta learner Â has access to training data from several different tasks,
which are embedded in a common task environment, and aims to extract information from this data.
The goal is to use this information to improve the performance of a base learner A on a new task
from the same task environment. For instance, the task environment can consist of different image
classification tasks, and the goal of the meta learner is to learn a shared representation for the tasks or
to find suitable hyperparameters for a base learner performing image classification.
As in conventional learning, a central goal in meta learning is to bound the gap between the loss on the
training data and the population risk on unseen data. Two current approaches for achieving this goal
are: i) to use techniques from classical learning theory to obtain minimax performance guarantees,
or ii) to use information-theoretic methods to obtain algorithm-, data- and distribution-dependent
guarantees. So far, these two lines of work have evolved largely separately. In this paper, we take
some steps toward unifying them. Specifically, we: i) derive new, tighter information-theoretic
generalization bounds for meta learning, and ii) demonstrate that these bounds are expressive enough
to recover bounds for meta learning from classical learning theory. To concretize the discussion in
this introduction, we assume that the meta learner outputs a member h of a function class H on the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

