Quantum Speedups of Optimizing Approximately
Convex Functions with Applications to Logarithmic
Regret Stochastic Convex Bandits

Tongyang Li
Advanced Institute of Information Technology,
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies,
and School of Computer Science,
Peking University
tongyangli@pku.edu.cn

Ruizhe Zhang
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
ruizhe@utexas.edu

Abstract
We initiate the study of quantum algorithms for optimizing approximately convex
functions. Given a convex set K ⊆ Rn and a function F : Rn → R such that there
exists a convex function f : K → R satisfying supx∈K |F (x) − f (x)| ≤ /n,
our quantum algorithm finds an x∗ ∈ K such that F (x∗ ) − minx∈K F (x) ≤ 
using Õ(n3 ) quantum evaluation queries to F . This achieves a polynomial quantum speedup compared to the best-known classical algorithms. As an application, we give a quantum algorithm for zeroth-order stochastic convex bandits
2
5
with
√ Õ(n log T ) regret, an exponential speedup in T compared to the classical
Ω( T ) lower bound. Technically, we achieve quantum speedup in n by exploiting
a quantum framework of simulated annealing and adopting a quantum version of
the hit-and-run walk. Our speedup in T for zeroth-order stochastic convex bandits
is due to a quadratic quantum speedup in multiplicative error of mean estimation.

1

Introduction

Optimization theory is a central research topic in computer science, mathematics, operations research, etc. Currently, many efficient algorithms for optimizing convex functions have been proposed (see for instance [10]), but much less is known for nonconvex optimization. In this paper,
we investigate polynomial-time algorithms for optimizing approximately convex functions. On the
one hand, such algorithms enjoy robustness and cover many natural scenarios including stochastic
convex optimization, empirical risk minimization, etc. On the other hand, approximately convex
optimization paves the way of understanding nonconvex optimization in the general case.
Specifically, let K ⊆ Rn be a convex set. We call F : Rn → R as an approximately convex function
over K if there is a convex function f : K → R such that
sup |F (x) − f (x)| ≤ /n.

(1)

x∈K

Throughout the paper, we assume that f is L-Lipschitz with respect to `∞ norm, i.e., |f (x)−f (y)| ≤
Lkx − yk∞ for any x, y ∈ K. We assume that B2 (0, 1) ⊆ K ⊆ B2 (0, R), i.e., the convex body
K contains the unit ball centered at 0 and is contained by a ball of radius R centered at 0. Unless
otherwise mentioned, we aim at algorithms with poly(log R) dependence in R.
It is standard to assume the zeroth-order oracle of F , which returns the function value F (x) given an
input x. As far as we know, the state-of-the-art algorithm for finding an x∗ ∈ K such that F (x∗ ) −
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

