Rethinking Lipschitz Neural Networks and Certified
Robustness: A Boolean Function Perspective
Bohang Zhang1,3,4 Du Jiang1 Di He1,∗ Liwei Wang1,2,∗
1
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory 4 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu)
{zhangbohang,dujiang,dihe}@pku.edu.cn,

wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Designing neural networks with bounded Lipschitz constant is a promising way
to obtain certifiably robust classifiers against adversarial examples. However, the
relevant progress for the important ℓ∞ perturbation setting is rather limited, and a
principled understanding of how to design expressive ℓ∞ Lipschitz networks is still
lacking. In this paper, we bridge the gap by studying certified ℓ∞ robustness from
a novel perspective of representing Boolean functions. We derive two fundamental
impossibility results that hold for any standard Lipschitz network: one for robust
classification on finite datasets, and the other for Lipschitz function approximation.
These results identify that networks built upon norm-bounded affine layers and Lipschitz activations intrinsically lose expressive power even in the two-dimensional
case, and shed light on how recently proposed Lipschitz networks (e.g., GroupSort
and ℓ∞ -distance nets) bypass these impossibilities by leveraging order statistic
functions. Finally, based on these insights, we develop a unified Lipschitz network
that generalizes prior works, and design a practical version that can be efficiently
trained (making certified robust training free). Extensive experiments show that our
approach is scalable, efficient, and consistently yields better certified robustness
across multiple datasets and perturbation radii than prior Lipschitz networks.

1

Introduction

Modern neural networks, despite their great success in various applications [22, 13], typically suffer
from a severe drawback of lacking adversarial robustness. In classification tasks, given an image x
correctly classified by a neural network, there often exists a small adversarial perturbation δ, making
the perturbed image x + δ look indistinguishable to humans but fool the network to predict a wrong
class with high confidence [57, 4].
It is well-known that the adversarial robustness of a neural network is closely related to its Lipschitz
continuity [8, 61] (see Section 3.1). Accordingly, training neural networks with bounded Lipschitz
constant has been considered a promising way to address the problem. A variety of works studied
Lipschitz architectures for the ordinary Euclidean norm [61, 60, 36, 54], and recent works even
established state-of-the-art (deterministic) certified ℓ2 robustness [55, 40]. However, when it comes
to the more critical (realistic) ℓ∞ perturbation setting, the progress seems to be rather limited. In fact,
standard Lipschitz ReLU networks have been shown to perform poorly in terms of ℓ∞ robustness
[61, 24, 2]. While other more advanced Lipschitz networks have been proposed [2, 10], the achieved
results are still not satisfactory even on simple datasets like MNIST. Until recently, Zhang et al.
[73, 74] designed a quite unusual Lipschitz network based on a heuristic choice of the ℓ∞ -distance
function, which surprisingly established state-of-the-art certified ℓ∞ robustness on multiple datasets
over prior works. Yet, it remains unclear why previous Lipschitz networks typically failed, and what
is the essential reason behind the success of this particular ℓ∞ -distance network structure.
∗

Correspondence to Liwei Wang <wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn> and Di He <dihe@pku.edu.cn>

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

