Model-based Safe Deep Reinforcement Learning via a
Constrained Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithm

Ashish Kumar Jayant
Department of Computer Science Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
ashishjayant@iisc.ac.in

Shalabh Bhatnagar
Department of Computer Science Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
shalabh@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
During initial iterations of training in most Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms, agents perform a significant number of random exploratory steps. In the
real world, this can limit the practicality of these algorithms as it can lead to potentially dangerous behavior. Hence safe exploration is a critical issue in applying RL
algorithms in the real world. This problem has been recently well studied under
the Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) Framework, where in addition
to single-stage rewards, an agent receives single-stage costs or penalties as well
depending on the state transitions. The prescribed cost functions are responsible
for mapping undesirable behavior at any given time-step to a scalar value. The
goal then is to find a feasible policy that maximizes reward returns while constraining the cost returns to be below a prescribed threshold during training as well as
deployment.
We propose an On-policy Model-based Safe Deep RL algorithm in which we learn
the transition dynamics of the environment in an online manner as well as find a
feasible optimal policy using the Lagrangian Relaxation-based Proximal Policy
Optimization. We use an ensemble of neural networks with different initializations
to tackle epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty issues faced during environment model
learning. We compare our approach with relevant model-free and model-based
approaches in Constrained RL using the challenging Safe Reinforcement Learning
benchmark - the Open AI Safety Gym. We demonstrate that our algorithm is more
sample efficient and results in lower cumulative hazard violations as compared to
constrained model-free approaches. Further, our approach shows better reward
performance than other constrained model-based approaches in the literature.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning has provided exceptional results both in the case of discrete action
settings [Mnih et al., 2013] as well as continuous action domains such as locomotion tasks [Haarnoja
et al., 2018], [Schulman et al., 2017], [Schulman et al., 2016]. However, most of the RL algorithms
perform significant number of random exploratory steps during learning as well as deployment which
can lead to agents performing undesirable and hazardous behaviour. This limits the application of
RL algorithms in the real world. In scenarios like robot navigation [Han et al., 2018], autonomous
driving [Kendall et al., 2018], healthcare [Yu et al., 2020], etc., where RL has potential applications,
unsafe behavior can have hazardous consequences even on human life and property.
In García et al. [2015], the authors have provided a comprehensive survey of several notions of
safety and the associated problem formulations. In our work, we focus on a constraint-based notion
of safety. In Constraint-based RL, the goal is to maximize long-term expected reward returns and
keep the expected cost-returns below a prescribed threshold. This problem is known as the Safe
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

