Trap and Replace: Defending Backdoor Attacks by
Trapping Them into an Easy-to-Replace Subnetwork

Haotao Wang
University of Texas at Austin
htwang@utexas.edu

Junyuan Hong
Michigan State University
hongju12@msu.edu

Jiayu Zhou
Michigan State University
jiayuz@msu.edu

Aston Zhang
Amazon Web Services
astonz@amazon.com

Zhangyang Wang
University of Texas at Austin
atlaswang@utexas.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to backdoor attacks. Previous works
have shown it extremely challenging to unlearn the undesired backdoor behavior
from the network, since the entire network can be affected by the backdoor samples.
In this paper, we propose a brand-new backdoor defense strategy, which makes
it much easier to remove the harmful influence of backdoor samples from the
model. Our defense strategy, Trap and Replace, consists of two stages. In the first
stage, we bait and trap the backdoors in a small and easy-to-replace subnetwork.
Specifically, we add an auxiliary image reconstruction head on top of the stem
network shared with a light-weighted classification head. The intuition is that the
auxiliary image reconstruction task encourages the stem network to keep sufficient
low-level visual features that are hard to learn but semantically correct, instead of
overfitting to the easy-to-learn but semantically incorrect backdoor correlations.
As a result, when trained on backdoored datasets, the backdoors are easily baited
towards the unprotected classification head, since it is much more vulnerable than
the shared stem, leaving the stem network hardly poisoned. In the second stage, we
replace the poisoned light-weighted classification head with an untainted one, by
re-training it from scratch only on a small holdout dataset with clean samples, while
fixing the stem network. As a result, both the stem and the classification head in the
final network are hardly affected by backdoor training samples. We evaluate our
method against ten different backdoor attacks. Our method outperforms previous
state-of-the-art methods by up to 20.57%, 9.80%, and 13.72% attack success
rate and on-average 3.14%, 1.80%, and 1.21% clean classification accuracy on
CIFAR10, GTSRB, and ImageNet-12, respectively. Code is available at https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/Trap-and-Replace-Backdoor-Defense.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successfully used in many high-stakes applications such
as autonomous driving and speech recognition authorization. However, the data used to train those
systems are often collected from potentially insecure and unknown sources (e.g., crawled from the
Internet or directly collected from end-users) [1, 2]. Such insecure data collection process opens
the door for backdoor attackers to upload and distribute harmful training samples that can secretly
inject malicious behaviors into the DNNs (e.g., recognizing a stop sign as a speed-limit sign). More
specifically, backdoor attacks add premeditated backdoor triggers (e.g., a tiny square pattern or an
invisible additive noise) to a small portion of training samples with the same target label. Such
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

