On the consistent estimation of optimal Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve

Renxiong Liu
Department of Statistics
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
liu.6732@buckeyemail.osu.edu

Yunzhang Zhu
Department of Statistics
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
zhu.219@osu.edu

Abstract
Under a standard binary classification setting with possible model misspecification,
we study the problem of estimating general Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) curve, which is an arbitrary set of false positive rate (FPR) and true positive
rate (TPR) pairs. We formally introduce the notion of optimal ROC curve over
a general model space. It is argued that any ROC curve estimation methods
implemented over the given model space should target the optimal ROC curve over
that space. Three popular ROC curve estimation methods are then analyzed at the
population level (i.e., when there are infinite number of samples) under both correct
and incorrect model specification. Based on our analysis, they are all consistent
when the surrogate loss function satisfies certain conditions and the given model
space includes all measurable classifiers. Interestingly, some of these conditions
are similar to those that are required to ensure classification consistency. When the
model space is incorrectly specified, however, we show that only one method leads
to consistent estimation of the ROC curve over the chosen model space. We present
some numerical results to demonstrate the effects of model misspecification on the
performance of various methods in terms of their ROC curve estimates.

1

Introduction

One common goal in standard binary classification task is to find a classifier with minimum misclassification error, which is the weighted average of the false negative rate (FNR) and false positive
rate (FPR). This implicitly assumes that the two types of errors are equally important. In many
real applications, however, these two types of errors may need to be treated unequally by assigning
asymmetric losses to them. For example, in spam email detection, classifying non-spam as spam may
incur a higher cost than classifying spam into non-spam. Existing methods to handle this problem can
be roughly categorized into three groups. Cost-sensitive learning [Elkan, 2001], which generalizes
the empirical risk minimization framework [Vapnik, 1991], assigns unequal class weights to the two
types of errors and seeks to find a classifier that minimizes the weighted error. Neyman-Pearson
classification [Cannon et al., 2002; Scott and Nowak, 2005; Rigollet and Tong, 2011] is another type
of method, which aims to minimize one type of error (FNR) subject to a upper bound constraint on
the other type of error (FPR). We call these two types of methods weighted method and constrained
method, respectively. Another popular approach [Fawcett, 2006], which we call cutoff methods, directly constructs a set of classifiers based on a discriminant function from some classifier. Specifically,
the set of classifiers is obtained through changing the intercept of the given discriminant function.
Empirically, the cutoff method is computationally efficient and can work well in some situations.
To study the performance of these methods at the population level, i.e., there are infinite number of
samples, we first introduce a general notion of optimal ROC curve over an arbitrary model space. This
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

