Estimating Noise Transition Matrix with Label
Correlations for Noisy Multi-Label Learning

Shikun Li1,2

Xiaobo Xia3

Hansong Zhang1,2

Shiming Ge1,2∗

Yibing Zhan4

Tongliang Liu3

1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Trustworthy Machine Learning Lab, The University of Sydney 4 JD Explore Academy
2

Abstract
In label-noise learning, the noise transition matrix, bridging the class posterior for
noisy and clean data, has been widely exploited to learn statistically consistent
classifiers. The effectiveness of these algorithms relies heavily on estimating the
transition matrix. Recently, the problem of label-noise learning in multi-label classification has received increasing attention, and these consistent algorithms can be
applied in multi-label cases. However, the estimation of transition matrices in noisy
multi-label learning has not been studied and remains challenging, since most of the
existing estimators in noisy multi-class learning depend on the existence of anchor
points and the accurate fitting of noisy class posterior. To address this problem, in
this paper, we first study the identifiability problem of the class-dependent transition
matrix in noisy multi-label learning, and then inspired by the identifiability results,
we propose a new estimator by exploiting label correlations without neither anchor
points nor accurate fitting of noisy class posterior. Specifically, we estimate the
occurrence probability of two noisy labels to get noisy label correlations. Then,
we perform sample selection to further extract information that implies clean label
correlations, which is used to estimate the occurrence probability of one noisy label
when a certain clean label appears. By utilizing the mismatch of label correlations
implied in these occurrence probabilities, the transition matrix is identifiable, and
can then be acquired by solving a simple bilinear decomposition problem. Empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of our estimator to estimate the transition
matrix with label correlations, leading to better classification performance. Source
codes are available at https://github.com/tmllab/Multi-Label-T.

1

Introduction

In real-world scenarios, an instance is naturally associated with multiple labels, and these labels have
complex entangled correlations [7]. Recently, the problem of label-noise learning in multi-label
classification has received more and more attention [29, 34, 54, 50, 46, 47], since it is time-consuming
and expensive to collect large-scale accurate labels and the noisy labels are much cheaper and easier
to acquire. In the setting of noisy multi-label learning, the multiple labels assigned to an instance may
be corrupted simultaneously. That is to say, any label for each class can be flipped with its respective
transition matrix that denotes the transition relationship from clean labels to noisy labels.
Transition matrix has been utilized to build a series of statistically consistent algorithms for noisy
multi-class learning [32, 52, 48, 8]. The main advantage of these consistent algorithms is that they
∗

Shiming Ge is the corresponding author. (Email: geshiming@iie.ac.cn)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

