Log-Concave and Multivariate Canonical Noise
Distributions for Differential Privacy
Jordan A. Awan
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
jawan@purdue.edu

Jinshuo Dong
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University and IDEAL⇤
jinshuo@northwestern.edu

Abstract
A canonical noise distribution (CND) is an additive mechanism designed to satisfy
f -differential privacy (f -DP), without any wasted privacy budget. f -DP is a hypothesis testing-based formulation of privacy phrased in terms of tradeoff functions,
which captures the difficulty of a hypothesis test. In this paper, we consider the
existence and construction of both log-concave CNDs and multivariate CNDs.
Log-concave distributions are important to ensure that higher outputs of the mechanism correspond to higher input values, whereas multivariate noise distributions
are important to ensure that a joint release of multiple outputs has a tight privacy
characterization. We show that the existence and construction of CNDs for both
types of problems is related to whether the tradeoff function can be decomposed
by functional composition (related to group privacy) or mechanism composition.
In particular, we show that pure ✏-DP cannot be decomposed in either way and that
there is neither a log-concave CND nor any multivariate CND for ✏-DP. On the
other hand, we show that Gaussian-DP, (0, )-DP, and Laplace-DP each have both
log-concave and multivariate CNDs.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP), proposed by Dwork et al. [2006], is the state-of-the-art framework in
formal privacy protection and is being implemented by tech companies, government agencies, and
academic institutions. Over time, the DP community has developed many new DP mechanisms as
well as new frameworks. Recently, f -DP (Dong et al. [2022] was proposed as a generalization of DP,
allowing for tight calculations of group privacy, composition, subsampling, and post-processing. It
was shown in Dong et al. [2022] that f -DP is provably the tightest version of DP that respects the
post-processing property of DP. In particular, f -DP can be losslessly converted to Rényi-DP (or any
f -divergence version of DP) as well as (✏, )-DP, but not vice-versa [Dong et al., 2022]. Furthermore,
f -DP is equivalent (can be losslessly converted back and forth) to the privacy profile [Balle et al.,
2018, 2020] and the privacy loss random variables [Sommer et al., 2019, Zhu et al., 2022].
f -DP is defined in terms of a tradeoff function or receiver operator curve (ROC), which encapsulates
the difficulty of conducting a hypothesis test between two distributions. If f = T (P, Q) is the
tradeoff function for testing between the distributions P and Q, then if a mechanism M satisfies
f -DP, this means that given the output of M when run on one of two adjacent databases, it is at least
as hard to determine which database was used, as it is to test between P and Q.
While f -DP has the many desirable theoretical properties listed above in its favor, there are limited
techniques for working with f -DP, and few constructive mechanisms for an arbitrary f -DP guarantee.
A notable exception is a canonical noise distribution (CND) from the recent paper Awan and Vadhan
⇤

The Institute for Data, Econometrics, Algorithms, and Learning

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

