Isometric 3D Adversarial Examples in the
Physical World

Yibo Miao1,3⋆ , Yinpeng Dong2,3† , Jun Zhu2,3,4,5 , Xiao-Shan Gao1†
1
KLMM, UCAS, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
RealAI 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory 5 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
yibomiao21@163.com, {dongyinpeng, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn, xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn

Abstract
3D deep learning models are shown to be as vulnerable to adversarial examples
as 2D models. However, existing attack methods are still far from stealthy and
suffer from severe performance degradation in the physical world. Although 3D
data is highly structured, it is difficult to bound the perturbations with simple
metrics in the Euclidean space. In this paper, we propose a novel ϵ-isometric (ϵISO) attack to generate natural and robust 3D adversarial examples in the physical
world by considering the geometric properties of 3D objects and the invariance to
physical transformations. For naturalness, we constrain the adversarial example
to be ϵ-isometric to the original one by adopting the Gaussian curvature as a
surrogate metric guaranteed by a theoretical analysis. For invariance to physical
transformations, we propose a maxima over transformation (MaxOT) method that
actively searches for the most harmful transformations rather than random ones
to make the generated adversarial example more robust in the physical world.
Experiments on typical point cloud recognition models validate that our approach
can significantly improve the attack success rate and naturalness of the generated
3D adversarial examples than the state-of-the-art attack methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved unprecedented performance on numerous tasks, including 2D image classification [33, 25, 27] and 3D point cloud recognition [48, 49, 68]. However,
DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples [59, 20] — inputs crafted by adding imperceptible
perturbations to original examples that can cause misclassification of the victim model. Adversarial
examples are prevalent in various domains beyond images, including texts [28], speeches [84] and
3D objects [73]. As deep 3D point cloud recognition has been adopted in safety-critical applications,
such as autonomous driving [5, 85], robotics [65, 94], medical image processing [60], it has garnered
increasing attention to studying the adversarial robustness of 3D point cloud recognition models [6].
However, the existing adversarial attacks on point cloud recognition models are still far from stealthy
and suffer from drastic performance degeneration in the physical world. There is usually a trade-off
between the stealthiness and the real-world attacking performance, making it challenging to achieve
the best of both worlds. Early methods [79, 73, 42] adopt gradient-based attacks to add, remove, and
modify points, but they are limited to digital-world attacks. The KNN attack [63] and the GeoA3
attack [69] constrain the smoothness of the adversarial point clouds and reconstruct adversarial
⋆

This work was done when Yibo Miao was intern at RealAI, Inc; † Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

