PEER: A Comprehensive and Multi-Task Benchmark
for Protein Sequence Understanding

Minghao Xu1,2 ∗ Zuobai Zhang1,2 ∗ Jiarui Lu1,2 Zhaocheng Zhu1,2
Yangtian Zhang3 Chang Ma4 Runcheng Liu5 Jian Tang1,6,7 †
*

equal contribution

†

corresponding author

1

Mila - Québec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Peking University 5 Tsinghua University 6 HEC Montréal 7 CIFAR AI Research Chair
contacts: <minghao.xu, zuobai.zhang>@mila.quebec, jian.tang@hec.ca

Abstract
We are now witnessing significant progress of deep learning methods in a variety of
tasks (or datasets) of proteins. However, there is a lack of a standard benchmark to
evaluate the performance of different methods, which hinders the progress of deep
learning in this field. In this paper, we propose such a benchmark called PEER, a
comprehensive and multi-task benchmark for Protein sEquence undERstanding.
PEER provides a set of diverse protein understanding tasks including protein
function prediction, protein localization prediction, protein structure prediction,
protein-protein interaction prediction, and protein-ligand interaction prediction. We
evaluate different types of sequence-based methods for each task including traditional feature engineering approaches, different sequence encoding methods as well
as large-scale pre-trained protein language models. In addition, we also investigate
the performance of these methods under the multi-task learning setting. Experimental results show that large-scale pre-trained protein language models achieve the best
performance for most individual tasks, and jointly training multiple tasks further
boosts the performance. The datasets and source codes of this benchmark are all
available at https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/PEER_Benchmark.

1

Introduction

Proteins are working horses of life and play a critical role in many biological processes. Understanding
the functions of proteins is therefore important in a variety of applications [105, 53, 8]. Thanks to the
recent progress of protein sequencing [52, 51], a large number of protein sequences are available. For
example, in the UniProt database [13], more than 200 million protein sequences are available. This
offers a big opportunity for machine learning methods to analyze these sequences and understand the
functions of proteins.
Indeed, a variety of deep learning methods have been successfully applied to different protein tasks
such as protein function prediction [24, 93, 104], protein structure prediction [36, 4] and protein
engineering [53, 8]. These works generally borrow techniques from the natural language processing
(NLP) community to learn effective protein representations with different sequence encoders, e.g.,
CNNs [74], LSTMs [63] and Transformers [63, 19, 65]. However, these approaches are usually
evaluated on different tasks/datasets, and there lacks a standard benchmark to systematically evaluate
the performance of different techniques, which hinders the progress of deep learning for protein
understanding.
In this paper, we are inspired by the success of deep learning in computer vision and natural language
processing community, where, to a large extent, the progresses are driven by benchmark datasets
such as ImageNet [17] and GLUE [90]. Therefore, we take the initiative of building a comprehensive
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

