BiMLP: Compact Binary Architectures for Vision
Multi-Layer Perceptrons

Yixing Xu, Xinghao Chen, Yunhe Wang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{yixing.xu, xinghao.chen, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of designing compact binary architectures for
vision multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). We provide extensive analysis on the
difficulty of binarizing vision MLPs and find that previous binarization methods
perform poorly due to limited capacity of binary MLPs. In contrast with the
traditional CNNs that utilizing convolutional operations with large kernel size,
fully-connected (FC) layers in MLPs can be treated as convolutional layers with
kernel size 1 × 1. Thus, the representation ability of the FC layers will be limited
when being binarized, and places restrictions on the capability of spatial mixing and
channel mixing on the intermediate features. To this end, we propose to improve
the performance of binary MLP (BiMLP) model by enriching the representation
ability of binary FC layers. We design a novel binary block that contains multiple
branches to merge a series of outputs from the same stage, and also a universal
shortcut connection that encourages the information flow from the previous stage.
The downsampling layers are also carefully designed to reduce the computational
complexity while maintaining the classification performance. Experimental results
on benchmark dataset ImageNet-1k demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
BiMLP models, which achieve state-of-the-art accuracy compared to prior binary
CNNs. The MindSpore code is available at https://gitee.com/mindspore/
models/tree/master/research/cv/BiMLP.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witness the boosting of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on several computer
vision (CV) applications, e.g., image recognition [19, 38, 14, 9, 11], object detection [35, 34],
semantic segmentation [32] and low-level vision [21]. However, the success of CNN models highly
depends on their huge computational cost and massive parameters, which are not suitable to be
directly applied to edge devices that have limited computational resources such as mobile phones,
smart watches.
There are several model compression and acceleration methods to reduce the number of parameters
and FLOPs of the original CNNs and derive a portable model. For instance, knowledge distillation [16,
48, 49] aims to train a small student network with the help of a cumbersome teacher network. Filter
pruning [29, 15, 42, 41] methods sort the weights of the network based on their importance and throw
away those who have negligible influence on the final performance. Model quantization [4, 54, 31]
methods reduce the original 32-bit floating point weights and activations into lower bits and tensor
decomposition [1, 46] methods express a large weight tensor as a sequence of elementary operations
on a series of simpler tensors. Among them, binary CNN [53, 33, 12, 45] is an extreme case of model
quantization that uses only 1-bit for weights and activations. Compared to the original convolutional
operation, binarized one has 64× less FLOPs and 32× less memory consumption.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

