Are All Losses Created Equal:
A Neural Collapse Perspective

Jinxin Zhou
Ohio State University
zhou.3820@osu.edu

Chong You
Google Research
cyou@google.com

Sheng Liu
New York University
shengliu@nyu.edu

Xiao Li
University of Michigan
xlxiao@umich.edu

Qing Qu
University of Michigan
qingqu@umich.edu

Kangning Liu
New York University
kl3141@nyu.edu

Zhihui Zhu∗
Ohio State University
zhu.3440@osu.edu

Abstract
While cross entropy (CE) is the most commonly used loss function to train deep
neural networks for classification tasks, many alternative losses have been developed to obtain better empirical performance. Among them, which one is the best
to use is still a mystery, because there seem to be multiple factors affecting the
answer, such as properties of the dataset, the choice of network architecture, and
so on. This paper studies the choice of loss function by examining the last-layer
features of deep networks, drawing inspiration from a recent line work showing
that the global optimal solution of CE and mean-square-error (MSE) losses exhibits a Neural Collapse (N C) phenomenon. That is, for sufficiently large networks trained until convergence, (i) all features of the same class collapse to the
corresponding class mean and (ii) the means associated with different classes are
in a configuration where their pairwise distances are all equal and maximized.
We extend such results and show through global solution and landscape analyses
that a broad family of loss functions including commonly used label smoothing
(LS) and focal loss (FL) exhibits N C. Hence, all relevant losses (i.e., CE, LS,
FL, MSE) produce equivalent features on training data. In particular, based on
the unconstrained feature model assumption, we provide either the global landscape analysis for LS loss or the local landscape analysis for FL loss and show
that the (only!) global minimizers are N C solutions, while all other critical points
are strict saddles whose Hessian exhibit negative curvature directions either in the
global scope for LS loss or in the local scope for FL loss near the optimal solution.
The experiments further show that N C features obtained from all relevant losses
(i.e., CE, LS, FL, MSE) lead to largely identical performance on test data as well,
provided that the network is sufficiently large and trained until convergence. The
source code is available at https://github.com/jinxinzhou/nc_loss.

1

Introduction

Loss function is an indispensable component in the training of deep neural networks (DNNs). While
cross-entropy (CE) loss is one of the most popular choices for classification tasks, studies over the
past few years have suggested many improved versions of CE that bring better empirical performance. Some notable examples include label smoothing (LS) [1] where one-hot label is replaced by
a smoothed label, focal loss (FL) [2] which puts more emphasis on hard misclassified samples and
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

