Energy-Based Contrastive Learning of
Visual Representations

Beomsu Kim
Department of Mathematical Sciences
KAIST
beomsu.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Jong Chul Ye
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
KAIST
jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Contrastive learning is a method of learning visual representations by training
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to increase the similarity between representations
of positive pairs (transformations of the same image) and reduce the similarity
between representations of negative pairs (transformations of different images).
Here we explore Energy-Based Contrastive Learning (EBCLR) that leverages
the power of generative learning by combining contrastive learning with EnergyBased Models (EBMs). EBCLR can be theoretically interpreted as learning the
joint distribution of positive pairs, and it shows promising results on small and
medium-scale datasets such as MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR100. Specifically, we find EBCLR demonstrates from ×4 up to ×20 acceleration
compared to SimCLR and MoCo v2 in terms of training epochs. Furthermore, in
contrast to SimCLR, we observe EBCLR achieves nearly the same performance
with 254 negative pairs (batch size 128) and 30 negative pairs (batch size 16) per
positive pair, demonstrating the robustness of EBCLR to small numbers of negative
pairs. Hence, EBCLR provides a novel avenue for improving contrastive learning
methods that usually require large datasets with a significant number of negative
pairs per iteration to achieve reasonable performance on downstream tasks. Code:
https://github.com/1202kbs/EBCLR

1

Introduction

In computer vision, supervised learning requires a large-scale human-annotated dataset of images to
train accurate deep neural networks (DNNs). However, acquiring labels for millions of images can be
difficult or impossible in practice. This has led to the rise of self-supervised learning, which learns
useful visual representations by forcing DNNs to be invariant or equivariant to image transformations.
Among self-supervised learning algorithms, contrastive methods are rapidly gaining popularity for
their superb performance.
Specifically, contrastive learning methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] train DNNs by increasing the similarity
between representations of positive pairs (transformations of the same image) and decreasing the
similarity between representations of negative pairs (transformations of different images). The
negative pairs prevent DNNs from collapsing to the trivial constant function. There are numerous
contrastive learning methods, such as SimCLR [4], Momentum Contrast (MoCo) [5], etc.
Despite this flurry of research in contrastive learning, contrastive methods require large datasets and
a large number of negative pairs per positive pair to achieve reasonable performance on downstream
tasks. Although there are recently proposed non-contrastive methods such as BYOL [6] and SimSiam
[7] that do not rely on negative pairs, they require heuristic techniques such as stop-gradient to avert
collapsing to the trivial solution. There has been an effort to explain the dynamics of non-contrastive
methods with linear neural networks [3], but it is unclear how the analyses generalize to DNNs.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

