Parameter-Efficient Masking Networks

Yue Bai1,∗ Huan Wang1,4 Xu Ma1 Yitian Zhang1 Zhiqiang Tao3 Yun Fu1,2,4
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University
3
School of Information, Rochester Institute of Technology
4
AInnovation Labs, Inc.
Project Homepage: https://yueb17.github.io/PEMN

Abstract
A deeper network structure generally handles more complicated non-linearity and
performs more competitively. Nowadays, advanced network designs often contain
a large number of repetitive structures (e.g., Transformer). They empower the
network capacity to a new level but also increase the model size inevitably, which is
unfriendly to either model restoring or transferring. In this study, we are the first to
investigate the representative potential of fixed random weights with limited unique
values by learning diverse masks and introduce the Parameter-Efficient Masking
Networks (PEMN). It also naturally leads to a new paradigm for model compression to diminish the model size. Concretely, motivated by the repetitive structures
in modern neural networks, we utilize one random initialized layer, accompanied
with different masks, to convey different feature mappings and represent repetitive
network modules. Therefore, the model can be expressed as one-layer with a
bunch of masks, which significantly reduce the model storage cost. Furthermore,
we enhance our strategy by learning masks for a model filled by padding a given
random weights vector. In this way, our method can further lower the space complexity, especially for models without many repetitive architectures. We validate
the potential of PEMN learning masks on random weights with limited unique
values and test its effectiveness for a new compression paradigm based on different
network architectures. Code is available at https://github.com/yueb17/PEMN.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have emerged in several application fields and achieved state-of-the-art performances [8, 16, 29]. Along with the data explosion in this era, huge amount of data gathered to build
network models with higher capacity [4, 7, 25]. In addition, researchers also pursue a unified network
framework to deal with multi-modal and multi-task problems as a powerful intelligent model [25, 37].
All these trending topics inevitably require even larger and deeper network models to tackle diverse
data flows, arising new challenges to compress and transmit models, especially for mobile systems.
Despite the success of recent years with promising task performances, advanced neural networks
suffer from their growing size, which causes inconvenience for both model storage and transferring.
To reduce the model size of a given network architecture, neural network pruning is a typical
technique [22, 20, 12]. Pruning approaches remove redundant weights using designed criteria and
the pruning operation can be conducted for both pretrained model (conventional pruning: [13, 12])
and randomly initialized model (pruning at initialization: [21, 32]). Another promising direction is to
obtain sparse network by dynamic sparse training [9, 24]. They jointly optimize network architectures
and weights to find good sparse networks. Basically, these methods commonly demand regular
training, and the final weights are updated by optimization algorithms like SGD automatically.
* Corresponding author: bai.yue@northeastern.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

