Memory Efficient Continual Learning with
Transformers
Beyza Ermis
Amazon Web Services
ermibeyz@amazon.com

Giovanni Zappella
Amazon Web Services
zappella@amazon.com

Aditya Rawal
Amazon Web Services
adirawal@amazon.com

Martin Wistuba
Amazon Web Services
marwistu@amazon.com

Cédric Archambeau
Amazon Web Services
cedrica@amazon.com

Abstract
In many real-world scenarios, data to train machine learning models becomes
available over time. Unfortunately, these models struggle to continually learn new
concepts without forgetting what has been learnt in the past. This phenomenon
is known as catastrophic forgetting and it is difficult to prevent due to practical
constraints. For instance, the amount of data that can be stored or the computational
resources that can be used might be limited. Moreover, applications increasingly
rely on large pre-trained neural networks, such as pre-trained Transformers, since
the resources or data might not be available in sufficiently large quantities to
practitioners to train the model from scratch. In this paper, we devise a method to
incrementally train a model on a sequence of tasks using pre-trained Transformers
and extending them with Adapters. Different than the existing approaches, our
method is able to scale to a large number of tasks without significant overhead
and allows sharing information across tasks. On both image and text classification
tasks, we empirically demonstrate that our method maintains a good predictive
performance without retraining the model or increasing the number of model
parameters over time. The resulting model is also significantly faster at inference
time compared to Adapter-based state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Transformers [57], e.g. BERT [12], have shown their effectiveness in various natural language
processing (NLP) tasks such as classification [25], Natural Language Inference [41, 39], and Question
Answering [16]. Inspired by this achievement, some pioneering works have recently been introduced
on adapting Transformers architectures to Computer Vision (CV). Vision Transformers [13, 55]
showed that a pure Transformer applied directly to a sequence of image patches can perform well
on image classification tasks. Besides, some recent studies [67, 4, 30] showed that Transformers are
generalized to new domains given only a few samples. Transformers show a great ability to learn
complex concepts but when confronted with a sequence of different tasks they tend to “overwrite” the
previously learnt concepts. In general, deep networks suffer heavily from this phenomenon, called
catastrophic forgetting (CF) [35], impeding continual or lifelong learning. In the last few years, a
growing body of works attempted to tackle CF in continual learning (CL) [14, 19, 27, 46, 63, 65]
but most of them are not able to meet the scale or accuracy requirements of real-world applications.
Moreover, adapting large-scale pre-trained Transformer models to downstream tasks via fine-tuning
is the method of choice in NLP applications, posing the need for methods that can directly work with
pre-trained models instead of requiring the training of a new model from scratch [15].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

