Rank Diminishing in Deep Neural Networks

Ruili Feng1 , Kecheng Zheng2,1 , Yukun Huang1 , Deli Zhao2,3 ,
Michael Jordan4 , Zheng-Jun Zha1∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Ant Research, 3 Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
4
University of California, Berkeley
ruilifengustc@gmail.com,{zkcys001,kevinh}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
zhaodeli@gmail.com,jordan@cs.berkeley.edu,zhazj@ustc.edu.cn.

Abstract
The rank of neural networks measures information flowing across layers. It is
an instance of a key structural condition that applies across broad domains of
machine learning. In particular, the assumption of low-rank feature representations
leads to algorithmic developments in many architectures. For neural networks,
however, the intrinsic mechanism that yields low-rank structures remains vague and
unclear. To fill this gap, we perform a rigorous study on the behavior of network
rank, focusing particularly on the notion of rank deficiency. We theoretically
establish a universal monotonic decreasing property of network rank from the basic
rules of differential and algebraic composition, and uncover rank deficiency of
network blocks and deep function couplings. By virtue of our numerical tools,
we provide the first empirical analysis of the per-layer behavior of network rank
in practical settings, i.e., ResNets, deep MLPs, and Transformers on ImageNet.
These empirical results are in direct accord with our theory. Furthermore, we reveal
a novel phenomenon of independence deficit caused by the rank deficiency of
deep networks, where classification confidence of a given category can be linearly
decided by the confidence of a handful of other categories. The theoretical results
of this work, together with the empirical findings, may advance understanding of
the inherent principles of deep neural networks. Code to detect the rank behavior
of networks can be found in https://github.com/RuiLiFeng/Rank-Diminishing-inDeep-Neural-Networks.

1

Introduction

In mathematics, the rank of a smooth function measures the volume of independent information
captured by the function [21]. Deep neural networks are highly smooth functions, thus the rank
of a network has long been an essential concept in machine learning that underlies many tasks
such as information compression [46, 55, 35, 53, 47], network pruning [31, 54, 6, 25, 10], data
mining [7, 24, 11, 56, 19, 28], computer vision [58, 57, 30, 26, 28, 60, 59, 16, 17], and natural
language processing [9, 27, 8, 12]. Numerous methods are either designed to utilize the mathematical
property of network ranks, or are derived from an assumption that low-rank structures are to be
preferred.
Yet a rigorous investigation to the behavior of rank of general networks, combining both theoretical
and empirical arguments, is still absent in current research, weakening our confidence in the being able
to predict performance. To the best of our knowledge, there are only a few previous works discussing
the rank behavior of specific network architectures, like attention blocks [15] and BatchNorms [13, 5]
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

