Towards Theoretically Inspired Neural Initialization
Optimization

Yibo Yang1 , Hong Wang2 , Haobo Yuan3 , Zhouchen Lin2,4,5∗
1

2

JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
Pazhou Laboratory, Guangzhou, China

Abstract
Automated machine learning has been widely explored to reduce human efforts
in designing neural architectures and looking for proper hyperparameters. In the
domain of neural initialization, however, similar automated techniques have rarely
been studied. Most existing initialization methods are handcrafted and highly
dependent on specific architectures. In this paper, we propose a differentiable
quantity, named GradCosine, with theoretical insights to evaluate the initial state of
a neural network. Specifically, GradCosine is the cosine similarity of sample-wise
gradients with respect to the initialized parameters. By analyzing the samplewise optimization landscape, we show that both the training and test performance
of a network can be improved by maximizing GradCosine under gradient norm
constraint. Based on this observation, we further propose the neural initialization
optimization (NIO) algorithm. Generalized from the sample-wise analysis into
the real batch setting, NIO is able to automatically look for a better initialization
with negligible cost compared with the training time. With NIO, we improve
the classification performance of a variety of neural architectures on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and ImageNet. Moreover, we find that our method can even help to
train large vision Transformer architecture without warmup.

1

Introduction

For a deep neural network, architecture [19, 20, 21] and parameter initialization [18, 16] are two
initial elements that largely account for the final model performance. Lots of human efforts have been
devoted to finding better answers with respect to the two aspects. To automatically produce better
architectures, neural architecture search [62, 38, 5] has been a research focus. However, on the other
hand, using automated techniques for parameter initialization has rarely been studied.
Previous initialization methods are mostly handcrafted. They focus on finding proper variance
patterns of randomly initialized weights [18, 16, 40, 36] or rely on empirical evidence derived from
certain architectures [58, 23, 15, 7]. Recently, [60, 8] propose learning-based initialization that learns
to tune the norms of the initial weights so as to minimize a quantity that is intimately related to
favorable training dynamics. Despite being architecture-agnostic and gradient-based, these methods
do not consider sample-wise landscape. Their derived quantities lack theoretical supports for being
related to model performance. It is unclear whether optimizing these quantities can indeed lead to
better training or generalization performance.
In order to find a better initialization, a theoretically sound quantity that intimately evaluates both the
training and test performance should be designed. Finding such a quantity is a non-trivial problem and
∗: corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

