Few-shot Relational Reasoning via Connection
Subgraph Pretraining
Qian Huang⇤
Stanford University
qhwang@cs.stanford.edu

Hongyu Ren⇤
Stanford University
hyren@cs.stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec
Stanford University
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Few-shot knowledge graph (KG) completion task aims to perform inductive reasoning over the KG: given only a few support triplets of a new relation ./ (e.g.,
(chop, ./, kitchen), (read, ./, library)), the goal is to predict the query triplets
of the same unseen relation ./, e.g., (sleep, ./, ?). Current approaches cast the
problem in a meta-learning framework, where the model needs to be first jointly
trained over many training few-shot tasks, each being defined by its own relation,
so that learning/prediction on the target few-shot task can be effective. However,
in real-world KGs, curating many training tasks is a challenging ad hoc process.
Here we propose Connection Subgraph Reasoner (CSR), which can make predictions for the target few-shot task directly without the need for pre-training on the
human curated set of training tasks. The key to CSR is that we explicitly model
a shared connection subgraph between support and query triplets, as inspired by
the principle of eliminative induction. To adapt to specific KG, we design a corresponding self-supervised pretraining scheme with the objective of reconstructing
automatically sampled connection subgraphs. Our pretrained model can then be
directly applied to target few-shot tasks on without the need for training few-shot
tasks. Extensive experiments on real KGs, including NELL, FB15K-237, and
ConceptNet, demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework: we show that even a
learning-free implementation of CSR can already perform competitively to existing
methods on target few-shot tasks; with pretraining, CSR can achieve significant
gains of up to 52% on the more challenging inductive few-shot tasks where the
entities are also unseen during (pre)training.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are structured representations of human knowledge, where each edge
represents a fact in the triplet form of (head entity, relation, tail entity) [10, 13, 17, 20].
Since KGs are typically highly incomplete yet widely used in downstream applications, predicting
missing edges, i.e., KG completion, is one of the most important machine learning tasks over these
large heterogeneous data structures. Deep learning based methods have achieved great success on
this task [19, 21, 26], but the more challenging few-shot setting [23] is much less explored: Given a
background knowledge graph, an unseen relation, and a few support edges in triplet form, the task is
to predict whether this unseen relation exists between a query entity and candidate answers based
on the background knowledge graph. Such a setting captures the most difficult and important case
during KG completion: predict rare relations (i.e. appearing only a few times in the existing KG) and
incorporating new relations into the KG efficiently. It also tests the inductive reasoning skill of the
model on deriving new knowledge data-efficiently, which is critical for AI in general.
⇤

indicates equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

