Learning Physical Dynamics with
Subequivariant Graph Neural Networks

Wenbing Huang∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence,
Renmin University of China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data
Management and Analysis Methods

Jiaqi Han
Tsinghua University

Hengbo Ma
University of California, Berkeley

Jiachen Li
Stanford University

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL

Chuang Gan
UMass Amherst
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become a prevailing tool for learning physical dynamics. However, they still encounter several challenges: 1) Physical laws
abide by symmetry, which is a vital inductive bias accounting for model generalization and should be incorporated into the model design. Existing simulators either
consider insufficient symmetry, or enforce excessive equivariance in practice when
symmetry is partially broken by gravity. 2) Objects in the physical world possess
diverse shapes, sizes, and properties, which should be appropriately processed by
the model. To tackle these difficulties, we propose a novel backbone, Subequivariant Graph Neural Network, which 1) relaxes equivariance to subequivariance by
considering external fields like gravity, where the universal approximation ability
holds theoretically; 2) introduces a new subequivariant object-aware message passing for learning physical interactions between multiple objects of various shapes in
the particle-based representation; 3) operates in a hierarchical fashion, allowing for
modeling long-range and complex interactions. Our model achieves on average
over 3% enhancement in contact prediction accuracy across 8 scenarios on Physion and 2× lower rollout MSE on RigidFall compared with state-of-the-art GNN
simulators, while exhibiting strong generalization and data efficiency. Code and
videos are available at our project page: https://hanjq17.github.io/SGNN/.

1

Introduction

Learning and predicting the complicated physical dynamics and interactions between objects are vital
to many tasks including physical reasoning [8, 38, 7, 19], scene understanding [3], and model-based
planning and control [20, 23, 24, 37, 1]. Several learning-based differentiable simulators [31, 30,
22, 27] have been proposed, and they obtain promising achievements in simulating various kinds of
interacting objects including rigid and fluids. The success mainly relies on the prevalence of graph
neural networks [14, 30, 15], which are desirable tools for physical simulation, by modeling particles
as nodes, physical relations as edges, and their interactions as the message passing thereon.
∗

Corresponding author: Wenbing Huang.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

