SemiFL: Semi-Supervised Federated Learning for
Unlabeled Clients with Alternate Training

Enmao Diao
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705, USA
enmao.diao@duke.edu

Jie Ding
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
dingj@umn.edu

Vahid Tarokh
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705, USA
vahid.tarokh@duke.edu

Abstract
Federated Learning allows the training of machine learning models by using the
computation and private data resources of many distributed clients. Most existing
results on Federated Learning (FL) assume the clients have ground-truth labels.
However, in many practical scenarios, clients may be unable to label task-specific
data due to a lack of expertise or resource. We propose SemiFL to address the
problem of combining communication-efficient FL such as FedAvg with SemiSupervised Learning (SSL). In SemiFL, clients have completely unlabeled data and
can train multiple local epochs to reduce communication costs, while the server
has a small amount of labeled data. We provide a theoretical understanding of the
success of data augmentation-based SSL methods to illustrate the bottleneck of a
vanilla combination of communication-efficient FL with SSL. To address this issue,
we propose alternate training to ‘fine-tune global model with labeled data’ and
‘generate pseudo-labels with the global model.’ We conduct extensive experiments
and demonstrate that our approach significantly improves the performance of a
labeled server with unlabeled clients training with multiple local epochs. Moreover,
our method outperforms many existing SSFL baselines and performs competitively
with the state-of-the-art FL and SSL results. Our code is available here.

1

Introduction

For billions of users around the world, mobile devices and Internet of Things (IoT) devices are
becoming common computing platforms [1]. These devices produce a large amount of data that can
be used to improve a variety of existing applications [2]. Consequently, it has become increasingly
appealing to process data and train models locally from privacy and economic standpoints. To address
this, distributed machine learning framework of Federated Learning (FL) has been proposed [3, 4].
This method aggregates locally trained model parameters in order to produce a global inference
model without sharing private local data.
Most existing works of FL focus on supervised learning tasks assuming that clients have groundtruth labels. However, in many practical scenarios, most clients may not be experts in the task of
interest to label their data. In particular, the private data of each client may be completely unlabeled.
For instance, a healthcare system may involve a central hub (“server”) with domain experts and a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

