On the Parameterization and Initialization of
Diagonal State Space Models

Albert Gu† , Ankit Gupta‡ , Karan Goel† , Christopher Ré†
†
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
‡
IBM Research
{albertgu,knrg}@stanford.edu, chrismre@cs.stanford.edu
ankitgupta.iitkanpur@gmail.com

Abstract
State space models (SSM) have recently been shown to be very effective as a deep
learning layer as a promising alternative to sequence models such as RNNs, CNNs,
or Transformers. The first version to show this potential was the S4 model, which
is particularly effective on tasks involving long-range dependencies by using a
prescribed state matrix called the HiPPO matrix. While this has an interpretable
mathematical mechanism for modeling long dependencies, it introduces a custom
representation and algorithm that can be difficult to implement. On the other hand,
a recent variant of S4 called DSS showed that restricting the state matrix to be
fully diagonal can still preserve the performance of the original model when using
a specific initialization based on approximating S4’s matrix. This work seeks
to systematically understand how to parameterize and initialize such diagonal
state space models. While it follows from classical results that almost all SSMs
have an equivalent diagonal form, we show that the initialization is critical for
performance. We explain why DSS works mathematically, by showing that the
diagonal restriction of S4’s matrix surprisingly recovers the same kernel in the
limit of infinite state dimension. We also systematically describe various design
choices in parameterizing and computing diagonal SSMs, and perform a controlled
empirical study ablating the effects of these choices. Our final model S4D is a
simple diagonal version of S4 whose kernel computation requires just 2 lines of
code and performs comparably to S4 in almost all settings, with state-of-the-art
results for image, audio, and medical time-series domains, and averaging 85% on
the Long Range Arena benchmark.

1

Introduction

A core class of models in modern deep learning are sequence models, which are parameterized
mappings operating on arbitrary sequences of inputs. Recent approaches based on state space models
(SSMs) have outperformed traditional deep sequence models such as recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and Transformers, in both computational efficiency
and modeling ability. In particular, the S4 model displayed strong results on a range of sequence
modeling tasks, especially on long sequences [9]. Its ability to model long-range dependencies arises
from being defined with a particular state matrix called the “HiPPO matrix” [6], which allows S4 to
be viewed as a convolutional model that decomposes an input onto an orthogonal system of smooth
basis functions[10].
However, beyond its theoretical interpretation, actually computing S4 as a deep learning model
requires a sophisticated algorithm with many linear algebraic techniques that are difficult to understand
and implement. These techniques were necessitated by parameterizing its state matrix as a diagonal
plus low-rank (DPLR) matrix, which is necessary to capture HiPPO matrices. A natural question is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

