Autoregressive Perturbations for Data Poisoning
Pedro Sandoval-Segura1⇤ Vasu Singla1⇤ Jonas Geiping1 Micah Goldblum2
Tom Goldstein1 David W. Jacobs1
1
University of Maryland 2 New York University
{psando, vsingla, jgeiping, tomg, dwj}@umd.edu

goldblum@nyu.edu

Abstract
The prevalence of data scraping from social media as a means to obtain datasets has
led to growing concerns regarding unauthorized use of data. Data poisoning attacks
have been proposed as a bulwark against scraping, as they make data “unlearnable”
by adding small, imperceptible perturbations. Unfortunately, existing methods
require knowledge of both the target architecture and the complete dataset so that a
surrogate network can be trained, the parameters of which are used to generate the
attack. In this work, we introduce autoregressive (AR) poisoning, a method that
can generate poisoned data without access to the broader dataset. The proposed
AR perturbations are generic, can be applied across different datasets, and can
poison different architectures. Compared to existing unlearnable methods, our AR
poisons are more resistant against common defenses such as adversarial training
and strong data augmentations. Our analysis further provides insight into what
makes an effective data poison.

1

Introduction

Increasingly large datasets are being used to train state-of-the-art neural networks [24, 26, 25]. But
collecting enormous datasets through web scraping makes it intractable for a human to review
samples in a meaningful way or to obtain consent from relevant parties [3]. In fact, companies have
already trained commercial facial recognition systems using personal data collected from media
platforms [15]. To prevent the further exploitation of online data for unauthorized or illegal purposes,
imperceptible, adversarial modifications to images can be crafted to cause erroneous output for a
neural network trained on the modified data [12]. This crafting of malicious perturbations for the
purpose of interfering with model training is known as data poisoning.
In this work, we focus on poisoning data to induce poor performance for a network trained on
the perturbed data. This kind of indiscriminate poisoning, which seeks to damage average model
performance, is often referred to as an availability attack [1, 2, 40, 18, 9, 10]. Because we assume
the data is hosted on a central server controlled by the poisoner, the poisoner is allowed to perturb
the entire dataset, or a large portion of it. Throughout this work, unless stated otherwise, poisoning
refers to the perturbing of every image in the training dataset. This makes the creation of unlearnable
data different from other poisoning methods, such as backdoor [5, 13] and targeted poisoning
attacks [28, 43].
We introduce autoregressive (AR) data poisoning for degrading overall performance of neural
networks on clean data. The perturbations that we additively apply to clean data are generated by
AR processes that are data and architecture-independent. An AR(p) process is a Markov chain,
where each new element is a linear combination of p previous ones, plus noise. This means AR
perturbations are cheap to generate, not requiring any optimization or backpropagation through
network parameters. AR perturbations are generic; the same set of AR processes can be re-used to
⇤

Authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

