Size and depth of monotone neural networks:
interpolation and approximation

Dan Mikulincer
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Daniel Reichman
Worcester Polytechnic Institute

Abstract
Monotone functions and data sets arise in a variety of applications. We study the
interpolation problem for monotone data sets: The input is a monotone data set
with n points, and the goal is to find a size and depth efficient monotone neural
network with non negative parameters and threshold units that interpolates the
data set. We show that there are monotone data sets that cannot be interpolated
by a monotone network of depth 2. On the other hand, we prove that for every
monotone data set with n points in Rd , there exists an interpolating monotone
network of depth 4 and size O(nd). Our interpolation result implies that every
monotone function over [0, 1]d can be approximated arbitrarily well by a depth4 monotone network, improving the previous best-known construction of depth
d + 1. Finally, building on results from Boolean circuit complexity, we show that
the inductive bias of having positive parameters can lead to a super-polynomial
blow-up in the number of neurons when approximating monotone functions.

1

Introduction

The recent successes of neural networks are owed, at least in part, to their great approximation and
interpolation power. However, some prediction tasks require their predictors to possess specific
properties. This work focuses on monotonicity and studies the effect on overall expressive power
when restricting attention to monotone neural networks.
Given x, y ∈ Rd we consider the partial ordering,
x ≥ y ⇐⇒ for every i = 1, . . . d, [x]i ≥ [y]i .
Here, and throughout the paper, we use [x]i for the ith coordinate of x. A function f : [0, 1]d → R
is monotone1 if for every two vectors x, y ∈ [0, 1]d ,
x ≥ y =⇒ f (x) ≥ f (y).
Monotone functions arise in several fields such as economics, operations research, statistics, healthcare, and engineering. For example, larger houses typically result in larger prices, and certain features are monotonically related to option pricing [12] and bond rating [9]. As monotonicity constraints abound, there are specialized statistical methods aimed at fitting and modeling monotonic
functions such as Isotonic Regression [1, 22, 24] as well as many other works related to monotone
approximation [7, 17,41]. Neural networks are no exception: Several works are devoted to the study
of approximating monotone functions using neural networks [9, 35, 38].
When using a network to approximate a monotone function, one might try to “force” the network
to be monotone. A natural way to achieve this is to consider only networks where every parameter
1
As we will only be dealing with monotone increasing functions, we shall refer to monotone increasing
functions as monotone.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

