Online Training Through Time for Spiking Neural
Networks
∗

Mingqing Xiao1 , Qingyan Meng2,3 , Zongpeng Zhang4 , Di He1 , Zhouchen Lin1,5,6
1
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of Intelligence Science and Technology,
Peking University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
4
Center for Data Science, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{mingqing_xiao, dihe, zlin}@pku.edu.cn, qingyanmeng@link.cuhk.edu.cn,
zongpeng.zhang98@gmail.com

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are promising brain-inspired energy-efficient
models. Recent progress in training methods has enabled successful deep SNNs
on large-scale tasks with low latency. Particularly, backpropagation through time
(BPTT) with surrogate gradients (SG) is popularly used to enable models to achieve
high performance in a very small number of time steps. However, it is at the cost of
large memory consumption for training, lack of theoretical clarity for optimization,
and inconsistency with the online property of biological learning rules and rules on
neuromorphic hardware. Other works connect the spike representations of SNNs
with equivalent artificial neural network formulation and train SNNs by gradients
from equivalent mappings to ensure descent directions. But they fail to achieve low
latency and are also not online. In this work, we propose online training through
time (OTTT) for SNNs, which is derived from BPTT to enable forward-in-time
learning by tracking presynaptic activities and leveraging instantaneous loss and
gradients. Meanwhile, we theoretically analyze and prove that the gradients of
OTTT can provide a similar descent direction for optimization as gradients from
equivalent mapping between spike representations under both feedforward and
recurrent conditions. OTTT only requires constant training memory costs agnostic
to time steps, avoiding the significant memory costs of BPTT for GPU training.
Furthermore, the update rule of OTTT is in the form of three-factor Hebbian
learning, which could pave a path for online on-chip learning. With OTTT, it is the
first time that the two mainstream supervised SNN training methods, BPTT with
SG and spike representation-based training, are connected, and meanwhile it is in a
biologically plausible form. Experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet,
and CIFAR10-DVS demonstrate the superior performance of our method on largescale static and neuromorphic datasets in a small number of time steps. Our code
is available at https://github.com/pkuxmq/OTTT-SNN.

1

Introduction

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are regarded as the third generation of neural network models [1]
and have gained increasing attention in recent years [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. SNNs
are composed of brain-inspired spiking neurons that imitate biological neurons to transmit spikes
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

