Evaluating Out-of-Distribution Performance on
Document Image Classifiers
Stefan Larson⇤ 1,3

Gordon Lim2

1
DryvIQ
Ann Arbor, MI, USA

2

Yutong Ai2

University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA

David Kuang2

3

Kevin Leach3

Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN, USA

Abstract
The ability of a document classifier to handle inputs that are drawn from a distribution different from the training distribution is crucial for robust deployment and
generalizability. The RVL-CDIP corpus [18] is the de facto standard benchmark
for document classification, yet to our knowledge all studies that use this corpus do
not include evaluation on out-of-distribution documents. In this paper, we curate
and release a new out-of-distribution benchmark for evaluating out-of-distribution
performance for document classifiers. Our new out-of-distribution benchmark
consists of two types of documents: those that are not part of any of the 16 indomain RVL-CDIP categories (RVL-CDIP-O), and those that are one of the 16
in-domain categories yet are drawn from a distribution different from that of the
original RVL-CDIP dataset (RVL-CDIP-N). While prior work on document classification for in-domain RVL-CDIP documents reports high accuracy scores, we find
that these models exhibit accuracy drops of between roughly 15-30% on our new
out-of-domain RVL-CDIP-N benchmark, and further struggle to distinguish between in-domain RVL-CDIP-N and out-of-domain RVL-CDIP-O inputs. Our new
benchmark provides researchers with a valuable new resource for analyzing out-ofdistribution performance on document classifiers. Our new out-of-distribution data
can be found at github.com/gxlarson/rvl-cdip-ood.

1

Introduction

The task of automated document classification has wide-ranging use cases, especially in industry
where it can be used to apply labels to massive amounts of documents. In many scenarios, a model
is trained on an initial training set, which is drawn from a particular distribution which may have
certain characteristics (e.g., all documents are in the English language, are from a particular industry
or time period, etc.). It is often desirable for the model to be able to generalize to valid inputs that are
out-of-distribution and exhibit different characteristics than those seen in the in-distribution training
data. At the same time, it is desirable for a model operating in unconstrained input spaces to be able
to identify inputs that are not part of the target label set as out-of-domain to minimize false-positive
predictions.
The RVL-CDIP corpus has emerged as the de facto benchmark dataset for document classification.
This single-label classification dataset covers 16 document categories (e.g., resume, invoice,
letter, memo, etc.), and consists of samples taken from a large collection of documents made public
as a result of litigation and settlement agreements involving the tobacco industry. As such, most of
⇤

Corresponding email: slarson@dryviq.com (alternate email: stefan.dataset@gmail.com).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

