OTKGE: Multi-modal Knowledge Graph Embeddings
via Optimal Transport
Zongsheng Cao1,2
Qianqian Xu3∗
Zhiyong Yang4
5
6,1
Yuan He
Xiaochun Cao
Qingming Huang4,3,7,8∗
1

SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Tech., CAS
4
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Alibaba Group
6
School of Cyber Science and Tech., Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University
7
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
8
Peng Cheng Laboratory
2

caozongsheng@iie.ac.cn
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn
heyuan.hy@alibaba-inc.com
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Multi-modal knowledge graph embeddings (KGE) have caught more and more
attention in learning representations of entities and relations for link prediction
tasks. Different from previous uni-modal KGE approaches, multi-modal KGE
can leverage expressive knowledge from a wealth of modalities (image, text, etc.),
leading to more comprehensive representations of real-world entities. However,
the critical challenge along this course lies in that the multi-modal embedding
spaces are usually heterogeneous. In this sense, direct fusion will destroy the
inherent spatial structure of different modal embeddings. To overcome this challenge, we revisit multi-modal KGE from a distributional alignment perspective and
propose optimal transport knowledge graph embeddings (OTKGE). Specifically,
we model the multi-modal fusion procedure as a transport plan moving different
modal embeddings to a unified space by minimizing the Wasserstein distance
between multi-modal distributions. Theoretically, we show that by minimizing the
Wasserstein distance between the individual modalities and the unified embedding
space, the final results are guaranteed to maintain consistency and comprehensiveness. Moreover, experimental results on well-established multi-modal knowledge
graph completion benchmarks show that our OTKGE achieves state-of-the-art
performance.

1

Introduction

In the past decades, with the emergence and development of numerous knowledge graphs (KGs)
[1, 2], a spectrum of related applications has been widely facilitated, e.g., question answering [3, 4],
semantic search [5, 6], and recommendation systems [7, 8]. Due to the incompleteness of real-world
knowledge graphs, link prediction becomes an important procedure for constructing knowledge
graphs. To achieve this goal, Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) [9, 10, 11, 12, 13] attracts more
and more attention. It can learn the low-dimensional representations of entities and relations and thus
predict missing links.
Nowadays, most of the KGE methods [11, 12, 13] mainly focus on the uni-modal knowledge graphs
represented with pure symbols or concepts. However, most data sources we can access exhibit a
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

