Less-Forgetting Multi-Lingual Fine-Tuning

Yuren Mao1 Yaobo Liang2∗ Nan Duan2 Haobo Wang1
Kai Wang3 Lu Chen1 Yunjun Gao1∗
1

Zhejiang University
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
{yuren.mao,wanghaobo,luchen,gaoyj}@zju.edu.cn
{yalia,nanduan}@microsoft.com, w.kai@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Multi-lingual fine-tuning (MLF), which fine-tunes a multi-lingual language model
(MLLM) with multiple source languages, aims to gain good zero-shot performance
on target languages. In MLF, the fine-tuned model tends to fit the source languages
while forgetting its cross-lingual knowledge obtained from the pre-training stage.
This forgetting phenomenon degenerates the zero-shot performance of MLF, which
remains under-explored. To fill this gap, this paper proposes a multi-lingual finetuning method, dubbed Less-forgetting Multi-lingual Fine-tuning (LF-MLF). In
LF-MLF, we cast multi-lingual fine-tuning as a constrained optimization problem,
where the optimization objective is to minimize forgetting, and constraints are
reducing the fine-tuning loss. The proposed method has superior zero-shot performance; furthermore, it can achieve the Pareto stationarity. Extensive experiments on
Named Entity Recognition, Question Answering and Natural Language Inference
back up our theoretical analysis and validate the superiority of our proposals.

1

Introduction

Multi-lingual Language Models (MLLMs), which are pre-trained on multiple languages, have the
cross-lingual generalization ability. By fine-tuning MLLMs on source languages, we can expect
promising zero-shot performance on target languages [1, 2]. In literature, most of the works focus
on mono-lingual fine-tuning, which fine-tunes a multilingual model on only one source language
(typically English). However, in practice, it is common that there are multiple source languages
available, e.g., in name entity recognition, it is easy to obtain labeled data for English, German,
French and so on. In this background, multi-lingual fine-tuning (MLF), which fine-tunes an MLLM
on multiple source languages, becomes an emerging research topic.
In the fine-tuning procedure of MLF, each source language has a language-specific gradient descent
direction. Combining these gradient descent directions together, we can find a set of gradient descent
directions common for all the source languages. However, in this set, some directions lead a MLLM
to fit the source languages too much and forget its cross-lingual knowledge obtained from the pretraining stage. This forgetting phenomenon can degenerate the zero-shot performance of MLF. Thus,
how to find a common gradient descent direction that benefits both the fine-tuning performance and
zero-shot performance is a important issue in MLF, which remains under-explored.
To address this issue, this paper proposes to find a less-forgetting descent direction, which prevents a
MLLM from forgetting the cross-lingual generalization ability and is a common descent direction for
the source languages. To find this less-forgetting descent direction, we cast MLF as a constrained
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

