Improving Self-Supervised Learning by
Characterizing Idealized Representations
Yann Dubois, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Stefano Ermon, Percy Liang
Stanford University
{yanndubs,thashim,ermon,pliang}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Despite the empirical successes of self-supervised learning (SSL) methods, it
is unclear what characteristics of their representations lead to high downstream
accuracies. In this work, we characterize properties that SSL representations should
ideally satisfy. Specifically, we prove necessary and sufficient conditions such
that for any task invariant to given data augmentations, desired probes (e.g., linear
or MLP) trained on that representation attain perfect accuracy. These requirements
lead to a unifying conceptual framework for improving existing SSL methods and
deriving new ones. For contrastive learning, our framework prescribes simple but
significant improvements to previous methods such as using asymmetric projection
heads. For non-contrastive learning, we use our framework to derive a simple and
novel objective. Our resulting SSL algorithms outperform baselines on standard
benchmarks, including SwAV+multicrops on linear probing of ImageNet.

1

Introduction

We study self-supervised learning (SSL), where the goal is to learn representations from minimal
supervision, such that simple probes trained on these representations achieve high downstream
accuracy. Recently, there has been many different SSL methods achieving impressive empirical results
(e.g. SimCLR [1], SwAV [2]) using label-preserving augmentations (e.g. cropping or color jittering)
as supervision. We dub this setting invariant SSL (ISSL). Despite these empirical successes, it remains
unclear how these various SSL methods relate to one another, how to improve them, and how to derive
new ones. Our goal is to provide a simple conceptual framework to think about those questions.
To derive such a framework, we ask ourselves: what are the ideal requirements that ISSL representations should aim to satisfy? We prove necessary and sufficient requirements to ensure that probes from
a specified family, e.g. linear or multi-layer perceptron (MLP), perfectly classify any task that is invariant to desired data augmentations. This complements theoretical work in ISSL [3–8], which analyze
specific ISSL algorithms. Our work instead focuses on properties of representations that should serve
as a goal for any ISSL algorithm. These ideal properties are: (i) desired predictors should be able to
distinguish positive and negative examples from the representation; (ii) the dimensionality of the representation should be sufficiently large; (iii) augmented inputs should map to the same representations.
Previous ISSL methods can be seen as approximations of our ideal requirements. Using our requirements, we derive simple improvements to those approximations as well as new ISSL objectives. Our
theory thus results in a unifying conceptual ISSL framework, with practical prescriptions including:
• improvements to existing methods, such as increasing the dimensionality of representations and
using asymmetric projections heads, which lead to 5% point gains on TinyImageNet;
• a novel non-contrastive ISSL objective that outperforms all baselines, including
SwAV+multicrops, by at least 1% point on linear classification of ImageNet;
• extensions of ISSL algorithms to learn representations that are better suited for non-linear probes.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

