Generating Long Videos of Dynamic Scenes

Tim Brooks
NVIDIA, UC Berkeley

Janne Hellsten
NVIDIA

Jaakko Lehtinen
NVIDIA, Aalto University

Miika Aittala
NVIDIA

Ming-Yu Liu
NVIDIA

Ting-Chun Wang
NVIDIA

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Timo Aila
NVIDIA

Tero Karras
NVIDIA

Abstract
We present a video generation model that accurately reproduces object motion,
changes in camera viewpoint, and new content that arises over time. Existing video
generation methods often fail to produce new content as a function of time while
maintaining consistencies expected in real environments, such as plausible dynamics and object persistence. A common failure case is for content to never change
due to over-reliance on inductive biases to provide temporal consistency, such as a
single latent code that dictates content for the entire video. On the other extreme,
without long-term consistency, generated videos may morph unrealistically between different scenes. To address these limitations, we prioritize the time axis by
redesigning the temporal latent representation and learning long-term consistency
from data by training on longer videos. We leverage a two-phase training strategy,
where we separately train using longer videos at a low resolution and shorter videos
at a high resolution. To evaluate the capabilities of our model, we introduce two
new benchmark datasets with explicit focus on long-term temporal dynamics.

1

Introduction

Videos are data that change over time, with complex patterns of camera viewpoint, motion, deformation and occlusion. In certain respects, videos are unbounded — they may last arbitrarily long and
there is no limit to the amount of new content that may become visible over time. Yet videos that
depict the real world must also remain consistent with physical laws that dictate which changes over
time are feasible. For example, the camera may only move through 3D space along a smooth path,
objects cannot morph between each other, and time cannot go backward. Generating long videos thus
requires the ability to produce endless new content while maintaining appropriate consistencies.
In this work, we focus on generating long videos with rich dynamics and new content that arises over
time. While existing video generation models can produce “infinite” videos, the type and amount of
change along the time axis is highly limited. For example, a synthesized infinite video of a person
talking will only include small motions of the mouth and head. Moreover, common video generation
datasets often contain short clips with little new content over time, which may inadvertently bias the
design choices toward training on short segments or pairs of frames, forcing content in videos to stay
fixed, or using architectures with small temporal receptive fields.
We make the time axis a first-class citizen for video generation. To this end, we introduce two new
datasets that contain motion, changing camera viewpoints, and entrances/exits of objects and scenery
over time. We learn long-term consistencies by training on long videos and design a temporal latent
representation that enables modeling complex temporal changes. Figure 1 illustrates the rich motion
and scenery changes that our model is capable of generating. See our webpage1 for video results,
code, data and pretrained models.
1

https://www.timothybrooks.com/tech/long-videos

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

