Transition to Linearity of General Neural Networks
with Directed Acyclic Graph Architecture
Libin Zhu⇤

Chaoyue Liu†

Mikhail Belkin‡

Abstract
In this paper we show that feedforward neural networks corresponding to arbitrary
directed acyclic graphs undergo transition to linearity as their “width” approaches
infinity. The width of these general networks is characterized by the minimum indegree of their neurons, except for the input and first layers. Our results identify the
mathematical structure underlying transition to linearity and generalize a number
of recent works aimed at characterizing transition to linearity or constancy of the
Neural Tangent Kernel for standard architectures.

1

Introduction

A remarkable property of wide neural networks, first discovered in [10] in terms of the constancy
of the Neural Tangent Kernel along the optimization path, is that they transition to linearity (using
the terminology from [14]), i.e., are approximately linear in a ball of a fixed radius. There has been
an extensive study of this phenomenon for different types of standard neural networks architectures
including fully-connected neural networks (FCNs), convolutional neural networks (CNNs), ResNets
[12, 4, 3, 7]. Yet the scope of the transition to linearity and the underlying mathematical structure has
not been made completely clear.
In this paper, we show that the property of transition to linearity holds for a much broader class of
neural networks – feedforward neural networks. The architecture of a feedforward neural network
can generically be described by a DAG [25, 24, 16]: the vertices and the edges correspond to the
neurons and the trainable weight parameters of a neural network, respectively. This DAG structure
includes standard network architectures e.g., FCNs, CNNs, ResNets, as well as DenseNets [9], whose
property of transition to linearity has not been studied in literature. This generalization shows that the
transition to linearity, or the constant Neural Tangent Kernel, does not depend on the specific designs
of the networks, and is a more fundamental and universal property.
We define the width of a feedforward neural network as the minimum in-degree of all neurons except
for the input and first layers, which is a natural generalization of the the minimum number of neurons
in hidden layers which is how the width is defined for standard architectures. For a feedforward
neural network, we show it transitions to linearity if its width goes to infinity as long as the in-degrees
of individual neurons are bounded by a polynomial of the network width. Specifically, we control the
deviation of the network function from its linear approximation by the spectral norm of the Hessian
of the network function, which, as we show vanishes in a ball of fixed radius, in the infinite width
limit. Interestingly, we observe that not only the output neurons, but any pre-activated neuron in
the hidden layers of a feedforward neural network can be regarded as a function with respect to its
parameters, which will also transition to linearity as the width goes to infinity.
⇤
Department of Computer Science & Halicioğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San Diego.
E-mail: l5zhu@ucsd.edu
†
Halicioğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San Diego. E-mail: chl212@ucsd.edu
‡
Halicioğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San Diego. E-mail: mbelkin@ucsd.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

