Improving Certified Robustness via Statistical
Learning with Logical Reasoning

Zhuolin Yang∗
UIUC
zhuolin5@illinois.edu
Jiawei Zhang
UIUC
jiaweiz7@illinois.edu
Bojan Karlaš
ETH Zürich
karlasb@inf.ethz.ch

Zhikuan Zhao∗
ETH Zürich
zhikuan.zhao@inf.ethz.ch

Boxin Wang
UIUC
boxinw2@illinois.edu

Linyi Li
UIUC
linyi2@illinois.edu

Hengzhi Pei
UIUC
hpei4@illinois.edu

Ji Liu
Kwai Inc.
ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Heng Guo
University of Edinburgh
hguo@inf.ed.ac.uk

Ce Zhang
ETH Zürich
ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch

Bo Li
UIUC
lbo@illinois.edu

Abstract
Intensive algorithmic efforts have been made to enable the rapid improvements
of certificated robustness for complex ML models recently. However, current
robustness certification methods are only able to certify under a limited perturbation radius. Given that existing pure data-driven statistical approaches have
reached a bottleneck, in this paper, we propose to integrate statistical ML models with knowledge (expressed as logical rules) as a reasoning component using
Markov logic networks (MLN), so as to further improve the overall certified robustness. This opens new research questions about certifying the robustness of
such a paradigm, especially the reasoning component (e.g., MLN). As the first step
towards understanding these questions, we first prove that the computational complexity of certifying the robustness of MLN is #P-hard. Guided by this hardness
result, we then derive the first certified robustness bound for MLN by carefully
analyzing different model regimes. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on
five datasets including both high-dimensional images and natural language texts,
and we show that the certified robustness with knowledge-based logical reasoning
indeed significantly outperforms that of the state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Given extensive studies on adversarial attacks against ML models recently [3, 13, 39, 24, 64, 23, 53],
building models that are robust against such attacks is an important and emerging topic. Thus, a
plethora of empirical defenses have been proposed to improve the ML robustness [30, 59, 22, 43, 53,
52]; however, most of these are attacked again by stronger adaptive attacks [3, 1, 46]. To end such
repeated security cat-and-mouse games, there is a line of research focusing on developing certified
defenses for DNNs under certain adversarial constraints [8, 26, 25, 54, 28, 61, 27, 60, 58].
∗

The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

