Robust Calibration with Multi-domain
Temperature Scaling
Yaodong Yu
University of California, Berkeley
yyu@eecs.berkeley.edu

Stephen Bates
University of California, Berkeley
stephenbates@cs.berkeley.edu

Yi Ma
University of California, Berkeley
yima@eecs.berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification is essential for the reliable deployment of machine
learning models to high-stakes application domains. Uncertainty quantification is
all the more challenging when training distribution and test distribution are different,
even if the distribution shifts are mild. Despite the ubiquity of distribution shifts
in real-world applications, existing uncertainty quantification approaches mainly
study the in-distribution setting where the train and test distributions are the same.
In this paper, we develop a systematic calibration model to handle distribution shifts
by leveraging data from multiple domains. Our proposed method—multi-domain
temperature scaling—uses the heterogeneity in the domains to improve calibration
robustness under distribution shift. Through experiments on three benchmark data
sets, we find our proposed method outperforms existing methods as measured on
both in-distribution and out-of-distribution test sets.

1

Introduction

To make learning systems reliable and fault-tolerant, predictions must be accompanied by uncertainty
estimates. A significant challenge to accurately codifying uncertainty is the distribution shift that
typically arises over the course of a system’s deployment [Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2008]. For
example, suppose health providers from 20 different hospitals employ a model to make diagnostic
predictions from fMRI data. The distributions across hospitals could be quite different as a result of
differing patient populations, machine conditions, and so on. In such a setting, it is critical to provide
uncertainty quantification that is valid for every hospital—not just on average across all hospitals.
Going even further, our uncertainty quantification should be informative when a new 21st hospital
goes online, even if the distribution shifts from those already encountered. As another example, a
centralized model is trained on training data from existing clients in federated learning. It is important
for the central server to provide uncertainty quantification for every client. Similar to the fMRI
example, the centralized model should still produce valid uncertainty quantification for unseen new
clients. Another example is applying animal recognition models on images in wildlife monitoring,
where one set of camera traps corresponds to one domain, and the model will be deployed under
distribution shift, i.e., new camera traps. In this work, we study calibration in the multi-domain
setting. We find that by requiring accurate calibration across all observed domains, our method
provides more accurate uncertainty quantification on unseen domains.
Calibration is a core topic in learning [Platt et al., 1999; Naeini et al., 2015; Gal and Ghahramani,
2016; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2017; Bates et al., 2021], but most techniques are
targeted at settings with no distribution shift. To see this, we consider a simple experiment on the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

