C O NS O L E: Convex Neural Symbolic Learning

Haoran Li
Yang Weng
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, 85287
{lhaoran, yang.weng}@asu.edu

Hanghang Tong
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL, 61820
htong@illinois.edu

Abstract
Learning the underlying equation from data is a fundamental problem in many
disciplines. Recent advances rely on Neural Networks (NNs) but do not provide
theoretical guarantees in obtaining the exact equations owing to the non-convexity
of NNs. In this paper, we propose Convex Neural Symbolic Learning (C O NS O L E)
to seek convexity under mild conditions. The main idea is to decompose the
recovering process into two steps and convexify each step. In the first step of
searching for right symbols, we convexify the deep Q-learning. The key is to
maintain double convexity for both the negative Q-function and the negative reward
function in each iteration, leading to provable convexity of the negative optimal Q
function to learn the true symbol connections. Conditioned on the exact searching
result, we construct a Locally-Convex equation Learner (L O C A L) neural network
to convexify the estimation of symbol coefficients. With such a design, we quantify
a large region with strict convexity in the loss surface of L O C A L for commonly
used physical functions. Finally, we demonstrate the superior performance of the
C O NS O L E framework over the state-of-the-art on a diverse set of datasets.

1

Introduction

Identifying the underlying mathematical expressions from data plays a key role in multiple domains.
For example, scientific discovery naturally requires learning analytical solutions to fit data. Engineering systems also need to frequently re-estimate system equations due to events, maintenance,
upgrading, and new constructions [1], etc. In general, the problem, known as Symbolic Regression (SR) [2], learns the underlying equations y = g(x) constructed via certain symbols, where x
and y represent the input/output vector of the equations. If successfully learned, the equation can
enjoy many important properties like high interpretability and generalizability, which will in turn
significantly benefit scientific understanding and engineering planning, monitoring, and control.
Promising as it might be, SR is NP-hard [3, 4]. Mathematically, one can cast SR as an optimization
problem over both discrete variables to select symbols and continuous variables to represent the
symbol coefficients. Traditional solutions employ evolutionary algorithms like Genetic Programming
(GP) [5]. These methods start from an initial set of expressions and continue evolving via operations
like crossover or mutation. With fitness measures, GP-based algorithms can evaluate and select the
best equations. However, these methods have poor scalability and limited theoretical guarantees [3].
More recent SR studies leverage Neural Networks (NNs) with high representational power. For the
NN-based SR, we mainly categorize them into two groups based on the roles of the NNs. The first
group employs NNs to directly model the equations, where sparsity of the NN weights is enforced to
select symbols [6–10]. Thus, the problem is transformed into training the designed NN with sparsity
regularization. However, due to the non-convexity of NNs, the weight selection and updating can be
easily stuck in local optima, failing to find the exact equations.
The second group employs NNs to search the symbol connections, and non-linear optimizations like
BFGS [11] can be employed to estimate symbol coefficients. For the searching procedure, [3, 12–14]
leverage a Recursive Neural Network (RNN) as a policy network to iteratively generate optimal
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

