Neural Differential Equations for Learning to Program
Neural Nets Through Continuous Learning Rules

1

Kazuki Irie1 Francesco Faccio1 Jürgen Schmidhuber1,2
The Swiss AI Lab, IDSIA, USI & SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland
2
AI Initiative, KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{kazuki, francesco, juergen}@idsia.ch

Abstract
Neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) have attracted much attention as
continuous-time counterparts of deep residual neural networks (NNs), and numerous extensions for recurrent NNs have been proposed. Since the 1980s, ODEs have
also been used to derive theoretical results for NN learning rules, e.g., the famous
connection between Oja’s rule and principal component analysis. Such rules are
typically expressed as additive iterative update processes which have straightforward ODE counterparts. Here we introduce a novel combination of learning rules
and Neural ODEs to build continuous-time sequence processing nets that learn to
manipulate short-term memory in rapidly changing synaptic connections of other
nets. This yields continuous-time counterparts of Fast Weight Programmers and linear Transformers. Our novel models outperform the best existing Neural Controlled
Differential Equation based models on various time series classification tasks, while
also addressing their fundamental scalability limitations. Our code is public.1

1

Introduction

Neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) [1] have opened a new perspective on continuoustime computation with neural networks (NNs) as a practical framework for machine learning based
on differential equations. While the original approach—proposed as a continuous-depth version of
deep feed-forward residual NNs [2, 3]—only covers autonomous ODEs entirely determined by the
initial conditions, more recent extensions deal with sequential data (reviewed in Sec. 2.1) in a way
similar to what is typically done with standard recurrent NNs (RNNs) in the discrete-time scenario.
This potential for continuous-time (CT) sequence processing (CTSP) is particularly interesting, since
there are many applications where datapoints are observed at irregularly spaced time steps, and CT
sequence models might better deal with such data than their discrete-time counterparts. However,
the development of NODEs for CTSP is still at an early stage. For example, a popular approach of
Neural Controlled Differential Equations [4] (NCDEs; also reviewed in Sec. 2.1) has in practice only
one architectural variant corresponding to the “vanilla” RNN [5]. Discrete-time processing, however,
exploits many different RNN architectures as well as Transformers [6].
While it is not straightforward to transform the standard Transformer into a CT sequence processor,
we’ll show that the closely related Fast Weight Programmers (FWPs) [7, 8, 9, 10] and linear Transformers [11] (reviewed in Sec. 2.3) have direct CT counterparts. In FWPs, temporal processing of
short-term memory (stored in fast weight matrices) uses learnable sequences of learning rules. Hence
CT versions of FWPs will require differential equations to model the learning rules. This relates to a
trend of the 1980s/90s. Among many old connections between NNs and dynamical systems described
by ODEs (e.g., [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]), the theoretical analysis of NN learning rules in the ODE
1

https://github.com/IDSIA/neuraldiffeq-fwp

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

