Optimistic Posterior Sampling for Reinforcement
Learning with Few Samples and Tight Guarantees

Daniil Tiapkin
HSE University
dtyapkin@hse.ru

Denis Belomestny
Duisburg-Essen University, HSE University
denis.belomestny@uni-due.de

Daniele Calandriello
DeepMind
dcalandriello@deepmind.com

Éric Moulines
École Polytechnique
eric.moulines@polytechnique.edu

Remi Munos
DeepMind
munos@deepmind.com
Mark Rowland
DeepMind
markrowland@deepmind.com

Alexey Naumov
HSE University
anaumov@hse.ru

Michal Valko
DeepMind
valkom@deepmind.com

Pierre Ménard
ENS Lyon
pierre.menard@ens-lyon.fr

Abstract
We consider reinforcement learning in an environment modeled by an episodic,
finite, stage-dependent Markov decision process of horizon H with S states, and A
actions. The performance of an agent is measured by the regret after interacting
with the environment for T episodes. We propose an optimistic posterior sampling algorithm for reinforcement learning (OPSRL), a simple variant of posterior
sampling that only needs a number of posterior samples logarithmic in H, S, A,
and T per state-action pair.
√ For OPSRL we guarantee a high-probability regret
e H 3 SAT ) ignoring poly log(HSAT ) terms. The key
bound of order at most O(
novel technical ingredient is a new sharp anti-concentration inequality for linear
forms which may be of independent interest. Specifically, we extend the normal
approximation-based lower bound for Beta distributions by Alfers and Dinges
[1984]
√ to Dirichlet distributions. Our bound matches the lower bound of order
Ω( H 3 SAT ), thereby answering the open problems raised by Agrawal and Jia
[2017b] for the episodic setting.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning an agent interacts with an environment, whose underlying mechanism is
unknown, by sequentially taking actions, receiving rewards, and transitioning to the next state [Sutton
and Barto, 1998]. With the goal of maximizing the expected sum of the collected rewards, the agent
must carefully balance between exploring in order to gather more information about the environment
and exploiting the current knowledge to collect the rewards. In this paper, we are interested in solving
this exploration-exploitation dilemma by injecting noise into the agent’s decision-making process.
We model the environment as an episodic, finite, unknown Markov decision process (MDP) of horizon
H, with S states and A actions. In particular, we consider the stage-dependent setting where the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

