Biologically Inspired Dynamic Thresholds
for Spiking Neural Networks

Jianchuan Ding1 Bo Dong2∗ Felix Heide2
Yufei Ding3 Yunduo Zhou1 Baocai Yin1 Xin Yang1∗
1
Dalian University of Technology, Department of Computer Science
2
Princeton University, Department of Computer Science
3
University of California-Santa Barbara, Department of Computer Science

Abstract
The dynamic membrane potential threshold, as one of the essential properties of a
biological neuron, is a spontaneous regulation mechanism that maintains neuronal
homeostasis, i.e., the constant overall spiking firing rate of a neuron. As such, the
neuron firing rate is regulated by a dynamic spiking threshold, which has been
extensively studied in biology. Existing work in the machine learning community does not employ bioinspired spiking threshold schemes. This work aims at
bridging this gap by introducing a novel bioinspired dynamic energy-temporal
threshold (BDETT) scheme for spiking neural networks (SNNs). The proposed
BDETT scheme mirrors two bioplausible observations: a dynamic threshold has
1) a positive correlation with the average membrane potential and 2) a negative
correlation with the preceding rate of depolarization. We validate the effectiveness
of the proposed BDETT on robot obstacle avoidance and continuous control tasks
under both normal conditions and various degraded conditions, including noisy
observations, weights, and dynamic environments. We find that the BDETT outperforms existing static and heuristic threshold approaches by significant margins
in all tested conditions, and we confirm that the proposed bioinspired dynamic
threshold scheme offers homeostasis to SNNs in complex real-world tasks.

1

Introduction

A spiking neural network (SNN) is a bioinspired neural network. Each spiking neuron is a mathematical model abstracted from the properties of a biological neuron. Spiking neurons communicate
with each other through spike trains, mimicking the information transfer process of biological neurons [1, 2, 3]. Similar to how biological action potentials are all-or-none impulses, the spikes of SNNs
are commonly binary voltage pulses. Leveraging this binary representation, specifically designed
neuromorphic hardware [4, 5, 6], e.g., TrueNorth [7] and Loihi [8], can run SNNs at extremely low
power levels; they are 75 times more energy-efficient than their deep neural network counterparts on
low-power GPU platforms [9]. As such, recently, SNNs have rapidly emerged as effective models for
robotic control tasks, especially in mobile robots that demand low power consumption [10, 11].
However, existing SNNs suffer from poor generalizability, unlike their biological counterparts.
Biologically, a neuron leverages a spontaneous regulation mechanism to maintain neuronal homeostasis [12]—the stable overall spiking firing rate or excitability within a network [13]—to robustly
adapt to different external conditions and offer strong generalization. A dynamic threshold, one
type of regulatory mechanism, plays an essential role in maintaining neuronal homeostasis by regulating the action potential firing rate; such thresholds are widely observed in different nervous
systems [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. This threshold can be regarded as an adaptation to
membrane potentials at short timescales [16], and it influences how the received signals of a neuron
are encoded into a spike.
∗

Corresponding author xinyang@dlut.edu.cn; bo.dong@princeton.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

