NS3: Neuro-Symbolic Semantic Code Search
Shushan Arakelyan1, Anna Hakhverdyan2, Miltiadis Allamanis3 ⇤,
Luis Garcia4, Christophe Hauser4 †, Xiang Ren1 †
1
University of Southern California, Department of Computer Science
2
National Polytechnic University of Armenia
3
Microsoft Research Cambridge
4
USC Information Sciences Institute
shushana@usc.edu, annahakhverdyan98@gmail.com
miltos@allamanis.com, {lgarcia, hauser}@isi.edu, xiangren@usc.edu

Abstract
Semantic code search is the task of retrieving a code snippet given a textual description of its functionality. Recent work has been focused on using similarity metrics
between neural embeddings of text and code. However, current language models
are known to struggle with longer, compositional text, and multi-step reasoning.
To overcome this limitation, we propose supplementing the query sentence with
a layout of its semantic structure. The semantic layout is used to break down the
final reasoning decision into a series of lower-level decisions. We use a Neural
Module Network architecture to implement this idea. We compare our model NS3 (Neuro-Symbolic Semantic Search) - to a number of baselines, including
state-of-the-art semantic code retrieval methods, and evaluate on two datasets CodeSearchNet and Code Search and Question Answering. We demonstrate that
our approach results in more precise code retrieval, and we study the effectiveness
of our modular design when handling compositional queries1 .

1

Introduction

The increasing scale of software repositories makes retrieving relevant code snippets more challenging.
Traditionally, source code retrieval has been limited to keyword [33, 30] or regex [7] search. Both rely
on the user providing the exact keywords appearing in or around the sought code. However, neural
models enabled new approaches for retrieving code from a textual description of its functionality,
a task known as semantic code search (SCS). A model like Transformer [36] can map a database
of code snippets and natural language queries to a shared high-dimensional space. Relevant code
snippets are then retrieved by searching over this embedding space using a predefined similarity
metric, or a learned distance function [26, 13, 12]. Some of the recent works capitalize on the rich
structure of the code, and employ graph neural networks for the task [17, 28].
Despite impressive results on SCS, current neural approaches are far from satisfactory in dealing
with a wide range of natural-language queries, especially on ones with compositional language
structure. Encoding text into a dense vector for retrieval purposes can be problematic because we
risk loosing faithfulness of the representation, and missing important details of the query. Not only
does this a) affect the performance, but it can b) drastically reduce a model’s value for the users,
because compositional queries such as “Check that directory does not exist before creating it” require
performing multi-step reasoning on code.
⇤

Currently at Google Research
Equal supervision
1
Code and data are available at https://github.com/ShushanArakelyan/modular_code_search

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

