Fair Infinitesimal Jackknife: Mitigating the Influence
of Biased Training Data Points Without Refitting
Prasanna Sattigeri
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
psattig@us.ibm.com

Soumya Ghosh
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
Cambridge, MA
ghoshso@us.ibm.com

Pierre Dognin
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
pdognin@us.ibm.com

Inkit Padhi
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
inkit.padhi@ibm.com

Kush R. Varshney
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
krvarshn@us.ibm.com

Abstract
In consequential decision-making applications, mitigating unwanted biases in
machine learning models that yield systematic disadvantage to members of groups
delineated by sensitive attributes such as race and gender is one key intervention
to strive for equity. Focusing on demographic parity and equality of opportunity,
in this paper we propose an algorithm that improves the fairness of a pre-trained
classifier by simply dropping carefully selected training data points. We select
instances based on their influence on the fairness metric of interest, computed
using an infinitesimal jackknife-based approach. The dropping of training points is
done in principle, but in practice does not require the model to be refit. Crucially,
we find that such an intervention does not substantially reduce the predictive
performance of the model but drastically improves the fairness metric. Through
careful experiments, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed approach on
diverse tasks and find that it consistently improves upon existing alternatives.

1

Introduction

Among the many possible interventions to improve equity in society (most of them involve structural
policy change), bias mitigation algorithms constitute one narrow sliver that has emerged in the
machine learning literature to address distributive justice in high-stakes automated decision making. These algorithms may be categorized into pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing
approaches [37]. In the case of in-processing algorithms [20], the bias mitigation intervention occurs
at the model training stage. This is usually achieved by minimizing the empirical risk regularized by
a fairness metric surrogate that captures the dependence of the prediction and the sensitive attribute.
Pre-processing methods typically learn transformations of the data distribution such that they do not
contain information about the sensitive attributes [43, 26]. Task specific models are then learned
from scratch on these debiased representations. Retraining a model from scratch is intractable in
many real-world situations for a variety of reasons including policy, cost, and technical feasibility;
post-processing approaches are the only viable option in such cases. For example, consider trying to
refit large foundation models. Limiting ourselves to notions of group fairness such as demographic
parity and equality of opportunity, existing post-processing bias mitigation algorithms tend to either
randomly or deterministically alter the hard or soft predicted label of individual test data points that
have been scored by a model [19, 17, 30, 8, 25, 39].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

