Micro and Macro Level Graph Modeling for Graph
Variational Auto-Encoders
Kiarash Zahirnia, Oliver Schulte∗, Parmis Naddaf, Ke Li
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
{kzahirni, oschulte, pnaddaf, keli}@sfu.ca

Abstract
Generative models for graph data are an important research topic in machine
learning. Graph data comprise two levels that are typically analyzed separately:
node-level properties such as the existence of a link between a pair of nodes, and
global aggregate graph-level statistics, such as motif counts. This paper proposes
a new multi-level framework that jointly models node-level properties and graphlevel statistics, as mutually reinforcing sources of information. We introduce a
new micro-macro training objective for graph generation that combines node-level
and graph-level losses. We utilize the micro-macro objective to improve graph
generation with a GraphVAE, a well-established model based on graph-level latent
variables, that provides fast training and generation time for medium-sized graphs.
Our experiments show that adding micro-macro modeling to the GraphVAE model
improves graph quality scores up to 2 orders of magnitude on five benchmark
datasets, while maintaining the GraphVAE generation speed advantage.

1

Introduction: multi-level graph modeling

Many datasets contain relational information about entities and their links that can be represented
as a graph. Deep generative learning on graphs has become a popular research topic [20], with
applications including molecule design [42], and recommendation [12]. It is common in graph
analysis to distinguish two levels of information [10, 20]: (1) local node-level properties, such as
the existence of a link between two nodes or the attribute of a node [27, 37, 19], and (2) global
graph-level statistics (graph statistics for short) that depend on the entire graph, such as node degree
distribution or motif counts. Most deep Graph Generative Models (GGMs) are trained with an
objective based on local properties (e.g., maximizing the probabilities of observed edges). Figure 1
illustrates the difference between local and global structure. Different edges have different roles in
the graph global structure. Some edges play a critical role for the connectivity/community structure,
while others are less important. Previous GGM training is generally based on a likelihood objective
that decomposes into individual edge likelihoods [47, 31, 11], which does not discriminate edges
with different roles. Graph global level information on the other hand can capture how different
edges have different importance in the graph structure (see also Section 4). Whereas the sparsity
of typical graphs causes difficulties for training objectives based on local information only [38, 27],
graph statistics are typically dense.
This paper proposes a new perspective on the node/graph level dichotomy: a principled probabilistic framework that incorporates both local and global graph properties. From the framework we
derive a novel micro-macro (MM) objective function for training a GGM to match both local and
global properties. The term micro-macro originates from the philosophy of science and refers to
scientific frameworks that treat local (“micro”) resp. global (“macro”) properties of a system as equal
targets [17].
∗

Supported by NSERC Canada Discovery Grant R611341

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

