“Why Not Other Classes?”: Towards Class-Contrastive
Back-Propagation Explanations

Yipei Wang, Xiaoqian Wang∗
Elmore Family School of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
{wang4865,joywang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Numerous methods have been developed to explain the inner mechanism of deep
neural network (DNN) based classifiers. Existing explanation methods are often limited to explaining predictions of a pre-specified class, which answers the
question “why is the input classified into this class?” However, such explanations with respect to a single class are inherently insufficient because they do
not capture features with class-discriminative power. That is, features that are
important for predicting one class may also be important for other classes. To
capture features with true class-discriminative power, we should instead ask “why
is the input classified into this class, but not others?” To answer this question, we
propose a weighted contrastive framework for explaining DNNs. Our framework
can easily convert any existing back-propagation explanation methods to build
class-contrastive explanations. We theoretically validate our weighted contrast
explanation in general back-propagation explanations, and show that our framework enables class-contrastive explanations with significant improvements in both
qualitative and quantitative experiments. Based on the results, we point out an
important blind spot in the current explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) study,
where explanations towards the predicted logits and the probabilities are obfuscated. We suggest that these two aspects should be distinguished explicitly any
time explanation methods are applied.

1

Introduction

The black-box essence of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has been impeding the development and
application of powerful deep learning tools in reality. Without providing a promising reasoning
process, DNNs are never fully trusted by end-users, especially for high-stake areas such as medical
analysis, autonomous vehicles, etc. Recently, General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) even
explicitly proclaim the right to explanations for automated decisions (Selbst and Powles, 2018). This
further stimulates the demand for explainable DNNs. As a result, the studies of eXplainable Artificial
Intelligence (XAI) thrive to explore the inner mechanism of DNNs and to build trustworthy models.
Since then, countless explanation methods have been devised to serve such purposes. Methods
developed have covered various aspects including pattern recognition, decision making, natural
language inference, etc. Albeit seemingly prosperous, the lack of systematicness is an inevitable
issue of XAI studies. One of the fundamental questions to be answered is what makes a proper
explanation to the black-box model? We need to know what end users are longing for before we
develop the techniques. For the moment, this still remains an open question as there is no unified
framework for XAI. A reasonable workaround is to set specific goals (Wang and Wang, 2022) and
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

