Offline Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning
via f -Advantage Regression
Yecheng Jason Ma, Jason Yan, Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani
University of Pennsylvania
{jasonyma, jasyan, dineshj, obastani}@seas.upenn.edu

https://jasonma2016.github.io/GoFAR/

Abstract
Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) promises general-purpose
skill learning in the form of reaching diverse goals from purely offline datasets. We
propose Goal-conditioned f -Advantage Regression (GoFAR), a novel regressionbased offline GCRL algorithm derived from a state-occupancy matching perspective; the key intuition is that the goal-reaching task can be formulated as a stateoccupancy matching problem between a dynamics-abiding imitator agent and an
expert agent that directly teleports to the goal. In contrast to prior approaches,
GoFAR does not require any hindsight relabeling and enjoys uninterleaved optimization for its value and policy networks. These distinct features confer GoFAR
with much better offline performance and stability as well as statistical performance
guarantee that is unattainable for prior methods. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that GoFAR’s training objectives can be re-purposed to learn an agent-independent
goal-conditioned planner from purely offline source-domain data, which enables
zero-shot transfer to new target domains. Through extensive experiments, we
validate GoFAR’s effectiveness in various problem settings and tasks, significantly
outperforming prior state-of-art. Notably, on a real robotic dexterous manipulation
task, while no other method makes meaningful progress, GoFAR acquires complex
manipulation behavior that successfully accomplishes diverse goals.

1

Introduction

Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning [18, 43, 39] (GCRL) aims to learn a repertoire of skills
in the form of reaching distinct goals. Offline GCRL [6, 47] is particularly promising because it
enables learning general goal-reaching policies from purely offline interaction datasets without any
environment interaction [28, 25], which can be expensive in the real-world. As offline datasets
contain diverse goals and become increasingly prevalent [9, 19, 6], policies learned this way can
acquire a large set of useful primitives for downstream tasks [30]. A central challenge in GCRL is the
sparsity of reward signal [3]; without any additional knowledge about the environment, an agent at a
state typically only accrues positive binary reward when the state lies within the goal neighborhood.
This sparse reward problem is exacerbated in the offline setting, in which the agent cannot explore
the environment to discover more informative states about desired goals. Therefore, designing an
effective offline GCRL algorithm is a concrete yet challenging path towards general-purpose and
scalable policy learning.
In this paper, we present a novel offline GCRL algorithm, Goal-conditioned f-Advantage Regression
(GoFAR), first casting GCRL as a state-occupancy matching [27, 32] problem and then deriving a
regression-based policy objective. In particular, GoFAR begins with the following goal-conditioned
state-matching objective:
min DKL (d⇡ (s; g)kp(s; g))
(1)
⇡

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

