Biological Learning of Irreducible Representations
of Commuting Transformations

Alexander Genkin*

David Lipshutz†

Tiberiu Teşileanu†

†

Siavash Golkar†

Dmitri B. Chklovskii*,†

* Neuroscience Institute, NYU Langone Medical School
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute

alexander.genkin@gmail.com
{dlipshutz,sgolkar,ttesileanu,dchklovskii}@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
A longstanding challenge in neuroscience is to understand neural mechanisms underlying the brain’s remarkable ability to learn and detect transformations of objects
due to motion. Translations and rotations of images can be viewed as orthogonal
transformations in the space of pixel intensity vectors. Every orthogonal transformation can be decomposed into rotations within irreducible two-dimensional
subspaces (or representations). For sets of commuting transformations, known
as toroidal groups, Cohen and Welling proposed a mathematical framework for
learning the irreducible representations. We explore the possibility that the brain
also learns irreducible representations using a biologically plausible learning mechanism. The first is based on SVD of the anti-symmetrized outer product of the
vectors representing consecutive images and is implemented by a single-layer
neural network. The second is based on PCA of the difference between consecutive
frames and is implemented in a two-layer network but with greater biological
plausibility. Both networks learn image rotations (replicating Cohen and Welling’s
results) as well as translations. It would be interesting to search for the proposed
networks in nascent connectomics and physiology datasets.

1

Introduction

The brains of humans and other animals identify objects, such as human faces, regardless of their
location and orientation in the visual field. This requires learning identity-preserving transformations
such as translations, scaling and rotations. Guiding locomotion requires identifying the direction and
speed of the optic flow. Flies, to maintain stable flight, detect relative translational and rotational
motion of their surroundings.
Whereas real-life transformations can be a mixture of translations and rotations, for simplicity,
we consider learning one kind of transformation at a time. A sequence of pairs of images before
and after transformations are streamed to an unsupervised algorithm. The algorithm learns these
transformations and detects their magnitude, which corresponds to the speed times the time step.
Transformations such as rotations and translations of any magnitude can be decomposed into infinitesimal transformation operators (called generators) and magnitudes. For these so called Lie groups,
generators can be learned from data and magnitudes of transformation determined for each pair of
images, as shown by Rao and Ruderman [14].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

