Improving Variational Autoencoders with Density
Gap-based Regularization

Jianfei Zhang1,2
1

Jun Bai1,2

Chenghua Lin3

Yanmeng Wang4

Wenge Rong1,2

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
4
Ping An Technology, China
{zhangjf,ba1_jun,w.rong}@buaa.edu.cn
c.lin@sheffield.ac.uk, wangyanmeng219@pingan.com.cn

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are one of the most powerful unsupervised learning frameworks in NLP for latent representation learning and latent-directed generation. The classic optimization goal of VAEs is to maximize the Evidence Lower
Bound (ELBo), which consists of a conditional likelihood for generation and a
negative Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence for regularization. In practice, optimizing ELBo often leads the posterior distribution of all samples converging to
the same degenerated local optimum, namely posterior collapse or KL vanishing.
There are effective ways proposed to prevent posterior collapse in VAEs, but we
observe that they in essence make trade-offs between posterior collapse and the
hole problem, i.e., the mismatch between the aggregated posterior distribution and
the prior distribution. To this end, we introduce new training objectives to tackle
both problems through a novel regularization based on the probabilistic density gap
between the aggregated posterior distribution and the prior distribution. Through
experiments on language modeling, latent space visualization, and interpolation,
we show that our proposed method can solve both problems effectively and thus
outperforms the existing methods in latent-directed generation. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to jointly solve the hole problem and posterior collapse.

1

Introduction

As one of the most powerful likelihood-based generative models, variational autoencoders (VAEs) [21,
32] are designed for probabilistic modeling directed by continuous latent variables, which are
successfully applied in many NLP tasks, e.g., dialogue generation [45, 14], machine translation [34,
12], recommendation [10], and data augmentation [43, 39]. One of the major advantages of VAEs is
the flexible latent representation space, which enables easy manipulation of high-level semantics on
corresponding representations, e.g., guided sentence generation with interpretable vector operators.
Despite the attractive theoretical strengths, VAEs are observed to suffer from a well-known problem
named posterior collapse or KL vanishing [21, 24], an optimum state of VAEs when the posterior
distribution contains little information about the corresponding datapoint, which is particularly
obvious when strong auto-regressive decoders are implemented [46, 4].
Another challenge for VAEs is the hole problem, the state when the aggregated (approximate) posterior
fails to fit the prior distribution, and thus the inference from the prior distribution becomes no longer
suitable to describe the global data distribution [33], which can lead to poor generation quality in
VAEs [1, 25].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

