Adam Can Converge Without Any Modification On
Update Rules

Yushun Zhang13 , Congliang Chen1 , Naichen Shi2 , Ruoyu Sun13∗, Zhi-Quan Luo13
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China 2 University of Michigan, US
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
{yushunzhang,congliangchen}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, naichens@umich.edu
{sunruoyu,luozq}@cuhk.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Ever since Reddi et al. (2018) pointed out the divergence issue of Adam, many new variants
have been designed to obtain convergence. However, vanilla Adam remains exceptionally
popular and it works well in practice. Why is there a gap between theory and practice? We
point out there is a mismatch between the settings of theory and practice: Reddi et al. (2018)
pick the problem after picking the hyperparameters of Adam, i.e., (β1 , β2 ); while practical
applications often fix the problem first and then tune (β1 , β2 ). Due to this observation, we
conjecture that the empirical convergence can be theoretically justified, only if we change the
order of picking the problem and hyperparameter. In this work, we confirm this conjecture.
We prove that, when
√ the 2nd-order momentum parameter β2 is large and 1st-order momentum
parameter β1 < β2 < 1, Adam converges to the neighborhood of critical points. The size
of the neighborhood is propositional to the variance of stochastic gradients. Under an extra
condition (strong growth condition), Adam converges to critical points. It is worth mentioning
that our results cover a wide range of hyperparameters: as β2 increases, our convergence result
can cover any β1 ∈ [0, 1) including β1 = 0.9, which is the default setting in deep learning
libraries. To our knowledge, this is the first result showing that Adam can converge without any
modification on its update rules. Further, our analysis does not require assumptions of bounded
gradients or bounded 2nd-order momentum. When β2 is small, we further point out a large
region of (β1 , β2 ) combinations where Adam can diverge to infinity. Our divergence result
considers the same setting (fixing the optimization problem ahead) as our convergence result,
indicating that there is a phase transition from divergence to convergence when increasing β2 .
These positive and negative results provide suggestions on how to tune Adam hyperparameters:
√
for instance, when Adam does not work well, we suggest tuning up β2 and trying β1 < β2 .

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning tasks often aim to solve the following finite-sum problem.
min f (x) =

x∈Rd

n−1
X

fi (x),

(1)

i=0

where n is the number of samples or mini-batches and x denotes the trainable parameters. In deep
learning, Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) is one of the most popular algorithms for solving (1). It
has been applied to various machine learning domains such as natural language processing (NLP)
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2018), generative adversarial networks (GANs)
(Radford et al., 2015; Isola et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017) and computer vision (CV) (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021). Despite its prevalence, Reddi et al. (2018) point out that Adam can diverge with a wide
range of hyperparameters. A main result in (Reddi et al., 2018) states that 2 :
∗
2

Correspondence author
We formally re-state their results in Appendix D.2.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

