Addressing Resource Scarcity across Sign Languages
with Multilingual Pretraining
and Unified-Vocabulary Datasets

Gokul NC1,2 , Manideep Ladi2 , Sumit Negi2 , Prem Selvaraj1 ,
Pratyush Kumar1,2,3 , Mitesh Khapra1,2
1
AI4Bharat, 2 IIT Madras, 3 Microsoft Research
gokulnc@ai4bharat.org, manideepladi@gmail.com, sumitnegi662@gmail.com, prem@ai4bharat.org,
pratyush@cse.iitm.ac.in, miteshk@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
There are over 300 sign languages in the world, many of which have very limited
or no labelled sign-to-text datasets. To address low-resource data scenarios, selfsupervised pretraining and multilingual finetuning have been shown to be effective
in natural language and speech processing. In this work, we apply these ideas
to sign language recognition. We make three contributions. First, we release
SignCorpus, a large pretraining dataset on sign languages comprising about 4.6K
hours of signing data across 10 sign languages. SignCorpus is curated from
sign language videos on the internet, filtered for data quality, and converted into
sequences of pose keypoints thereby removing all personal identifiable information
(PII). Second, we release Sign2Vec, a graph-based model with 5.2M parameters that
is pretrained on SignCorpus. We envisage Sign2Vec as a multilingual large-scale
pretrained model which can be fine-tuned for various sign recognition tasks across
languages. Third, we create MultiSign-ISLR – a multilingual and label-aligned
dataset of sequences of pose keypoints from 11 labelled datasets across 7 sign
languages, and MultiSign-FS – a new finger-spelling training and test set across 7
languages. On these datasets, we fine-tune Sign2Vec to create multilingual isolated
sign recognition models. With experiments on multiple benchmarks, we show
that pretraining and multilingual transfer are effective giving significant gains over
state-of-the-art results. All datasets, models, and code has been made open-source
via the OpenHands toolkit1 .

1

Introduction

According to the World Health Organization, 500 million people in the world have disabling hearing
loss, and the number is expected to go up to 700 million by 2050. Sign language is a common medium
of communication amongst the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (DHH). In sign languages, expressions
are through the visuospatial modality by combining movements of fingers, arms, face, and upper
body. Sign languages are full-fledged languages that have evolved over long durations of time to
have their unique lexical and grammatical features. Across the world, there are over 300 different
sign languages which often have very little commonality with languages spoken in respective regions.
Finally, there are large variations in signing between people using the same sign language. All these
characteristics make it challenging to build tools to reduce communication barriers between DHH
people and those who do not know sign languages.
1

https://openhands.ai4bharat.org

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

