Few-Shot Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning is Better
and Cheaper than In-Context Learning
Haokun Liu∗ Derek Tam∗
Jay Mohta

Tenghao Huang

Mohammed Muqeeth∗
Mohit Bansal

Colin Raffel

Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{haokunl,dtredsox,muqeeth,craffel}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Few-shot in-context learning (ICL) enables pre-trained language models to perform a previously-unseen task without any gradient-based training by feeding a
small number of training examples as part of the input. ICL incurs substantial
computational, memory, and storage costs because it involves processing all of the
training examples every time a prediction is made. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) (e.g. adapter modules, prompt tuning, sparse update methods, etc.) offers
an alternative paradigm where a small set of parameters are trained to enable a
model to perform the new task. In this paper, we rigorously compare few-shot
ICL and PEFT and demonstrate that the latter offers better accuracy as well as
dramatically lower computational costs. Along the way, we introduce a new PEFT
method called (IA)3 that scales activations by learned vectors, attaining stronger
performance while only introducing a relatively tiny amount of new parameters.
We also propose a simple recipe based on the T0 model [1] called T-Few that
can be applied to new tasks without task-specific tuning or modifications. We
validate the effectiveness of T-Few on completely unseen tasks by applying it to
the RAFT benchmark [2], attaining super-human performance for the first time
and outperforming the state-of-the-art by 6% absolute. All of the code used in our
experiments is publicly available.1

1

Introduction

Pre-trained language models have become a cornerstone of natural language processing, thanks
to the fact that they can dramatically improve data efficiency on tasks of interest – i.e., using a
pre-trained language model for initialization often produces better results with less labeled data. A
historically common approach has been gradient-based fine-tuning on a downstream task of interest
with pre-trained parameters as the initialization. While fine-tuning has produced many state-of-the-art
results [1], it results in a model specialized for a single task with an entirely new set of parameter
values, which can become impractical when fine-tuning on many downstream tasks.
An alternative approach popularized by [3, 4] is in-context learning (ICL), which induces a model
to perform a downstream task by inputting prompted examples. Few-shot prompting converts a
small collection of input-target pairs into (typically) human-understandable instructions and examples
[3, 4], along with a single unlabeled example for which a prediction is desired. Notably, ICL requires
no gradient-based training and therefore allows a single model to immediately perform a wide variety
of tasks. Performing ICL therefore solely relies on the capabilities that a model learned during
pre-training. These characteristics have led to a great deal of recent interest in ICL methods [5–10].
∗
1

Equal contribution.
https://github.com/r-three/t-few

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

