Data-Driven Conditional Robust Optimization

Abhilash Chenreddy
GERAD & Dept. of Decision Sciences
HEC Montréal
Montréal, Quebec, Canada
abhilash.chenreddy@hec.ca

Nymisha Bandi
McGill University
Montréal, Quebec, Canada
nymisha.bandi@mcgill.ca

Erick Delage
GERAD & Dept. of Decision Sciences
HEC Montréal
Montréal, Quebec, Canada
erick.delage@hec.ca

Abstract
In this paper, we study a novel approach for data-driven decision-making under
uncertainty in the presence of contextual information. Specifically, we address this
problem using a new Conditional Robust Optimization (CRO) paradigm that seeks
the solution of a robust optimization problem where the uncertainty set accounts
for the most recent side information provided by a set of covariates. We propose
an integrated framework that designs the conditional uncertainty set by jointly
learning a partition in the covariate data space and simultaneously constructing
region specific deep uncertainty sets for the random vector that perturbs the CRO
problem. We also provide theoretical guarantees for the coverage provided by
conditional uncertainty sets and for the value-at-risk performances obtained using
the proposed CRO model. Finally, we use simulated and real world data to illustrate
the implementation of our approach and compare it against two non-contextual
robust optimization benchmark approaches to demonstrate the value of exploiting
contextual information in robust optimization.

1

Introduction

In most real world decision problems, the decision maker (DM) faces uncertainty either in the
objective function that he aims to optimize, or some of the constraints that he needs to satisfy.
Stochastic Programming and Robust Optimization (RO) are the most popular methods for addressing
this issue. With the growing availability of data, there has recently been a surge of interest in modeling
optimization under uncertainty as contextual optimization problems that seek to leverage rich feature
observations to make better decisions [Ban and Rudin, 2019, Bertsimas and Kallus, 2020]. In a
simple cost minimization problem, where X ⊆ Rn and c(x, ξ) respectively capture the feasible set
of actions and a cost that depends on both the action x and a random perturbation vector ξ ∈ Rm , the
“contextual” DM has access to a vector of covariates ψ ∈ Rm assumed to be correlated to ξ. This
DM therefore traditionally wishes to identify an optimal policy, i.e. a functional x : Rm → X that
suggests an action in X adapted to the observed realization of ψ, with respect to his expected cost
over the joint distribution of (ψ, ξ):
min E[c(x(ψ), ξ)].
x(·)

(1)

From a theoretical point of view, one can exploit the interchangeability property (see Theorem 14.60,
[Rockafellar and Wets, 2009]) to identify an optimal policy for Problem (1) using the following
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

