Large-batch Optimization for Dense Visual
Predictions: Training Faster R-CNN in 4.2 Minutes

Zeyue Xue∗
The University of Hong Kong
xuezeyue@connect.hku.hk
Guanglu Song
Sensetime Research
songguanglu@sensetime.com

Jianming Liang∗
Beihang University
ljmmm1997@gmail.com

Zhuofan Zong∗
Beihang Univerisity
zongzhuofan@gmail.com

Yu Liu†
Sensetime Research
liuyuisanai@gmail.com

Liang Chen∗
Peking University
clandzyy@pku.edu.cn

Ping Luo†
The University of Hong Kong,
Shanghai AI Laboratory
pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Training a large-scale deep neural network in a large-scale dataset is challenging and time-consuming. The recent breakthrough of large-batch optimization
is a promising way to tackle this challenge. However, although the current advanced algorithms such as LARS and LAMB succeed in classification models,
the complicated pipelines of dense visual predictions such as object detection
and segmentation still suffer from the heavy performance drop in the large-batch
training regime. To address this challenge, we propose a simple yet effective
algorithm, named Adaptive Gradient Variance Modulator (AGVM), which can
train dense visual predictors with very large batch size, enabling several benefits
more appealing than prior arts. Firstly, AGVM can align the gradient variances
between different modules in the dense visual predictors, such as backbone, feature
pyramid network (FPN), detection, and segmentation heads. We show that training
with a large batch size can fail with the gradient variances misaligned among them,
which is a phenomenon primarily overlooked in previous work. Secondly, AGVM
is a plug-and-play module that generalizes well to many different architectures
(e.g., CNNs and Transformers) and different tasks (e.g., object detection, instance
segmentation, semantic segmentation, and panoptic segmentation). It is also compatible with different optimizers (e.g., SGD and AdamW). Thirdly, a theoretical
analysis of AGVM is provided. Extensive experiments on the COCO and ADE20K
datasets demonstrate the superiority of AGVM. For example, it can train Faster RCNN+ResNet50 in 4.2 minutes without losing performance. AGVM demonstrates
more stable generalization performance than prior arts under extremely large batch
size (i.e., 10k). It enables training an object detector with one billion parameters in
just 3.5 hours, reducing the training time by 20.9×, whilst achieving 62.2 mAP on
COCO. The deliverables are released at https://github.com/Sense-X/AGVM.

* Work done during an internship at Sensetime Research.
†

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

