Uncertainty-Aware Hierarchical Refinement for
Incremental Implicitly-Refined Classification

Jian Yang1∗
Kai Zhu1,∗ ,‡
Kecheng Zheng2
Yang Cao1,3,†
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Ant Group
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{yangjian12138@mail, zkzy@mail}.ustc.edu.cn
zkccloud@gmail.com forrest@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Incremental implicitly-refined classification task aims at assigning hierarchical labels to each sample encountered at different phases. Existing methods tend to
fail in generating hierarchy-invariant descriptors when the novel classes are inherited from the old ones. To address the issue, this paper, which explores the
inheritance relations in the process of multi-level semantic increment, proposes
an Uncertainty-Aware Hierarchical Refinement (UAHR) scheme. Specifically,
our proposed scheme consists of a global representation extension strategy that
enhances the discrimination of incremental representation by widening the corresponding margin distance, and a hierarchical distribution alignment strategy that
refines the distillation process by explicitly determining the inheritance relationship of the incremental class. Particularly, the shifting subclasses are corrected
under the guidance of hierarchical uncertainty, ensuring the consistency of the
homogeneous features. Extensive experiments on widely used benchmarks (i.e.,
IIRC-CIFAR, IIRC-ImageNet-lite, IIRC-ImageNet-Subset, and IIRC-ImageNetfull) demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method over the state-of-the-art
approaches.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has made huge breakthroughs in the field of computer vision, matching
or even surpassing human performance on some image recognition tasks [3]. However, learning
multiple tasks [25] in sequential data (i.e., continual learning [20, 22]) remains a major challenge,
which requires models to have the ability to aggregate different learning objectives into a coherent
whole over time.
When a new task comes with the increase of identified classes (i.e., class-incremental learning),
joint training with all old and new data is too time-consuming and labor-intensive. Furthermore,
most data from past tasks are unavailable due to the data privacy. To adapt rapidly to the new
scenarios, previous methods [26] try to adopt a simple alternative that directly fine-tune the network
with new data. However, this may severely degrade the performance of the old class due to the bias
of the feature extractor and classifier towards the new class [15], which is also known as catastrophic
forgetting.
To address the issue, existing methods [16] maintain the performance of the old class by preserving
the representative samples (i.e., exemplar) and aligning the output distribution (i.e., knowledge dis* Co-first Author
†
‡

Corresponding Author
Work done during an internship at Ant Group

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

