Saliency-Aware Neural Architecture Search

Ramtin Hosseini and Pengtao Xie
UC San Diego
rhossein@eng.ucsd.edu, p1xie@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Recently a wide variety of NAS methods have been proposed and achieved considerable success in automatically identifying highly-performing architectures of
neural networks for the sake of reducing the reliance on human experts. Existing
NAS methods ignore the fact that different input data elements (e.g., image pixels)
have different importance (or saliency) in determining the prediction outcome.
They treat all data elements as being equally important and therefore lead to suboptimal performance. To address this problem, we propose an end-to-end framework
which dynamically detects saliency of input data, reweights data using saliency
maps, and searches architectures on saliency-reweighted data. Our framework is
based on four-level optimization, which performs four learning stages in a unified
way. At the first stage, a model is trained with its architecture tentatively fixed. At
the second stage, saliency maps are generated using the trained model. At the third
stage, the model is retrained on saliency-reweighted data. At the fourth stage, the
model is evaluated on a validation set and the architecture is updated by minimizing
the validation loss. Experiments on several datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our framework.

1

Introduction

Neural architecture search (NAS) [76, 41, 47], which aims to automatically identify highly performant
neural architectures, has received much attention recently. Existing NAS methods treat all elements
in an input data example (such as pixels in an image, tokens in a sentence, etc.) as being equally
important, without considering the different saliency of individual elements, which leads to lessoptimal performance. In machine learning applications, an input data example typically consists
of many data elements. For instance, an image example consists of a grid of pixel elements and a
sentence example consists of a sequence of token elements. When used to make a prediction, different
data elements have different importance (or saliency). For example, when predicting which object
category an image belongs to, pixels in foreground object regions are more important than those in
background regions. Such saliency information is not leveraged by existing NAS methods.
In this paper, we aim to bridge this gap, by proposing a saliency-aware NAS method which automatically identifies the saliency of data elements and leverages that to search for better architectures. Our
framework is formulated as a four-level optimization problem. At the first level, the model tentatively
fixes its architecture and trains its first set of network weights. At the second level, the trained model
generates saliency maps using an adversarial attack based method [18]. At the third level, input data
is reweighted using saliency maps and the second set of model weights are trained using reweighted
data. At the fourth level, the two sets of trained model weights are evaluated on a human-provided
validation set and the architecture is optimized by minimizing the validation losses.
The major contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a framework which performs end-to-end detection of saliency and leverage saliencyreweighted data to improve neural architecture search.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

