Is Out-of-Distribution Detection Learnable?
Zhen Fang1 , Yixuan Li2 , Jie Lu1∗, Jiahua Dong3,4 , Bo Han5 , Feng Liu1,6∗
1
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney.
2
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
3
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. 4 ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
5
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University.
6
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne.
{zhen.fang,jie.lu}@uts.edu.au, sharonli@cs.wisc.edu,
dongjiahua1995@gmail.com,bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk,feng.liu1@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Supervised learning aims to train a classifier under the assumption that training and
test data are from the same distribution. To ease the above assumption, researchers
have studied a more realistic setting: out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, where
test data may come from classes that are unknown during training (i.e., OOD data).
Due to the unavailability and diversity of OOD data, good generalization ability
is crucial for effective OOD detection algorithms. To study the generalization of
OOD detection, in this paper, we investigate the probably approximately correct
(PAC) learning theory of OOD detection, which is proposed by researchers as an
open problem. First, we find a necessary condition for the learnability of OOD
detection. Then, using this condition, we prove several impossibility theorems for
the learnability of OOD detection under some scenarios. Although the impossibility theorems are frustrating, we find that some conditions of these impossibility
theorems may not hold in some practical scenarios. Based on this observation, we
next give several necessary and sufficient conditions to characterize the learnability
of OOD detection in some practical scenarios. Lastly, we also offer theoretical
supports for several representative OOD detection works based on our OOD theory.

1

Introduction

The success of supervised learning is established on an implicit assumption that training and test data
share a same distribution, i.e., in-distribution (ID) [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, test data distribution in many
real-world scenarios may violate the assumption and, instead, contain out-of-distribution (OOD) data
whose labels have not been seen during the training process [5, 6]. To mitigate the risk of OOD data,
researchers have considered a more practical learning scenario: OOD detection which determines
whether an input is ID/OOD, while classifying the ID data into respective classes. OOD detection has
shown great potential to ensure the reliable deployment of machine learning models in the real world.
A rich line of algorithms have been developed to empirically address the OOD detection problem
[6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. However, very few works study theory of OOD
detection, which hinders the rigorous path forward for the field. This paper aims to bridge the gap.
In this paper, we provide a theoretical framework to understand the learnability of the OOD detection
problem. We investigate the probably approximately correct (PAC) learning theory of OOD detection,
which is posed as an open problem to date. Unlike the classical PAC learning theory in a supervised
setting, our problem setting is fundamentally challenging due to the absence of OOD data in training.
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

