Counterfactual Fairness with Partially Known
Causal Graph
Aoqi Zuo
The University of Melbourne
azuo@student.unimelb.edu.au

Susan Wei
The University of Melbourne
susan.wei@unimelb.edu.au

Tongliang Liu
The University of Sydney
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Bo Han
Hong Kong Baptist University
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Kun Zhang
Carnegie Mellon University & MBZUAI
kunz1@cmu.edu

Mingming Gong
The University of Melbourne
mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au

†

Abstract
Fair machine learning aims to avoid treating individuals or sub-populations unfavourably based on sensitive attributes, such as gender and race. Those methods
in fair machine learning that are built on causal inference ascertain discrimination
and bias through causal effects. Though causality-based fair learning is attracting
increasing attention, current methods assume the true causal graph is fully known.
This paper proposes a general method to achieve the notion of counterfactual
fairness when the true causal graph is unknown. To select features that lead to
counterfactual fairness, we derive the conditions and algorithms to identify ancestral relations between variables on a Partially Directed Acyclic Graph (PDAG),
specifically, a class of causal DAGs that can be learned from observational data
combined with domain knowledge. Interestingly, we find that counterfactual fairness can be achieved as if the true causal graph were fully known, when specific
background knowledge is provided: the sensitive attributes do not have ancestors
in the causal graph. Results on both simulated and real-world datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

With the widespread application of machine learning in various fields (e.g., hiring decisions [23],
recidivism predictions [1, 11], and finance [26, 55]), the ethical and social impact of machine learning
is receiving increasing attention. In particular, machine learning algorithms are sensitive to the bias
in training data, which may render their decisions discriminatory against individual or sub-population
group with respect to sensitive attributes, e.g., gender and race. For example, bias against AfricanAmericans was found with COMPAS, a decision support tool used by U.S. courts to assess the
likelihood of a defendant becoming a recidivist [12].
To achieve fair machine learning, a large body of methods have been proposed to mitigate bias
according to different fairness measures. These methods can be roughly categorized into two groups.
The first group focuses on devising statistical fairness notions, which typically indicate the statistical
†

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

