Learning Distributed and Fair Policies for Network
Load Balancing as Markov Potential Game
Zhiyuan Yao⇤
École Polytechnique, Cisco Systems
zhiyuan.yao@polytechnique.edu

Zihan Ding⇤
Princeton University
zihand@princeton.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates the network load balancing problem in data centers (DCs)
where multiple load balancers (LBs) are deployed, using the multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) framework. The challenges of this problem consist
of the heterogeneous processing architecture and dynamic environments, as well
as limited and partial observability of each LB agent in distributed networking
systems, which can largely degrade the performance of in-production load balancing algorithms in real-world setups. Centralised-training-decentralised-execution
(CTDE) RL scheme has been proposed to improve MARL performance, yet it
incurs – especially in distributed networking systems, which prefer distributed
and plug-and-play design schemes – additional communication and management
overhead among agents. We formulate the multi-agent load balancing problem
as a Markov potential game, with a carefully and properly designed workload
distribution fairness as the potential function. A fully distributed MARL algorithm
is proposed to approximate the Nash equilibrium of the game. Experimental evaluations involve both an event-driven simulator and real-world system, where the
proposed MARL load balancing algorithm shows close-to-optimal performance in
simulations, and superior results over in-production LBs in the real-world system.

1

Introduction

In cloud data centers (DCs) and distributed networking systems, servers are deployed on infrastructures with multiple processors to provide scalable services [1]. To optimise workload distribution
and reduce additional queuing delay, load balancers (LBs) play a significant role in such systems.
State-of-the-art network LBs rely on heuristic mechanisms [2–5] under the low-latency and highthroughput constraints of the data plane. However, these heuristics are not adaptive to dynamic
environments and require human interventions, which can lead to most painful mistakes in the
cloud – mis-configurations. RL approaches have shown performance gains in distributed system and
networking problems [6–9], yet applying RL on the network load balancing problem is challenging.
First, unlike traditional workload distribution or task scheduling problem [6, 7], network LBs have
limited observations over the system, including task sizes and actual server load states. Being aware
of only the number of tasks they have distributed, servers can be overloaded by collided elephant
tasks and have degraded quality of service (QoS).
Second, to guarantee high service availability in the cloud, multiple LBs are deployed in DCs.
Network traffic is split among all LBs. This multi-agent setup makes LBs have only partial observation
over the system.
Third, modern DCs are based on heterogeneous hardware and elastic infrastructures [10], where
server capacities vary. It is challenging to assign correct weights to servers according to their actual
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

