Exponential Family Model-Based Reinforcement
Learning via Score Matching

Gene Li
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
gene@ttic.edu

Junbo Li
UC Santa Cruz
jli753@ucsc.edu

Anmol Kabra
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
anmol@ttic.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Zhuoran Yang
Yale University
zhuoran.yang@yale.edu

Abstract
We propose an optimistic model-based algorithm, dubbed SMRL, for finite-horizon
episodic reinforcement learning (RL) when the transition model is specified by
exponential family distributions with d parameters and the reward is bounded and
known. SMRL uses score matching, an unnormalized density estimation technique
that enables efficient estimation of the model parameter
√ by ridge regression. Under
standard regularity assumptions, SMRL achieves Õ(d H 3 T ) online regret, where
H is the length of each episode and T is the total number of interactions (ignoring
polynomial dependence on structural scale parameters).

1

Introduction

This paper studies the regret minimization problem for finite horizon, episodic reinforcement learning
(RL) with infinitely large state and action spaces. Empirically, RL has achieved success in diverse
domains, even when the problem size (measured in the number of states and actions) explodes
[35, 41, 28]. The key to developing sample-efficient algorithms is to leverage function approximation,
enabling us to generalize across different state-action pairs. Much theoretical progress has been
made towards understanding function approximation in RL. Existing theory typically requires
strong linearity assumptions on transition dynamics [e.g., 51, 26, 8, 36] or action-value functions
[e.g., 30, 52] of the Markov Decision Process (MDP). However, most real world problems are
nonlinear. Our theoretical understanding of these settings remains limited. Thus, we ask the question:
Can we design provably efficient RL algorithms in nonlinear environments?
Recently, Chowdhury et al. [11] introduced a nonlinear setting where the state-transition measures are
finitely parameterized exponential family models, and they proposed to estimate model parameters
via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). The exponential family is a well-studied and powerful
statistical framework, so it is a natural model class to consider beyond linear models. Chowdhury
et al. study exponential family transitions of the form:
PW0 (s0 |s, a) = q(s0 ) exp (hψ(s0 ), W0 φ(s, a)i − Zsa (W0 )) ,

(1)

where ψ ∈ Rdψ and φ ∈ Rdφ are known feature mappings, q is a known base measure, W0 is the
unknown parameter to be learned, and Zsa is the log partition function that ensures the density
integrates to 1. This transition model covers both linear dynamical systems as well as the nonlinear
dynamical system (nonLDS), introduced by Mania et al. [33]. Linear dynamical systems with
quadratic rewards, i.e., the linear quadratic regulator (LQR), have received much attention recently as
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

