Fair and Efficient Allocations Without Obvious
Manipulations
Alexandros Psomas
Purdue University
apsomas@cs.purdue.edu

Paritosh Verma
Purdue University
verma136@purdue.edu

Abstract
We consider the fundamental problem of allocating a set of indivisible goods among
strategic agents with additive valuation functions. It is well known that, in the absence of monetary transfers, Pareto efficient and truthful rules are dictatorial, while
there is no deterministic truthful mechanism that allocates all items and achieves
envy-freeness up to one item (EF1), even for the case of two agents. In this paper,
we investigate the interplay of fairness and efficiency under a relaxation of truthfulness called non-obvious manipulability (NOM), recently proposed by [TM20]. We
show that this relaxation allows us to bypass the aforementioned negative results
in a very strong sense. Specifically, we prove that there are deterministic and EF1
algorithms that are not obviously manipulable, and the algorithm that maximizes
utilitarian social welfare (the sum of agents’ utilities), which is Pareto efficient
but not dictatorial, is not obviously manipulable for n 3 agents (but obviously
manipulable for n = 2 agents). At the same time, maximizing the egalitarian
social welfare (the minimum of agents’ utilities) or the Nash social welfare (the
product of agents’ utilities) is obviously manipulable for any number of agents and
items. Our main result is an approximation preserving black-box reduction from
the problem of designing EF1 and NOM mechanisms to the problem of designing
EF1 algorithms. En route, we prove an interesting structural result about EF1
allocations, as well as new “best-of-both-worlds” results (for the problem without
incentives), that might be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

We consider the fundamental problem of allocating a set of indivisible items among strategic agents
with additive preferences. It is well-understood that, in the absence of monetary transfers, fairness, efficiency and truthfulness cannot be reconciled, in a very strong sense. For example, a serial dictatorship
(arguably the most unfair rule) is the unique truthful and Pareto efficient mechanism [KM02, EK03],
even for the case of two agents and randomized mechanisms (or, equivalently, divisible items) [Sch96].
At the same time, achieving envy-freeness up to one item (EF1) [Bud11], a popular fairness notion
for indivisible goods that is compatible with Pareto efficiency [CKM+ 19], is impossible for truthful
and deterministic mechanisms to achieve, even for two additive agents [ABCM17].
The standard abstraction for a strategic agent assumes that, when presented with an algorithm, the
agent will perfectly understand it and optimally respond to it. Therefore, a truthful mechanism should
protect against all deviating strategies. This modeling is overly pessimistic since, for example, in
practice agents do not have exact knowledge about others’ preferences. Since truthfulness rules out
reasonable solutions, previous work typically ignores strategic issues altogether. In this paper we
aim to escape the aforementioned impossibility results by relaxing truthfulness: our goal is to design
mechanisms that protect only against obviously dominant deviating strategies.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

