DetCLIP: Dictionary-Enriched Visual-Concept
Paralleled Pre-training for Open-world Detection

Lewei Yao1,2∗ , Jianhua Han2∗ , Youpeng Wen3 , Xiaodan Liang3 , Dan Xu1 ,
Wei Zhang2 , Zhenguo Li2 , Chunjing Xu2 , Hang Xu2†
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University

Abstract
Open-world object detection, as a more general and challenging goal, aims to recognize and localize objects described by arbitrary category names. The recent work
GLIP formulates this problem as a grounding problem by concatenating all category
names of detection datasets into sentences, which leads to inefficient interaction
between category names. This paper presents DetCLIP, a paralleled visual-concept
pre-training method for open-world detection by resorting to knowledge enrichment from a designed concept dictionary. To achieve better learning efficiency, we
propose a novel paralleled concept formulation that extracts concepts separately
to better utilize heterogeneous datasets (i.e., detection, grounding, and image-text
pairs) for training. We further design a concept dictionary (with descriptions) from
various online sources and detection datasets to provide prior knowledge for each
concept. By enriching the concepts with their descriptions, we explicitly build the
relationships among various concepts to facilitate the open-domain learning. The
proposed concept dictionary is further used to provide sufficient negative concepts
for the construction of the word-region alignment loss and to complete labels for
objects with missing descriptions in captions of image-text pair data. The proposed
framework demonstrates strong zero-shot detection performances, e.g., on the LVIS
dataset, our DetCLIP-T outperforms GLIP-T by 9.9% mAP and obtains a 13.5%
improvement on rare categories compared to the fully-supervised model with the
same backbone as ours.

1

Introduction

Most state-of-the-art object detection methods [37, 39, 3, 55] can only recognize and localize a predefined number of categories. Their detection performance greatly relies on sufficient training data for
each category, which requires expensive and time-consuming human annotations, especially for the
rare classes that can only be distinguished from the expert. Even though a great effort has been made,
existing publicly available detection datasets only have a limited number of object categories, for
instance, 80 for COCO [31], 365 for Object365 [43], and 1203 for LVIS [16]. However, versatile openworld object detection is still out of reach mainly for two reasons: a) Due to the long-tail problem [16],
finding sufficient examples for rare categories is surprisingly challenging; b) Developing a larger
detection dataset requires extremely costly and labor-intensive manual annotation.
On the other hand, image-text pair data are cheap and abundant on the Internet. Recent visionlanguage (VL) pre-training methods (e.g., CLIP [36], ALIGN [26]) utilize those data to extend their
open-domain capacity and have shown good zero-shot ability on various downstream classification
tasks. Intuitively, some works [15, 51, 48, 12] try to extend a two-stage detector to an open-world
∗

Equal contribution, † Corresponding author: xu.hang@huawei.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

