VRL3: A Data-Driven Framework for Visual Deep
Reinforcement Learning

Che Wang1,2∗

Xufang Luo3

Keith Ross1

Dongsheng Li3

1

New York University Shanghai
2
New York University
3
Microsoft Research Asia, Shanghai, China

Abstract
We propose VRL3, a powerful data-driven framework with a simple design for
solving challenging visual deep reinforcement learning (DRL) tasks. We analyze a
number of major obstacles in taking a data-driven approach, and present a suite
of design principles, novel findings, and critical insights about data-driven visual
DRL. Our framework has three stages: in stage 1, we leverage non-RL datasets
(e.g. ImageNet) to learn task-agnostic visual representations; in stage 2, we use
offline RL data (e.g. a limited number of expert demonstrations) to convert the
task-agnostic representations into more powerful task-specific representations; in
stage 3, we fine-tune the agent with online RL. On a set of challenging hand
manipulation tasks with sparse reward and realistic visual inputs, compared to
the previous SOTA, VRL3 achieves an average of 780% better sample efficiency.
And on the hardest task, VRL3 is 1220% more sample efficient (2440% when
using a wider encoder) and solves the task with only 10% of the computation.
These significant results clearly demonstrate the great potential of data-driven deep
reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, the sample efficiency of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has significantly improved in popular benchmarks such as Gym [4, 82] and DeepMind Control Suite (DMC)
[80]. However, the environments in these benchmarks often look different from the real world (see
discussion in section 5.8, page 8 in [73]). It remains unclear whether the sample-efficient methodologies developed for these benchmarks can be successfully extended to more practical tasks that rely on
realistic visual inputs from cameras and sensors, such as in robotic control and autonomous driving.
A promising direction is to take a data-driven approach, that is, try to use all the data available that
might contribute to the learning process. Indeed, in the past few decades, the most important advances
in deep learning have been facilitated by the use of large amounts of data and computation [78, 47].
Such a data-driven approach is natural and mature for supervised learning, but not as much so for RL,
where learning is most commonly performed in an online fashion.
Although recent advances in representation learning for RL and offline RL reveal the potential of
such an approach, most existing offline RL methods focus on tasks with proprioceptive (“raw-state”)
input and not the challenging visual control tasks. There is yet to be a method that can fully utilize
data from multiple different sources to boost learning efficiency. In this work, the goal is to develop
a data-driven framework that fills this role. And this framework is designed to be as simple as
∗

This work was done when Che Wang was interning with Microsoft Research Asia.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

