Positively Weighted Kernel Quadrature via
Subsampling
Satoshi Hayakawa, Harald Oberhauser, Terry Lyons
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford
{hayakawa,oberhauser,tlyons}@maths.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We study kernel quadrature rules with convex weights. Our approach combines the
spectral properties of the kernel with recombination results about point measures.
This results in effective algorithms that construct convex quadrature rules using
only access to i.i.d. samples from the underlying measure and evaluation of the
kernel and that result in a small worst-case error. In addition to our theoretical
results and the benefits resulting from convex weights, our experiments indicate that
this construction can compete with the optimal bounds in well-known examples. 1

1

Introduction

The goal of numerical quadrature is to provide, for a given probability measure µ on a space X , a set
of points x1 , . . . , xn 2 X and weights w1 , . . . , wn 2 R such that
Z
n
X
wi f (xi ) ⇡
f (x) dµ(x)
(1)
X

i=1

holds for a large class of functions f : X ! R. Kernel quadrature focuses on the case when the
function class forms a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). What makes kernel quadrature
attractive, is that the kernel choice provides a simple and flexible way to encode the regularity
properties of a function class. Exploiting such regularity properties is essential when the integration
domain X is high-dimensional or the function class is large. Additionally, the domain X does not
have to be Euclidean, but can be any topological space that carries a positive semi-definite kernel.
Pn
More formally, given a set Q := {(wi , xi ) : i = 1, . . . , n} ⇢ R ⇥ X denote with µQ := i=1 wi xi
the resulting measure on X . We refer to Q [resp. µQ ] as a quadrature [resp. quadrature measure], to
the points x1 , . . . , xn as the support of Q [resp. µQ ]. The aim of kernel quadrature is to construct
quadrature measures µQ that have a small worst-case error
Z
Z
Q
wce(Q; Hk , µ) := sup
f (x) dµ (x)
f (x) dµ(x) ,
(2)
kf kHk 1

X

X

where Hk denotes the RKHS associated
Pn with a positive semi-definite kernel k. If the weights are
positive and sum up to one, wi > 0, i=1 wi = 1, then we refer to Q as a convex quadrature rule.

Contribution. The primary contribution of this article is to leverage recombination (a consequence
of Carathéodory’s Theorem) with spectral analysis of kernels to construct convex kernel quadrature
rules and derive convergence rates. We also provide efficient algorithms that compute these quadrature
rules; they only need access to i.i.d. samples from µ and the evaluation of the kernel k. See Table 1
for a comparision with other kernel quadrature constructions.
1

Code: https://github.com/satoshi-hayakawa/kernel-quadrature

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

