Amortized Inference for Causal Structure Learning

Lars Lorch
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
llorch@ethz.ch
Andreas Krause∗
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

Scott Sussex
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
ssussex@ethz.ch

Jonas Rothfuss
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
rojonas@ethz.ch

Bernhard Schölkopf∗
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Inferring causal structure poses a combinatorial search problem that typically involves evaluating structures with a score or independence test. The resulting search
is costly, and designing suitable scores or tests that capture prior knowledge is
difficult. In this work, we propose to amortize causal structure learning. Rather
than searching over structures, we train a variational inference model to directly
predict the causal structure from observational or interventional data. This allows
our inference model to acquire domain-specific inductive biases for causal discovery solely from data generated by a simulator, bypassing both the hand-engineering
of suitable score functions and the search over graphs. The architecture of our
inference model emulates permutation invariances that are crucial for statistical
efficiency in structure learning, which facilitates generalization to significantly
larger problem instances than seen during training. On synthetic data and semisynthetic gene expression data, our models exhibit robust generalization capabilities
when subject to substantial distribution shifts and significantly outperform existing
algorithms, especially in the challenging genomics domain. Our code and models
are publicly available at: https://github.com/larslorch/avici.

1

Introduction

Learning the causal structure among a set of variables is a fundamental task in various scientific
disciplines (Spirtes et al., 2000; Pearl, 2009). However, inferring this causal structure from observations of the variables is a difficult inverse problem. The solution space of potential causal structures,
usually modeled as directed graphs, grows superexponentially with the number of variables. To infer
a causal structure, standard methods have to search over potential graphs, usually maximizing either
a graph scoring function or testing for conditional independences (Heinze-Deml et al., 2018).
Specifying realistic inductive biases is universally difficult for existing approaches to causal discovery.
Score-based methods use strong assumptions about the data-generating process, such as linearity
(Shimizu et al., 2006), specific noise models (Hoyer et al., 2008; Peters and Bühlmann, 2014), and
the absence of measurement error (cf. Scheines and Ramsey 2016; Zhang et al. 2017), which are
difficult to verify (Dawid, 2010; Reisach et al., 2021). Conversely, constraint-based methods do not
have enough domain-specific inductive bias. Even with an arbitrarily large dataset, they are limited
to identifying equivalence classes that may be exponentially large (He et al., 2015b). Moreover, the
search over directed graphs itself may introduce unwanted bias and artifacts (cf. Colombo et al. 2014).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
∗

Equal supervision.

