Repeated Augmented Rehearsal: A Simple but Strong
Baseline for Online Continual Learning

Yaqian Zhang
University of Waikato
New Zealand
yaqianz@waikato.ac.nz
Albert Bifet
University of Waikato
New Zealand
LTCI, Télécom Paris, France
abifet@waikato.ac.nz

Bernhard Pfahringer
University of Waikato
New Zealand
bernhard@waikato.ac.nz
Nick Jin Sean Lim
University of Waikato
New Zealand
nick.lim@waikato.ac.nz

Eibe Frank
University of Waikato
New Zealand
eibe@waikato.ac.nz
Yunzhe Jia
University of Waikato
New Zealand
alvin.jia@waikato.ac.nz

Abstract
Online continual learning (OCL) aims to train neural networks incrementally from
a non-stationary data stream with a single pass through data. Rehearsal-based methods attempt to approximate the observed input distributions over time with a small
memory and revisit them later to avoid forgetting. Despite their strong empirical
performance, rehearsal methods still suffer from a poor approximation of past data’s
loss landscape with memory samples. This paper revisits the rehearsal dynamics in
online settings. We provide theoretical insights on the inherent memory overfitting
risk from the viewpoint of biased and dynamic empirical risk minimization, and
examine the merits and limits of repeated rehearsal. Inspired by our analysis, a
simple and intuitive baseline, repeated augmented rehearsal (RAR), is designed
to address the underfitting-overfitting dilemma of online rehearsal. Surprisingly,
across four rather different OCL benchmarks, this simple baseline outperforms
vanilla rehearsal by 9%-17% and also significantly improves the state-of-the-art
rehearsal-based methods MIR, ASER, and SCR. We also demonstrate that RAR
successfully achieves an accurate approximation of the loss landscape of past data
and high-loss ridge aversion in its learning trajectory. Extensive ablation studies are
conducted to study the interplay between repeated and augmented rehearsal, and
reinforcement learning (RL) is applied to dynamically adjust the hyperparameters
of RAR to balance the stability-plasticity trade-off online. Code is available at
https://github.com/YaqianZhang/RepeatedAugmentedRehearsal.

1

Introduction

Despite its recent success, deep learning largely relies on the assumption of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data that can be repeatedly revisited during training. Non-i.i.d settings are
challenging for neural networks due to catastrophic forgetting: previously learned knowledge can
easily be overwritten when training on new data because this data may follow a different distribution [Li and Hoiem, 2017, Rebuffi et al., 2017, Delange et al., 2021]. Online continual learning (OCL
or Online CL) studies how to enable deep learning in an online manner from a non-stationary data
stream. As the data stream can be vast or even infinite, it is infeasible to store and shuffle the dataset
for multiple epochs of training. Therefore, a fundamental assumption is that the data stream can only
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

