The least-control principle
for local learning at equilibrium

Alexander Meulemans∗ †1 , Nicolas Zucchet∗1 , Seijin Kobayashi∗†1
Johannes von Oswald1 , João Sacramento2
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and ETH Zürich
{ameulema, nzucchet, seijink, voswaldj, rjoao}@ethz.ch
2

Abstract
Equilibrium systems are a powerful way to express neural computations. As
special cases, they include models of great current interest in both neuroscience
and machine learning, such as deep neural networks, equilibrium recurrent neural
networks, deep equilibrium models, or meta-learning. Here, we present a new
principle for learning such systems with a temporally- and spatially-local rule.
Our principle casts learning as a least-control problem, where we first introduce
an optimal controller to lead the system towards a solution state, and then define
learning as reducing the amount of control needed to reach such a state. We
show that incorporating learning signals within a dynamics as an optimal control
enables transmitting activity-dependent credit assignment information, avoids
storing intermediate states in memory, and does not rely on infinitesimal learning
signals. In practice, our principle leads to strong performance matching that of
leading gradient-based learning methods when applied to an array of problems
involving recurrent neural networks and meta-learning. Our results shed light on
how the brain might learn and offer new ways of approaching a broad class of
machine learning problems.

1

Introduction

The neural networks of the cortex are both layered and highly recurrent [1, 2]. Their high degree
of recurrence and relatively low depth stands in contrast to the prevailing design of artificial neural
networks, which have high depth and little to no recurrence. This discrepancy has triggered a recent
wave of research into recurrent networks that are more brain-like and which achieve high performance
in perceptual tasks [3–7]. Concurrently, another line of recent work has shown that repeating a short
sequence of neural computations until convergence can lead to large gains in efficiency, reaching the
state-of-the-art in various machine learning problems while reducing model size [8–10].
As we develop models that come closer to cortical networks by way of their recurrence, the precise
mechanisms supporting learning in the brain remain largely unknown. While gradient-based methods
currently dominate machine learning, standard methods for efficient gradient computation result
in non-local rules that are hard to interpret in biological terms [11, 12]. This issue is particularly
aggravated when applying these methods to complex systems involving recurrence [13]. Indeed,
while multiple interesting proposals [14–23] have emerged for how to efficiently compute loss
function gradients for feedforward networks in biologically-plausible ways, apart from a few notable
exceptions [24, 25] much less progress has been made for recurrent networks. Furthermore, the
majority of these methods requires that error feedback does not influence network activity, a property
∗
†

Equal contribution
Work partly done at the Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich & ETH Zürich

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

