Rethinking Individual Global Max in Cooperative
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Yitian Hong
East China University of Science and Technology
ythong1314@mail.ecust.edu.cn

Yaochu Jin∗
Bielefeld University
yaochu.jin@uni-bielefeld.de

Yang Tang∗
East China University of Science and Technology
yangtang@ecust.edu.cn

Abstract
In cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning, centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) has achieved remarkable success. Individual Global
Max (IGM) decomposition, which is an important element of CTDE, measures the
consistency between local and joint policies. The majority of IGM-based research
focuses on how to establish this consistent relationship, but little attention has
been paid to examining IGM’s potential flaws. In this work, we reveal that the
IGM condition is a lossy decomposition, and the error of lossy decomposition
will accumulated in hypernetwork-based methods. To address the above issue, we
propose to adopt an imitation learning strategy to separate the lossy decomposition
from Bellman iterations, thereby avoiding error accumulation. The proposed strategy is theoretically proved and empirically verified on the StarCraft Multi-Agent
Challenge benchmark problem with zero sight view. The results also confirm that
the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art IGM-based approaches.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has been proposed for multi-agent collaborations to accomplish many challenging tasks [1, 2, 3, 4]. MARL often relies on decentralized
structures because of constraints in communication and observation commonly seen in applications
[5]. Using additional information during the training process is a popular paradigm for decentralized
MARL, known as centralized training [6, 7].
The value decomposition (VD) method [8], as one of the centralized training and decentralized
execution (CTDE) paradigm, decomposes the joint-action value into multiple individual-action values
and has achieved the state-of-the-art performance in StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) [9].
In the CTDE paradigm, Individual Global Max (IGM) is an important principle in VD for efficiently
facilitating centralized training for decentralized execution.
IGM was proposed in QMIX [10], a popular VD method, which uses a hypernetwork (MIX network) structure with additional environmental information to decompose the joint-action value into
* Corresponding author
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Basic Science Center Program:
61988101), Natural Science Foundation of China (62136003, 62233005), the Programme of Introducing Talents
of Discipline to Universities (the 111 Project) under Grant B17017 and Shanghai AI Lab.
Y. Jin is supported by an Alexander von Humboldt Professorship for AI endowed by the German Federal Ministry
of Education and Research.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

