SignRFF: Sign Random Fourier Features

Xiaoyun Li, Ping Li
LinkedIn Ads
700 Bellevue WA NE, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{lixiaoyun996,pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
The industry practice has been moving to embedding based retrieval (EBR). For
example, in many applications, the embedding vectors are trained by some form
of two-tower models. During serving phase, candidates (embedding vectors) are
retrieved according to the rankings of cosine similarities either exhaustively or
by approximate near neighbor (ANN) search algorithms. For those applications,
it is natural to apply “sign random projections” (SignRP) or variants, on the
trained embedding vectors to facilitate efficient data storage and cosine distance
computations. SignRP is also one of the standard indexing schemes for conducting
approximate near neighbor search. In the literature, SignRP has been popular and,
to an extent, becomes the default method for “locality sensitive hashing” (LSH).
In this paper, we propose “sign random Fourier features” (SignRFF) as an alternative to SignRP. The original method of random Fourier features (RFF) is a standard
technique for approximating the Gaussian kernel (as opposed to the linear cosine
kernel), in the literature of large-scale machine learning. Basically, RFF applies a
simple nonlinear transformation on the samples generated by random projections
(RP). Thus, in the pipeline of EBR, it is straightforward to replace SignRP by
SignRFF. This paper explains, in a principled manner, why it makes sense to do so.
In this paper, a new analytical measure called Ranking Efficiency (RE) is developed, which in retrospect is closely related to the “two-sample mean” t-test
statistic for binomial variables. RE provides a systematic and unified framework for
comparing different LSH methods. We compare our proposed SignRP with SignRP,
KLSH (kernel LSH), as well SQ-RFF (which is another 1-bit coding scheme for
RFF). According to the RE expression, SignRFF consistently outperforms KLSH
(for Gaussian kernel) and SQ-RFF. SignRFF also outperforms SignRP in the relatively high similarity region. The theoretical comparison results are consistent
with our empirical findings. In addition, experiments are conducted to compare
SignRFF with a wide range of data-dependent and deep learning based hashing
methods and show the advantage of SignRFF with a sufficient number of hash bits.

1

Introduction

We study the search problem with data points in Rd . Let X denote the database consisting of n
data points. Given a query data point q, the task is to find the a similar data point in X. For the
purpose of discussion, we denote two data points in X by x and y. For simplicity, we consider the
data points are normalized, i.e., ∥x∥ = ∥y∥ = 1. Therefore, the “cosine” similarity between x and
Pd
y is simply ρ = cos(x, y) = i=1 xi yi . We also denote the Gaussian kernel between x and y to
2
be k(ρ) ≡ k(x, y) = e−γ (1−ρ) , where γ > 0 is a tuning parameter. In this paper, we study binary
coding algorithms for efficiently finding near neighbors based on similarities related to ρ and k(ρ).
In particular, our methods are based on random projections and (quantized) random Fourier features.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

