NAS-Bench-360: Benchmarking
Neural Architecture Search on Diverse Tasks
Renbo Tu∗
University of Toronto
renbo.tu@mail.utoronto.ca

Nicholas Roberts∗
University of Wisconsin
nick11roberts@cs.wisc.edu

Mikhail Khodak
Carnegie Mellon University
khodak@cmu.edu

Junhong Shen
Carnegie Mellon University
junhongs@andrew.cmu.edu

Frederic Sala
University of Wisconsin
fsala@wisc.edu

Ameet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
Most existing neural architecture search (NAS) benchmarks and algorithms prioritize well-studied tasks, e.g. image classification on CIFAR or ImageNet. This
makes the performance of NAS approaches in more diverse areas poorly understood. In this paper, we present NAS-Bench-360, a benchmark suite to evaluate
methods on domains beyond those traditionally studied in architecture search, and
use it to address the following question: do state-of-the-art NAS methods perform
well on diverse tasks? To construct the benchmark, we curate ten tasks spanning
a diverse array of application domains, dataset sizes, problem dimensionalities,
and learning objectives. Each new task is carefully chosen to interoperate with
modern convolutional neural network (CNN) search methods while being far-afield
from their original development domain. To speed up and reduce the cost of NAS
research, for two of the tasks we release the precomputed performance of 15,625
architectures comprising a standard CNN search space. Experimentally, we show
the need for more robust NAS evaluation of the kind NAS-Bench-360 enables by
showing that several modern NAS procedures perform inconsistently across the ten
tasks, with many catastrophically poor results. We also demonstrate how our benchmark and its associated precomputed results will enable future scientific discoveries
by testing whether several recent hypotheses promoted in the NAS literature hold
on diverse tasks. NAS-Bench-360 is hosted at https://nb360.ml.cmu.edu/.

1

Introduction

Neural architecture search (NAS) aims to automate the design of deep neural networks, ensuring
performance on par with hand-crafted architectures while reducing human labor devoted to tedious
architecture tuning [20]. With the growing number of application areas of ML, and thus of use-cases
for automating it, NAS has experienced an intense amount of study in well-established machine
learning domains, with significant progress in search space design [63, 42, 6], search efficiency [46],
and search algorithms [55, 37, 53]. Notably, the field has largely been dominated by methods designed
for and evaluated on benchmarks in computer vision [42, 56, 17], yet the use of NAS techniques may
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

