How Powerful are K-hop Message Passing Graph
Neural Networks
Jiarui Feng1,2 Yixin Chen1 Fuhai Li2 Anindya Sarkar1 Muhan Zhang3,4
{feng.jiarui, fuhai.li, anindya}@wustl.edu,
chen@cse.wustl.edu, muhan@pku.edu.cn
1
Department of CSE, Washington University in St. Louis
2
Institute for Informatics, Washington University School of Medicine
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
The most popular design paradigm for Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) is 1-hop
message passing—aggregating information from 1-hop neighbors repeatedly. However, the expressive power of 1-hop message passing is bounded by the WeisfeilerLehman (1-WL) test. Recently, researchers extended 1-hop message passing to
K-hop message passing by aggregating information from K-hop neighbors of
nodes simultaneously. However, there is no work on analyzing the expressive
power of K-hop message passing. In this work, we theoretically characterize the
expressive power of K-hop message passing. Specifically, we first formally differentiate two different kernels of K-hop message passing which are often misused
in previous works. We then characterize the expressive power of K-hop message
passing by showing that it is more powerful than 1-WL and can distinguish almost
all regular graphs. Despite the higher expressive power, we show that K-hop message passing still cannot distinguish some simple regular graphs and its expressive
power is bounded by 3-WL. To further enhance its expressive power, we introduce
a KP-GNN framework, which improves K-hop message passing by leveraging
the peripheral subgraph information in each hop. We show that KP-GNN can
distinguish many distance regular graphs which could not be distinguished by
previous distance encoding or 3-WL methods. Experimental results verify the
expressive power and effectiveness of KP-GNN. KP-GNN achieves competitive
results across all benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Currently, most existing graph neural networks (GNNs) follow the message passing framework,
which iteratively aggregates information from the neighbors and updates the representations of nodes.
It has shown superior performance on graph-related tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] comparing to traditional
graph embedding techniques [8, 9]. However, as the procedure of message passing is similar to the
1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) test [10], the expressive power of message passing GNNs
is also bounded by the 1-WL test [7, 11]. Namely, GNNs cannot distinguish two non-isomorphic
graph structures if the 1-WL test fails.
In normal message passing GNNs, the node representation is updated by the direct neighbors of
the node, which are called 1-hop neighbors. Recently, some works extend the notion of message
passing into K-hop message passing [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. K-hop message passing is a type of
message passing where the node representation is updated by aggregating information from not only
1st hop but all the neighbors within K hops of the node. However, there is no work on theoretically
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

