On the Learning Mechanisms in Physical Reasoning

Shiqian Li⋆,1,2,5 , Kewen Wu⋆,3,5 , Chi Zhang4,5 , Yixin Zhu1,2
1

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
4
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
5
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
Project Website https://lishiqianhugh.github.io/LfID_Page

Abstract
Is dynamics prediction indispensable for physical reasoning? If so, what kind
of roles do the dynamics prediction modules play during the physical reasoning
process? Most studies focus on designing dynamics prediction networks and treating physical reasoning as a downstream task without investigating the questions
above, taking for granted that the designed dynamics prediction would undoubtedly
help the reasoning process. In this work, we take a closer look at this assumption,
exploring this fundamental hypothesis by comparing two learning mechanisms:
Learning from Dynamics (LfD) and Learning from Intuition (LfI). In the first
experiment, we directly examine and compare these two mechanisms. Results
show a surprising finding: Simple LfI is better than or on par with state-of-the-art
LfD. This observation leads to the second experiment with Ground-truth Dynamics (GD), the ideal case of LfD wherein dynamics are obtained directly from a
simulator. Results show that dynamics, if directly given instead of approximated,
would achieve much higher performance than LfI alone on physical reasoning; this
essentially serves as the performance upper bound. Yet practically, LfD mechanism
can only predict Approximate Dynamics (AD) using dynamics learning modules
that mimic the physical laws, making the following downstream physical reasoning
modules degenerate into the LfI paradigm; see the third experiment. We note that
this issue is hard to mitigate, as dynamics prediction errors inevitably accumulate in
the long horizon. Finally, in the fourth experiment, we note that LfI, the extremely
simpler strategy when done right, is more effective in learning to solve physical
reasoning problems. Taken together, the results on the challenging benchmark of
PHYRE [3] show that LfI is, if not better, as good as LfD with bells and whistles
for dynamics prediction. However, the potential improvement from LfD, though
challenging, remains lucrative.

1

Introduction

Humans possess a distinctive ability of understanding physical concepts and performing complex
physical reasoning. The literature on humans learning mechanisms for solving physical reasoning
problems can be categorized into two schools of thought [43]: (i) physical intuition at a glance
without much thinking, such as judging whether a stacked block tower will collapse [6], and (ii) more
⋆

indicates equal contribution.
indicates corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

