Off-Team Learning

Brandon Cui†
MosaicML
brandon@mosaicml.com

Hengyuan Hu†
Stanford University
hengyuan@cs.stanford.edu

Andrei Lupu
Meta AI & FLAIR, University of Oxford
alupu@meta.com

Samuel Sokota
Carnegie Mellon University
ssokota@andrew.cmu.edu

Jakob N. Foerster †
FLAIR, University of Oxford
jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Zero-shot coordination (ZSC) evaluates an algorithm by the performance of a
team of agents that were trained independently under that algorithm. Off-belief
learning (OBL) is a recent method that achieves state-of-the-art results in ZSC in
the game Hanabi. However, the implementation of OBL relies on a belief model
that experiences covariate shift. Moreover, during ad-hoc coordination, OBL or
any other neural policy may experience test-time covariate shift. We present two
methods addressing these issues. The first method, off-team belief learning (OTBL), attempts to improve the accuracy of the belief model of a target policy πT
on a broader range of inputs by weighting trajectories approximately according to
the distribution induced by a different policy πb . The second, off-team off-belief
learning (OT-OBL), attempts to compute an OBL equilibrium, where fixed point
error is weighted according to the distribution induced by cross-play between the
training policy π and a different fixed policy πb instead of self-play of π. We
investigate these methods in variants of Hanabi.

1

Introduction

A core objective of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is to develop methods for coordinating with previously unseen partners such as other artificial agents or humans. In partially observable
fully cooperative settings, policies that were learned through self play develop efficient but opaque
arbitrary conventions that make collaboration with novel partners, or even independent training runs
of the same algorithm, extremely difficult [6, 4]. To study this issue, Hu et al. [6] introduced the
zero-shot coordination (ZSC) setting in which the goal is to maximize the intra-algorithm cross-play
(intra-AXP).2 ZSC evaluates algorithms under intra-AXP, i.e. by independently training N groups
of agents and evaluating teams made up of one member of each group. For an algorithm to achieve
good intra-AXP, it must tend to find compatible strategies across different, independent training runs.
Off-belief learning (OBL) [7] is a recent MARL algorithm designed to produce high intra-AXP. OBL
takes in an input policy π0 and aims to produce a uniquely defined output policy π1 . It effectively
†

Work done while at Meta AI (FAIR).
Note that the term “zero-shot coordination” is used ambiguously in the original paper[6], both informally
and as a specific problem setting. To avoid confusion, in this paper we use it strictly for the technical setting.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

