Towards Lightweight Black-Box Attacks Against Deep
Neural Networks
Chenghao Sun1 Yonggang Zhang2 Wan Chaoqun3 Qizhou Wang2
∗
Ya Li4 Tongliang Liu5 Bo Han2 Xinmei Tian1
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Hong Kong Baptist University
3
Alibaba Cloud Computing Ltd 4 iFlytek Research
5
The University of Sydney

Abstract
Black-box attacks can generate adversarial examples without accessing the parameters of deep neural networks (DNNs), largely exacerbating the threats of deployed
models. However, previous works state that black-box attacks fail to mislead
DNNs when their training data and outputs are inaccessible. In this work, we
argue that black-box attacks can pose practical attacks in this highly restrictive
scenario where only several test samples are available. Specifically, we find that
attacking the shallow layers of DNNs trained on a few test samples can generate
powerful adversarial examples. As only a few samples are required, we refer to
these attacks as lightweight black-box attacks. The main challenge to promoting
lightweight attacks is to mitigate the adverse impact caused by the approximation
error of shallow layers. As it is hard to mitigate the approximation error with few
available samples, we propose Error TransFormer (ETF) for lightweight attacks.
Namely, ETF transforms the approximation error in the parameter space into a
perturbation in the feature space and alleviates the error by disturbing features. In
our experiments, lightweight black-box attacks with the proposed ETF achieve
surprising results. For example, even if only 1 sample per category is available,
the attack success rate achieved by lightweight black-box attacks is only about 3%
lower than that of the black-box attacks using complete training data 1 .

1

Introduction

Black-box attack methods [12, 56, 60] can mount successful attacks without accessing the parameters
of deep neural networks (DNNs), posing great challenges to deep learning in safety-critical situations.
Existing black-box attack methods implicitly assume that the training data and/or the outputs of
target models are available to adversaries. For scenarios where training data are available, adversarial
examples can be generated by attacking surrogate models constructed for approximate target models.
Using the target models’ outputs for estimating gradients is another practical approach to crafting
adversarial examples. In general, due to the low dependency on target model information, the
black-box attacks raise realistic threats to real-world deep learning systems, including semantic
segmentation [2, 36], object detection [18, 45, 44], and automatic driving [54].
However, these assumptions can be violated in many practical scenarios [3, 46], where both the
training data and the outputs of target models are inaccessible. This realistic attack scenario is
introduced in [3], generally termed as the no-box setting. Under such a restrictive setting, Li et
∗
1

Corresponding author (xinmei@ustc.edu.cn)
Code is available at https://github.com/sunch-ustc/Error_TransFormer/tree/ETF

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

