DABS 2.0: Improved Datasets and Algorithms
for Universal Self Supervision
Alex Tamkin†
Stanford University

Gaurab Banerjee
Stanford University

Mohamed Owda
Stanford University

Vincent Liu
Stanford University

Shashank Rammoorthy
Stanford University

Noah D. Goodman
Stanford University

Abstract
Universal self-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms hold enormous promise for
making machine learning accessible to high-impact domains such as protein biology, manufacturing, and genomics. We present DABS 2.0: a set of improved
datasets and algorithms for advancing research on universal SSL. We extend the
recently-introduced DABS benchmark with the addition of five real-world science
and engineering domains: protein biology, bacterial genomics, multispectral satellite imagery, semiconductor wafers, and particle physics, bringing the total number
of domains in the benchmark to twelve. We also propose a new universal SSL
algorithm, Capri, and a generalized version of masked autoencoding, and apply
both on all twelve domains—the most wide-ranging exploration of SSL yet. We
find that multiple algorithms show gains across different domains, outperforming
previous baselines. In addition, we demonstrate the usefulness of DABS for scientific study of SSL by investigating the optimal corruption rate for each algorithm,
showing that the best setting varies based on the domain. Code will be released at
http://github.com/alextamkin/dabs.

1

Introduction

Recent months have continued to see the rise of large, self-supervised learning (SSL) models across
multiple domains [28, 31, 14, 4, 21, 77]. These works have been characterized by an increasing
convergence upon a similar set of methods [71, 10] generally involving large transformer model
architectures trained on large-scale datasets. Despite this trend, the actual learning tasks used to
train these SSL models still tend to vary significantly: contrastive, autoregressive, and denoising
objectives have each claimed their own niche, and different techniques still predominate in different
communities. While some prior work has moved towards a more domain-agnostic approach to SSL,
these works have largely been limited to analyzing the well-studied domains of images, text, and
speech [3, 6], leaving open the question of generalization to less-studied domains, including scientific,
medical, and engineering settings.
The DABS benchmark [62] was developed to provide a testbed for research on universal SSL
algorithms that could be applied across seven different domains, including less common settings
such as wearable sensors and chest x-rays. DABS can be used to develop new and improved
universal SSL algorithms, or to conduct scientific studies on pretraining and transfer across diverse
domains. Crucially, evaluating on a breadth of different domains enables researchers to have
greater confidence that their methods will generalize to a range of different settings in the real world,
and also to investigate how design choices made for one domain can affect learning on others.
†

atamkin@stanford.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

