Why do tree-based models still outperform deep
learning on typical tabular data?

Léo Grinsztajn
Soda, Inria Saclay
leo.grinsztajn@inria.fr

Edouard Oyallon
MLIA, Sorbonne University

Gaël Varoquaux
Soda, Inria Saclay

Abstract
While deep learning has enabled tremendous progress on text and image datasets,
its superiority on tabular data is not clear. We contribute extensive benchmarks of
standard and novel deep learning methods as well as tree-based models such as
XGBoost and Random Forests, across a large number of datasets and hyperparameter combinations. We define a standard set of 45 datasets from varied domains
with clear characteristics of tabular data and a benchmarking methodology accounting for both fitting models and finding good hyperparameters. Results show that
tree-based models remain state-of-the-art on medium-sized data (∼10K samples)
even without accounting for their superior speed. To understand this gap, we
conduct an empirical investigation into the differing inductive biases of tree-based
models and neural networks. This leads to a series of challenges which should
guide researchers aiming to build tabular-specific neural network: 1. be robust
to uninformative features, 2. preserve the orientation of the data, and 3. be able
to easily learn irregular functions. To stimulate research on tabular architectures,
we contribute a standard benchmark and raw data for baselines: every point of a
20 000 compute hours hyperparameter search for each learner.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has enabled tremendous progress for learning on image, language, or even audio
datasets. On tabular data, however, the picture is muddier and ensemble models based on decision
trees like XGBoost remain the go-to tool for most practitioners [Sta] and data science competitions
[Kossen et al., 2021]. Indeed deep learning architectures have been crafted to create inductive biases
matching invariances and spatial dependencies of the data. Finding corresponding invariances is hard
in tabular data, made of heterogeneous features, small sample sizes, extreme values.
Creating tabular-specific deep learning architectures is a very active area of research (see section 2).
One motivation is that tree-based models are not differentiable, and thus cannot be easily composed
and jointly trained with other deep learning blocks. Most tabular deep learning publications claim
to beat or match tree-based models, but their claims have been put into question: a simple Resnet
seems to be competitive with some of these new models [Gorishniy et al., 2021], and most of
these methods seem to fail on new datasets [Shwartz-Ziv and Armon, 2021]. Indeed, the lack
of an established benchmark for tabular data learning provides additional degrees of freedom to
researchers when evaluating their method. Furthermore, most tabular datasets available online are
small compared to benchmarks in other machine learning subdomains, such as ImageNet [Ima],
making evaluation noisier. These issues add up to other sources of unreplicability across machine
learning, such as unequal hyperparameters tuning efforts [Lipton and Steinhardt, 2019] or failure
to account for statistical uncertainty in benchmarks [Bouthillier et al., 2021]. To alleviate these
concerns, we contribute a tabular data benchmark with a precise methodology for datasets inclusion
and hyperparameter tuning. This enables us to evaluate recent deep learning models which have
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

