PyramidCLIP: Hierarchical Feature Alignment for
Vision-language Model Pretraining

Yuting Gao1∗ Jinfeng Liu1,2,∗
1

Tencent Youtu Lab

2

Zihan Xu1,∗

Jun Zhang1

Shanghai Jiaotong University

Ke Li1
3

Chunhua Shen3

Zhejiang University

{yutinggao,ianxxu,bobbyjzhang,tristanli}@tencent.com

Abstract
Large-scale vision-language pre-training has achieved promising results on downstream tasks. Existing methods highly rely on the assumption that the image-text
pairs crawled from the Internet are in perfect one-to-one correspondence. However,
in real scenarios, this assumption can be difficult to hold: the text description,
obtained by crawling the affiliated metadata of the image, often suffers from the
semantic mismatch and the mutual compatibility. To address these issues, we
introduce PyramidCLIP, which constructs an input pyramid with different semantic
levels for each modality, and aligns visual elements and linguistic elements in
the form of hierarchy via peer-level semantics alignment and cross-level relation
alignment. Furthermore, we soften the loss of negative samples (unpaired samples)
so as to weaken the strict constraint during the pre-training stage, thus mitigating
the risk of forcing the model to distinguish compatible negative pairs. Experiments
on five downstream tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed PyramidCLIP. In particular, with the same amount of 15 million pre-training image-text
pairs, PyramidCLIP exceeds CLIP on ImageNet zero-shot classification top-1
accuracy by 10.6%/13.2%/10.0% with ResNet50/ViT-B32/ViT-B16 based image
encoder respectively. When scaling to larger datasets, PyramidCLIP achieves the
state-of-the-art results on several downstream tasks. In particular, the results of
PyramidCLIP-ResNet50 trained on 143M image-text pairs surpass that of CLIP
using 400M data on ImageNet zero-shot classification task, significantly improving
the data efficiency of CLIP.

1

Introduction

Recently, vision-language pre-training (VLP) has achieved great success, which aims to improve
the accuracy of downstream vision-language tasks by pre-training a model on large-scale image-text
pairs harvested from the web without any manual annotation. The mainstream VLP methods can
be categorized into two paradigms, single-stream (1; 2; 3; 4; 5) and dual-stream (6; 7; 8; 9; 10).
Compared to the single-stream counterpart, the dual-stream paradigm decouples the image encoder
and text encoder and extracts features for images and texts respectively. Due to its simplicity and
flexibility for downstream applications, the dual-stream paradigm dominates. The representative
dual-stream model CLIP (6) performs contrastive vision-language pre-training on 400M imagetext pairs collected from the Internet, which achieves astounding results. Later, DeCLIP (10) and
FILIP (8) improve CLIP by introducing more supervisions, and bringing in fine-grained cross-modal
interaction.
Although existing CLIP-alike methods have achieved promising results on downstream tasks, they
strongly rely on the assumption that the image-text pairs are of high quality, i.e., the pairs are in
∗

The first three authors contributed equally. This work was done when J. Liu was an intern at Tencent.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

