Video-based Human-Object Interaction Detection
from Tubelet Tokens

1

Danyang Tu1 , Wei Sun1 , Xiongkuo Min1 , Guangtao Zhai1(B) , Wei Shen2(B)
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{danyangtu, sunguwei, minxiongkuo, zhaiguangtao, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a novel vision Transformer, named TUTOR, which is able to learn
tubelet tokens, served as highly-abstracted spatiotemporal representations, for
video-based human-object interaction (V-HOI) detection. The tubelet tokens structurize videos by agglomerating and linking semantically-related patch tokens along
spatial and temporal domains, which enjoy two benefits: 1) Compactness: each
tubelet token is learned by a selective attention mechanism to reduce redundant
spatial dependencies from others; 2) Expressiveness: each tubelet token is enabled
to align with a semantic instance, i.e., an object or a human, across frames, thanks
to agglomeration and linking. The effectiveness and efficiency of TUTOR are
verified by extensive experiments. Results show our method outperforms existing
works by large margins, with a relative mAP gain of 16.14% on VidHOI and a 2
points gain on CAD-120 as well as a 4× speedup.

1

Introduction

Human-object interaction (HOI) detection is a detailed scene understanding task, which requires both
localization of interacted human-object pairs and recognition of interaction labels. Existing methods
mostly investigated detecting HOIs in static images without capturing temporal information (Figure 1
(a)), thus lack the ability to detect time-related interactions (e.g., shoot or pass a basketball). However, interactions are more of time-related in practical scenario, leading to a strong demand to detect
HOIs from videos, a more challenging problem built on spatiotemporal semantic representations.
Transformer, originated from natural language processing (NLP), is an intuitive choice for its eminent
capability of reasoning long-range dependencies, in which one of the most crucial components is the
token. A token serves as an element of data representations, which is usually a word in language.
However, unlike language that naturally has such a discrete signal space for building tokenized
dictionaries, images lie in a continuous and high-dimensional space. To address this issue, vision
Transformer (ViT) [7] provided a solution that divides each image into several local patch tokens
(“visual words”) to structurize the entire image as a “visual sentence”(Figure 1(b)). This solution
has become a de facto tokenization standard followed by most existing Transformer-based methods,
which has achieved excellent performance for various vision tasks, especially image classification.
Nevertheless, this patch based tokenization strategy might not be proper for video-based HOI (V-HOI)
detection (as the performance degradation of the ViT-like framework shown in Table. 1a). We find
that the reason is the patch tokens generated by regular splitting are difficult to exactly capture
instance-level semantics (an instance is an object or a human, e.g., the basketball shooter in Figure 1),
which yet is crucial for V-HOI detection to reason the interaction labels. These patch tokens inevitably
B

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

