ViSioNS: Visual Search in Natural Scenes Benchmark
Fermin Travi1,2*
ftravi@dc.uba.ar

Gonzalo Ruarte1*
gruarte@dc.uba.ar

Gaston Bujia1,2
gbujia@dc.uba.ar

Juan E. Kamienkowski1,2,3
juank@dc.uba.ar

1
Laboratorio de Inteligencia Artificial Aplicada, Instituto de Ciencias de la Computación,
Universidad de Buenos Aires - CONICET, Argentina; 2 Depto. de Computación, Fac. de Cs.
Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina; 3 Maestría de Explotación de
Datos y Descubrimiento del Conocimiento, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina
*
Both authors contributed equally to the present work.

Abstract
Visual search is an essential part of almost any everyday human interaction with
the visual environment [1, 2]. Nowadays, several algorithms are able to predict
gaze positions during simple observation, but few models attempt to simulate
human behavior during visual search in natural scenes. Furthermore, these models
vary widely in their design and exhibit differences in the datasets and metrics
with which they were evaluated. Thus, there is a need for a reference point, on
which each model can be tested and from where potential improvements can be
derived. In this study, we select publicly available state-of-the-art visual search
models and datasets in natural scenes, and provide a common framework for
their evaluation. To this end, we apply a unified format and criteria, bridging
the gaps between them, and we estimate the models’ efficiency and similarity
with humans using a specific set of metrics. This integration has allowed us to
enhance the Ideal Bayesian Searcher by combining it with a neural network-based
visual search model, which enables it to generalize to other datasets. The present
work sheds light on the limitations of current models and how integrating different
approaches with a unified criteria can lead to better algorithms. Moreover, it moves
forward on bringing forth a solution for the urgent need of benchmarking data
and metrics to support the development of more general human visual search
computational models. All of the code used here, including metrics, plots, and
visual search models, alongside the preprocessed datasets, are available at https:
//github.com/FerminT/VisualSearchBenchmark.

1

Introduction

The neural mechanisms underlying the visual processing of an image at the center of the visual
field, without eye movements, have been thoroughly studied [3, 4]. This knowledge inspires the
development of precise models of image processing and feature extraction (both objective and
subjective) in the field of Artificial Intelligence [5, 6, 7]. Closing the loop, these models also provide
an intuition to the understanding of the algorithms that underpin human cognition [7, 8, 9, 10]. Among
their recent successes, they have been highly effective at predicting gaze positions over an image
when it is being freely explored [11, 12, 13, 14]; the metric-specific predicted spatial distribution,
derived from the model’s fixation density map, is called a saliency map [15, 16].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

