WebShop: Towards Scalable Real-World Web
Interaction with Grounded Language Agents
Shunyu Yao⇤ Howard Chen⇤ John Yang Karthik Narasimhan
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
{shunyuy, howardchen, jy1682, karthikn}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Existing benchmarks for grounding language in interactive environments either
lack real-world linguistic elements, or prove difficult to scale up due to substantial
human involvement in the collection of data or feedback signals. To bridge this gap,
we develop WebShop – a simulated e-commerce website environment with 1.18
million real-world products and 12, 087 crowd-sourced text instructions. Given a
text instruction specifying a product requirement, an agent needs to navigate multiple types of webpages and issue diverse actions to find, customize, and purchase
an item. WebShop provides several challenges for language grounding including
understanding compositional instructions, query (re-)formulation, comprehending and acting on noisy text in webpages, and performing strategic exploration.
We collect over 1, 600 human demonstrations for the task, and train and evaluate
a diverse range of agents using reinforcement learning, imitation learning, and
pre-trained image and language models. Our best model achieves a task success
rate of 29%, which outperforms rule-based heuristics (9.6%) but is far lower than
human expert performance (59%). We also analyze agent and human trajectories
and ablate various model components to provide insights for developing future
agents with stronger language understanding and decision making abilities. Finally,
we show that agents trained on WebShop exhibit non-trivial sim-to-real transfer
when evaluated on amazon.com and ebay.com , indicating the potential value of
WebShop in developing practical web-based agents that can operate in the wild.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in natural language processing (NLP) and reinforcement learning (RL) have brought
about several exciting developments in agents that can perform sequential decision making while
making use of linguistic context [30, 50, 58]. On the other hand, large-scale language models like
GPT-3 [6] and BERT [11] are excelling at traditional NLP benchmarks such as text classification,
information extraction and question answering. While the former set of tasks are limited in their
set of linguistic concepts and prove difficult to scale up, the latter tasks usually contain static, noninteractive datasets that lack adequate grounding to extra-linguistic concepts [4]. In order to make
further progress in building grounded language models, we believe there is a need for scalable
interactive environments that contain: (1) language elements that reflect rich, real-world usage and
are collectible at scale, and (2) task feedback that is well-defined and automatically computable to
facilitate interactive learning, without the constant need for expensive feedback from humans.
The world wide web (WWW) is a massive open-domain interactive environment that inherently
satisfies the first aforementioned requirement through its interconnected set of pages with natural
text, images and interactive elements. By being simultaneously scalable, semantic, interactive,
dynamic and realistic, the web is uniquely different from existing environments for autonomous
* Equal contribution. Project site with code, data, and demos: https://webshop-pnlp.github.io.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

