On Convergence of FedProx: Local Dissimilarity
Invariant Bounds, Non-smoothness and Beyond
Xiao-Tong Yuan
Nanjing Univ. of Information Sci. & Tech.
219 Ningliu Rd, Nanjing, China
xtyuan1980@gmail.com

Ping Li
LinkedIn Ads
700 Bellevue Way NE, Bellevue, WA, USA
pinli@linkedin.com

Abstract
The FedProx algorithm is a simple yet powerful distributed proximal point optimization method widely used for federated learning (FL) over heterogeneous data.
Despite its popularity and remarkable success witnessed in practice, the theoretical
understanding of FedProx is largely underinvestigated: the appealing convergence
behavior of FedProx is so far characterized under certain non-standard and unrealistic dissimilarity assumptions of local functions, and the results are limited to
smooth optimization problems. In order to remedy these deficiencies, we develop
a novel local dissimilarity invariant convergence theory for FedProx and its minibatch stochastic extension through the lens of algorithmic stability. As a result, we
contribute to derive several new and deeper insights into FedProx for non-convex
federated optimization including: 1) convergence guarantees invariant to certain
stringent local dissimilarity conditions; 2) convergence guarantees for non-smooth
FL problems; and 3) linear speedup with respect to size of minibatch and number
of sampled devices. Our theory for the first time reveals that local dissimilarity and
smoothness are not must-have for FedProx to get favorable complexity bounds.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has recently emerged as a promising paradigm for communication-efficient
distributed learning on remote devices, such as smartphones, internet of things, or agents (Konečnỳ
et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2019). The goal of FL is to collaboratively train a shared model that works
favorably for all the local data but without requiring the learners to transmit raw data across the
network. The principle of optimizing a global model while keeping data localized can be beneficial
for both computational efficiency and data privacy (Bhowmick et al., 2018). While resembling
the classic distributed learning regimes, there are two most distinct features associated with FL: 1)
large statistical heterogeneity of local data mainly due to the non-iid manner of data generalization
and collection across the devices (Hard et al., 2020); and 2) partial participation of devices in the
network mainly due to the massive number of devices. These fundamental challenges make FL highly
demanding to tackle, both in terms of optimization algorithm design and in terms of theoretical
understanding of convergence behavior (Li et al., 2020a).
FL is most conventionally formulated as the following problem of global population risk minimization
averaged over a set of M devices:
minp R̄(w) :=

w∈R

M
o
1 X n (m)
R (w) := EZ (m) ∼D(m) [`(m) (w; Z (m) )] ,
M m=1

(1)

where R(m) is the local population risk on device m, `(m) : Rp × Z (m) 7→ R+ is a non-negative
loss function whose value `(m) (w; Z (m) ) measures the loss over a random data point Z (m) ∈ Z (m)
with parameter w, D(m) represents an underlying random data distribution over Z (m) . Since the data
distribution is typically unknown, the following empirical risk minimization (ERM) version of (1) is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

