Marksman Backdoor: Backdoor Attacks with
Arbitrary Target Class

Khoa D. Doan1 , Yingjie Lao2 , Ping Li3
College of Engineering and Computer Science, VinUniversity
2
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Clemson University, USA
3
LinkedIn Ads, 700 Bellevue Way NE, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
khoa.dd@vinuni.edu.vn, ylao@clemson.edu, pinli@linkedin.com
1

Abstract
In recent years, machine learning models have been shown to be vulnerable to
backdoor attacks. Under such attacks, an adversary embeds a stealthy backdoor
into the trained model such that the compromised models will behave normally on
clean inputs but will misclassify according to the adversary’s control on maliciously
constructed input with a trigger. While these existing attacks are very effective,
the adversary’s capability is limited: given an input, these attacks can only cause
the model to misclassify toward a single pre-defined or target class. In contrast,
this paper exploits a novel backdoor attack with a much more powerful payload,
denoted as Marksman, where the adversary can arbitrarily choose which target
class the model will misclassify given any input during inference. To achieve this
goal, we propose to represent the trigger function as a class-conditional generative
model and to inject the backdoor in a constrained optimization framework, where
the trigger function learns to generate an optimal trigger pattern to attack any target
class at will while simultaneously embedding this generative backdoor into the
trained model. Given the learned trigger-generation function, during inference, the
adversary can specify an arbitrary backdoor attack target class, and an appropriate
trigger causing the model to classify toward this target class is created accordingly.
We show empirically that the proposed framework achieves high attack performance
(e.g., 100% attack success rates in several experiments) while preserving the cleandata performance in several benchmark datasets, including MNIST, CIFAR10,
GTSRB, and TinyImageNet. The proposed Marksman backdoor attack can also
easily bypass existing backdoor defenses that were originally designed against
backdoor attacks with a single target class. Our work takes another significant step
toward understanding the extensive risks of backdoor attacks in practice.

1

Introduction

Machine learning, especially deep neural networks (DNN), rapidly advances and transforms our daily
lives in various fields and applications. Such intelligence is becoming prevalent and pervasive, embedded ubiquitously from centralized servers to fully distributed Internet-of-Things (IoT). Unfortunately,
since well-trained models are now viewed as high-value assets that demand extensive computer
resources, annotated data, and machine learning expertise, they are becoming increasingly attractive
targets for cyberattacks [20, 51, 52]. Prior research has shown deep learning algorithms are vulnerable
to a wide range of attacks, including adversarial examples [3, 31], poisoning attacks [33, 38, 17],
backdoor attacks [30, 28, 15, 11], and privacy leakages [39, 14]. Among these, backdoor attacks expose the vulnerability in the model building supply chain that seeks to inject a stealthy backdoor into
a model by poisoning the data or manipulating the training process [30, 28, 15]. Ideally, the model
with injected backdoor should behave normally with clean inputs, but the input will be misclassified
into the target class whenever the trigger is present.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

