ULNeF: Untangled Layered Neural Fields
for Mix-and-Match Virtual Try-On

Igor Santesteban
Universidad Rey Juan Carlos
Madrid, Spain
igor.santesteban@urjc.es

Miguel A. Otaduy
Universidad Rey Juan Carlos
Madrid, Spain
miguel.otaduy@urjc.es

Nils Thuerey
Technical University of Munich
Germany
nils.thuerey@tum.de

Dan Casas
Universidad Rey Juan Carlos
Madrid, Spain
dan.casas@urjc.es

Abstract
Recent advances in neural models have shown great results for virtual try-on (VTO)
problems, where a 3D representation of a garment is deformed to fit a target body
shape. However, current solutions are limited to a single garment layer, and cannot
address the combinatorial complexity of mixing different garments. Motivated by
this limitation, we investigate the use of neural fields for mix-and-match VTO, and
identify and solve a fundamental challenge that existing neural-field methods cannot
address: the interaction between layered neural fields. To this end, we propose
a neural model that untangles layered neural fields to represent collision-free
garment surfaces. The key ingredient is a neural untangling projection operator that
works directly on the layered neural fields, not on explicit surface representations.
Algorithms to resolve object-object interaction are inherently limited by the use of
explicit geometric representations, and we show how methods that work directly
on neural implicit representations could bring a change of paradigm and open the
door to radically different approaches.

1

Introduction

In virtual try-on (VTO) applications, a computer model of a 3D garment is displayed together
with an avatar of a person, to communicate how the garment deforms based on the shape and
pose of the person. Neural processing methods have shown great success to solve the problem of
VTO [38, 57, 50, 23, 5, 84], by leveraging low-dimensionality parameterizations of body shape and
pose [36, 29]. These methods train a 3D deformation model of one garment (or a predefined outfit),
and provide an accurate approximation of physics simulation at runtime, while requiring just a small
fraction of the computational cost of physical simulations.
However, state-of-the-art VTO is limited to wearing a single garment or a predefined outfit, but in
real life we combine many clothes to create different outfits. Unfortunately, existing garment-specific
or outfit-specific neural processing solutions cannot address the combinatorial complexity of mixand-match VTO. In fact, the problem of mix-and-match VTO poses novel challenges to machine
learning algorithms, as it drives the attention toward object interaction problems where each object
(e.g., each garment) is geometrically complex, and the space of object-object interactions cannot be
exhaustively trained.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

