SoundSpaces 2.0: A Simulation Platform for
Visual-Acoustic Learning

Changan Chen1,4∗ Carl Schissler2∗ Sanchit Garg2∗ Philip Kobernik2 Alexander Clegg4
Paul Calamia2 Dhruv Batra3,4 Philip Robinson2 Kristen Grauman1,4
1
UT Austin 2 Reality Labs at Meta 3 Georgia Tech 4 Meta AI

Abstract
We introduce SoundSpaces 2.0, a platform for on-the-fly geometry-based audio
rendering for 3D environments. Given a 3D mesh of a real-world environment,
SoundSpaces can generate highly realistic acoustics for arbitrary sounds captured
from arbitrary microphone locations. Together with existing 3D visual assets, it
supports an array of audio-visual research tasks, such as audio-visual navigation,
mapping, source localization and separation, and acoustic matching. Compared to
existing resources, SoundSpaces 2.0 has the advantages of allowing continuous spatial sampling, generalization to novel environments, and configurable microphone
and material properties. To our knowledge, this is the first geometry-based acoustic
simulation that offers high fidelity and realism while also being fast enough to use
for embodied learning. We showcase the simulator’s properties and benchmark
its performance against real-world audio measurements. In addition, we demonstrate two downstream tasks—embodied navigation and far-field automatic speech
recognition—and highlight sim2real performance for the latter. SoundSpaces 2.0 is
publicly available to facilitate wider research for perceptual systems that can both
see and hear.2

1

Introduction

What we see and hear dominates our perceptual experience, and there is often a strong relationship
between the two modalities. At the object level, we can anticipate the sounds an object makes based
on how it looks, and vice versa (a dog barks, a door slams, a baby cries). At the environment level,
materials and geometry of the surrounding 3D space that we see transform the sounds that reach our
ears. For example, a person speaking in a marble-floored, high-ceiling museum sounds distinct from
one speaking in a cozy carpeted bookshop.
Modeling the correspondence between visuals and acoustics in 3D spaces is of vital importance for
many applications in embodied AI and augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR). For instance, a rescue
robot needs to localize the person who is calling for help; a service robot needs to look and listen to
know if the espresso machine is running properly; an AR system needs to generate sounds that are
consistent with the user’s acoustical environment for an immersive experience.
Realistic simulations of the first-person perceptual experience are a valuable resource for AI research.
They allow training and evaluating models at scale and in a replicable manner. On the visual side,
fast visual simulators [60, 70] coupled with 3D assets from scanned real-world environments [11, 78,
68, 56] have facilitated substantial work in visual navigation and related tasks in recent years [77, 12,
6, 30, 57, 34], enabling rigorous benchmarks [1] and even successful “sim2real" transfer to agents
that move in the real world [76, 73, 36]. On the audio side, acoustic simulation has been traditionally
∗
2

Equal contribution
https://github.com/facebookresearch/sound-spaces

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

