Quo Vadis: Is Trajectory Forecasting the Key Towards
Long-Term Multi-Object Tracking?
Patrick Dendorfer

Vladimir Yugay

Aljoša Ošep

Laura Leal-Taixé

Technical University of Munich
{patrick.dendorfer, vladimir.yugay, aljosa.osep, leal.taixe}@tum.de

Abstract
Recent developments in monocular multi-object tracking have been very successful
in tracking visible objects and bridging short occlusion gaps, mainly relying on
data-driven appearance models. While significant advancements have been made in
short-term tracking performance, bridging longer occlusion gaps remains elusive:
state-of-the-art object trackers only bridge less than 10% of occlusions longer than
three seconds. We suggest that the missing key is reasoning about future trajectories
over a longer time horizon. Intuitively, the longer the occlusion gap, the larger the
search space for possible associations. In this paper, we show that even a small yet
diverse set of trajectory predictions for moving agents will significantly reduce this
search space and thus improve long-term tracking robustness. Our experiments
suggest that the crucial components of our approach are reasoning in a bird’s-eye
view space and generating a small yet diverse set of forecasts while accounting for
their localization uncertainty. This way, we can advance state-of-the-art trackers
on the MOTChallenge dataset and significantly improve their long-term tracking
performance. This paper’s source code and experimental data are available at
https://github.com/dendorferpatrick/QuoVadis.

1

Introduction

Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a long-standing research problem with a wide range of applications,
including real-time dynamic situational awareness for robot navigation [21, 15, 77, 44, 62, 10], traffic
monitoring [69], studying animal behavior [52] and monitoring biological phenomena [3].
State-of-the-art MOT methods [75, 8, 4, 82, 74, 65] combine regression [75, 4] and combinatorial
optimization [8] in conjunction with identity re-identification (ReID) models [32, 59, 8, 75, 66, 4]
to track objects in the image space. Such approaches have been very successful for tracking visible
objects and bridging short-term occlusions. However, as can be seen in Figure 1b, long-term tracking
remains an open challenge: state-of-the-art methods successfully bridge 50% of occlusions within
one second, falling below 10% when the occlusion extends for more than 3 seconds. This is often not
reflected in standard benchmarks [15, 21, 69, 77], as long-term occlusions are statistically rare.
In the past, combining ReID models with simple motion models has been immensely helpful [15]
for short-term tracking. Nonetheless, as the occlusion time becomes longer, the set of possible
associations grows exponentially with the increasing gap length [54]. This combinatorial complexity
hinders the ability of visual-based ReID models to disambiguate between objects. Consequently, we
believe that ReID models are insufficient to resolve long-term occlusions. However, continued efforts
to develop stronger appearance models will remain an important research direction in vision-based
MOT. Tracking moving pedestrians during occlusions is challenging, and simple linear motion models
fail since human motion is complex and driven by non-observable factors such as goals, intent, or
simply preferences. Therefore, we propose an alternative in this work: using long-term trajectory
forecasting in order to prune down the combinatorial search space of feasible trajectory continuations.
As the main contribution of this paper, we carefully study what is needed to leverage trajectory
forecasting for multi-object tracking, as we have recently witnessed rapid progress in learning-based
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

