Convergent Representations of Computer Programs in
Human and Artificial Neural Networks
Shashank Srikant∗1,4 Benjamin Lipkin∗2 Anna A. Ivanova1,2,3
Evelina Fedorenko2,3 Una-May O’Reilly1,4
* Equal contribution
1
CSAIL, MIT 2 BCS, MIT
3
McGovern Institute for Brain Research MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{shash, lipkinb, annaiv, evelina9}@mit.edu, unamay@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
What aspects of computer programs are represented by the human brain during
comprehension? We investigate this question by analyzing brain recordings derived from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies of programmers
comprehending Python code. We first evaluate a selection of static and dynamic
code properties, such as abstract syntax tree (AST)-related and runtime-related
metrics and study how they relate to neural brain signals. Then, to learn whether
brain representations encode fine-grained information about computer programs,
we train a probe to align brain recordings with representations learned by a suite
of ML models trained on code. We find that both the Multiple Demand and Language systems–brain systems which are responsible for very different cognitive
tasks, encode specific code properties and uniquely align with machine learned
representations of code. These findings suggest at least two distinct neural mechanisms mediating computer program comprehension and evaluation, prompting
the design of code model objectives that go beyond static language modeling.
We make all the corresponding code, data, and analysis publicly available at
https://github.com/ALFA-group/code-representations-ml-brain

1

Introduction

Computer code comprehension is a complex task which recruits multiple cognitive processes—from
syntactic parsing to mentally simulating programs. Despite the prevalence of this task, the representations of code processed in the human brain during code comprehension remain uninvestigated. Is
it possible that common code properties and program semantics are faithfully represented in brain
activity patterns when code is read and evaluated? A few prior works have used data derived from
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG) to locate physical
regions in the brain involved in code-related activities like code comprehension and debugging
[Siegmund et al., 2017, Floyd et al., 2017, Peitek et al., 2018, Castelhano et al., 2019, Ivanova et al.,
2020, Liu et al., 2020, Ikutani et al., 2021, Peitek et al., 2021], code writing [Krueger et al., 2020,
Karas et al., 2021], and data structure manipulation [Huang et al., 2019]. These studies have helped
determine whether code-related activities join other activities supported by those brain regions, such
as working memory (processed by a set of brain regions known as the Multiple Demand system)
or language processing (processed by the Language system–another set of brain regions). While
these results improve our understanding of the brain regions involved in code comprehension, it still
remains unclear what specific code-related information these regions encode. For example, does the
response in a region seen during code comprehension encode specific syntactic or semantic code
properties? Do responses from multiple brain regions correspond to the same set of properties? Or,
are different code properties encoded in different regions?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

