CEBaB: Estimating the Causal Effects of Real-World
Concepts on NLP Model Behavior
Eldar David Abraham⇤,1
eldar.a@campus.technion.ac.il

Karel D’Oosterlink⇤,2,3
Karel.DOosterlinck@UGent.be

Amir Feder⇤,1
feder@campus.technion.ac.il

Yair Gat⇤,1
yairgat@campus.technion.ac.il

Atticus Geiger⇤,2
atticusg@stanford.edu

Christopher Potts⇤,2
cgpotts@stanford.edu

Roi Reichart⇤,1
roiri@technion.ac.il

Zhengxuan Wu⇤,2
wuzhengx@stanford.edu
1

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

2

Stanford University

3

Ghent University

Abstract
The increasing size and complexity of modern ML systems has improved their
predictive capabilities but made their behavior harder to explain. Many techniques
for model explanation have been developed in response, but we lack clear criteria
for assessing these techniques. In this paper, we cast model explanation as the
causal inference problem of estimating causal effects of real-world concepts on the
output behavior of ML models given actual input data. We introduce CEBaB, a new
benchmark dataset for assessing concept-based explanation methods in Natural
Language Processing (NLP). CEBaB consists of short restaurant reviews with
human-generated counterfactual reviews in which an aspect (food, noise, ambiance,
service) of the dining experience was modified. Original and counterfactual reviews
are annotated with multiply-validated sentiment ratings at the aspect-level and
review-level. The rich structure of CEBaB allows us to go beyond input features
to study the effects of abstract, real-world concepts on model behavior. We use
CEBaB to compare the quality of a range of concept-based explanation methods
covering different assumptions and conceptions of the problem, and we seek to
establish natural metrics for comparative assessments of these methods.

1

Introduction

Explaining model behavior has emerged as a central goal within ML. In NLP, models have grown in
size and complexity, and while they have become increasingly successful, they have also become
more opaque [28,36], raising concerns about trust [18,23], safety [1,34], and fairness [16,19]. These
concerns will persist if these models remain “black-boxes”.
Seeking to open the black-box, researchers have developed methods that try to explain model behavior
[2,11,13,30,41]. However, there is no consensus about how to evaluate such methods to allow robust
⇤

Equal contribution. Author names alphabetical.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

