The First Optimal Algorithm for Smooth and
Strongly-Convex-Strongly-Concave Minimax
Optimization

Dmitry Kovalev
KAUST∗
dakovalev1@gmail.com

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT†, ISP RAS‡, HSE§
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the smooth and strongly-convex-strongly-concave minimax
optimization problem. Zhang et al. (2021) and Ibrahim et al. (2020) established
√
the lower bound Ω κx κy log 1ϵ on the number of gradient evaluations required
to find an ϵ-accurate solution, where κx and κy are condition numbers for the
strong convexity and strong concavity assumptions. However, the existing stateof-the-art methods do not match this lower bound: algorithms of Lin et al. (2020)

√
and Wang and Li (2020) have gradient evaluation complexity O κx κy log3 1ϵ

√
and O κx κy log3 (κx κy ) log 1ϵ , respectively. We fix this fundamental issue by

√
providing the first algorithm with O κx κy log 1ϵ gradient evaluation complexity.
We design our algorithm in three steps: (i) we reformulate the original problem
as a minimization problem via the pointwise conjugate function; (ii) we apply
a specific variant of the proximal point algorithm to the reformulated problem;
(iii) we compute the proximal operator inexactly using the optimal algorithm for
operator norm reduction in monotone inclusions.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we revisit the smooth and strongly-convex-strongly-concave minimax optimization
problem of the form
min max r(x) + F (x, y) − g(y),
(1)
x∈Rdx y∈Rdy

where F (x, y) : Rdx × Rdy → R is a continuously differentiable function, r(x) : Rdx → R ∪ {+∞}
and g(y) : Rdy → R ∪ {+∞} are proper lower semi-continuous convex functions. Problem (1)
has been actively studied in economics, game theory, statistics and computer science (Başar and
Olsder, 1998; Roughgarden, 2010; Von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947; Facchinei and Pang, 2003;
Berger, 2013). Recently, many applications of this problem appeared in machine learning, including
adversarial training (Madry et al., 2017; Sinha et al., 2017), prediction and regression problems
(Taskar et al., 2005; Xu et al., 2009), reinforcement learning (Du et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2018) and
generative adversarial networks Arjovsky et al. (2017); Goodfellow et al. (2014).
In our paper, we focus on the case when function f (x, y) is strongly convex in x and strongly concave
in y. There are several reasons to consider this function class. First, this setting is fundamental and
∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
‡
Institute for System Programming RAS, Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia
§
National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

