Semi-Supervised Video Salient Object Detection Based
on Uncertainty-Guided Pseudo Labels

1

Yongri Piao1,∗ , Chenyang Lu1,∗ , Miao Zhang1( ) , Huchuan Lu1,2
Dalian University of Technology, China 2 Pengcheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
yrpiao@dlut.edu.cn, luchenyang0724@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
{miaozhang, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Video Salient Object Detection (SS-VSOD) is challenging because of the lack of temporal information caused by sparse annotations in video
sequences. Most works address this problem by generating pseudo labels for unlabeled data. However, error-prone pseudo labels negatively affect the VOSD model.
Therefore, a deeper insight into pseudo labels should be developed. In this work, we
aim to explore 1) how to utilize the incorrect predictions in pseudo labels to guide
the network to generate more robust pseudo labels and 2) how to further screen out
the noise that still exists in the improved pseudo labels. To this end, we propose an
Uncertainty-Guided Pseudo Label Generator (UGPLG), which makes full use of
inter-frame information to ensure the temporal consistency of the pseudo-labels
and improves the robustness of the pseudo labels by strengthening the learning of
difficult scenarios. Furthermore, we also introduce adversarial learning to address
the noise problems in pseudo labels, guaranteeing the positive guidance of pseudo
labels during model training. Experimental results demonstrate that our methods
outperform existing semi-supervised method and partial fully-supervised methods
across five public benchmarks of DAVIS, FBMS, MCL, ViSal, and SegTrack-V2.
Code and dataset are available at https://github.com/Lanezzz/UGPL.

1

Introduction

Video Salient Object Detection (VSOD) aims to locate and segment the objects people are most
interested in in the video consequence. With the increasing demand for video data processing,
research on VSOD has received increased attention. As a fundamental technique in computer vision,
many video-related applications adopt it as preprocessing to allocate more attention to salient regions,
such as video tracking [55] , video object segmentation [37], video action recognition [31], video
captioning [41].
Compared with still-image-based SOD tasks, VSOD is more challenging because the prediction of
salient objects in video is heavily dependent on temporal dynamics. In recent years, deep-learningbased VSOD has achieved significant progress with the development of CNN. However, it is usually
expensive and difficult to label temporally consistent pixel-level annotations for videos. To reduce the
heavy efforts of labeling segmentation ground truth, numerous pseudo-label based semi-supervised
video methods [58, 3, 12] are proposed. These works try to use limited, sparsely annotated groundtruth labels to generate labels for unlabeled data through self-training or label propagation, to make
up for the lack of temporal information between sparsely annotated frames. Because video data has
much redundant information (et al., 24 fps in the DAVIS [43] dataset), we believe using a small
amount of ground truth and large amounts of pseudo labels to supervise the model’s training tends to
be more efficient for VSOD.
*means equal contributions. Miao Zhang

is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

