Improved Differential Privacy for SGD via Optimal
Private Linear Operators on Adaptive Streams

Sergey Denisov
University of Wisconsin-Madison
denissov@wisc.edu

H. Brendan McMahan
Google Research
mcmahan@google.com

Adam Smith
Boston University
ads22@bu.edu

Keith Rush
Google Research
krush@google.com

Abhradeep Thakurta
Google Research
athakurta@google.com

Abstract
Motivated by recent applications requiring differential privacy over adaptive
streams, we investigate optimal instantiations of the matrix mechanism [1] in
this setting. We prove fundamental theoretical results on the applicability of matrix factorizations to adaptive streams, and provide a parameter-free fixed-point
algorithm for computing optimal factorizations. We instantiate this framework
with respect to concrete matrices which arise naturally in machine learning, and
train user-level differentially private models with the resulting optimal mechanisms,
yielding significant improvements in a notable problem in federated learning with
user-level differential privacy.

1

Introduction and background

An important setting for private data analysis is that of streaming inputs and outputs—often dubbed
continual release. Hiding individual information is especially challenging in such settings since the
arrival of one person’s data may affect all future outputs of the system. A significant line of work
formalizes differential privacy (DP, [2]) under continual release and builds algorithms that meet the
resulting definition (e.g. [3–8]). One prominent application of private, continual-release algorithms is
to adapt iterative optimization algorithms such as SGD so that their outputs satisfy DP [7, 6, 9].
The problem of privately computing cumulative sums plays a key role in both theory and applications.
Given a set of input vectors (e.g., gradients) g1 , . . . , gn with gi ∈ Rd , the task is to approximate
the sequence of prefix sums (g1 , g1 + g2 , . . . , g1 + · · · + gn ) while satisfying DP. Solutions to
this task form the core building block in DP algorithms for online PCA [10], online marginal
estimation [4, 3, 11], online top-k selection [12], and training ML models [13, 6, 14], among others.
For example, a common approach to private optimization is to add noise to the gradient estimates in
SGD [15–17]. Kairouz et al. [6] make the observation that the key DP primitive in such contexts is not
the independent estimation of individual gradients, but rather the accurate estimation of cumulative
sums of gradients. Lowering the error of the DP algorithm’s approximation to the cumulative sum
translates directly to improved optimization.1
1
SGD with constant learning rate η serves as P
an intuitive illustration: performing SGD on parameters θ
starting from 0, the t-th iterate is simply θt = −η ti=1 gi , where gi is the gradient computed on step i. That
is, the learned model parameters θt are exactly a scaled version of the cumulative sum of gradients so far. It is
the total error in these cumulative sums that matters most, not the error in the private estimates of each individual
gi . See Theorem 5.1 of [6] for a formal statement.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

