LAPO: Latent-Variable Advantage-Weighted Policy
Optimization for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Xi Chen1 , Ali Ghadirzadeh2 , Tianhe Yu2 , Jianhao Wang1 , Yuan Gao3 ,
Wenzhe Li1 , Bin Liang1 , Chelsea Finn2 , Chongjie Zhang1
1
Tsinghua University, China, 2 Stanford University, USA
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, China

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning methods hold the promise of learning policies from
pre-collected datasets without the need to query the environment for new samples.
This setting is particularly well-suited for continuous control robotic applications
for which online data collection based on trial-and-error is costly and potentially
unsafe. In practice, offline datasets are often heterogeneous, i.e., collected in
a variety of scenarios, such as data from several human demonstrators or from
policies that act with different purposes. Unfortunately, such datasets often contain
action distributions with multiple modes and, in some cases, lack a sufficient
number of high-reward trajectories, which render offline policy training inefficient.
To address this challenge, we propose to leverage latent-variable generative model
to represent high-advantage state-action pairs leading to better adherence to data
distributions that contributes to solving the task, while maximizing reward via a
policy over the latent variable. As we empirically show on a range of simulated
locomotion, navigation, and manipulation tasks, our method referred to as latentvariable advantage-weighted policy optimization (LAPO), improves the average
performance of the next best-performing offline reinforcement learning methods
by 49% on heterogeneous datasets, and by 8% on datasets with narrow and biased
distributions.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL), also known as batch RL [26], addresses the problem of learning
an effective policy from a static fixed-sized dataset without interacting with the environment to
collect new data. This formulation is especially important for robotics, as it avoids costly and unsafe
trial-and-error and provides an alternative way of leveraging a pre-collected dataset. However, in
practical settings, such offline datasets are often heterogeneous and are collected using different
policies, leading to a data distribution with multiple modes. These data-collection policies may aim to
accomplish tasks that are not necessarily aligned with the target task or may accomplish the same task
but provide conflicting solutions. In contrast to the prior works that have focused on the distributional
shift problem [24, 9, 25], in this paper, we address the problem of learning from heterogeneous data.
The main challenges in learning from heterogeneous settings are the existence of conflicting actions
in the dataset, and the lack of sufficient high-return trajectories as the dataset is constructed by
re-labeling state-action pairs from some different tasks. Learning from heterogeneous datasets with
conflicting actions is particularly challenging for implicit policy constraint methods that formulate
a supervised learning objective function based on the forward Kullback–Leibler (KL)-divergence
between the parametric policy being learned and the closed-form optimal policy found through
advantage-weighted behavior cloning [39, 41, 44]. Figure 1 illustrates an example of offline heterogeneous settings in which state-conditional distributions learned directly over the action space
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

