Scalable Representation Learning in Linear
Contextual Bandits with Constant Regret Guarantees

Andrea Tirinzoni
Meta
tirinzoni@meta.com

Matteo Papini
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
matteo.papini@upf.edu

Alessandro Lazaric
Meta
lazaric@meta.com

Ahmed Touati
Meta
atouati@meta.com

Matteo Pirotta
Meta
pirotta@meta.com

Abstract
We study the problem of representation learning in stochastic contextual linear
bandits. While the primary concern in this domain is usually to find realizable representations (i.e., those that allow predicting the reward function at any context-action
pair exactly), it has been recently shown that representations with certain spectral
properties (called HLS) may be more effective for the exploration-exploitation task,
enabling LinUCB to achieve constant (i.e., horizon-independent) regret. In this
paper, we propose BANDIT SRL, a representation learning algorithm that combines a novel constrained optimization problem to learn a realizable representation
with good spectral properties with a generalized likelihood ratio test to exploit the
recovered representation and avoid excessive exploration. We prove that BAN DIT SRL can be paired with any no-regret algorithm and achieve constant regret
whenever an HLS representation is available. Furthermore, BANDIT SRL can be
easily combined with deep neural networks and we show how regularizing towards
HLS representations is beneficial in standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The contextual bandit is a general framework to formalize the exploration-exploitation dilemma
arising in sequential decision-making problems such as recommendation systems, online advertising,
and clinical trials [e.g., 1]. When solving real-world problems, where contexts and actions are
complex and high-dimensional (e.g., users’ social graph, items’ visual description), it is crucial
to provide the bandit algorithm with a suitable representation of the context-action space. While
several representation learning algorithms have been proposed in supervised learning and obtained
impressing empirical results [e.g., 2, 3], how to efficiently learn representations that are effective for
the exploration-exploitation problem is still relatively an open question.
The primary objective in representation learning is to find features that map the context-action space
into a lower-dimensional embedding that allows fitting the reward function accurately, i.e., realizable representations [e.g., 4–10]. Within the space of realizable representations, bandit algorithms
leveraging features of smaller dimension are expected to learn faster and thus have smaller regret.
Nonetheless, Papini et al. [11] have recently shown that, even among realizable features, certain
representations are naturally better suited to solve the exploration-exploitation problem. In particular,
they proved that L IN UCB [12, 13] can achieve constant regret when provided with a “good” representation. Interestingly, this property is not related to “global” characteristics of the feature map (e.g.,
dimension, norms), but rather on a spectral property of the representation (the space associated to
optimal actions should cover the context-action space, see HLS property in Def. 2.1). This naturally
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

