On the Importance of Gradient Norm in
PAC-Bayesian Bounds

Itai Gat1 , Yossi Adi2,3 , Alexander Schwing4 , Tamir Hazan1
1
Technion
2
FAIR Team, Meta AI Research
3
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
4
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Generalization bounds which assess the difference between the true risk and the
empirical risk have been studied extensively. However, to obtain bounds, current
techniques use strict assumptions such as a uniformly bounded or a Lipschitz
loss function. To avoid these assumptions, in this paper, we follow an alternative
approach: we relax uniform bounds assumptions by using on-average bounded loss
and on-average bounded gradient norm assumptions. Following this relaxation,
we propose a new generalization bound that exploits the contractivity of the logSobolev inequalities. These inequalities add an additional loss-gradient norm term
to the generalization bound, which is intuitively a surrogate of the model complexity.
We apply the proposed bound on Bayesian deep nets and empirically analyze the
effect of this new loss-gradient norm term on different neural architectures.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are ubiquitous across disciplines and often achieve state-of-the-art results.
Despite the fact that deep nets are able to encode highly complex input-output relations, in practice,
they do not tend to overfit [Zhang et al., 2016]. This tendency to not overfit has been investigated in
numerous works on generalization bounds. Indeed, many generalization bounds apply to composite
functions specified by deep nets. However, most of these results assume that the loss function satisfies
various assumptions, such as uniformly bounded [Alquier et al., 2016], Lipschitz [Alquier et al.,
2019], sub-Gaussian [Bégin et al., 2016, Alquier and Guedj, 2018], sub-gamma [Germain et al.,
2016], or self-bounding [Haddouche et al., 2021]. Unfortunately, these assumptions exclude many
state-of-the-art deep nets, whose properties cannot be statistically determined per data distribution.
In this work, we take a different route and use the deep net gradient-norm as a measure for PACBayesian generalization. For this purpose, we treat the loss function as a random function that is
generated by a high-dimensional probability space, which is governed by the generating process
of the training data. This view allows us to introduce new tools from high-dimensional probability
theory that relate measure concentration to the expansion of the loss function, as determined by its
gradient-norm [van Handel, 2016].
We begin by adjusting a theorem (Herbst theorem) to estimate the measure concentration via the
entropy of the loss function (Lemma 3.1). We then derive a term for the entropy tailored to the
multiclass classification setting (discrete labels which condition Gaussian data), (Lemma 3.2). Finally
we bound the entropy using a log-Sobolev inequality (Lemma 3.3).
Importantly, these steps result in a PAC-Bayesian bound which depends on the norm of the gradient of
the loss. Intuitively this norm measures the complexity of the loss function, i.e., the model. Different
from prior work, the bound hence depends on the structure of the employed model and its gradient
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

