Surprise Minimizing Multi-Agent Learning with
Energy-based Models

Karush Suri1 , Xiao Qi Shi2 , Konstantinos Plataniotis1 , Yuri Lawryshyn1
1
University of Toronto, 2 RBC Capital Markets
karush.suri@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has demonstrated significant success by virtue of collaboration across agents. Recent work, on the other hand,
introduces surprise which quantifies the degree of change in an agent’s environment. Surprise-based learning has received significant attention in the case of
single-agent entropic settings but remains an open problem for fast-paced dynamics
in multi-agent scenarios. A potential alternative to address surprise may be realized
through the lens of free-energy minimization. We explore surprise minimization in
multi-agent learning by utilizing the free energy across all agents in a multi-agent
system. A temporal Energy-Based Model (EBM) represents an estimate of surprise
which is minimized over the joint agent distribution. Our formulation of the EBM
is theoretically akin to the minimum conjugate entropy objective and highlights
suitable convergence towards minimum surprising states. We further validate our
theoretical claims in an empirical study of multi-agent tasks demanding collaboration in the presence of fast-paced dynamics. Our implementation and agent videos
are available at the Project Webpage.

1

Introduction

The rise of RL has led to an increasing interest in the study of multi-agent systems [34, 58], commonly
known as Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL). In the case of partially observable settings,
MARL enables the learning of policies with centralised training and decentralised control [26]. This
has proven to be useful for exploiting value-based methods which motivate collaboration across large
number of agents. But how do agents behave in the presence of sudden environmental changes?
Consider the problem of autonomous driving wherein a driver (agent) autonomously operates a
vehicle in real-time. The driver learns to optimize the reward function by maintaining constant
speed and covering more distance in different traffic conditions. Whenever the vehicle approaches
an obstacle, the driver acts to avoid it by utilizing the brake and directional steering commands.
However, due to the fast-paced dynamics of the environment, say fast-moving traffic, the agent may
abruptly encounter an obstacle (a person running across the street) which may result in a collision.
Irrespective of the optimal action (pushing of brakes) executed by the agent, the vehicle may fail to
evade the collision as a result of the abrupt temporal change.
The above arises as a consequence of surprise, which is defined as a statistical measure of uncertainty.
Surprise minimization [3] is a recent phenomenon observed in the case of single-agent RL methods
which deals with environments consisting of rapidly changing states. In the case of model-based
RL [24], surprise minimization is used as an effective planning tool in the agent’s model [3]. In
the case of model-free RL, surprise minimization is witnessed as an intrinsic motivation [1, 36] or
generalization problem [9]. On the other hand, MARL does not account for surprise across agents as
a result of which agents remain unaware of drastic changes in the environment [35]. Thus, surprise
minimization in the case of multi-agent settings requires attention from a critical standpoint.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

