Maximum a posteriori natural scene reconstruction
from retinal ganglion cells with deep denoiser priors
Eric G. Wu
Stanford University
wueric@stanford.edu

Nora Brackbill
Stanford University

Eero P. Simoncelli
Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation,
and New York University
eero.simoncelli@nyu.edu

Alexander Sher & Alan M. Litke
University of California, Santa Cruz

E.J. Chichilnisky
Stanford University
ej@stanford.edu

Abstract
Visual information arriving at the retina is transmitted to the brain by signals in
the optic nerve, and the brain must rely solely on these signals to make inferences
about the visual world. Previous work has probed the content of these signals
by directly reconstructing images from retinal activity using linear regression
or nonlinear regression with neural networks. Maximum a posteriori (MAP)
reconstruction using retinal encoding models and separately-trained natural image
priors offers a more general and principled approach. We develop a novel method
for approximate MAP reconstruction that combines a generalized linear model
for retinal responses to light, including their dependence on spike history and
spikes of neighboring cells, with the image prior implicitly embedded in a deep
convolutional neural network trained for image denoising. We use this method to
reconstruct natural images from ex vivo simultaneously-recorded spikes of hundreds
of retinal ganglion cells uniformly sampling a region of the retina. The method
produces reconstructions that match or exceed the state-of-the-art in perceptual
similarity and exhibit additional fine detail, while using substantially fewer model
parameters than previous approaches. The use of more rudimentary encoding
models (a linear-nonlinear-Poisson cascade) or image priors (a 1/f spectral model)
significantly reduces reconstruction performance, indicating the essential role of
both components in achieving high-quality reconstructed images from the retinal
signal.

1

Introduction

A torrent of visual information arrives at each of our eyes where it is transduced by a large population
of photoreceptors and transformed by retinal circuitry. The resulting signals are transmitted to the
brain in the spikes of a relatively small number of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), suggesting that
a large fraction of this visual information is lost. Elucidating the nature of these encoded signals,
and the inference processes the brain could use to interpret them, is fundamental to understanding
biological vision. Image reconstruction provides a method of visualizing the content encoded by
RGC signals, evaluating it using standard image quality metrics, and reasoning about how the brain
might use it [1, 2, 3, 4]. The fidelity and quality of reconstructed images also provides a useful
objective function for optimizing the design of electrical stimulation patterns delivered by devices
implanted to restore vision to people blinded by retinal degeneration [5, 6].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

