Efficient and Effective Augmentation
Strategy for Adversarial Training

Sravanti Addepalli† ∗
Samyak Jain† ⋄ ‡ ∗
R.Venkatesh Babu†
†
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
⋄
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi

Abstract
Adversarial training of Deep Neural Networks is known to be significantly more
data-hungry when compared to standard training. Furthermore, complex data augmentations such as AutoAugment, which have led to substantial gains in standard
training of image classifiers, have not been successful with Adversarial Training.
We first explain this contrasting behavior by viewing augmentation during training
as a problem of domain generalization, and further propose Diverse Augmentationbased Joint Adversarial Training (DAJAT) to use data augmentations effectively
in adversarial training. We aim to handle the conflicting goals of enhancing the
diversity of the training dataset and training with data that is close to the test distribution by using a combination of simple and complex augmentations with separate
batch normalization layers during training. We further utilize the popular JensenShannon divergence loss to encourage the joint learning of the diverse augmentations, thereby allowing simple augmentations to guide the learning of complex
ones. Lastly, to improve the computational efficiency of the proposed method, we
propose and utilize a two-step defense, Ascending Constraint Adversarial Training
(ACAT), that uses an increasing epsilon schedule and weight-space smoothing to
prevent gradient masking. The proposed method DAJAT achieves substantially
better robustness-accuracy trade-off when compared to existing methods on the
RobustBench Leaderboard on ResNet-18 and WideResNet-34-10. The code for implementing DAJAT is available here: https://github.com/val-iisc/DAJAT.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Network (DNN) based image classifiers are vulnerable to crafted imperceptible perturbations known as Adversarial Attacks [41] that can flip the predictions of the model to unrelated classes
leading to disastrous implications. Adversarial Training [14, 27, 50] has been the most successful
defense strategy, where a model is explicitly trained to be robust in the presence of such attacks. While
early defenses focused on designing suitable loss functions for training, subsequent works [29, 34]
showed that with careful hyperparameter tuning, even the two most popular methods PGD-AT [27]
and TRADES [50] yield comparable performance, highlighting the saturation in performance with
respect to changes in the training loss. Schmidt et al. [35] observed that adversarial training has a
large sample complexity and further gains require the use of additional training data. Subsequent
works [5, 16] indeed used additional data whose distribution is close to that of the original dataset in
order to obtain performance gains. The availability of large amounts of relevant data is impractical to
assume, leading to an exploration towards augmentations based on Generative Adversarial Networks
[13] and Diffusion based models [19, 16]. However, the use of such generative models incurs an
∗
Equal Contribution.
Correspondence to Sravanti Addepalli <sravantia@iisc.ac.in>, Samyak Jain <samyakjain.cse18@itbhu.ac.in>
‡
Work done during internship at Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

