Heatmap Distribution Matching for Human Pose
Estimation
Li Xu
SUTD
Singapore
li_xu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Haoxuan Qu
SUTD
Singapore
haoxuan_qu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
Yujun Cai
NTU
Singapore
yujun001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Lin Geng Foo
SUTD
Singapore
lingeng_foo@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Jun Liu ∗
SUTD
Singapore
jun_liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
For tackling the task of 2D human pose estimation, the great majority of the recent methods regard this task as a heatmap estimation problem, and optimize the
heatmap prediction using the Gaussian-smoothed heatmap as the optimization
objective and using the pixel-wise loss (e.g. MSE) as the loss function. In this
paper, we show that optimizing the heatmap prediction in such a way, the model
performance of body joint localization, which is the intrinsic objective of this
task, may not be consistently improved during the optimization process of the
heatmap prediction. To address this problem, from a novel perspective, we propose
to formulate the optimization of the heatmap prediction as a distribution matching problem between the predicted heatmap and the dot annotation of the body
joint directly. By doing so, our proposed method does not need to construct the
Gaussian-smoothed heatmap and can achieve a more consistent model performance
improvement during the optimization of the heatmap prediction. We show the
effectiveness of our proposed method through extensive experiments on the COCO
dataset and the MPII dataset.

1

Introduction

2D human pose estimation aims to locate body joints of a person in a given RGB image. It is relevant
to a variety of applications, such as action recognition [34], human-machine interaction [40], and sign
language understanding [19]. For tackling the task of 2D human pose estimation, most of the recent
methods [29, 20, 33, 26, 14, 4, 39, 35, 15, 17, 37] are heatmap-based, i.e., they regard 2D human
pose estimation as a heatmap estimation problem. Specifically, for each body joint, these methods
generally estimate a grid-like heatmap, on which each pixel value represents the probability that
this pixel contains the body joint. Compared to the methods [30, 2, 32, 13] that directly regress the
coordinates of body joints (i.e. coordinate regression-based methods), the heatmap-based methods
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

