BiT: Robustly Binarized Multi-distilled Transformer

Zechun Liu∗
Reality Labs, Meta Inc.
zechunliu@fb.com
Lin Xiao
Meta AI
linx@fb.com

Barlas Oğuz∗
Meta AI
barlaso@fb.com
Scott Yih
Meta AI
scottyih@fb.com

Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi
Reality Labs, Meta Inc.
raghuraman@fb.com

Aasish Pappu
Meta AI
aasish@fb.com
Meng Li
Peking University
meng.li@pku.edu.cn
Yashar Mehdad
Meta AI
mehdad@fb.com

Abstract
Modern pre-trained transformers have rapidly advanced the state-of-the-art in
machine learning, but have also grown in parameters and computational complexity,
making them increasingly difficult to deploy in resource-constrained environments.
Binarization of the weights and activations of the network can significantly alleviate
these issues, however, is technically challenging from an optimization perspective.
In this work, we identify a series of improvements that enables binary transformers
at a much higher accuracy than what was possible previously. These include a
two-set binarization scheme, a novel elastic binary activation function with learned
parameters, and a method to quantize a network to its limit by successively distilling
higher precision models into lower precision students. These approaches allow
for the first time, fully binarized transformer models that are at a practical level
of accuracy, approaching a full-precision BERT baseline on the GLUE language
understanding benchmark within as little as 5.9%. Code and models are available
at: https://github.com/facebookresearch/bit.

1

Introduction

The past few years have witnessed tremendous advances in almost all applied fields of AI. It
would hardly be a simplification to say that the bulk of these advances was achieved by scaling
the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) to ever larger sizes with increasing computation
budget (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2018, 2019; Raffel et al., 2020; Brown
et al., 2020). On the other hand, mobile devices and wearables have proliferated and shrunk in size,
with stringent requirements for storage, computation and energy consumption. Consumers demand
more portability, while having access to all that current AI technology has to offer. As a result, the
gap between what is possible in AI, and what is deployable has never been wider.
While there is a variety of methods to increase inference efficiency in neural networks (e.g. knowledge
distillation, pruning), quantization has some attractive properties and has been widely successful
in practice (Gholami et al., 2021). For one, storage and latency gains from quantization are deterministically defined for a given quantization level. For instance, reducing the precision of model
parameters by a given factor immediately translates to an identical reduction in storage cost. Similarly,
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

