Second Thoughts are Best: Learning to Re-Align With
Human Values from Text Edits
1

2

3,4

Ruibo Liu , Chenyan Jia , Ge Zhang ,
1∗
2
1
Ziyu Zhuang , Tony X. Liu , Soroush Vosoughi
1
2
Dartmouth College, Stanford University,
3
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
1
{ruibo.liu.gr, soroush.vosoughi}@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
We present S ECOND T HOUGHTS, a new learning paradigm that enables language
models (LMs) to re-align with human values. By modeling the chain-of-edits
between value-unaligned and value-aligned text, with LM fine-tuning and additional refinement through reinforcement learning, S ECOND T HOUGHTS not only
achieves superior performance in three value alignment benchmark datasets but
also shows strong human-value transfer learning ability in few-shot scenarios. The
generated editing steps also offer better interpretability and ease for interactive
error correction. Extensive human evaluations further confirm its effectiveness.

1

Introduction
“Machines can and will make better decisions than humans
but only when the values are aligned with those of human race.”
——Prof. Stuart Russell, Value Alignment, 2015

Current large-scale pre-trained language models (LMs) have shown great success in many
knowledge-recalling tasks, such as question answering (Talmor et al., 2022) and entity retrieval (Cao et al., 2021); however, their ability
to select socially good text from bad (or generating prosocial text) in open-world settings is still
limited (Hendrycks et al., 2021a), even when
the models are scaled up to hundreds of billions
of parameters (Lin et al., 2021). In other words,
pre-training ever-larger LMs does not lead to
expected substantive gains in tasks that require
human value judgment (Hoffmann et al., 2022).
Consider the example in Figure 1: given a context, a fine-tuned LM GPT-2 (Radford et al.,
2
2019) assigns a larger probability mass to the
immoral option than to the moral ground truth.

Figure 1: Fine-tuned language models (LMs) still
tend to generate text violating human values in
certain contexts. Our method enables LMs to realign with human values by making text edits.

∗

Work done during the internship at Dartmouth College.
We take the log-probability predicted by the LM, log Pr(y∣x), which is the conditional log-probability
of generating option y given input context x. We then compute its exponential for better readability. Such a
protocol is also adopted by BIG-Bench: https://github.com/google/BIG-bench.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

