Active Learning for Multiple Target Models

Ying-Peng Tang and Sheng-Jun Huang ∗
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing 211106, China
{tangyp,huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
We describe and explore a novel setting of active learning (AL), where there are
multiple target models to be learned simultaneously. In many real applications, the
machine learning system is required to be deployed on diverse devices with varying
computational resources (e.g., workstation, mobile phone, edge devices), which
leads to the demand of training multiple target models on the same labeled dataset.
However, it is generally believed that AL is model-dependent and untransferable,
i.e., the data queried by one model may be less effective for training another model.
This phenomenon naturally raises a question “Does there exist an AL method that
is effective for multiple target models?”. In this paper, we answer this question by
theoretically analyzing the label complexity of active and passive learning under
the setting with multiple target models, and conclude that AL does have potential to
achieve better label complexity under this novel setting. Based on this insight, we
further propose an agnostic AL sampling strategy to select the examples located in
the joint disagreement regions of different target models. The experimental results
on the OCR benchmarks show that the proposed method can significantly surpass
the traditional active and passive learning methods under this challenging setting.

1

Introduction

Data labeling is expensive due to the involving of human annotator. Active learning (AL) is one of
the main approaches to reduce the labeling cost [28]. It evaluates the utility of the unlabeled data
based on the target model, and actively queries the labels from the oracle for the examples that is the
most beneficial to the performance improvement of the target model.
Existing active learning methods assume that there is only one specific target model, and try to fit
it with least queries. However, in many real applications, the machine learning system is required
to be deployed on multiple types of devices with different resource constraints [6]. For example, a
speech recognition software needs to support diverse machines with varying hardware efficiency,
ranging from high-performance workstation to the mobile-phone. Due to the different computational
resources, the applicable model architectures vary a lot, e.g., a deep model which is well-performed
on the cloud server may not be deployed on the edge device. It thus raises the demand of training
multiple models with different complexity to accommodate these devices.
Given multiple target models, how to effectively improve them with least labeled data becomes a
practical and challenging problem. It is generally believed that AL is usually model-dependent and
untransferable [22, 24, 38], i.e., the best query strategy for different target models varies a lot [39]. In
other words, the data queried by one model may be less effective for training another model [22].
These observations imply that the existing active query strategies can hardly benefit all target models
simultaneously, and the design of AL algorithm for multi-models can be rather difficult. A natural
∗

Corresponding author: Sheng-Jun Huang <huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

