Regularized Molecular Conformation Fields
Lihao Wang1⇤, Yi Zhou2 , Yiqun Wang2 , Xiaoqing Zheng1 , Xuanjing Huang1,3 , Hao Zhou4
1
Fudan University, 2 ByteDance AI Lab
3
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
4
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
{wanglh19, zhengxq, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn
{zhouyi.naive, yiqun.wang}@bytedance.com, zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Predicting energetically favorable 3-dimensional conformations of organic
molecules from molecular graph plays a fundamental role in computer-aided
drug discovery research. However, effectively exploring the high-dimensional
conformation space to identify (meta)stable conformers is anything but trivial. In
this work, we introduce R MCF, a novel framework to generate a diverse set of lowenergy molecular conformations through sampling from a regularized molecular
conformation field. We develop a data-driven molecular segmentation algorithm
to automatically partition each molecule into several structural building blocks to
reduce the modeling degrees of freedom. Then, we employ a Markov Random
Field to learn the joint probability distribution of fragment configurations and interfragment dihedral angles, which enables us to sample from different low-energy
regions of a conformation space. Our model constantly outperforms state-of-the-art
models for the conformation generation task on the GEOM-Drugs dataset. We attribute the success of R MCF to modeling in a regularized feature space and learning
a global fragment configuration distribution for effective sampling. The proposed
method could be generalized to deal with larger biomolecular systems.2

1

Introduction

The spatial arrangement of atoms within a molecule, also known as molecular conformation, determines the molecular physico-chemical properties, which plays an essential role in downstream
computer-aided drug discovery tasks. However, the high-dimensional conformation space spanned
by all atomic degrees of freedom (DoF) makes it a great challenge to identify the local minima of
the associated potential energy surface (PES) of a molecule. Recently, many machine learning (ML)
models have achieved remarkable success in molecular conformation generation tasks [Mansimov
et al., 2019, Simm and Hernandez-Lobato, 2020, Xu et al., 2021a, Ganea et al., 2021, Xu et al., 2022],
exhibiting orders of magnitude faster conformation prediction speed than traditional computational
simulation approaches. This makes ML generative models a powerful tool for high-throughput
screening in drug discovery, especially large molecules.
To fully exploit the power of ML in molecular conformation generation, we need to tackle a few key
challenges. First, a molecule exhibits invariance under SE(3) transformations (i.e., translation and
rotation) in 3-dimensional (3D) Euclidean space. In other words, each molecular conformation is
uniquely defined up to rigid motion. Hence a single molecule can adopt an infinite set of possible
poses. Second, molecules exhibit a variety of dynamics under ambient conditions (e.g., bond rotation,
vibration, etc.), leading to a possibly complex PES landscape of high dimension. This makes
⇤

2

This work was done when Lihao Wang was a research intern at Bytedance AI Lab.
The code is available at https://github.com/leowang1217/RMCF.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

