Relaxing Equivariance Constraints with
Non-stationary Continuous Filters

Tycho F.A. van der Ouderaa
Imperial College London
United Kingdom

David W. Romero
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
The Netherlands

Mark van der Wilk
Imperial College London
United Kingdom

Abstract
Equivariances provide useful inductive biases in neural network modeling, with
the translation equivariance of convolutional neural networks being a canonical
example. Equivariances can be embedded in architectures through weight-sharing
and place symmetry constraints on the functions a neural network can represent.
The type of symmetry is typically fixed and has to be chosen in advance. Although
some tasks are inherently equivariant, many tasks do not strictly follow such
symmetries. In such cases, equivariance constraints can be overly restrictive.
In this work, we propose a parameter-efficient relaxation of equivariance that
can effectively interpolate between a (i) non-equivariant linear product, (ii) a
strict-equivariant convolution, and (iii) a strictly-invariant mapping. The proposed
parameterisation can be thought of as a building block to allow adjustable symmetry
structure in neural networks. In addition, we demonstrate that the amount of
equivariance can be learned from the training data using backpropagation. Gradientbased learning of equivariance achieves similar or improved performance compared
to the best value found by cross-validation and outperforms baselines with partial
or strict equivariance on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 image classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Symmetric properties, such as equivariances and invariances, can be embedded into neural network
architectures to provide inductive biases that leads to better data-efficiency and improved generalisation. Convolutional layers are known to provide translation equivariance in simple Euclidean spaces,
and recent works have allowed various extensions to more complex groups and domains. However,
symmetries are typically fixed, must be specified in advance, and can not be adjusted.
Symmetries embedded in network architectures enforce a hard constraint on the functions a neural
network can represent. This can be an effective way to encode prior knowledge for problems
that are inherently symmetric. However, hard symmetry constraints can become prohibitive if a
problem does not strictly follow the symmetries. For example, convolutional layers can not encode
potentially relevant absolute positional information, and ‘6’s and a ‘9’s become difficult to distinguish
under rotation invariance. Relaxed symmetry constraints can mitigate such potential symmetry
misspecification without losing the useful inductive biases that symmetries provide.
We propose to relax equivariance constraints by generalising the convolution operator with nonstationary filters that can also depend on absolute group elements. This results in a layer that can
efficiently interpolate between (i) non-invariant linear products akin to a fully-connected layer, (ii)
strict group equivariant convolutions, and (iii) strict group invariant mappings (Fig. 1).
The importance of this work is twofold. First of all, relaxable symmetry constraints can directly
improve the performance in cases where strict symmetries are misspecified and result in an overly
restrictive model class. Secondly, automatically learning symmetry structure from data is an interesting problem. Work in this field often focuses on invariances [34, 4, 33, 29, 12], which are easier to
parameterise than equivariances. We show a way to effectively parameterise learnable equivariance
constraints and demonstrate gradient-based learning of layer-by-layer equivariance constraints.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

