Exact learning dynamics of deep linear networks with
prior knowledge

Lukas Braun †,1
lukas.braun@psy.ox.ac.uk

Clémentine C. J. Dominé †,2
clementine.domine.20@ucl.ac.uk

James E. Fitzgerald 3
fitzgeraldj@janelia.hhmi.org

Andrew M. Saxe 2,4,5
a.saxe@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning in deep neural networks is known to depend critically on the knowledge
embedded in the initial network weights. However, few theoretical results have
precisely linked prior knowledge to learning dynamics. Here we derive exact
solutions to the dynamics of learning with rich prior knowledge in deep linear
networks by generalising Fukumizu’s matrix Riccati solution [1]. We obtain
explicit expressions for the evolving network function, hidden representational
similarity, and neural tangent kernel over training for a broad class of initialisations
and tasks. The expressions reveal a class of task-independent initialisations that
radically alter learning dynamics from slow non-linear dynamics to fast exponential
trajectories while converging to a global optimum with identical representational
similarity, dissociating learning trajectories from the structure of initial internal
representations. We characterise how network weights dynamically align with
task structure, rigorously justifying why previous solutions successfully described
learning from small initial weights without incorporating their fine-scale structure.
Finally, we discuss the implications of these findings for continual learning, reversal
learning and learning of structured knowledge. Taken together, our results provide
a mathematical toolkit for understanding the impact of prior knowledge on deep
learning.

1

Introduction

A hallmark of human learning is our exquisite sensitivity to prior knowledge: what we already know
affects how we subsequently learn [2]. For instance, having learned about the attributes of nine
animals, we may learn about the tenth more quickly [3, 4, 5, 6]. In machine learning, the impact
of prior knowledge on learning is evident in a range of paradigms including reversal learning [7],
transfer learning [8, 9, 10, 11], continual learning [12, 13, 14], curriculum learning [15], and meta
learning [16]. One form of prior knowledge in deep networks is the initial network state, which is
known to strongly impact learning dynamics [17, 18, 19]. Even random initial weights of different
variance can yield qualitative shifts in network behaviour between the lazy and rich regimes [20],
imparting distinct inductive biases on the learning process. More broadly, rich representations such
as those obtained through pretraining provide empirically fertile inductive biases for subsequent
† First authors, random order
1. Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
2. Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, London, United Kingdom
3. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, USA
4. Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London, London, United Kingdom
5. CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar, CIFAR, Toronto, Canada
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

