Memorization and Optimization in Deep Neural
Networks with Minimum Over-parameterization

Simone Bombari∗, Mohammad Hossein Amani†, Marco Mondelli∗.

Abstract
The Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) has emerged as a powerful tool to provide
memorization, optimization and generalization guarantees in deep neural networks.
A line of work has studied the NTK spectrum for two-layer and deep networks
with at least a layer with Ω(N ) neurons, N being the number of training samples.
Furthermore, there is increasing evidence suggesting that deep networks with sublinear layer widths are powerful memorizers and optimizers, as long as the number
of parameters exceeds the number of samples. Thus, a natural open question is
whether the NTK is well conditioned in such a challenging sub-linear setup. In this
paper, we answer this question in the affirmative. Our key technical contribution
is a lower bound on the smallest NTK eigenvalue for deep networks with the
minimum possible over-parameterization: up to logarithmic factors, the number
of
√
parameters is Ω(N ) and, hence, the number of neurons is as little as Ω( N ). To
showcase the applicability of our NTK bounds, we provide two results concerning
memorization capacity and optimization guarantees for gradient descent training.

1

Introduction

Training a neural network is a non-convex problem that exhibits disconnected local minima [8, 57, 70].
Yet, in practice gradient descent (GD) and its variants routinely find solutions with zero training loss
[72]. A framework to understand this phenomenon comes from the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK).
This quantity was introduced in [33], where it was proved that, during GD training, the network
follows the kernel gradient of the functional cost with respect to the NTK. Furthermore, as the layer
widths go large, the NTK converges to a deterministic limit which stays constant during training.
Hence, in this infinite-width limit, it suffices that the smallest eigenvalue of the NTK is bounded
away from 0 for gradient descent to reach zero loss. Going to finite widths, a recipe to prove GD
convergence can be summarized as follows: show that (i) the NTK is well conditioned at initialization,
and (ii) the NTK has not changed significantly by the time GD has reached zero loss (see e.g.
[49, 17, 11]). A number of papers have exploited this recipe for networks with progressively smaller
over-parameterization: two-layer networks [22, 50, 63, 69, 62], deep networks with polynomially
wide layers [5, 21, 73, 74], and deep networks with a single wide layer [47, 43]. Besides optimization,
showing that the NTK is well conditioned directly implies a result on memorization capacity [42, 48],
and the smallest eigenvalue of the NTK has also been related to generalization [6].
In [48], it is shown that, given N training samples, a single layer with Ω(N ) neurons suffices for the
NTK to be well conditioned in networks of arbitrary depth. However, there is increasing evidence
that, in the challenging setup in which the layer widths are sub-linear in N , neural networks still
memorize the training data [14, 71, 66], reach zero loss under GD training in the two-layer setting
[61, 50, 42], and in the deep case, GD explores a nicely behaved region of the loss landscape [44].
This is in agreement with simple back-of-the-envelope calculations on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet:
CIFAR-10 has N = 50000 images and roughly 106 parameters suffice to fit random labels [72];
∗
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
marco.mondelli}@ist.ac.at.
†
EPFL, Switzerland. Email: mh.amani1998@gmail.com.

(ISTA).

Emails:

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

{simone.bombari,

