Will Bilevel Optimizers Benefit from Loops

Kaiyi Ji
Department of CSE
University at Buffalo
kaiyiji@buffalo.edu

Mingrui Liu
Department of CS
George Mason University
mingruil@gmu.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Lei Ying
Department of EECS
University of Michigan
leiying@umich.edu

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has arisen as a powerful tool for solving a variety of machine
learning problems. Two current popular bilevel optimizers AID-BiO and ITD-BiO
naturally involve solving one or two sub-problems, and consequently, whether
we solve these problems with loops (that take many iterations) or without loops
(that take only a few iterations) can significantly affect the overall computational
efficiency. Existing studies in the literature cover only some of those implementation choices, and the complexity bounds available are not refined enough to
enable rigorous comparison among different implementations. In this paper, we
first establish unified convergence analysis for both AID-BiO and ITD-BiO that are
applicable to all implementation choices of loops. We then specialize our results to
characterize the computational complexity for all implementations, which enable
an explicit comparison among them. Our result indicates that for AID-BiO, the
loop for estimating the optimal point of the inner function is beneficial for overall
efficiency, although it causes higher complexity for each update step, and the loop
for approximating the outer-level Hessian-inverse-vector product reduces the gradient complexity. For ITD-BiO, the two loops always coexist, and our convergence
upper and lower bounds show that such loops are necessary to guarantee a vanishing convergence error, whereas the no-loop scheme suffers from an unavoidable
non-vanishing convergence error. Our numerical experiments further corroborate
our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization has attracted significant attention recently due to its popularity in a variety of
machine learning applications including meta-learning [9, 1, 34, 17], hyperparameter optimization [9,
35, 5], reinforcement learning [22, 15], and signal processing [23, 7]. In this paper, we consider the
bilevel optimization problem that takes the following formulation.
min Φ(x) := f (x, y ∗ (x)) s.t.

x∈Rp

y ∗ (x) = arg min g(x, y),

(1)

y∈Rq

where the outer- and inner-level functions f and g are both jointly continuously differentiable. We
focus on the setting where the lower-level function g is strongly convex with respect to (w.r.t.) y
with the condition number κ = L
µ (where L and µ are gradient Lipschitzness and strong convexity
coefficients defined respectively in Assumptions 1 and 3 in Section 3), and the outer-level objective
function Φ(x) is possibly nonconvex w.r.t. x. Such types of geometries arise in many applications
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

