Not too little, not too much: a theoretical analysis of
graph (over)smoothing

Nicolas Keriven
CNRS, GIPSA-lab, Grenoble, France
nicolas.keriven@cnrs.fr

Abstract
We analyze graph smoothing with mean aggregation, where each node successively
receives the average of the features of its neighbors. Indeed, it has quickly been
observed that Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which generally follow some
variant of Message-Passing (MP) with repeated aggregation, may be subject to
the oversmoothing phenomenon: by performing too many rounds of MP, the
node features tend to converge to a non-informative limit. In the case of mean
aggregation, for connected graphs, the node features become constant across the
whole graph. At the other end of the spectrum, it is intuitively obvious that some
MP rounds are necessary, but existing analyses do not exhibit both phenomena at
once: beneficial “finite” smoothing and oversmoothing in the limit. In this paper,
we consider simplified linear GNNs, and rigorously analyze two examples for
which a finite number of mean aggregation steps provably improves the learning
performance, before oversmoothing kicks in. We consider a latent space random
graph model, where node features are partial observations of the latent variables
and the graph contains pairwise relationships between them. We show that graph
smoothing restores some of the lost information, up to a certain point, by two
phenomena: graph smoothing shrinks non-principal directions in the data faster
than principal ones, which is useful for regression, and shrinks nodes within
communities faster than they collapse together, which improves classification.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep architectures such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), along with the availability
of large sets of graph data, have significantly broadened the field of machine learning on graphs and
structured data, with a myriad of applications ranging from community detection [11] to molecule
classification [20], drug discovery [19], quantum chemistry [15], recommender systems [44], semisupervised learning, and so on. See [7, 16, 6, 46] for reviews. Most GNNs rely on the MessagePassing (MP) framework [15, 23], with a plethora of variants. At each layer k, for each node i, a
(k)
representation zi is computed using the representations of the neighbors Ni of i in the graph at the
previous layer:


(k)
(k−1)
zi = AGG {zj
}j∈Ni
(1)
(k−1)

where AGG is an aggregation function that, crucially, treats {zj
}j∈Ni as an unordered set, to
respect the absence of node ordering in the graph. There are many variants of aggregation functions,
based on sum, mean, max, min, degree-normalized [23], attention-based [39], and so on. In this work,
we consider one of the most classical, mean aggregation:


P
(k)
(k−1)
zi = P 1aij j aij Ψ zj
(2)
j

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

