On Scrambling Phenomena
for Randomly Initialized Recurrent Networks
Vaggos Chatziafratis⇤
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Santa Cruz
vaggos@ucsc.edu
Clayton Sanford
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
clayton@cs.columbia.edu

Ioannis Panageas
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
ipanagea@ics.uci.edu
Stelios Andrew Stavroulakis
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
sstavrou@uci.edu

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) frequently exhibit complicated dynamics,
and their sensitivity to the initialization process often renders them notoriously
hard to train. Recent works have shed light on such phenomena analyzing when
exploding or vanishing gradients may occur, either of which is detrimental for
training dynamics. In this paper, we point to a formal connection between RNNs
and chaotic dynamical systems and prove a qualitatively stronger phenomenon
about RNNs than what exploding gradients seem to suggest. Our main result proves
that under standard initialization (e.g., He, Xavier etc.), RNNs will exhibit Li-Yorke
chaos with constant probability independent of the network’s width. This explains
the experimentally observed phenomenon of scrambling, under which trajectories
of nearby points may appear to be arbitrarily close during some timesteps, yet will
be far away in future timesteps. In stark contrast to their feedforward counterparts,
we show that chaotic behavior in RNNs is preserved under small perturbations
and that their expressive power remains exponential in the number of feedback
iterations. Our technical arguments rely on viewing RNNs as random walks under
non-linear activations, and studying the existence of certain types of higher-order
fixed points called periodic points that lead to phase transitions from order to chaos.

1

Introduction

In standard feedforward neural networks (FNNs), computation is performed “from left to right”
propagating the input through the hidden units to the output. In contrast, recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) form a feedback loop, transfering information from their output back to their input (e.g.,
LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997), GRUs (Cho et al., 2014)). This feedback loop allows
RNNs to share parameters across time because the weights and biases of each iteration are identical.
As a result, RNNs can capture long range temporal correlations in the input. For these reasons, they
have been very successful in applications in sequence learning domains, such as speech recognition,
natural language processing, video understanding, and time-series prediction (Bahdanau et al., 2014;
Cho et al., 2014; Chung et al., 2014).
⇤

Authors order determined by the output of a randomly initialized recurrent network (operating at the chaotic
regime).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

