RankFeat: Rank-1 Feature Removal for
Out-of-distribution Detection
Yue Song1 , Nicu Sebe1 , and Wei Wang2
1

Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
2
Beijing Jiaotong University, China
yue.song@unitn.it

Abstract
The task of out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial for deploying machine
learning models in real-world settings. In this paper, we observe that the singular
value distributions of the in-distribution (ID) and OOD features are quite different:
the OOD feature matrix tends to have a larger dominant singular value than the
ID feature, and the class predictions of OOD samples are largely determined by it.
This observation motivates us to propose RankFeat, a simple yet effective post
hoc approach for OOD detection by removing the rank-1 matrix composed of
the largest singular value and the associated singular vectors from the high-level
feature. RankFeat achieves state-of-the-art performance and reduces the average
false positive rate (FPR95) by 17.90% compared with the previous best method.
Extensive ablation studies and comprehensive theoretical analyses are presented to
support the empirical results.

1

Introduction

In the real-world applications of deep learning, understanding whether a test sample belongs to the
same distribution of training data is critical to the safe deployment of machine learning models. The
main challenge stems from the fact that current deep learning models can easily give over-confident
predictions for out-of-distribution (OOD) data [43]. Recently a rich line of literature has emerged to
address the challenge of OOD detection [60, 27, 3, 7, 52, 14, 11, 54, 66, 37, 13, 68, 10, 15, 18].
Previous OOD detection approaches either rely on the feature distance [38], activation abnormality [52], or gradient norm [27]. In this paper, we tackle the problem of OOD detection from another
perspective: by analyzing the spectrum of the high-level feature matrices (e.g., the output of Block 3
or Block 4 of a typical ResNet [19] model), we observe that the feature matrices have quite different
singular value distributions for the in-distribution (ID) and OOD data (see Fig. 1(a)): the OOD feature
tends to have a much larger dominant singular value than the ID feature, whereas the magnitudes of
the rest singular values are very similar. This peculiar behavior motivates us to remove the rank-1
matrix composed of the dominant singular value and singular vectors from the feature. As displayed
in Fig. 1(b), removing the rank-1 feature drastically perturbs the class prediction of OOD samples;
a majority of predictions have been changed. On the contrary, most ID samples have consistent
classification results before and after removing the subspace. This phenomenon indicates that the
over-confident prediction of OOD samples might be largely determined by the dominant singular
value and the corresponding singular vectors.
Based on this observation, we assume that the first singular value of OOD feature tends to be much
larger than that of ID feature. The intuition behind is that the OOD feature corresponds to a larger
Wei Wang is the corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

