Zero-Sum Stochastic Stackelberg Games
Denizalp Goktas
Department of Computer Science
Brown University
Providence, RI 02906, USA
denizalp_goktas@brown.edu

Jiayi Zhao
Department of Computer Science
Pomona College
Pomona, CA, USA
jzae2019@mymail.pomona.edu

Amy Greenwald
Brown University
Providence, RI 02906, USA
amy_greenwald@brown.edu

Abstract
Zero-sum stochastic games have found important applications in a variety of fields,
from machine learning to economics. Work on this model has primarily focused on
the computation of Nash equilibrium due to its effectiveness in solving adversarial
board and video games. Unfortunately, a Nash equilibrium is not guaranteed to
exist in zero-sum stochastic games when the payoffs at each state are not convexconcave in the players’ actions. A Stackelberg equilibrium, however, is guaranteed
to exist. Consequently, in this paper, we study zero-sum stochastic Stackelberg
games. Going beyond known existence results for (non-stationary) Stackelberg
equilibria, we prove the existence of recursive (i.e., Markov perfect) Stackelberg
equilibria (recSE) in these games, provide necessary and sufficient conditions for
a policy profile to be a recSE, and show that recSE can be computed in (weakly)
polynomial time via value iteration. Finally, we show that zero-sum stochastic
Stackelberg games can model the problem of pricing and allocating goods across
agents and time. More specifically, we propose a zero-sum stochastic Stackelberg
game whose recSE correspond to the recursive competitive equilibria of a large
class of stochastic Fisher markets. We close with a series of experiments that
showcase how our methodology can be used to solve the consumption-savings
problem in stochastic Fisher markets.
Min-max optimization has paved the way for recent progress in a variety of fields, from machine
learning to economics. These applications require computing solutions to a constrained min-max
optimization problem i.e., minx2X maxy2Y f (x, y), where the objective function f : X ⇥ Y ! R
is continuous, and the constraint sets X ⇢ Rn and Y ⇢ Rm are nonempty and compact. When
f is convex-concave, and the constraint sets X and Y are convex, the seminal minimax theorem
[1, 2] holds, i.e., minx2X maxy2Y f (x, y) = maxy2Y minx2X f (x, y), and such problems can
be interpreted as computing a Nash equilibrium of a simultaneous-move min-max (or zero-sum)
game between an outer player x and an inner player y with respective payoff functions f , f and
respective action sets X , Y, where the solutions (x⇤ , y ⇤ ) 2 X ⇥ Y are best responses to one another.
More generally, one can consider zero-sum stochastic games, played over an infinite discrete time
horizon N+ . The game starts at some initial state S (0) ⇠ µ(0) . At each subsequent time-step t 2 N+ ,
players encounter a new state s(t) 2 S. After taking their respective actions (x(t) , y (t) ) from their
respective action spaces X (s(t) ) ✓ Rn and Y(s(t) ) ✓ Rm , they receive payoffs r(s(t) , x(t) , y (t) ),
and then either transition to a new state S (t+1) ⇠ p(· | s(t) , x(t) , y (t) ) with probability , or the game
ends with the remaining probability. The goal of the outer (resp. inner) player is to play a sequence
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

