APG: Adaptive Parameter Generation Network for
Click-Through Rate Prediction
Bencheng Yan⇤ , Pengjie Wang ⇤, Kai Zhang, Feng Li, Hongbo Deng, Jian Xu, Bo Zheng †
Alibaba Group
China
{bencheng.ybc,pengjie.wpj,victorlanger.zk,
adam.lf,dhb167148,xiyu.xj,bozheng}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In many web applications, deep learning-based CTR prediction models (deep CTR
models for short) are widely adopted. Traditional deep CTR models learn patterns
in a static manner, i.e., the network parameters are the same across all the instances.
However, such a manner can hardly characterize each of the instances which may
have different underlying distributions. It actually limits the representation power
of deep CTR models, leading to sub-optimal results. In this paper, we propose an
efficient, effective, and universal module, named as Adaptive Parameter Generation
network (APG), which can dynamically generate parameters for deep CTR models
on-the-fly based on different instances. Extensive experimental evaluation results
show that APG can be applied to a variety of deep CTR models and significantly
improve their performance. Meanwhile, APG can reduce the time cost by 38.7%
and memory usage by 96.6% compared to a regular deep CTR model. We have
deployed APG in the industrial sponsored search system and achieved 3% CTR
gain and 1% RPM gain respectively.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep CTR models have achieved great
success in various web applications such as recommender systems, web search, and online advertising [4, 9, 31, 14]. Formally, a regular deep
CTR model can be expressed as yi = F⇥ (xi )
where xi , yi are the input features and the predicted CTR of the instance i respectively, ⇥ is
the parameter, and F is usually implemented as Figure 1: An example of feature distribution from
a neural network.
different users (i.e., active vs. cold users). Left:
Improving the performance of deep CTR models the CTR distributions are varied from different user
has been a very hot topic in the research and groups and a custom pattern should be considered.
industrial areas. Existing works can be broadly Right: A common pattern is welcomed to model
divided into two categories: (1) Focusing on the similar age distributions from different groups.
xi , more and more elaborated information (e.g.,
user behavior features [37, 22], multimodal information [3, 11], knowledge graph [36, 30], etc) is
introduced to enrich feature space (i.e., xi ); (2) Focusing on F, advanced architectures (including
feature interaction modeling [4, 9, 31], automated architecture search [14, 26] and so on) are designed
to improve the model performance.
⇤
†

⇤ These authors contributed equally to this work and are co-first authors.
† Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

