Segmenting Moving Objects via an Object-Centric
Layered Representation

1

Junyu Xie1
Weidi Xie1,2
Andrew Zisserman1
Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
Coop. Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{jyx,weidi,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The objective of this paper is a model that is able to discover, track and segment
multiple moving objects in a video. We make four contributions: First, we introduce
an object-centric segmentation model with a depth-ordered layer representation.
This is implemented using a variant of the transformer architecture that ingests
optical flow, where each query vector specifies an object and its layer for the
entire video. The model can effectively discover multiple moving objects and
handle mutual occlusions; Second, we introduce a scalable pipeline for generating
multi-object synthetic training data via layer compositions, that is used to train
the proposed model, significantly reducing the requirements for labour-intensive
annotations, and supporting Sim2Real generalisation; Third, we conduct thorough
ablation studies, showing that the model is able to learn object permanence and
temporal shape consistency, and is able to predict amodal segmentation masks;
Fourth, we evaluate our model, trained only on synthetic data, on standard video
segmentation benchmarks, DAVIS, MoCA, SegTrack, FBMS-59, and achieve stateof-the-art performance among existing methods that do not rely on any manual
annotations. With test-time adaptation, we observe further performance boosts.

1

Introduction

Humans have the ability to discover and segment moving objects in videos. This ability is present
even in young infants, together with notions of object permanence through occlusions, and temporal
shape constancy [4, 5, 50, 54]. Achieving this ability by machine has long been a goal of the field [7–
9, 14, 27, 33, 45, 58, 59, 65, 67, 68], and modern methods are now able to reliably discover and
segment single moving objects using both appearance (RGB) and motion (optical flow) streams of
the video. However, success is limited in the case of multiple moving objects and occlusion.
Our goal in this paper is to develop and study a model that can discover multiple moving objects
and also handle their mutual occlusions. To this end, we propose a layered object-centric model that
predicts amodal segmentation masks [73] for each object throughout the video. Note that, given
amodal segmentations, the depth ordering of the object layers can be determined from occlusions in
the observed (modal) frames when the objects overlap. See Figure 1. Our innovation is to build this
mechanism into the representation: when objects overlap in a frame, the model has to maintain the
amodal shapes through temporal consistency, and can thus infer depth ordering.
To achieve this goal we use only optical flow as our primary information stream. There are benefits
and drawbacks to this choice. The benefits are two fold: first, the information that we are after,
the segmentation masks, are directly available from discontinuities in the flow field; second, a key
advantage of using solely optical flow is that the domain adaptation problem is largely avoided [15, 32]
– and this means that the model can be trained on synthetic sequences and applied directly to real
sequences without a significant Sim2Real disparity. However, the drawbacks are also two fold: first,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

