Parallel Tempering With a Variational Reference
Nikola Surjanovic
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
nikola.surjanovic@stat.ubc.ca

Saifuddin Syed
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
saifuddin.syed@stats.ox.ac.uk

Alexandre Bouchard-Côté
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
bouchard@stat.ubc.ca

Trevor Campbell
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
trevor@stat.ubc.ca

Abstract
Sampling from complex target distributions is a challenging task fundamental to
Bayesian inference. Parallel tempering (PT) addresses this problem by constructing
a Markov chain on the expanded state space of a sequence of distributions interpolating between the posterior distribution and a fixed reference distribution, which
is typically chosen to be the prior. However, in the typical case where the prior and
posterior are nearly mutually singular, PT methods are computationally prohibitive.
In this work we address this challenge by constructing a generalized annealing path
connecting the posterior to an adaptively tuned variational reference. The reference
distribution is tuned to minimize the forward (inclusive) KL divergence to the
posterior distribution using a simple, gradient-free moment-matching procedure.
We show that our adaptive procedure converges to the forward KL minimizer, and
that the forward KL divergence serves as a good proxy to a previously developed
measure of PT performance. We also show that in the large-data limit in typical
Bayesian models, the proposed method improves in performance, while traditional
PT deteriorates arbitrarily. Finally, we introduce PT with two references—one fixed,
one variational—with a novel split annealing path that ensures stable variational
reference adaptation. The paper concludes with experiments that demonstrate the
large empirical gains achieved by our method in a wide range of realistic Bayesian
inference scenarios.

1

Introduction

Parallel tempering (PT) is a popular approach to sampling from challenging probability distributions
used in many scientific disciplines [1, 2, 10, 5]. PT methods involve running Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) on the expanded state space of a sequence of distributions that connect the target
distribution of interest, π1 , to a simple reference distribution, π0 , for which i.i.d. sampling is tractable.
The key innovation in PT is that the MCMC chain enables distributions along the path to swap
states (or communicate). This communication enables i.i.d. draws from the reference π0 to aid in
exploration of the challenging target π1 . Indeed, recent work has shown that the effectiveness of
a PT method is essentially characterized by the efficiency of this communication via the global
communication barrier (GCB) from π0 to π1 [36]. Intuitively, the GCB is low when the reference π0
is similar to the target π1 ; in this case, the distributions along the path have substantial overlap and
proposed swaps are generally accepted. The GCB is also inversely related to the restart rate, which
quantifies how frequently i.i.d. samples from π0 traverse the path to π1 (a restart) [36].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

