Towards Improving Calibration in Object Detection
Under Domain Shift
Muhammad Akhtar Munir1,2∗ , Muhammad Haris Khan2 , M. Saquib Sarfraz3,4 , Mohsen Ali1
1

Information Technology University of Punjab, 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence,
3
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 4 Mercedes-Benz Tech Innovation

Abstract
With deep neural network based solution more readily being incorporated in realworld applications, it has been pressing requirement that predictions by such
models, especially in safety-critical environments, be highly accurate and wellcalibrated. Although some techniques addressing DNN calibration have been
proposed, they are only limited to visual classification applications and in-domain
predictions. Unfortunately, very little to no attention is paid towards addressing
calibration of DNN-based visual object detectors, that occupy similar space and
importance in many decision making systems as their visual classification counterparts. In this work, we study the calibration of DNN-based object detection
models, particularly under domain shift. To this end, we first propose a new,
plug-and-play, train-time calibration loss for object detection (coined as TCD). It
can be used with various application-specific loss functions as an auxiliary loss
function to improve detection calibration. Second, we devise a new implicit technique for improving calibration in self-training based domain adaptive detectors,
featuring a new uncertainty quantification mechanism for object detection. We
demonstrate TCD is capable of enhancing calibration with notable margins (1)
across different DNN-based object detection paradigms both in in-domain and
out-of-domain predictions, and (2) in different domain-adaptive detectors across
challenging adaptation scenarios. Finally, we empirically show that our implicit
calibration technique can be used in tandem with TCD during adaptation to further
boost calibration in diverse domain shift scenarios.

1

Introduction

Owing to the success of deep neural network in last decade, they have been progressively becoming
part of different safety-critical applications, including autonomous driving [5], healthcare [2, 32], and
legal research [40]. In such high-stake applications, it is of paramount importance that the model
predictions are not only correct, but also well-calibrated. For a calibrated model, probability of being
correct across all confidence levels and the predictions-confidence should be aligned [6, 35] It is
desired that the incorrect predictions have low-confidence, however, a poorly calibrated model is
prone to have confident but incorrect predictions.
We have witnessed tremendous effort towards improving the predictive accuracy of models, however,
considerably less attention is devoted to model calibration. Among a few works addressing model
calibration, the majority of them focus on classification tasks [6, 17, 20, 22, 35]. A dominant class
of methods address calibration by proposing different post-hoc approaches [28, 6], The core idea
is to transform model outputs by a single parameter which is optimized on a validation set, with
∗

Corresponding author, Intelligent Machines Lab, Department of Computer Science, Information Technology University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan. Email: akhtar.munir@itu.edu.pk Project Page:
http://im.itu.edu.pk/towards-improving-calibration/
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

