(De-)Randomized Smoothing for
Decision Stump Ensembles

Miklós Z. Horváth∗, Mark Niklas Müller∗, Marc Fischer, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
Switzerland
mihorvat@ethz.ch, {mark.mueller,marc.fischer,martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Tree-based models are used in many high-stakes application domains such as
finance and medicine, where robustness and interpretability are of utmost importance. Yet, methods for improving and certifying their robustness are severely
under-explored, in contrast to those focusing on neural networks. Targeting this
important challenge, we propose deterministic smoothing for decision stump ensembles. Whereas most prior work on randomized smoothing focuses on evaluating
arbitrary base models approximately under input randomization, the key insight of
our work is that decision stump ensembles enable exact yet efficient evaluation via
dynamic programming. Importantly, we obtain deterministic robustness certificates,
even jointly over numerical and categorical features, a setting ubiquitous in the real
world. Further, we derive an MLE-optimal training method for smoothed decision
stumps under randomization and propose two boosting approaches to improve their
provable robustness. An extensive experimental evaluation on computer vision
and tabular data tasks shows that our approach yields significantly higher certified
accuracies than the state-of-the-art for tree-based models. We release all code and
trained models at https://github.com/eth-sri/drs.

1

Introduction

Tree-based models have long been a favourite for making decisions in high-stakes domains such
as medicine and finance, due to their interpretability and exceptional performance on tabular data
[1]. However, recent results have highlighted that tree-based models are, similarly to other machine
learning models [2, 3], also highly susceptible to adversarial examples [4–6], raising concerns about
their use in high-stakes domains where errors can have dire consequences.
While the robustness of neural models has received considerable attention [7–21], the challenge
of obtaining robustness guarantees for ensembles of tree-based models has only been investigated
recently [4, 22, 23]. However, these initial works only consider numerical features and are based on
worst-case approximations, which do not scale well to the difficult ℓp -norm setting.
This Work In this work, we address this challenge and present DRS, a novel (De-)Randomized
Smoothing approach, for constructing robust tree-based models with deterministic ℓp -norm guarantees
while supporting both categorical and numerical variables. Unlike prior work, our method is based
on Randomized Smoothing (RS) [24], an approach that obtains robustness guarantees by evaluating a
general base model under an input randomization ϕ(x). However, in contrast to standard applications
of RS, which use costly and imprecise approximations via sampling and only obtain probabilistic
certificates, we leverage the structure of decision stump ensembles to compute their exact output
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

