Non-Stationary Bandits under Recharging Payoffs:
Improved Planning with Sublinear Regret
Orestis Papadigenopoulos
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
papadig@cs.utexas.edu

Constantine Caramanis
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Sanjay Shakkottai
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
sanjay.shakkottai@utexas.edu

Abstract
The stochastic multi-armed bandit setting has been recently studied in the nonstationary regime, where the mean payoff of each action is a non-decreasing
function of the number of rounds passed since it was last played. This model
captures natural behavioral aspects of the users which crucially determine the
performance of recommendation platforms, ad placement systems, and more.
Even assuming prior knowledge of the mean payoff functions, computing an
optimal planning in the above model is NP-hard, while the state-of-the-art is a
1/4-approximation algorithm for the case where at most one arm can be played per
round. We first focus on the setting where the mean payoff functions are known. In
this setting, we significantly improve the best-known guarantees for the planning
problem by developing a polynomial-time (1 1/e)-approximation algorithm
(asymptotically and in expectation), based on a novel combination of randomized
LP rounding and a time-correlated (interleaved) scheduling method. Furthermore,
our algorithm achieves improved guarantees – compared to prior work – for the
case where more than one arm can be played at each round. Moving to the bandit
setting, when the mean payoff functions are initially unknown, we show how our
algorithm can be transformed into a bandit algorithm with sublinear regret.

1

Introduction

In the last two decades, the predominant rise of the social media industry has made the notion of a
newsfeed an integral part of our lives. In a newsfeed, a user observes a structured sequence of content
items (posts, photos etc.) particularly selected by the platform according to her/his preferences. Apart
from social media, an analogous idea – potentially relabeled – also appears in different domains
as, for example, “frequently bought together” in e-commerce, “shuffling similar songs” in music
recommendation, or “recommended articles” in scholarly literature indexing databases. Whether it
is measured in terms of click-rate or time devoted, the high-level objective of newsfeeds is fairly
well-known: to maximize the user’s engagement with the platform. In many applications, however,
achieving this objective is not as simple as identifying the user’s “favorite” content, given that her/his
satisfaction can depend on the time passed since the same (or similar) content has been observed. As
an example, a user’s engagement can worsen if a social media feed (resp., a music recommendation
platform) constantly presents content from the same source (resp., same artist).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

