Active Labeling: Streaming Stochastic Gradients

Vivien Cabannes∗
Meta

Francis Bach
INRIA / ENS / PSL

Vianney Perchet
ENSAE

Alessandro Rudi
INRIA / ENS / PSL

Abstract
The workhorse of machine learning is stochastic gradient descent. To access
stochastic gradients, it is common to consider iteratively input/output pairs of a
training dataset. Interestingly, it appears that one does not need full supervision
to access stochastic gradients, which is the main motivation of this paper. After
formalizing the "active labeling" problem, which focuses on active learning with
partial supervision, we provide a streaming technique that provably minimizes
the ratio of generalization error over the number of samples. We illustrate our
technique in depth for robust regression.

1

Introduction

A large amount of the current hype around artificial intelligence was fueled by the recent successes
of supervised learning. Supervised learning consists in designing an algorithm that maps inputs to
outputs by learning from a set of input/output examples. When accessing many samples, and given
enough computation power, this framework is able to tackle complex tasks. Interestingly, many of
the difficulties arising in practice do not emerge from choosing the right statistical model to solve
the supervised learning problem, but from the problem of collecting and cleaning enough data (see
Chapters 1 and 2 of Géron, 2017, for example). Those difficulties are not disjoint from the current
trends toward data privacy regulations (Council of European Union, 2016). This fact motivates this
work, where we focus on how to efficiently collect information to carry out the learning process.
In this paper, we formalize the “active labeling” problem for weak supervision, where the goal is
to learn a target function by acquiring the most informative dataset given a restricted budget for
annotation. We focus explicitly on weak supervision that comes as a set of label candidates for
each input, aiming to partially supervise input data in the most efficient way to guide a learning
algorithm. We also restrict our study to the streaming variant where, for each input, only a single
partial information can be collected about its corresponding output. The crux of this work is to
leverage the fact that full supervision is not needed to acquire unbiased stochastic gradients, and
perform stochastic gradient descent.
The following summarizes our contributions.
1. First, we introduce the “active labeling” problem, which is a relevant theoretical framework
that encompasses many useful problems encountered by practitioners trying to annotate their
data in the most efficient fashion, as well as its streaming variation, in order to deal with
privacy preserving issues. This is the focus of Section 2.
2. Then, in Section 3, we give a high-level framework to access unbiased stochastic gradients
with weak information only. This provides a simple solution to the streaming “active labeling”
problem.
3. Finally, we detail this framework for a robust regression task in Section 4, and provide an
algorithm whose optimality is proved in Section 5.
∗ Work done while at INRIA / ENS / PSL. Contact the first author at vivien.cabannes@gmail.com.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

