STaR: Self-Taught Reasoner
Bootstrapping Reasoning With Reasoning

Eric Zelikman∗1 , Yuhuai Wu∗12 , Jesse Mu1 , Noah D. Goodman1
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Google Research
{ezelikman, yuhuai, muj, ngoodman}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Generating step-by-step "chain-of-thought" rationales improves language model
performance on complex reasoning tasks like mathematics or commonsense
question-answering. However, inducing language model rationale generation currently requires either constructing massive rationale datasets or sacrificing accuracy
by using only few-shot inference. We propose a technique to iteratively leverage a
small number of rationale examples and a large dataset without rationales, to bootstrap the ability to perform successively more complex reasoning. This technique,
the "Self-Taught Reasoner" (STaR), relies on a simple loop: generate rationales to
answer many questions, prompted with a few rationale examples; if the generated
answers are wrong, try again to generate a rationale given the correct answer; finetune on all the rationales that ultimately yielded correct answers; repeat. We show
that STaR significantly improves performance on multiple datasets compared to a
model fine-tuned to directly predict final answers, and performs comparably to finetuning a 30× larger state-of-the-art language model on CommensenseQA. Thus,
STaR lets a model improve itself by learning from its own generated reasoning.1

1

Introduction

Human decision-making is often the result of extended chains of thought [1, 2]. Recent work has
shown that explicit intermediate reasoning (“rationales”) can improve large language model (LLM)
performance as well [3–8]. For example, [5] demonstrated that LLMs explicitly trained to use
“scratchpads” for intermediate steps can attain perfect in-distribution performance on arithmetic,
and strong out-of-distribution generalization, while models trained to predict answers directly fail
to do either. These works suggest that generating explicit rationales before giving a final answer
(“rationale generation”) is valuable for LLMs across diverse tasks including mathematical reasoning,
commonsense reasoning, code evaluation, social bias inference, and natural language inference.
However, the two primary methods for inducing rationale generation both have serious drawbacks.
One approach to rationale generation is the construction of a fine-tuning dataset of rationales, either
manually by human annotators or automatically with hand-crafted templates [3–5, 9]. Manual
methods are expensive, and it is infeasible to construct such a dataset for each interesting problem
[3]. Meanwhile, template-based methods rely on automatically-generated rationales but only work
when a general solution is already known [5] or reasonable hard-coded heuristics can be made [4].
An alternative is to leverage in-context learning by including only a few rationale examples in the
language model prompt. This has been shown to improve accuracy on mathematical and symbolic
reasoning tasks relative to prompting without rationales (“direct” prompting) [5, 6]. Yet, while fewshot techniques with rationales tend to outperform their non-reasoning counterparts, they generally
substantially underperform models fine-tuned to directly predict answers using larger datasets [5, 6].
*
1

These authors contributed equally to this work
We release our code at https://github.com/ezelikman/STaR.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

