LISA: Learning Interpretable Skill Abstractions from
Language

Divyansh Garg∗
Skanda Vaidyanath∗
Kuno Kim
Jiaming Song Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
{divgarg, svaidyan, khkim, tsong, ermon} @stanford.edu

Abstract
Learning policies that effectively utilize language instructions in complex, multitask environments is an important problem in sequential decision-making. While
it is possible to condition on the entire language instruction directly, such an
approach could suffer from generalization issues. In our work, we propose Learning
Interpretable Skill Abstractions (LISA), a hierarchical imitation learning framework
that can learn diverse, interpretable primitive behaviors or skills from languageconditioned demonstrations to better generalize to unseen instructions. LISA uses
vector quantization to learn discrete skill codes that are highly correlated with
language instructions and the behavior of the learned policy. In navigation and
robotic manipulation tasks, LISA outperforms a strong non-hierarchical Decision
Transformer baseline in the low data regime and is able to compose learned skills to
solve tasks containing unseen long-range instructions. Our method demonstrates a
more natural way to condition on language in sequential decision-making problems
and achieve interpretable and controllable behavior with the learned skills.

1

Introduction

Intelligent machines should be able to solve a variety
of complex, long-horizon tasks in an environment
and generalize to novel scenarios. In the sequential
decision-making paradigm, provided expert demonstrations, an agent can learn to perform these tasks
via multi-task imitation learning (IL). As humans, it
is desirable to specify tasks to an agent using a convenient, yet expressive modality and the agent should
solve the task by taking actions in the environment.
There are several ways for humans to specify tasks
to an agent, such as task IDs, goal images, and goal
demonstrations. However, these specifications tend
to be ambiguous, require significant human effort,
and can be cumbersome to curate and provide at test
time. One of the most natural and versatile ways for
humans to specify tasks is via natural language.
The goal of language-conditioned IL is to solve tasks
in an environment given language-conditioned trajectories at training time and a natural language instruction at test time. This becomes challenging when the
task involves completing several sub-tasks sequen*

VQ Codebook
0

1

2

3

K

4

time
“pull the handle and
move black mug right”

1

3

1

3

3

Skill code z

1
1

3

3
3

Figure 1: Overview of LISA. Given a language
instruction, our method learns discrete skill abstractions z, picked from a vector codebook C. The
policy conditioned on a skill executes distinct behaviors and solves different sub-tasks. See GIF.

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

