PALBERT: Teaching ALBERT to Ponder

Nikita Balagansky, Daniil Gavrilov
Tinkoff
n.n.balaganskiy@tinkoff.ai, d.gavrilov@tinkoff.ai

Abstract
Currently, pre-trained models can be considered the default choice for a wide
range of NLP tasks. Despite their SoTA results, there is practical evidence that
these models may require a different number of computing layers for different
input sequences, since evaluating all layers leads to overconfidence in wrong
predictions (namely overthinking). This problem can potentially be solved by
implementing adaptive computation time approaches, which were first designed
to improve inference speed. Recently proposed PonderNet may be a promising
solution for performing an early exit by treating the exit layer’s index as a latent
variable. However, the originally proposed exit criterion, relying on sampling
from trained posterior distribution on the probability of exiting from the i-th
layer, introduces major variance in exit layer indices, significantly reducing the
resulting model’s performance. In this paper, we propose improving PonderNet
with a novel deterministic Q-exit criterion and a revisited model architecture. We
adapted the proposed mechanism to ALBERT and RoBERTa and compared it
with recent methods for performing an early exit. We observed that the proposed
changes can be considered significant improvements on the original PonderNet
architecture and outperform PABEE on a wide range of GLUE tasks. In addition,
we also performed an in-depth ablation study of the proposed architecture to further
understand Lambda layers and their performance.

1

Introduction

These days, fine-tuning pre-trained models on downstream tasks became a de facto standard technique
for training NLP models (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019).
Although, as model sizes increase, it becomes harder to use them for real world applications due to
computational footprint. Because of this fact, practitioners may desire to perform an early model exit
(i.e., with adaptive computation time (Graves, 2016)) to reduce the computation needed for a specific
model input.
One model that is widely used in real-world applications is ALBERT (Lan et al., 2020), which is
based on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) with shared layers (i.e., the same layer is
evaluated several times to provide an output). Sharing layer weights allows us to think of ALBERT as
of recurrent model that simplify development of early exit methods. Most of them (Teerapittayanon
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2020; Xin et al., 2020) rely on performing an early exit based on entropy
of predictions during the model evaluation. Although, Zhou et al. (2020) showed that running the
ALBERT-Base block for a fixed number of times (10) could increase the accuracy of the fine-tuned
model on specific tasks (e.g., MRPC) despite the entropy of predictions monotonously decreasing
for all 12 layers. A recent PABEE solution (Zhou et al., 2020) was designed to overcome this issue
by performing an early exit based on the consensus between different classifier heads from different
layers. The model stops evaluating when several classifiers in a row produce the same result.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

