SMPL: Simulated Industrial Manufacturing and
Process Control Learning Environments

Mohan Zhang1,2 , Xiaozhou Wang1 , Benjamin Decardi-Nelson3 , Song Bo3 ,
An Zhang3 , Jinfeng Liu3 , Sile Tao1 , Jiayi Cheng1 , Xiaohong Liu5 ,
DengDeng Yu4 , Matthew Poon1 , Animesh Garg2
1
Quartic.ai
mohan, xiaozhou, bill.tao, jerry, matthew@quartic.ai
2

University of Toronto

zhangmo4, garg@cs.toronto.edu
3

University of Alberta

decardin, sbo, azhang1, jinfeng@ualberta.ca
4

University of Texas at Arlington
dengdeng.yu@uta.edu

5

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
xiaohongliu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional biological and pharmaceutical manufacturing plants are controlled by
human workers or pre-defined thresholds. Modernized factories have advanced
process control algorithms such as model predictive control (MPC). However, there
is little exploration of applying deep reinforcement learning to control manufacturing plants. One of the reasons is the lack of high fidelity simulations and standard
APIs for benchmarking. To bridge this gap, we develop an easy-to-use library that
includes five high-fidelity simulation environments: BeerFMTEnv, ReactorEnv,
AtropineEnv, PenSimEnv and mAbEnv, which cover a wide range of manufacturing
processes. We build these environments on published dynamics models. Furthermore, we benchmark online and offline, model-based and model-free reinforcement
learning algorithms for comparisons of follow-up research. †

1

Introduction

With a large market value [1], the manufacturing industry is enthusiastic to the ways that is conductive
to the production efficiency. A number of studies have demonstrated that reinforcement learning may
be applied to manufacturing processes and has the potential to dramatically improve productivity
[2, 3].
Our goal is to bridge the gap between deep reinforcement learning research and industrial manufacturing by creating simulation environments that model real-world factories. In this paper, we
introduce five manufacturing simulation environments, including beer fermentation, atropine production, penicillin manufacturing, monoclonal antibodies production, and a continuous stirred tank
†

Official documentation:https://smpl-env.github.io/smpl-document/index.html
Official implementation: https://github.com/smpl-env/smpl
Code of experiments: https://github.com/smpl-env/smpl-experiments

Preprint. Under review.

