MORA: Improving Ensemble Robustness Evaluation
with Model-Reweighing Attack
Yunrui Yu⇤

State Key Lab of IOTSC,
University of Macau
Macau SAR, China
yb97445@um.edu.mo

Xitong Gao⇤

Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shenzhen, China
xt.gao@siat.ac.cn

Cheng-Zhong Xu†

State Key Lab of IOTSC,
University of Macau
Macau SAR, China
czxu@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Adversarial attacks can deceive neural networks by adding tiny perturbations
to their input data. Ensemble defenses, which are trained to minimize attack
transferability among sub-models, offer a promising research direction to improve
robustness against such attacks while maintaining a high accuracy on natural
inputs. We discover, however, that recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) adversarial attack
strategies cannot reliably evaluate ensemble defenses, sizeably overestimating their
robustness. This paper identifies the two factors that contribute to this behavior.
First, these defenses form ensembles that are notably difficult for existing gradientbased method to attack, due to gradient obfuscation. Second, ensemble defenses
diversify sub-model gradients, presenting a challenge to defeat all sub-models
simultaneously, simply summing their contributions may counteract the overall
attack objective; yet, we observe that ensemble may still be fooled despite most
sub-models being correct. We therefore introduce MORA, a model-reweighing
attack to steer adversarial example synthesis by reweighing the importance of submodel gradients. MORA finds that recent ensemble defenses all exhibit varying
degrees of overestimated robustness. Comparing it against recent SOTA white-box
attacks, it can converge orders of magnitude faster while achieving higher attack
success rates across all ensemble models examined with three different ensemble
modes (i.e., ensembling by either softmax, voting or logits). In particular, most
ensemble defenses exhibit near or exactly 0% robustness against MORA with
`1 perturbation within 0.02 on CIFAR-10, and 0.01 on CIFAR-100. We make
MORA open source with reproducible results and pre-trained models; and provide
a leaderboard of ensemble defenses under various attack strategies1 .

1

Introduction

Many safety-critical applications, such as autonomous robots [34], self-driving [8], search engines [24], etc. are becoming increasingly powerful and reliant on deep neural networks (DNNs).
Despite the monumental success of DNNs on these applications, they are highly susceptible to
adversarial examples — an attacker can add tiny delibrate perturbations to the input data, misleading
the model into giving incorrect results [23, 9]. Such adversarial attacks could pose a significant threat
to the safety and reliability of deep learning applications.
To mitigate this threat, many defense strategies [17, 33, 4] based on adversarial training [17] have
been proposed to improve model robustness. Adversarial training, however, gains robustness at the
⇤

Xitong Gao and Yunrui Yu contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence to: Cheng-Zhong Xu (cz.xu@um.edu.mo).
1
https://github.com/lafeat/mora.

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

