On Analyzing Generative and Denoising Capabilities
of Diffusion-based Deep Generative Models

Kamil Deja∗ †
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
kamil.deja@pw.edu.pl

Anna Kuzina∗
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
a.kuzina@vu.nl

Tomasz Trzciński
Warsaw University of Technology
Jagiellonian University of Cracow
Tooploox, IDEAS NCBR
tomasz.trzcinski@pw.edu.pl

Jakub M. Tomczak
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
j.m.tomczak@vu.nl

Abstract
Diffusion-based Deep Generative Models (DDGMs) offer state-of-the-art performance in generative modeling. Their main strength comes from their unique setup
in which a model (the backward diffusion process) is trained to reverse the forward diffusion process, which gradually adds noise to the input signal. Although
DDGMs are well studied, it is still unclear how the small amount of noise is
transformed during the backward diffusion process. Here, we focus on analyzing
this problem to gain more insight into the behavior of DDGMs and their denoising and generative capabilities. We observe a fluid transition point that changes
the functionality of the backward diffusion process from generating a (corrupted)
image from noise to denoising the corrupted image to the final sample. Based on
this observation, we postulate to divide a DDGM into two parts: a denoiser and
a generator. The denoiser could be parameterized by a denoising auto-encoder,
while the generator is a diffusion-based model with its own set of parameters. We
experimentally validate our proposition, showing its pros and cons.

1

Introduction

Diffusion-based Deep Generative Models [22] (DDGM) have recently attracted increasing attention,
due to the unprecedented quality of generated samples [5, 9, 11]. The general idea behind this set of
methods is to generate samples using diffusion processes [8, 10, 11, 23, 24]. In the forward diffusion
process, an image is passed through a number of steps that consecutively add a small portion of noise
to it. The backward diffusion process is a direct reverse of the forward process, where a generative
model is trained to gradually denoise the image. With a sufficient number of the forward diffusion
steps, noisy images approach isotropic Gaussian noise. Then, generating new examples is possible by
applying the backward diffusion to the noise sampled from the standard Gaussian distribution.
While the performance of DDGMs is impressive, not all of their aspects are fully understood.
Intuitively, a DDGM is trained to remove small amounts of noise from many intermediary corrupted
images. Although this perspective is reasonable and complies with the interpretation of DDGMs
using stochastic differential equations [10, 24], it is still unclear how the small amount of noise
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Work done while visiting Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

