DHRL: A Graph-Based Approach for Long-Horizon
and Sparse Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

Seungjae Lee1,2 , Jigang Kim1,2 , Inkyu Jang1,3 , H. Jin Kim1,3
1
Seoul National University
2
Artificial Intelligence Institute of Seoul National University (AIIS)
3
Automation and Systems Research Institute (ASRI)
{ysz0301, jgkim2020, leplusbon, hjinkim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) has made notable progress in complex
control tasks by leveraging temporal abstraction. However, previous HRL algorithms often suffer from serious data inefficiency as environments get large. The
extended components, i.e., goal space and length of episodes, impose a burden on
either one or both high-level and low-level policies since both levels share the total
horizon of the episode. In this paper, we present a method of Decoupling Horizons
Using a Graph in Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (DHRL) which can alleviate this problem by decoupling the horizons of high-level and low-level policies
and bridging the gap between the length of both horizons using a graph. DHRL
provides a freely stretchable high-level action interval, which facilitates longer
temporal abstraction and faster training in complex tasks. Our method outperforms
state-of-the-art HRL algorithms in typical HRL environments. Moreover, DHRL
achieves long and complex locomotion and manipulation tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been successfully
applied to a range of robot systems, such as locomotion tasks [24, 8], learning to control aerial robots
[10, 13], and robot manipulation [14, 22]. Goalconditioned RL, which augments state with the goal
to train an agent for various goals [23, 19], further
raised the applicability of RL in robot systems allowing the agent to achieve diverse tasks.
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL), which
trains multiple levels of goal-conditioned RL, has improved the performance of RL in complex and sparse
tasks with long horizons using temporally extended
policy [25, 26, 16]. On the back of these strengths,
HRL was adopted to solve various complex robotics
tasks [20, 11, 18].

AntMazeComplex
High-level Horizon
Low-level Horizon

Figure 1: DHRL: By decoupling the horizons of both levels of the hierarchical network, DHRL not only solves long and sparse
tasks but also significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art algorithms.

However, HRL often has difficulty in complex or large environments because of training inefficiency.
Previous studies speculated that the cause of this problem is the large goal space, and restricted
the high-level action space to alleviate this phenomenon [28, 12]. Nevertheless, this approach
performs well only in limited length and complexity and still suffers from the same trouble in larger
environments.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

