Conditional Diffusion Process for Inverse Halftoning

Hao Jiang
Peking University
jianghao@stu.pku.edu.cn

Yadong Mu∗
Peking University
Peng Cheng Laboratory
myd@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Inverse halftoning is a technique used to recover realistic images from ancient
prints (e.g., photographs, newspapers, books). The rise of deep learning has led
to the gradual incorporation of neural network designs into inverse halftoning
methods. Most of existing inverse halftoning approaches adopt the U-net architecture, which uses an encoder to encode halftone prints, followed by a decoder
for image reconstruction. However, the mainstream supervised learning paradigm
with element-wise regression commonly adopted in U-net based methods has poor
generalization ability in practical applications. Specifically, when there is a large
gap between the dithering patterns of the training and testing halftones, the reconstructed continuous-tone images have obvious artifacts. This is an important
issue in practical applications, since the algorithms for generating halftones are
ever-evolving. Even for the same algorithm, different parameter choices will result in different halftone dithering patterns. In this paper, we propose the first
generative halftoning method in the literature, which regards the black pixels in
halftones as physically moving particles, and makes the randomly distributed particles move under some certain guidance through reverse diffusion process, so as to
obtain desired halftone patterns. In particular, we propose a Conditional Diffusion
model for image Halftoning (CDH), which consists of a halftone dithering process
and an inverse halftoning process. By changing the initial state of the diffusion
model, our method can generate visually plausible halftones with different dithering patterns under the condition of image gray level and Laplacian prior. To avoid
introducing redundant patterns and undesired artifacts, we propose a meta-halftone
guided network to incorporate blue noise guidance in the diffusion process. In
this way, halftone images subject to more diverse distributions are fed into the
inverse halftoning model, which helps the model to learn a more robust mapping
from halftone distributions to continuous-tone distributions, thereby improving the
generalization ability to unseen samples. Quantitative and qualitative experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

Halftoning refers to the task of simulating the brightness change of a continuous-tone image by
changing the size or frequency of halftone dots (such as ink dots). In the last century, halftoning
technology has been widely used in the printing industry to store precious image data through old
newspapers, books, photographs, etc. At the same time, inverse halftoning technology emerged to
recover stored continuous-tone image from vintage materials. The goal of the inverse halftoning
technique is to minimize the loss of information in the restoration process, so that the restored print
has the highest possible visual quality.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

