Explain My Surprise: Learning Efficient Long-Term
Memory by Predicting Uncertain Outcomes

Artyom Sorokin
AIRI, MIPT
Moscow, Russia
asorokin@airi.net

Nazar Buzun
AIRI
Moscow, Russia
buzun@airi.net

Leonid Pugachev
MIPT
Dolgoprudny, Russia
puleon@mail.ru

Mikhail Burtsev
AIRI, MIPT
Moscow, Russia
burtsev@airi.net

Abstract
In many sequential tasks, a model needs to remember relevant events from the
distant past to make correct predictions. Unfortunately, a straightforward application of gradient based training requires intermediate computations to be stored
for every element of a sequence. This requires to store prohibitively large intermediate data if a sequence consists of thousands or even millions elements, and
as a result, makes learning of very long-term dependencies infeasible. However,
the majority of sequence elements can usually be predicted by taking into account
only temporally local information. On the other hand, predictions affected by
long-term dependencies are sparse and characterized by high uncertainty given
only local information. We propose MemUP, a new training method that allows
to learn long-term dependencies without backpropagating gradients through the
whole sequence at a time. This method can potentially be applied to any recurrent
architecture. LSTM network trained with MemUP performs better or comparable
to baselines while requiring to store less intermediate data.

1

Introduction

Two dominating approaches for memory augmentation in deep learning include recurrent neural
networks [1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9]) and Transformers [10; 11; 12; 13; 14; 15]. Historically, recurrent
networks and Transformers have been primarily developed for applications in natural language
processing, which is characterized by strong dependencies between closely located elements. On the
other hand, in the reinforcement learning setting, the agent often has to remember only a few bits of
information but for a very long time [16].
Evolution of neural architectures tackling the problem of learning long-term dependencies follows
the path of increasing size and complexity [6; 8; 17]. For example, Transformers[18] and memory
augmented neural networks [7] perform much better than the classical LSTM in tasks with long-term
temporal dependencies. Still, even gigantic language models like GPT-3 [19] process sequences only
up to 2048 elements due to quadratic complexity of self-attention. So, these architectures are much
more demanding in terms of the memory capacity and computational power required for training.
To learn a long-term dependency between a distant observation in the past and agent’s actions
in the current state, both the recurrent networks trained with back propagation through time and
Transformers need to store gradients for all intermediate steps. Taking into account, that the minimum
distance between useful information in the past and the moment of its utilization can be measured
in thousands or millions of time steps, such solutions seem unrealistic given the current hardware
capabilities. We propose a training method that allows an agent to find and store dependencies
between temporarily distant events without the need to process intermediate steps.
Our contributions are the following:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

