Association Graph Learning for Multi-Task
Classification with Category Shifts

Jiayi Shen1 , Zehao Xiao1 , Xiantong Zhen1,2 ∗, Cees G. M. Snoek1 , Marcel Worring1
1
AIM Lab, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands,
{j.shen, z.xiao, C.G.M.Snoek, m.worring}@uva.nl
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE, zhenxt@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on multi-task classification, where related classification
tasks share the same label space and are learned simultaneously. In particular,
we tackle a new setting, which is more realistic than currently addressed in the
literature, where categories shift from training to test data. Hence, individual tasks
do not contain complete training data for the categories in the test set. To generalize
to such test data, it is crucial for individual tasks to leverage knowledge from
related tasks. To this end, we propose learning an association graph to transfer
knowledge among tasks for missing classes. We construct the association graph
with nodes representing tasks, classes and instances, and encode the relationships
among the nodes in the edges to guide their mutual knowledge transfer. By message
passing on the association graph, our model enhances the categorical information
of each instance, making it more discriminative. To avoid spurious correlations
between task and class nodes in the graph, we introduce an assignment entropy
maximization that encourages each class node to balance its edge weights. This
enables all tasks to fully utilize the categorical information from related tasks.
An extensive evaluation on three general benchmarks and a medical dataset for
skin lesion classification reveals that our method consistently performs better than
representative baselines.1

1

Introduction

Multi-task learning aims to simultaneously solve several related tasks [9, 69] by sharing information
and has attracted much attention in recent years. In this paper, we focus on multi-task classification
under the multi-input multi-output setting [70, 37, 46, 69]. In this setting, the label space is shared
but each task operates on a different type of visual modality or the same modality collected from
different environments or equipment. As a consequence, each task follows different data distributions
for the shared labels. The intuition behind multi-task classification is that tasks having the same label
space provide partial knowledge of the distributions that can be shared among all tasks to reach a
better view of the full distribution, which in turn benefits the individual tasks.
A real-world challenge for multi-task classification is category shift, where the categories in the testing
phase are shared but during training not all classes are present for each individual task. This challenge
is common in various realistic scenarios, such as skin lesion classification [31, 64], fault diagnosis
[56, 14], or remote sensing scene classification [38]. For example, in skin lesion classification, data
provided by different hospitals or healthcare facilities should lead to the same set of diagnoses [31, 64].
Unfortunately, due to patient populations or proprietary use regulations, these tasks do not share
∗
1

Currently with United Imaging Healthcare, Co., Ltd., China.
Code: https://github.com/autumn9999/MTC-with-Category-Shifts.git

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

