A IRF RANS: High Fidelity Computational Fluid
Dynamics Dataset for Approximating
Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes Solutions

Florent Bonnet
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR
Extrality
Paris, France
bonnet@isir.upmc.fr

Jocelyn Ahmed Mazari
Extrality
Paris, France
ahmed@extrality.ai

Paola Cinnella
Sorbonne Université, Institut Jean Le Rond d’Alembert
Paris, France
paola.cinnella@sorbonne-universite.fr
Patrick Gallinari
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR
Criteo AI Lab
Paris, France
patrick.gallinari@sorbonne-universite.fr

Abstract
Surrogate models are necessary to optimize meaningful quantities in physical dynamics as their recursive numerical resolutions are often prohibitively expensive. It
is mainly the case for fluid dynamics and the resolution of Navier–Stokes equations.
However, despite the fast-growing field of data-driven models for physical systems,
reference datasets representing real-world phenomena are lacking. In this work, we
develop A IRF RANS, a dataset for studying the two-dimensional incompressible
steady-state Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes equations over airfoils at a subsonic regime and for different angles of attacks. We also introduce metrics on the
stress forces at the surface of geometries and visualization of boundary layers to
assess the capabilities of models to accurately predict the meaningful information
of the problem. Finally, we propose deep learning baselines on four machine
learning tasks to study A IRF RANS under different constraints for generalization
considerations: big and scarce data regime, Reynolds number, and angle of attack
extrapolation.

1

Introduction

Numerical simulations of physical dynamics are a consequent part of scientific research as it allows us
to quantitatively study natural phenomena without requiring often complex and expensive experiments.
Those dynamics are mainly governed by Partial Differential Equations (PDE) and are numerically
solved with the help of discretization methods such as finite differences, finite elements, or finite
volumes methods. Such techniques are accurate when used over sufficiently fine meshes but are often
expensive in time and resources. Thus, the optimization of meaningful quantities with respect to the
parameters of the studied dynamics is, most of the time, out of scope. In particular, the numerical
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

