Weakly Supervised Representation Learning with
Sparse Perturbations

Kartik Ahuja∗

Jason Hartford∗

Yoshua Bengio†∗

Abstract
The theory of representation learning aims to build methods that provably invert
the data generating process with minimal domain knowledge or any source of
supervision. Most prior approaches require strong distributional assumptions on the
latent variables and weak supervision (auxiliary information such as timestamps)
to provide provable identification guarantees. In this work, we show that if one
has weak supervision from observations generated by sparse perturbations of the
latent variables–e.g. images in a reinforcement learning environment where actions
move individual sprites–identification is achievable under unknown continuous
latent distributions. We show that if the perturbations are applied only on mutually
exclusive blocks of latents, we identify the latents up to those blocks. We also
show that if these perturbation blocks overlap, we identify latents up to the smallest
blocks shared across perturbations. Consequently, if there are blocks that intersect
in one latent variable only, then such latents are identified up to permutation and
scaling. We propose a natural estimation procedure based on this theory and
illustrate it on low-dimensional synthetic and image-based experiments.

1

Introduction

If you are reading this paper on a computer, press one of the arrow keys... all the text you are reading
jumps as the screen refreshes in response to your action. Now imagine you were playing a video
game like Atari’s Space Invaders—the same keystroke would cause a small sprite at the bottom of
your screen to move in response. These actions induce changes in pixels that are very different,
but in both cases, the visual feedback in response to our actions indicates the presence of some
object on the screen—a virtual paper and a virtual spacecraft, respectively—with properties that
we can manipulate. Our keystrokes induce sparse changes to a program’s state, and these changes
are reflected on the screen, albeit not necessarily in a correspondingly sparse way (e.g., most pixels
change when scrolling). Similarly, many of our interactions with the real world induce sparse changes
to the underlying causal factors of our environment: lift a coffee cup and the cup moves, but not the
rest of the objects on your desk; turn your head laterally, and the coordinates of all the objects in
the room shift, but only in the horizontal direction. These examples hint at the main question we
aim to answer in this paper: if we know that actions have sparse effects on the latent factors of our
system, can we use that knowledge as weak supervision to help disentangle these latent factors from
pixel-level data?
Self– and weakly-supervised learning approaches have made phenomenal progress in the last few
years, with large-scale systems like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) offering large improvements on
all natural language benchmarks, and CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) outperforming state-of-the-art
supervised models from six years ago (Szegedy et al., 2016) on the ImageNet challenge (Deng et al.,
2009) without using any of the labels.
∗
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Université de Montréal.
Correspondence to: kartik.ahuja@mila.quebec.

†

CIFAR Fellow.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

