Efficient Submodular Optimization under Noise:
Local Search is Robust
Lingxiao Huang
Huawei TCS Lab -> Nanjing University
huanglingxiao1990@126.com

Yuyi Wang
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
yuyiwang920@gmail.com

Chunxue Yang
Nanyang Technological University
chunxue001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Huanjian Zhou
The University of Tokyo
zhou@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The problem of monotone submodular maximization has been studied extensively
due to its wide range of applications. However, there are cases where one can
only access the objective function in a distorted or noisy form because of the
uncertain nature or the errors involved in the evaluation. This paper considers the
problem of constrained monotone submodular maximization with noisy oracles
introduced by [11]. For a
cardinality constraint, we propose an algorithm achieving

a near-optimal 1 − 1e − O(ε) -approximation guarantee (for arbitrary ε > 0) with
only a polynomial number of queries to the noisy value oracle, which improves
the exponential query complexity of [20]. For general matroid constraints, we
show the first constant approximation algorithm in the presence of noise. Our
main approaches are to design a novel local search framework that can handle the
effect of noise and to construct certain smoothing surrogate functions for noise
reduction.

1

Introduction

Consider the following problems in machine learning and operations research: (1) selecting a set
of locations to open up facilities with the goal of maximizing their overall user coverage [15]; (2)
reducing the number of features in a machine learning model while retaining as much information
as possible [23]; and (3) identifying a small set of seed nodes that can achieve the largest overall
influence in a social network [14]. Solving these problems all involves maximizing a monotone
submodular set function f : 2N 7→ R subject to certain constraints. Intuitively, submodularity
captures the property of diminishing returns. For example, a newly opened facility will contribute
less to the overall user coverage if we have already opened many facilities and more if we have
only opened a few. Although the general problem of monotone submodular maximization subject
to a cardinality or general matroid constraint is NP-hard [5], the greedy algorithm, which selects an
element with the largest margin at each step, can approximately solve this problem under a cardinality
constraint by a factor of 1 − 1/e, and this approximation ratio is tight [18]. Moreover, a non-oblivious
local search algorithm, which iteratively alters one element to improve an auxiliary objective function,
is guaranteed to achieve an approximation ratio of 1 − 1/e for general matroid constraints [7].
In the literature, the submodular optimization problem usually assumes a value oracle to the objective
function f , which means one is allowed to query the exact value of f (S) for any S ⊆ N . However, in
many applications, due to the uncertain nature of the objective or the errors involved in the evaluation,
one can only access the function value in a distorted or noisy form. For example, Globerson and
Roweis [9] pointed out that selecting features to construct a robust learning model is particularly
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

