NAS-Bench-Graph: Benchmarking Graph Neural
Architecture Search
Yijian Qin, Ziwei Zhang, Xin Wang∗, Zeyang Zhang, Wenwu Zhu∗
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
qinyj19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zwzhang,xin_wang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
zy-zhang20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph neural architecture search (GraphNAS) has recently aroused considerable
attention in both academia and industry. However, two key challenges seriously
hinder the further research of GraphNAS. First, since there is no consensus for the
experimental setting, the empirical results in different research papers are often not
comparable and even not reproducible, leading to unfair comparisons. Secondly,
GraphNAS often needs extensive computations, which makes it highly inefficient
and inaccessible to researchers without access to large-scale computation. To
solve these challenges, we propose NAS-Bench-Graph, a tailored benchmark that
supports unified, reproducible, and efficient evaluations for GraphNAS. Specifically,
we construct a unified, expressive yet compact search space, covering 26,206 unique
graph neural network (GNN) architectures and propose a principled evaluation
protocol. To avoid unnecessary repetitive training, we have trained and evaluated
all of these architectures on nine representative graph datasets, recording detailed
metrics including train, validation, and test performance in each epoch, the latency,
the number of parameters, etc. Based on our proposed benchmark, the performance
of GNN architectures can be directly obtained by a look-up table without any further
computation, which enables fair, fully reproducible, and efficient comparisons. To
demonstrate its usage, we make in-depth analyses of our proposed NAS-BenchGraph, revealing several interesting findings for GraphNAS. We also showcase
how the benchmark can be easily compatible with GraphNAS open libraries such
as AutoGL and NNI. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first benchmark
for graph neural architecture search.

1

Introduction

With the prevalence of graph data, graph machine learning [77], such as graph neural networks
(GNNs) [83, 67], has been widely adopted in diverse tasks, including recommendation systems [66],
bioinformatics [55], urban computing [24], physical simulations [54], combinatorial optimization [2],
etc. Graph neural architecture search (GraphNAS), aiming to automatically discover the optimal
GNN architecture for a given graph dataset and task, is at the front of graph machine learning research
and has drawn increasing attention in the past few years [78].
Despite the progress in GraphNAS research, there exist two key challenges that seriously hinder the
further development of GraphNAS:
∗

Corresponding Authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

