When does dough become a bagel?
Analyzing the remaining mistakes on ImageNet

Vijay Vasudevan, Benjamin Caine, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, Sara Fridovich-Keil2 , Rebecca Roelofs
{vrv, rofls}@google.com
Google Research, Brain Team, 2 University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Image classification accuracy on the ImageNet dataset has been a barometer for
progress in computer vision over the last decade. Several recent papers have
questioned the degree to which the benchmark remains useful to the community [33,
3, 31, 42, 36], yet innovations continue to contribute gains to performance, with
today’s largest models achieving 90%+ top-1 accuracy. To help contextualize
progress on ImageNet and provide a more meaningful evaluation for today’s stateof-the-art models, we manually review and categorize every remaining mistake
that a few top models make and provide insights into the long-tail of errors on one
of the most benchmarked datasets in computer vision. We focus on the multi-label
subset evaluation of ImageNet, where today’s best models achieve upwards of 97%
top-1 accuracy. Our analysis reveals that nearly half of the supposed mistakes
are not mistakes at all, and we uncover new valid multi-labels, demonstrating
that, without careful review, we are significantly underestimating the performance
of these models. On the other hand, we also find that today’s best models still
make a significant number of mistakes (40%) that are obviously wrong to human
reviewers. To calibrate future progress on ImageNet, we provide an updated multilabel evaluation set, and we curate ImageNet-Major1 : a 68-example "major error"
slice of the obvious mistakes made by today’s top models—a slice where models
should achieve near perfection, but today are far from doing so.

1

Introduction

Computer vision models often evaluate their performance on the ImageNet
classification dataset [5, 30] and many variants [29, 12, 13, 11, 38], as a
signal of capability for visual understanding. As performance on the standard
sets have reached diminishing returns to top-1 and top-5 accuracy, much
recent work [33, 3, 29, 31, 36, 17] has focused on understanding what is
left for the computer vision community to solve, and where the community
should be driving toward. Prior studies of ImageNet errors have identified Label: dough; Model:
issues stemming from lack of multi-labels, label noise, under-specified bagel. When does dough
classes, and more [33, 31, 3, 36, 18].
become a bagel?
Label errors and label noise affect the evaluation of any model [25], and
ImageNet is no exception. Many studies above have spent effort to correct
and improve these labels, showing that while ImageNet performance improvements are approaching
diminishing returns, the dataset can remain useful to the community, but only if we collectively
continue to shepherd it. As the best models improve, however, it is becoming increasingly challenging
to assess the often novel predictions these models make. For example, should we penalize models for
1

Dataset and analysis available at https://github.com/google-research/imagenet-mistakes.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

