Towards Disentangling Information Paths with
Coded ResNeXt
Apostolos Avranas∗
EURECOM
Sophia Antipolis, France
avranas@eurecom.fr

Marios Kountouris
EURECOM
Sophia Antipolis, France
kountour@eurecom.fr

Abstract
The conventional, widely used treatment of deep learning models as black boxes
provides limited or no insights into the mechanisms that guide neural network
decisions. Significant research effort has been dedicated to building interpretable
models to address this issue. Most efforts either focus on the high-level features
associated with the last layers, or attempt to interpret the output of a single layer.
In this paper, we take a novel approach to enhance the transparency of the function
of the whole network. We propose a neural network architecture for classification,
in which the information that is relevant to each class flows through specific paths.
These paths are designed in advance before training leveraging coding theory and
without depending on the semantic similarities between classes. A key property is
that each path can be used as an autonomous single-purpose model. This enables
us to obtain, without any additional training and for any class, a lightweight
binary classifier that has at least 60% fewer parameters than the original network.
Furthermore, our coding theory based approach allows the neural network to make
early predictions at intermediate layers during inference, without requiring its full
evaluation. Remarkably, the proposed architecture provides all the aforementioned
properties while improving the overall accuracy. We demonstrate these properties
on a slightly modified ResNeXt model tested on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet-1k.

1

Introduction

Most successful deep learning architectures for image classification consist of a certain building block
applied sequentially several times: one block follows another until a linear operation finally outputs
the model prediction. In deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the block consists of multiple
convolutional operations [36, 37] applied sequentially. Nonetheless, there are numerous proposals
placing the convolutional layers in parallel, forming multi-branch designs. For instance, inception
models [72, 73] use blocks with multiple branches, each applying some convolutional operations
on the block’s input and finally concatenating at the end the output of all branches. The multibranch design framework can also accommodate skip connections [22], as initially done in ResNeXt
networks [84], and later refined using squeeze-excitation in [25], or a split-attention mechanism in
[88]. A first question we ask in this work is: what is the purpose of multi-branch architectures?
Initially, in AlexNet [33] two branches were employed to allow the distribution of the model across
two GPUs, which at that time had limited memory. Nowadays, multi-branch architectures are
commonly used for distributing the parameters of a block into branches such that each one applies
a separate transformation to the input. However, rare are the cases where each branch is shown to
contribute in a different way. One example is SKNet [40], in which each branch is associated with
different receptive field size, and zooming in or out of an input image activates the appropriate branch.
∗

Currently working at Amadeus, Nice

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

