Towards Improving Faithfulness in Abstractive
Summarization
Xiuying Chen1
1

Mingzhe Li2

Xin Gao1,3∗

Xiangliang Zhang4,1∗

Computational Bioscience Reseach Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2
Ant Group
3
SDAIA-KAUST AI
4
University of Notre Dame
{xiuying.chen, xin.gao}@kaust.edu.sa, limingzhe.lmz@antgroup.com,xzhang33@nd.edu

Abstract
Despite the success achieved in neural abstractive summarization based on pretrained language models, one unresolved issue is that the generated summaries are
not always faithful to the input document. There are two possible causes of the
unfaithfulness problem: (1) the summarization model fails to understand or capture
the gist of the input text, and (2) the model over-relies on the language model
to generate fluent but inadequate words. In this work, we propose a Faithfulness
Enhanced Summarization model (FES), which is designed for addressing these
two problems and improving faithfulness in abstractive summarization. For the
first problem, we propose to use question-answering (QA) to examine whether the
encoder fully grasps the input document and can answer the questions on the key
information in the input. The QA attention on the proper input words can also
be used to stipulate how the decoder should attend to the source. For the second
problem, we introduce a max-margin loss defined on the difference between the
language and the summarization model, aiming to prevent the overconfidence of the
language model. Extensive experiments on two benchmark summarization datasets,
CNN/DM and XSum, demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms strong
baselines. The evaluation of factual consistency also shows that our model generates
more faithful summaries than baselines2 .

1

Introduction

In recent years, text generation has made impressive progress [1, 2, 3]. The abstractive summarization
task, aiming to produce a concise and fluent summary that is salient and faithful to the source
document, has become a research hotspot due to its broad application prospect. The prevalence of
pretrained transformer language models (LM) [4, 5] has largely improved the fluency and salience
of generated summaries. However, studies [6, 7] showed that many summarization models suffer
from unfaithfulness problem, i.e., the generated summary is not entailed by the information presented
in the source document. Durmus et al. [8] highlighted two notions of the unfaithfulness problem in
summarization: one is the manipulation of information presented in the input document (intrinsic
errors), and the other is the inclusion of information not inferable from the input (extrinsic errors).
The Intrinsic error problem is often caused by the failure of document level inference, which is
necessary for abstractive summarization. Specifically, the summarization model has misinformation
inferred from the input document because of an inadequate encoder that misunderstands the source
∗
2

corresponding author
https://github.com/iriscxy/FES

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

