Outlier-Robust Sparse Mean Estimation for
Heavy-Tailed Distributions
Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Jasper C.H. Lee
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jasper.lee@wisc.edu

Ankit Pensia
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ankitp@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the fundamental task of outlier-robust mean estimation for heavy-tailed
distributions in the presence of sparsity. Specifically, given a small number of
corrupted samples from a high-dimensional heavy-tailed distribution whose mean
µ is guaranteed to be sparse, the goal is to efficiently compute a hypothesis that
accurately approximates µ with high probability. Prior work had obtained efficient
algorithms for robust sparse mean estimation of light-tailed distributions. In this
work, we give the first sample-efficient and polynomial-time robust sparse mean
estimator for heavy-tailed distributions under mild moment assumptions. Our
algorithm achieves the optimal asymptotic error using a number of samples scaling
logarithmically with the ambient dimension. Importantly, the sample complexity of
our method is optimal as a function of the failure probability ⌧ , having an additive
log(1/⌧ ) dependence. Our algorithm leverages the stability-based approach from
the algorithmic robust statistics literature, with crucial (and necessary) adaptations
required in our setting. Our analysis may be of independent interest, involving
the delicate design of a (non-spectral) decomposition for positive semi-definite
matrices satisfying certain sparsity properties.

1

Introduction

One of the most fundamental problem setups in statistics is as follows: given n i.i.d. samples drawn
from an unknown distribution P chosen arbitrarily from some known distribution family P, infer
some particular property of P from the data. This generic model captures a range of statistical
problems of interest, for example, parameter estimation (such as the mean and (co)variance of P ),
as well as hypothesis testing. While long lines of work have given us a deep understanding on the
statistical and computational possibilities and limits on these problems, these results are not always
applicable in real-world settings due to (i) modelling issues, that the underlying distribution P might
not actually be in the known family P but only being close to it, and (ii) the fact that the n samples
supplied might be corrupted, for example by nefarious actors in high-stakes applications [ABH+ 72].
The field of robust statistics aims to design estimators and testers that can tolerate up to a constant
fraction of corrupted samples, independent of the potentially high dimensionality of the data [Tuk60,
HR09]. Classical works in the field have identified and resolved the statistical limits of problems in
this setup, both in terms of constructing estimators and proving impossibility results [Yat85, DL88,
DG92, HR09]. However, the proposed estimators were not computationally efficient, often requiring
exponential time to compute either in the number of samples or the number of dimensions [HR09].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

