TA-MoE: Topology-Aware Large Scale
Mixture-of-Expert Training

Chang Chen1∗,† Min Li2,3∗ , Zhihua Wu4 , Dianhai Yu4 , Chao Yang2,3,5‡
1
Center for Data Science, Peking University
2
School of Mathematics Sciences, Peking University
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analysis and Applications, Peking University
4
Baidu Inc.
5
Institute for Computing and Digital Economy, Peking University
charlie_chen,chao_yang@pku.edu.cn
limin_cn@163.com
wuzhihua02,yudianhai@baidu.com

Abstract
Sparsely gated Mixture-of-Expert (MoE) has demonstrated its effectiveness in
scaling up deep neural networks to an extreme scale. Despite that numerous efforts
have been made to improve the performance of MoE from the model design or
system optimization perspective, existing MoE dispatch patterns are still not able to
fully exploit the underlying heterogeneous network environments. In this paper, we
propose TA-MoE, a topology-aware routing strategy for large-scale MoE trainging,
from a model-system co-design perspective, which can dynamically adjust the
MoE dispatch pattern according to the network topology. Based on communication
modeling, we abstract the dispatch problem into an optimization objective and
obtain the approximate dispatch pattern under different topologies. On top of
that, we design a topology-aware auxiliary loss, which can adaptively route the
data to fit in the underlying topology without sacrificing the model accuracy.
Experiments show that TA-MoE can substantially outperform its counterparts
on various hardware and model configurations, with roughly 1.01x-1.61x, 1.01x4.77x, 1.25x-1.54x improvements over the popular DeepSpeed-MoE, FastMoE and
FasterMoE systems.

1

Introduction

The scale of model parameters in neural networks has increased from millions to trillions in recent
years, which promotes model accuracy in many domain, such as language processing [3, 4, 5] and
computer vision [27, 23]. However, the limited hardware resources, e.g., memory capability and
communication bandwidth, have constrained the model size to further scale up. To relieve this tension
and improve the model performance, Mixture of Expert (MoE) with a sparsely gated structure was
recently reintroduced [16, 26, 25]. The core structure of MoE is a group of small "expert" networks
and a gate network. Guided by the gate result, input data is dynamically routed to only a sub-group
of experts for computation. Compared with dense training methods, the sparsely activated feature
of MoE can significantly reduce the computation burden, extend the model size, and achieve higher
accuracy [6, 7, 11, 13].
∗

Equal Contribution.
Work done during internship at Baidu Inc..
‡
Corresponding author.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

