Implicit Regularization or Implicit Conditioning?
Exact Risk Trajectories of SGD in High Dimensions

Courtney Paquette
Google Research, Brain and McGill University
courtney.paquette@mcgill.ca
Ben Adlam
Google Research, Brain

Elliot Paquette
McGill University
elliot.paquette@mcgill.ca
Jeffrey Pennington
Google Research, Brain

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a pillar of modern machine learning, serving as the go-to optimization algorithm for a diverse array of problems. While
the empirical success of SGD is often attributed to its computational efficiency
and favorable generalization behavior, neither effect is well understood and disentangling them remains an open problem. Even in the simple setting of convex
quadratic problems, worst-case analyses give an asymptotic convergence rate for
SGD that is no better than full-batch gradient descent (GD), and the purported
implicit regularization effects of SGD lack a precise explanation. In this work, we
study the dynamics of multi-pass SGD on high-dimensional convex quadratics and
establish an asymptotic equivalence to a stochastic differential equation, which
we call homogenized stochastic gradient descent (HSGD), whose solutions we
characterize explicitly in terms of a Volterra integral equation. These results yield
precise formulas for the learning and risk trajectories, which reveal a mechanism
of implicit conditioning that explains the efficiency of SGD relative to GD. We
also prove that the noise from SGD negatively impacts generalization performance,
ruling out the possibility of any type of implicit regularization in this context.
Finally, we show how to adapt the HSGD formalism to include streaming SGD,
which allows us to produce an exact prediction for the excess risk of multi-pass
SGD relative to that of streaming SGD (bootstrap risk).

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the algorithm of choice for optimization in modern machine
learning and has been hailed as a major reason for deep learning’s success [11, 21]. Explanations
for the effectiveness of SGD typically refer to its computational efficiency and to its favorable
generalization properties, but theoretical understanding of these purported benefits is far from
complete.
The efficiency of SGD has been the subject of extensive research, dating back to the original work
of Robbins and Monro [68] and extending to modern large-scale machine learning applications (see
e.g. [10, 12]). However, despite its widespread adoption and algorithmic simplicity, surprisingly little
is known about how SGD performs in the types of high-dimensional optimization problems that
occur in practice. Part of the challenge in deriving robust high-level conclusions about the efficiency
of SGD is simply that those conclusions can depend on precisely which quantities are measured and
what assumptions are leveraged. For example, in the extreme setting where the samples are one-hot
vectors, running SGD on a quadratic function is actually identical to running full-batch gradient
descent; as such, any statements about the two algorithms’ relative efficiency must be data-dependent.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

