FourierFormer: Transformer Meets Generalized
Fourier Integral Theorem
Tan M. Nguyen⇤
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
tanmnguyen89@ucla.edu

Minh Pham⇤
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
minhrose@ucla.edu

Tam Nguyen
Department of ECE
Rice University
nguyenminhtam9520@gmail.com

Khai Nguyen
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
University of Texas at Austin
khainb@utexas.edu

Stanley J. Osher⇤⇤
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
sjo@math.ucla.edu

Nhat Ho⇤⇤
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
University of Texas at Austin
minhnhat@utexas.edu

Abstract
Multi-head attention empowers the recent success of transformers, the state-of-theart models that have achieved remarkable success in sequence modeling and beyond.
These attention mechanisms compute the pairwise dot products between the queries
and keys, which results from the use of unnormalized Gaussian kernels with the
assumption that the queries follow a mixture of Gaussian distribution. There is no
guarantee that this assumption is valid in practice. In response, we first interpret
attention in transformers as a nonparametric kernel regression. We then propose
the FourierFormer, a new class of transformers in which the dot-product kernels
are replaced by the novel generalized Fourier integral kernels. Different from the
dot-product kernels, where we need to choose a good covariance matrix to capture
the dependency of the features of data, the generalized Fourier integral kernels can
automatically capture such dependency and remove the need to tune the covariance
matrix. We theoretically prove that our proposed Fourier integral kernels can efficiently approximate any key and query distributions. Compared to the conventional
transformers with dot-product attention, FourierFormers attain better accuracy
and reduce the redundancy between attention heads. We empirically corroborate
the advantages of FourierFormers over the baseline transformers in a variety of
practical applications including language modeling and image classification.

1

Introduction

Transformers [83] are powerful neural networks that have achieved tremendous success in many
areas of machine learning [40, 76, 36] and become the state-of-the-art model on a wide range
of applications across different data modalities, from language [23, 1, 18, 13, 62, 4, 8, 21] to
images [24, 43, 78, 63, 59, 27], videos [3, 44], point clouds [97, 31], and protein sequence [65, 34].
In addition to their excellent performance on supervised learning tasks, transformers can also
effectively transfer the learned knowledge from a pretraining task to new tasks with limited or no
supervision [60, 61, 23, 94, 42]. At the core of transformers is the dot-product self-attention, which
⇤

Co-first authors. ⇤⇤ Co-last authors. Please correspond to: tanmnguyen89@ucla.edu
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

