Frank-Wolfe-based Algorithms
for Approximating Tyler’s M-estimator
Lior Danon
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003
liordanon@campus.technion.ac.il

Dan Garber
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003
dangar@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Tyler’s M-estimator is a well known procedure for robust and heavy-tailed covariance estimation. Tyler himself suggested an iterative fixed-point algorithm for
computing his estimator however, it requires super-linear (in the size of the data)
runtime per iteration, which maybe prohibitive in large scale. In this work we
propose, to the best of our knowledge, the first Frank-Wolfe-based algorithms for
computing Tyler’s estimator. One variant uses standard Frank-Wolfe steps, the
second also considers away-steps (AFW), and the third is a geodesic version of
AFW (GAFW). AFW provably requires, up to a log factor, only linear time per
iteration, while GAFW runs in linear time (up to a log factor) in a large n (number
of data-points) regime. All three variants are shown to provably converge to the
optimal solution with sublinear rate, under standard assumptions, despite the fact
that the underlying optimization problem is not convex nor smooth. Under an additional fairly mild assumption, that holds with probability 1 when the (normalized)
data-points are i.i.d. samples from a continuous distribution supported on the entire
unit sphere, AFW and GAFW are proved to converge with linear rates. Importantly,
all three variants are parameter-free and use adaptive step-sizes.

1

Introduction

Given n data-points in Rp , x1 , . . . , xn 2 Rp different from zero, Tyler’s M-estimator (TME),
originally proposed by Tyler in his seminal work [27], is a p ⇥ p positive definite matrix Q⇤ which
satisfies:
n
p X xi x>
i
= Q⇤ .
(1)
⇤ 1x
n i=1 x>
i
i Q
While the TME is not guaranteed to exist for any set of points x1 , . . . , xn , it is well known that under
the following assumption proposed in [27], it does.
Assumption 1. The data {x1 , . . . , xn } ⇢ Rp satisfies that xi 6= 0 for all i = 1, . . . , n, and that for
any proper subspace L ⇢ Rp , denoting by N (L) the number of data-points lying in L, it holds that
N (L)
n > dim(L)
p.
The TME is a well known distribution-free robust covariance estimator. It is also a maximum
likelihood estimator for the shape matrix of angular and compound Gaussian distributions, and often
used for estimation of heavy-tailed distributions [28]. Tyler’s M-estimator has received notable
interest within the statistics and signal processing communities, see for instance the excellent survey
[28] (including the many important references therein), as well as the recent works [30, 11, 29, 25,
6, 16, 20, 24, 2] which provide additional analysis results, related estimators, as well as structured
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

