On Sample Optimality in Personalized Collaborative
and Federated Learning

Mathieu Even1 , Laurent Massoulié 1,2 , Kevin Scaman 1
1

Inria Paris - Département d’informatique de l’ENS, PSL Research University
2

Microsoft-Inria Joint Center

Abstract
In personalized federated learning, each member of a potentially large set of agents
aims to train a model minimizing its loss function averaged over its local data
distribution. We study this problem under the lens of stochastic optimization,
focusing on a scenario with a large number of agents, that each possess very
few data samples from their local data distribution. Specifically, we prove novel
matching lower and upper bounds on the number of samples required from all
agents to approximately minimize the generalization error of a fixed agent. We
provide strategies matching these lower bounds, based on a gradient filtering
approach: given prior knowledge on some notion of distance between local data
distributions, agents filter and aggregate stochastic gradients received from other
agents, in order to achieve an optimal bias-variance trade-off. Finally, we quantify
the impact of using rough estimations of the distances between local distributions
of agents, based on a very small number of local samples.

1

Introduction

A central task in federated learning [31, 40] is the training of a common model from local data sets
held by individual agents. A typical application is when users (e.g. mobile phones, hospitals) want to
make predictions (e.g. next-word prediction, treatment prescriptions), but each has access to very few
data samples, hence the need for collaboration. As highlighted by many recent works (e.g. Hanzely
et al. [28], Mansour et al. [39]), while training a global model yields better statistical efficiency on the
combined datasets of all agents by increasing the number of samples linearly in the number of agents,
this approach can suffer from a dramatically poor generalization error on local datasets. A solution to
this generalization issue is the training of personalized models, a midway between a shared model
between agents and models trained locally without any coordination.
An ideal approach would take the best of both worlds: increased statistical efficiency by using more
samples, while keeping local generalization errors low. This raises the fundamental question: what
is the optimal bias/variance tradeoff between personalization and coordination, and how can it be
achieved?
We formulate the personalized federated learning problem as follows, studying it under the lens of
stochastic optimization [5]. Consider N ∈ N∗ agents denoted by integers 1 ⩽ i ⩽ N , each desiring
to minimize its own local function fi : Rd → R, while sharing their stochastic gradients. Since
only a limited number of samples are locally available, we focus on stochastic gradient  
descent-like
algorithms, where agents each sequentially compute stochastic gradients gik such that E gik = ∇fi .
In order to reduce the sample complexity, i.e. the number of samples or stochastic gradients required
to reach small generalization error,
  agents thus need to use stochastic gradients from other agents, that
are biased since in general E gik ̸= ∇fj . Our algorithms are based on a gradient filtering approach:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

