Multi-LexSum: Real-World Summaries of Civil Rights
Lawsuits at Multiple Granularities
Zejiang Shen† Kyle Lo† Lauren Yu} Nathan Dahlberg
Margo Schlanger}
Doug Downey†,|
†
}
Allen Institute for AI
University of Michigan | Northwestern University
{shannons, kylel, dougd}@allenai.org
{laurenyu, mschlan}@umich.edu nadahlberg@gmail.com

Abstract
With the advent of large language models, methods for abstractive summarization
have made great strides, creating potential for use in applications to aid knowledge workers processing unwieldy document collections. One such setting is the
Civil Rights Litigation Clearinghouse (CRLC),1 which posts information about
large-scale civil rights lawsuits, serving lawyers, scholars, and the general public.
Today, summarization in the CRLC requires extensive training of lawyers and law
students who spend hours per case understanding multiple relevant documents in
order to produce high-quality summaries of key events and outcomes. Motivated
by this ongoing real-world summarization effort, we introduce Multi-LexSum, a
collection of 9,280 expert-authored summaries drawn from ongoing CRLC writing.
Multi-LexSum presents a challenging multi-document summarization task given
the length of the source documents, often exceeding two hundred pages per case.
Furthermore, Multi-LexSum is distinct from other datasets in its multiple target
summaries, each at a different granularity (ranging from one-sentence “extreme”
summaries to multi-paragraph narrations of over five hundred words). We present
extensive analysis demonstrating that despite the high-quality summaries in the
training data (adhering to strict content and style guidelines), state-of-the-art summarization models perform poorly on this task. We release Multi-LexSum for
further summarization research and to facilitate the development of applications to
assist in the CRLC’s mission.2

1

Introduction

Automatic summarization is a longstanding goal of natural language processing. Recently, abstractive
summarization methods powered by large pretrained language models have shown impressive results
[36, 61]—raising the question of whether these methods can help real-world summarization workloads
currently performed by human experts. In this paper, we present a new dataset, Multi-LexSum, for
studying automatic summarization in an important real-world application setting found in the Civil
Rights Litigation Clearinghouse (CRLC). The CRLC currently collects and presents documents and
information from modern large-scale civil rights lawsuits in a manner easily understood by legal
practitioners and scholars and the general public alike [10]. Today, the Clearinghouse relies on human
legal experts to write summaries of civil rights cases, explaining their events and outcomes. This
cognitively demanding task requires summary writers to comprehend multiple documents of different
types (often totaling over two hundred pages of text per case); extract entities, events, and their
1

https://clearinghouse.net.
The dataset can be accessed at https://multilexsum.github.io. Please refer to the appendix for
details.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

