ATD: Augmenting CP Tensor Decomposition by
Self Supervision
1

Chaoqi Yang, 2 Cheng Qian, 1 Navjot Singh, 3 Cao Xiao, 4,5 M Brandon Westover,
1
Edgar Solomonik, 1 Jimeng Sun
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 IQVIA, 3 Relativity,
4
Massachusetts General Hospital, 5 Harvard Medical School
1
{chaoqiy2,navjot2,solomon2,jimeng}@illinois.edu, 2 alextoqc@gmail.com,
3
cao.xiao@relativity.com, 4,5 mwestover@mgh.harvard.edu

Abstract
Tensor decompositions are powerful tools for dimensionality reduction and feature
interpretation of multidimensional data such as signals. Existing tensor decomposition objectives (e.g., Frobenius norm) are designed for fitting raw data under
statistical assumptions, which may not align with downstream classification tasks.
In practice, raw input tensors can contain irrelevant information, while data augmentation techniques may be used to smooth out class-irrelevant noise in samples. This
paper addresses the above challenges by proposing augmented tensor decomposition (ATD), which effectively incorporates data augmentations and self-supervised
learning (SSL) to boost downstream classification. To address the non-convexity
of the new augmented objective, we develop an iterative method that enables the
optimization to follow an alternating least squares (ALS) fashion. We evaluate our
proposed ATD on multiple datasets. It can achieve 0.8% ⇠ 2.5% accuracy gain over
tensor-based baselines. Also, our ATD model shows comparable or better performance (e.g., up to 15% in accuracy) over self-supervised and autoencoder baselines
while using less than 5% of learnable parameters of these baseline models. We have
released our data processing and codes in https://github.com/ycq091044/ATD.

1

Introduction

Extracting unsupervised features from high-dimensional data is essential in various scenarios, such
as physiological signals (Cong et al., 2015), hyperspectral images (Wang et al., 2017) and fMRI
(Hamdi et al., 2018). Tensor decomposition models are often used for high-order feature extraction
(Sidiropoulos et al., 2017). Among these, the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition is
one of the most popular models. The low-rank CP tensor decompositions (Kolda and Bader, 2009)
assume that the input data is composited by a small set of components, while the reduced features are
the coefficients that quantify the importance of each basis, which provides a compact representation.
Under this low-rank assumption, existing tensor decomposition objectives aim to fit individual data
samples with statistical error measures (Hong et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022), e.g.,
Frobenius norm or KL-divergence. Though fitness is an essential principle for feature reduction,
common objective functions do not account for downstream tasks, e.g., classification.
Contrastive self-supervised learning (SSL) (He et al., 2020) is recently popular for unsupervised
feature learning, which utilizes the class-preserving data augmentations (Dao et al., 2019) and
learns an encoder that can filter out class-irrelevant information. The optimization goal is to enforce
alignments (Chen et al., 2020; Wang and Isola, 2020), ensuring that the anchor sample is closer to the
positive sample (which has the same latent class as the anchor sample) than to the negative sample
(which is in a different latent class) in the embedding space. In an unsupervised setting, positive
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

