SketchBoost: Fast Gradient Boosted Decision Tree for
Multioutput Problems

Leonid Iosipoi
Sber AI Lab and HSE University, Moscow, Russia
iosipoileonid@gmail.com

Anton Vakhrushev
Sber AI Lab, Moscow, Russia
btbpanda@gmail.com

Abstract
Gradient Boosted Decision Tree (GBDT) is a widely-used machine learning algorithm that has been shown to achieve state-of-the-art results on many standard
data science problems. We are interested in its application to multioutput problems
when the output is highly multidimensional. Although there are highly effective
GBDT implementations, their scalability to such problems is still unsatisfactory.
In this paper, we propose novel methods aiming to accelerate the training process
of GBDT in the multioutput scenario. The idea behind these methods lies in the
approximate computation of a scoring function used to find the best split of decision
trees. These methods are implemented in SketchBoost, which itself is integrated
into our easily customizable Python-based GPU implementation of GBDT called
Py-Boost. Our numerical study demonstrates that SketchBoost speeds up the training process of GBDT by up to over 40 times while achieving comparable or even
better performance.

1

Introduction

Gradient Boosted Decision Tree (GBDT) is one of the most powerful methods for solving prediction
problems in both classification and regression domains. It is a dominant tool today in application
domains where tabular data is abundant, for example, in e-commerce, financial, and retail industries.
GBDT has contributed to a large amount of top solutions in benchmark competitions such as Kaggle.
This makes GBDT a fundamental component in the modern data scientist’s toolkit.
The main focus of this paper is the scalability of
GBDT to multioutput problems. Such problems include multiclass classification (a classification task
with more than two mutually exclusive classes),
multilabel classification (a classification task with
more than two classes that are not mutually exclusive), and multioutput regression (a regression
task with a multivariate response variable). These
problems arise in various areas such as Finance
[Obermann and Waack, 2016], Multivariate Time
Series Forecasting [Zhai, Yao, and Zhou, 2020],
Recommender Systems [Jahrer, Töscher, and Leg- Figure 1: Training time of XGBoost and CatBoost
enstein, 2010], and others.
for different number of classes on a synthetic dataset
There are several extremely efficient, open-source,
and production-ready implementations of gradient boosting such as XGBoost [Chen and
Guestrin, 2016], LightGBM [Ke, Meng, Finley,
Wang, Chen, Ma, Ye, and Liu, 2017], and Cat-

for multiclass classification. Synthetic dataset contains 2000k instances, each described by 100 features. The maximal tree depth was limited to 6. The
experiment was conducted on GPU. Further details
are given in the Supplementary Material.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

