Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning via
Mutual Information Regularized Assignment

Dong Hoon Lee
KAIST∗
donghoonlee@kaist.ac.kr

Sungik Choi
LG AI Research
sungik.choi@lgresearch.ai

Hyunwoo Kim
LG AI Research
hwkim@lgresearch.ai

Sae-Young Chung
KAIST
sychungster@naver.com

Abstract
This paper proposes Mutual Information Regularized Assignment (MIRA), a
pseudo-labeling algorithm for unsupervised representation learning inspired by
information maximization. We formulate online pseudo-labeling as an optimization problem to find pseudo-labels that maximize the mutual information between
the label and data while being close to a given model probability. We derive a
fixed-point iteration method and prove its convergence to the optimal solution.
In contrast to baselines, MIRA combined with pseudo-label prediction enables
a simple yet effective clustering-based representation learning without incorporating extra training techniques or artificial constraints such as sampling strategy,
equipartition constraints, etc. With relatively small training epochs, representation
learned by MIRA achieves state-of-the-art performance on various downstream
tasks, including the linear/k-NN evaluation and transfer learning. Especially, with
only 400 epochs, our method applied to ImageNet dataset with ResNet-50 architecture achieves 75.6% linear evaluation accuracy. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/movinghoon/mira.

1

Introduction

There has been a growing interest in using a large-scale dataset to build powerful machine learning
models [45]. Self-supervised learning (SSL), which aims to learn a useful representation without
labels, is suitable for this trend; it is actively studied in the fields of natural language processing
[19, 20] and computer vision [10, 30]. In the vision domain, recent SSL methods commonly use
data augmentations and induce their visual representation to be augmentation-invariant. They have
achieved state-of-the-art performance surpassing supervised representation in a variety of visual tasks,
including semi-supervised learning [8, 53], transfer learning [22], and object detection [13].
Meanwhile, a line of work uses clustering for un-/self-supervised representation learning. They
explicitly assign pseudo-labels to embedded representation via clustering, and the model is thereby
trained to predict such labels. These clustering-based methods can account for inter-data similarity;
representations are encouraged to encode the semantic structure of data. Prior works [51, 49, 4, 32]
have shown encouraging results in small-scaled settings; Caron et al. [6] show that it can also be
applied to the large-scaled dataset or even to a non-curated dataset [7]. Recently, several works [2, 8,
39] have adopted the philosophy of augmentation invariance and achieved strong empirical results.
∗

Work partially done during internship at LG AI Research.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

