UM IX: Improving Importance Weighting for
Subpopulation Shift via Uncertainty-Aware Mixup

Zongbo Han1∗ ‡, Zhipeng Liang2∗ §, Fan Yang3∗, Liu Liu3 , Lanqing Li3 , Yatao Bian3 ,
Peilin Zhao3 , Bingzhe Wu3†, Changqing Zhang1†, Jianhua Yao3†
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 3 Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
Subpopulation shift widely exists in many real-world machine learning applications,
referring to the training and test distributions containing the same subpopulation
groups but varying in subpopulation frequencies. Importance reweighting is a
normal way to handle the subpopulation shift issue by imposing constant or adaptive sampling weights on each sample in the training dataset. However, some
recent studies have recognized that most of these approaches fail to improve the
performance over empirical risk minimization especially when applied to overparameterized neural networks. In this work, we propose a simple yet practical
framework, called uncertainty-aware mixup (UM IX), to mitigate the overfitting
issue in over-parameterized models by reweighting the “mixed” samples according
to the sample uncertainty. The training-trajectories-based uncertainty estimation
is equipped in the proposed UM IX for each sample to flexibly characterize the
subpopulation distribution. We also provide insightful theoretical analysis to verify
that UM IX achieves better generalization bounds over prior works. Further, we
conduct extensive empirical studies across a wide range of tasks to validate the
effectiveness of our method both qualitatively and quantitatively. Code is available
at this URL.

1

Introduction

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) typically faces challenges from distribution shift, which refers to
the difference between training and test distributions [3, 27, 61]. One common type of distribution
shift is subpopulation shift wherein the training and test distributions consist of the same subpopulation
groups but differ in subpopulation frequencies [6, 8]. Many practical research problems (e.g., fairness
of machine learning and class imbalance) can all be considered as a special case of subpopulation shift
[21, 28, 32]. For example, in the setting of fair machine learning, we train the model on a training
dataset with biased demographic subpopulations and test it on an unbiased test dataset [21, 32].
Therefore the essential goal of fair machine learning is to mitigate the subpopulation shift between
training and test datasets.
Many approaches have been proposed for solving this problem. Among these approaches, importance
weighting (IW) is a classical yet effective technique by imposing static or adaptive weights on each
sample when building weighted empirical loss. Therefore each subpopulation group contributes
comparably to the final training objective. Specifically, there are normally two ways to achieve
importance reweighting. Early works propose to reweight the sample inverse proportionally to the
subpopulation frequencies (i.e., static weights) [11, 13, 42, 58, 59, 61], such as class-imbalanced
∗
Equal contribution. ‡ Supported by 2021 Tencent Rhino-Bird Research Elite Training Program. § Work done
during an internship at Tencent AI Lab. † Corresponding authors: {bingzhewu,jianhuayao}@tencent.com,
zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

