Neural Transmitted Radiance Fields
Chengxuan Zhu†
Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology
School of Computer Science
Peking University
peterzhu@pku.edu.cn

Renjie Wan†
Department of Computer Science
Hong Kong Baptist University
renjiewan@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Boxin Shi∗
Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology
School of Computer Science
Peking University
shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) have brought tremendous progress to novel view
synthesis. Though NeRF enables the rendering of subtle details in a scene by
learning from a dense set of images, it also reconstructs the undesired reflections
when we capture images through glass. As a commonly observed interference, the
reflection would undermine the visibility of the desired transmitted scene behind
glass by occluding the transmitted light rays. In this paper, we aim at addressing
the problem of rendering novel transmitted views given a set of reflection-corrupted
images. By introducing the transmission encoder and recurring edge constraints as
guidance, our neural transmitted radiance fields can resist such reflection interference during rendering and reconstruct high-fidelity results even under sparse views.
The proposed method achieves superior performance from the experiments on a
newly collected dataset compared with state-of-the-art methods. Our code and data
is available at https://github.com/FreeButUselessSoul/TNeRF.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis plays a vital role in various computer vision applications. Tremendous progress
has been witnessed recently with the introduction of neural radiance fields (NeRF) [1]. By modeling
the emitted radiance and density of a scene from a set of images with a multi-layer perceptron (MLP),
it demonstrates an unprecedented level of fidelity on a range of challenging scenes. Despite its success
in diverse scenarios, such a framework still faces challenges when working with glass, a medium
which is frequently observed in photography and daily life [2] to provide see-through protection for
desired scenes. However, glass’s reflectivity may reflect undesired scenes on images captured through
it. People always feel interested in the transmitted scenes behind the glass and want to remove the
undesired reflection. This traps neural radiance fields into a dilemma: Its well-designed framework is
capable of modeling every detail in a scene, including those undesired ones.
One plausible way to resolve this dilemma is opting for a pre-processing tool to remove the undesired
components before the captured images are fed into NeRF [1]. For example, existing reflection
removal methods [3, 4, 5] can be adopted to suppress the undesired components and provide better
visibility for transmitted scenes. However, the processed images from different views may violate
†
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

