Pre-Trained Language Models for
Interactive Decision-Making
Shuang Li 1⇤ , Xavier Puig1 , Chris Paxton2 , Yilun Du1 , Clinton Wang1 , Linxi Fan2 ,
Tao Chen1 , De-An Huang2 , Ekin Akyürek1 , Anima Anandkumar2,3,† ,
Jacob Andreas1,† , Igor Mordatch4,† , Antonio Torralba1,† , Yuke Zhu2,5,†
1
MIT, 2 Nvidia, 3 Caltech, 4 Google Brain, 5 UT Austin
Junior authors are ordered based on contributions and senior authors† are ordered alphabetically.

Abstract
Language model (LM) pre-training is useful in many language processing tasks.
But can pre-trained LMs be further leveraged for more general machine learning problems? We propose an approach for using LMs to scaffold learning and
generalization in general sequential decision-making problems. In this approach,
goals and observations are represented as a sequence of embeddings, and a policy
network initialized with a pre-trained LM predicts the next action. We demonstrate
that this framework enables effective combinatorial generalization across different
environments and supervisory modalities. We begin by assuming access to a set of
expert demonstrations, and show that initializing policies with LMs and fine-tuning
them via behavior cloning improves task completion rates by 43.6% in the VirtualHome environment. Next, we integrate an active data gathering procedure in which
agents iteratively interact with the environment, relabel past “failed” experiences
with new goals, and update their policies in a self-supervised loop. Active data
gathering further improves combinatorial generalization, outperforming the best
baseline by 25.1%. Finally, we explain these results by investigating three possible
factors underlying the effectiveness of the LM-based policy. We find that sequential input representations (vs. fixed-dimensional feature vectors) and LM-based
weight initialization are both important for generalization. Surprisingly, however,
the format of the policy inputs encoding (e.g. as a natural language string vs. an
arbitrary sequential encoding) has little influence. Together, these results suggest
that language modeling induces representations that are useful for modeling not
just language, but also goals and plans; these representations can aid learning and
generalization even outside of language processing. 2

1

Introduction

Language models (LMs) play a key role in machine learning approaches to natural language
processing tasks [9]. This includes tasks that are not purely linguistic, and require nontrivial planning
and reasoning capabilities [24, 13]: for example, instruction following, vision-language navigation,
and visual question answering. Indeed, some of these tasks are so distant from language modeling
that one can ask whether pre-trained LMs can be used as a general framework even for tasks that
involve no language at all. If so, how might these capabilities be accessed in a model trained only to
process and generate natural language strings?
⇤

Correspondence to: Shuang Li <lishuang@mit.edu>
Project page: https://shuangli-project.github.io/Pre-Trained-Language-Models-for-Interactive-DecisionMaking. Part of this work was done during Shuang’s internship at NVIDIA.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

