Improving Policy Learning via Language Dynamics
Distillation
Victor Zhong1,2 , Jesse Mu3 , Luke Zettlemoyer1,2 , Edward Grefenstette4,5 and Tim Rocktäschel4
1

University of Washington
2
Meta AI Research
3
Stanford University
4
University College London
5
Cohere

Abstract
Recent work has shown that augmenting environments with language descriptions
improves policy learning. However, for environments with complex language
abstractions, learning how to ground language to observations is difficult due
to sparse, delayed rewards. We propose Language Dynamics Distillation (LDD),
which pretrains a model to predict environment dynamics given demonstrations
with language descriptions, and then fine-tunes these language-aware pretrained
representations via reinforcement learning (RL). In this way, the model is trained to
both maximize expected reward and retain knowledge about how language relates
to environment dynamics. On SILG, a benchmark of five tasks with language descriptions that evaluate distinct generalization challenges on unseen environments
(NetHack, ALFWorld, RTFM, Messenger, and Touchdown), LDD outperforms
tabula-rasa RL, VAE pretraining, and methods that learn from unlabeled demonstrations in inverse RL and reward shaping with pretrained experts. In our analyses,
we show that language descriptions in demonstrations improve sample-efficiency
and generalization across environments, and that dynamics modeling with expert
demonstrations is more effective than with non-experts.

1

Introduction

Language is a powerful medium that humans use to reason about abstractions—its compositionality
allows efficient descriptions that generalize across environments and tasks. Consider an agent that
follows instructions to clean the house (e.g. find the dirty dishes and wash them). In tabula-rasa
reinforcement learning (RL), the agent observes raw perceptual features of the environment, then
grounds these visual features to language cues to learn how to behave through trial and error. In
contrast, we can provide the agent with language descriptions that describe abstractions which are
present in the environment (e.g. there is a sink to your left and dishes on a table to your right), thereby
simplifying the grounding challenge. Language descriptions of observations occur naturally in many
environments such as text prompts in graphical user interfaces [Liu et al., 2018], dialogue [He et al.,
2018], and interactive games [Küttler et al., 2020]. Recent work has also shown improvements in
visual manipulation [Shridhar et al., 2021] and navigation [Zhong et al., 2021, Tam et al., 2022] by
captioning the observations with language descriptions. Despite these gains, learning how to interpret
language descriptions is difficult through RL, especially on environments with complex language
abstractions [Zhong et al., 2021].
Corresponding author Victor Zhong vzhong@cs.washington.edu
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

