Pushing the limits of fairness impossibility: Who’s the
fairest of them all?
Brian Hsu
LinkedIn Corporation
Sunnyvale, CA
bhsu@linkedin.com

Rahul Mazumder∗
LinkedIn Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA)
rmazumder@linkedin.com

Preetam Nandy
LinkedIn Corporation
Sunnyvale, CA
pnandy@linkedin.com

Kinjal Basu
LinkedIn Corporation
Sunnyvale, CA
kbasu@linkedin.com

Abstract
The impossibility theorem of fairness is a foundational result in the algorithmic
fairness literature. It states that outside of special cases, one cannot exactly and
simultaneously satisfy all three common and intuitive definitions of fairness demographic parity, equalized odds, and predictive rate parity. This result has
driven most works to focus on solutions for one or two of the metrics. Rather
than follow suit, in this paper we present a framework that pushes the limits of the
impossibility theorem in order to satisfy all three metrics to the best extent possible.
We develop an integer-programming based approach that can yield a certifiably
optimal post-processing method for simultaneously satisfying multiple fairness
criteria under small violations. We show experiments demonstrating that our
post-processor can improve fairness across the different definitions simultaneously
with minimal model performance reduction. We also discuss applications of our
framework for model selection and fairness explainability, thereby attempting to
answer the question: who’s the fairest of them all?

1

Introduction

While fairness in machine learning has received significant attention in recent years, most existing
works focus on one of the many fairness criteria [3]. Consequently, practitioners are perhaps left
with no choice but to use their best judgment to apply a single fairness criterion. We suspect that the
conflicting nature of existing mathematical definitions of fairness might have led to this undesirable
practice of narrowing down fairness-related measurement and mitigation to one chosen definition.
This is somewhat analogous to the trade-off between precision and recall while evaluating model
performance [5]. Instead of choosing one of precision or recall to evaluate the performance of a
classification model, practitioners often evaluate the trade-off and choose models that can maintain
a certain level of precision while optimizing recall or vice-versa [14]. In this paper, we provide
a framework for explicitly addressing such trade-offs among multiple fairness criteria and model
performance toward optimal model selection.
One of the most prolific examples of fairness in machine learning arose from the ProPublica recidivism
study ([2]), in which a risk assessment tool called COMPAS was found to be biased against black
defendants. But beyond the immediate implications in criminal justice, the study also prompted
∗

This work was done when Rahul Mazumder was a consultant for LinkedIn.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

