F LASH ATTENTION: Fast and
Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness

Tri Dao† , Daniel Y. Fu † , Stefano Ermon † , Atri Rudra ‡ , Christopher Ré †
† Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
‡ Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
{trid,danfu}@stanford.edu, ermon@stanford.edu, atri@buffalo.edu, chrismre@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Transformers are slow and memory-hungry on long sequences, since the time and
memory complexity of self-attention are quadratic in sequence length. Approximate
attention methods have attempted to address this problem by trading off model quality to reduce the compute complexity, but often do not achieve wall-clock speedup.
We argue that a missing principle is making attention algorithms IO-aware—
accounting for reads and writes between levels of GPU memory. We propose
F LASH ATTENTION, an IO-aware exact attention algorithm that uses tiling to reduce
the number of memory reads/writes between GPU high bandwidth memory (HBM)
and GPU on-chip SRAM. We analyze the IO complexity of F LASH ATTENTION,
showing that it requires fewer HBM accesses than standard attention, and is optimal
for a range of SRAM sizes. We also extend F LASH ATTENTION to block-sparse attention, yielding an approximate attention algorithm that is faster than any existing
approximate attention method. F LASH ATTENTION trains Transformers faster than
existing baselines: 15% end-to-end wall-clock speedup on BERT-large (seq. length
512) compared to the MLPerf 1.1 training speed record, 3× speedup on GPT-2 (seq.
length 1K), and 2.4× speedup on long-range arena (seq. length 1K-4K). F LASH ATTENTION and block-sparse F LASH ATTENTION enable longer context in Transformers, yielding higher quality models (0.7 better perplexity on GPT-2 and 6.4 points
of lift on long-document classification) and entirely new capabilities: the first Transformers to achieve better-than-chance performance on the Path-X challenge (seq.
length 16K, 61.4% accuracy) and Path-256 (seq. length 64K, 63.1% accuracy).

1

Introduction

Transformer models [86] have emerged as the most widely used architecture in applications such
as natural language processing and image classification. Transformers have grown larger [5] and
deeper [87], but equipping them with longer context remains difficult [83], since the self-attention
module at their heart has time and memory complexity quadratic in sequence length. An important
question is whether making attention faster and more memory-efficient can help Transformer models
address their runtime and memory challenges for long sequences.
Many approximate attention methods have aimed to reduce the compute and memory requirements
of attention. These methods range from sparse-approximation [53, 77] to low-rank approximation [13, 52, 88], and their combinations [3, 9, 96]. Although these methods reduce the compute
requirements to linear or near-linear in sequence length, many of them do not display wall-clock
speedup against standard attention and have not gained wide adoption. One main reason is that
they focus on FLOP reduction (which may not correlate with wall-clock speed) and tend to ignore
overheads from memory access (IO).
In this paper, we argue that a missing principle is making attention algorithms IO-aware [1]—that is,
carefully accounting for reads and writes to different levels of fast and slow memory (e.g., between
fast GPU on-chip SRAM and relatively slow GPU high bandwidth memory, or HBM [47], Figure 1
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

