Text Classification with Born’s Rule
Emanuele Guidotti
Institute of Financial Analysis
University of Neuchâtel, Switzerland
emanuele.guidotti@unine.ch

Alfio Ferrara
Department of Computer Science and Data Science Research Center
University of Milan, Italy
alfio.ferrara@unimi.it

Abstract
This paper presents a text classification algorithm inspired by the notion of superposition of states in quantum physics. By regarding text as a superposition of words,
we derive the wave function of a document and we compute the transition probability of the document to a target class according to Born’s rule. Two complementary
implementations are presented. In the first one, wave functions are calculated
explicitly. The second implementation embeds the classifier in a neural network
architecture. Through analysis of three benchmark datasets, we illustrate several
aspects of the proposed method, such as classification performance, explainability,
and computational efficiency. These ideas are also applicable to non-textual data.

1

Introduction

In quantum physics, the superposition principle is the idea that a system can be in multiple states at
the same time (e.g., a cat is simultaneously alive and dead in Schrödinger’s thought experiment [22]).
Here we show that text can be formally treated as a quantum system in a superposition of words.
Our superposition-of-words model is a bag-of-words model where each word is treated as a quantum
state. By exploiting this representation, we develop a supervised classifier based on key postulates of
quantum mechanics, namely the Born rule [4].
The Born rule provides a link between the mathematical formalism of quantum theory and experiment,
and as such is almost single-handedly responsible for practically all predictions of quantum physics.1
In this paper, we represent documents and classes as quantum objects and we compute the probability
of a document to collapse in a target class by applying the Born rule.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the motivation of this work. Section 3
introduces the notation and some preliminary notions in quantum mechanics. Section 4 develops our
classification algorithm. Section 5 embeds the classifier in a neural network architecture. Section 6
presents our empirical results. Finally, Section 7 gives our concluding remarks and discusses
extensions to semantics and non-textual data.
To simplify extensions to this work, we implement our classification algorithm in scikit-learn [17] and
we embed the classifier in a neural network architecture using pytorch [16]. All the code is available
at https://github.com/eguidotti/bornrule.
1

We refer the reader to [14] for an introduction to the Born rule.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

