End-to-end Symbolic Regression with Transformers

Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny∗ 1,2 , Stéphane d’Ascoli* 1,3
Guillaume Lample1 , François Charton1
1
Meta AI
2
ISIR MLIA, Sorbonne Université
3
Department of Physics, Ecole Normale Supérieure
pakamienny@meta.com

Abstract
Symbolic regression, the task of predicting the mathematical expression of a
function from the observation of its values, is a difficult task which usually involves
a two-step procedure: predicting the "skeleton" of the expression up to the choice
of numerical constants, then fitting the constants by optimizing a non-convex
loss function. The dominant approach is genetic programming, which evolves
candidates by iterating this subroutine a large number of times. Neural networks
have recently been tasked to predict the correct skeleton in a single try, but remain
much less powerful.
In this paper, we challenge this two-step procedure, and task a Transformer to
directly predict the full mathematical expression, constants included. One can
subsequently refine the predicted constants by feeding them to the non-convex
optimizer as an informed initialization. We present ablations to show that this
end-to-end approach yields better results, sometimes even without the refinement
step. We evaluate our model on problems from the SRBench benchmark and show
that our model approaches the performance of state-of-the-art genetic programming
with several orders of magnitude faster inference.

Introduction
Inferring mathematical laws from experimental data is a central problem in natural science; having
observed a variable y at n points {xi }i∈Nn , it implies finding a function f such that yi ≈ f (xi ) for
all i ∈ Nn . Two types of approaches exist to solve this problem. In parametric statistics (PS), the
function f is defined by a small number of parameters that can directly be estimated from the data.
On the other hand, machine learning (ML) techniques such as decision trees and neural networks
select f from large families of non-linear functions by minimizing a loss over the data. The latter
relax the assumptions about the underlying law, but their solutions are more difficult to interpret, and
tend to overfit small experimental data sets, yielding poor extrapolation performance.
Symbolic regression (SR) stands as a middle ground between PS and ML approaches: f is selected
from a large family of functions, but is required to be defined by an interpretable analytical expression.
It has already proved extremely useful in a variety of tasks such as inferring physical laws [1, 2].
SR is usually performed in two steps. First, predicting a “skeleton”, a parametric function using a
pre-defined list of operators – typically, the basic operations (+, ×, ÷) and functions (sqrt, exp, sin,
etc.). It determines the general shape of the law up to a choice of constants, e.g. f (x) = cos(ax + b).
Then, the constants in the skeleton (a, b) are estimated using optimization techniques, typically the
Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno algorithm (BFGS).
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

