Improved Bounds on Neural Complexity for
Representing Piecewise Linear Functions

Kuan-Lin Chen
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
kuc029@ucsd.edu

Harinath Garudadri
Qualcomm Institute
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
hgarudadri@ucsd.edu

Bhaskar D. Rao
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
brao@ucsd.edu

Abstract
A deep neural network using rectified linear units represents a continuous piecewise
linear (CPWL) function and vice versa. Recent results in the literature estimated
that the number of neurons needed to exactly represent any CPWL function grows
exponentially with the number of pieces or exponentially in terms of the factorial
of the number of distinct linear components. Moreover, such growth is amplified
linearly with the input dimension. These existing results seem to indicate that
the cost of representing a CPWL function is expensive. In this paper, we propose
much tighter bounds and establish a polynomial time algorithm to find a network
satisfying these bounds for any given CPWL function. We prove that the number
of hidden neurons required to exactly represent any CPWL function is at most a
quadratic function of the number of pieces. In contrast to all previous results, this
upper bound is invariant to the input dimension. Besides the number of pieces, we
also study the number of distinct linear components in CPWL functions. When
such a number is also given, we prove that the quadratic complexity turns into
bilinear, which implies a lower neural complexity because the number of distinct
linear components is always not greater than the minimum number of pieces in a
CPWL function. When the number of pieces is unknown, we prove that, in terms
of the number of distinct linear components, the neural complexities of any CPWL
function are at most polynomial growth for low-dimensional inputs and factorial
growth for the worst-case scenario, which are significantly better than existing
results in the literature.

1

Introduction

The rectified linear unit (ReLU) [Fukushima, 1980, Nair and Hinton, 2010] activation has been
by far the most widely used nonlinearity and successful building block in deep neural networks
(DNNs). Numerous architectures based on ReLU DNNs have achieved remarkable performance
or state-of-the-art accuracy in speech processing [Zeiler et al., 2013, Maas et al., 2013], computer
vision [Krizhevsky et al., 2012, Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015, He et al., 2016], medical image
segmentation [Ronneberger et al., 2015], game playing [Mnih et al., 2015, Silver et al., 2016], and
natural language processing [Vaswani et al., 2017], just to name a few. Besides such unprecedented
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

