Dungeons and Data: A Large-Scale NetHack Dataset
Eric Hambro⇤
Meta AI

Roberta Raileanu
Meta AI

Tim Rocktäschel
University College London†

Danielle Rothermel
Meta AI
Heinrich Küttler
Inflection AI†

Vegard Mella
Meta AI
Naila Murray
Meta AI

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in the development of agents to solve challenging sequential
decision making problems such as Go [50], StarCraft [58], or DOTA [3], have
relied on both simulated environments and large-scale datasets. However, progress
on this research has been hindered by the scarcity of open-sourced datasets and the
prohibitive computational cost to work with them. Here we present the NetHack
Learning Dataset (NLD), a large and highly-scalable dataset of trajectories from
the popular game of NetHack, which is both extremely challenging for current
methods and very fast to run [23]. NLD consists of three parts: 10 billion state
transitions from 1.5 million human trajectories collected on the NAO public NetHack
server from 2009 to 2020; 3 billion state-action-score transitions from 100,000
trajectories collected from the symbolic bot winner of the NetHack Challenge 2021;
and, accompanying code for users to record, load and stream any collection of such
trajectories in a highly compressed form. We evaluate a wide range of existing
algorithms including online and offline RL, as well as learning from demonstrations,
showing that significant research advances are needed to fully leverage large-scale
datasets for challenging sequential decision making tasks.

1

Introduction

Recent progress on deep reinforcement learning (RL) methods has led to significant breakthroughs
such as training autonomous agents to play Atari [33], Go [50], StarCraft [58], and Dota [3], or to
perform complex robotic tasks [24, 44, 26, 35, 16, 41]. In many of these cases, success relied on
having access to large-scale datasets of human demonstrations [58, 3, 41, 26]. Without access to such
demonstrations, training RL agents to operate effectively in these environments remains challenging
due to the hard exploration problem posed by their vast state and action spaces. In addition, having
access to a simulator is key for training agents that can discover new strategies not exhibited by human
demonstrations. Therefore, training agents using a combination of offline data and online interaction
has proven to be a highly successful approach for solving a variety of challenging sequential decision
making tasks. However, this requires access to complex simulators and large-scale offline datasets,
which tend to be computationally expensive.
The NetHack Learning Environment (NLE) was recently introduced as a testbed for RL, providing
an environment which is both extremely challenging [15] and exceptionally fast to simulate [23].
NLE is a stochastic, partially observed, and procedurally generated RL environment based on the
popular game of NetHack. Due to its long episodes (i.e. tens or hundreds of thousands of steps)
and large state and action spaces, NLE poses a uniquely hard exploration challenge for current
RL methods. Thus, one of the most promising research avenues towards progress on NetHack is
leveraging human or symbolic-bot demonstrations to bootstrap performance, which also proved
successful for StarCraft [58] and Dota [3].
⇤
†

Correspondence to ehambro@fb.com.
Work done while at Meta AI.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

