Revisit last-iterate convergence of mSGD under milder
requirement on step size

Ruinan Jin1

Xingkang He2∗ Lang Chen3 Difei Cheng4 Vijay Gupta2,5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, IN, USA
3
College of Information Engineering, Shenyang University of Chemical Technology, Shenyang, China
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, IN, USA
1

Abstract
Understanding convergence of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) based optimization algorithms can help deal with enormous machine learning problems. To ensure
last-iterate convergence of SGD and momentum-based SGD (mSGD), the existing
P+∞
studies usually constrain the step size ϵn to decay as n=1 ϵ2n < +∞, which
however is rather conservative and may lead to slow convergence in the early stage
of the iteration. In this paper, we relax this requirement by studying an alternate
step size for the mSGD. First, we relax the requirement of the decay on step size to
P+∞ 2+η0
< +∞ (0 ≤ η0 < 1/2). This implies that a larger step size, such as
n=1 ϵn
ϵn = √1n can be utilized for accelerating the mSGD in the early stage. Under this
new step size and some common conditions, we prove that the gradient norm of
mSGD for a class of non-convex loss functions asymptotically decays to zero. In
addition, we show that this step size can indeed help make the iterates of mSGD
converge into a neighborhood of the stationary points quicker in the early stage. Finally, we establish the convergence of mSGD under a constant step size ϵn ≡ ϵ > 0
by removing a common requirement in the literature on strong convexity of the
loss functions. Some experiments are given to illustrate the developed results.

1

Introduction

The booming development of machine learning over the past decade relies on the employment of
effective optimization algorithms for training parameterized machine learning models (e.g., neural
networks). A large number of such optimization algorithms are based on gradient descent (GD). The
optimization problem in machine learning can be cast as minimizing a loss function g(θ) ∈ R over
the choice of an N -dimensional real-valued parameter vector θ, i.e., by solving the problem
θ∗ = arg min g(θ).
θ∈RN

(1)

This problem can be solved with a typical GD algorithm through an iteration of the form
θn+1 = θn − ϵn ∇θn g(θn ),

(2)

where θn is the estimate of θ∗ at step n, ϵn is a positive step size (learning rate) to be designed, and
∇θn g(θn ) stands for the gradient of g(θn ) at step n. Under certain technical conditions, θn in (2)
can asymptotically (as n → ∞) converge to the optimal solution θ∗ . However, (2) is not efficient in
machine leaning applications with enormous training data. To accelerate (2), one attempt is stochastic
∗

Corresponding author: xhe9@nd.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

