SPoVT: Semantic-Prototype Variational Transformer
for Dense Point Cloud Semantic Completion

Sheng-Yu Huang1∗
1

Hao-Yu Hsu1∗

Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2

Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University
2

NVIDIA

{f08942095, r10922195}@ntu.edu.tw, frankwang@nvidia.com

Abstract
Point cloud completion is an active research topic for 3D vision and has been widely
studied in recent years. Instead of directly predicting the missing point cloud from
the partial input, we introduce a Semantic-Prototype Variational Transformer
(SPoVT) in this work, which takes both partial point cloud and their semantic
labels as the inputs for semantic point cloud object completion. By observing
and attending to geometry and semantic information as input features, our SPoVT
would derive point cloud features and their semantic prototypes for completion
purposes. As a result, our SPoVT not only performs point cloud completion with
varying resolution, it also allows manipulation of different semantic parts of an
object. Experiments on benchmark datasets would quantitatively and qualitatively
verify the effectiveness and practicality of our proposed model.

1

Introduction

3D computer vision has been a popular research topic throughout recent years, related to various
extensive applications such as autonomous vehicles, augmented reality, and graphical rendering.
As one of the most commonly used data representations, point clouds can be easily acquired by
3D sensors. However, these 3D scans are often incomplete and sparse due to self-occlusion or far
distance from sensors, leading to undesirable results for further applications (e.g., 3D object detection
for LiDAR point clouds often fails when target objects are far from the sensor). Therefore, recovering
full point cloud data from partial observations becomes an important task.
As pioneers of object-level point cloud completion, Yuan et al. [1] propose PCN, combining a
PointNet encoder [2] and a folding-based decoder [3]. Since PCN and the subsequent folding-based
methods [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] only adopt shared multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for point-wise decoding,
detailed geometry information might not be properly recovered. To alleviate this problem, [9, 10]
voxelize the partial point cloud so that 3D CNN can be directly used for local feature propagation.
To better refine local geometry, [11, 12, 13, 14] use Transformer [15]-based frameworks and apply
attention between neighboring points. Nevertheless, these approaches simply rely on 3D coordinates
as input features for the point cloud, and thus how to preserve the geometry and the associated
semantic information for each part of the output point cloud would be a challenge.
Different from object-level completion approaches, recent scene-level completion methods [16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21] show that point cloud completion and semantic segmentation can be jointly performed
by sharing semantic and geometrical information. With additional ground truth for 3D segmentation
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

