On the Symmetries of Deep Learning Models and
their Internal Representations

Charles Godfrey1,∗ , Davis Brown1,∗ , Tegan Emerson1,3,4 , Henry Kvinge1,2,3
1
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory,
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Washington,
3
Department of Mathematics, Colorado State University,
4
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas, El Paso
∗
Equal contribution
first.last@pnnl.gov

Abstract
Symmetry has been a fundamental tool in the exploration of a broad range of
complex systems. In machine learning, symmetry has been explored in both models and data. In this paper we seek to connect the symmetries arising from the
architecture of a family of models with the symmetries of that family’s internal
representation of data. We do this by calculating a set of fundamental symmetry
groups, which we call the intertwiner groups of the model. Each of these arises
from a particular nonlinear layer of the model and different nonlinearities result
in different symmetry groups. These groups change the weights of a model in
such a way that the underlying function that the model represents remains constant
but the internal representations of data inside the model may change. We connect
intertwiner groups to a model’s internal representations of data through a range
of experiments that probe similarities between hidden states across models with
the same architecture. Our work suggests that the symmetries of a network are
propagated into the symmetries in that network’s representation of data, providing us with a better understanding of how architecture affects the learning and
prediction process. Finally, we speculate that for ReLU networks, the intertwiner
groups may provide a justification for the common practice of concentrating model
interpretability exploration on the activation basis in hidden layers rather than
arbitrary linear combinations thereof.

1

Introduction

Symmetry provides an important path to understanding across a range of disciplines. This principle
is well-established in mathematics and physics, where it has been a fundamental tool (e.g., Noether’s
Theorem [Noe18]). Symmetry has also been brought to bear on deep learning problems from a
number of directions. There is, for example, a rich research thread that studies symmetries in data
types that can be used to inform model architectures. The most famous examples of this are standard
convolutional neural networks which encode the translation invariance of many types of semantic
content in natural images into a network’s architecture. In this paper, we focus on connections
between two other types of symmetry associated with deep learning models: the symmetries in the
learnable parameters of the model and the symmetries across different models’ internal representation
of the same data.
The first of these directions of research starts with the observation that in modern neural networks
there exist models with different weights that behave identically on all possible input. We show in
section 3 that at least some of these equivalent models arise because of symmetries intrinsic to the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

