RORL: Robust Offline Reinforcement Learning via
Conservative Smoothing
Rui Yang1⇤, Chenjia Bai2⇤ , Xiaoteng Ma3 , Zhaoran Wang4 , Chongjie Zhang3 , Lei Han5†
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Tsinghua University, 4 Northwestern University, 5 Tencent Robotics X
ryangam@connect.ust.hk, baichenjia@pjlab.org.cn
ma-xt17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhaoranwang@gmail.com
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn, leihan.cs@gmail.com

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) provides a promising direction to exploit
massive amount of offline data for complex decision-making tasks. Due to the
distribution shift issue, current offline RL algorithms are generally designed to be
conservative in value estimation and action selection. However, such conservatism
can impair the robustness of learned policies when encountering observation deviation under realistic conditions, such as sensor errors and adversarial attacks. To
trade off robustness and conservatism, we propose Robust Offline Reinforcement
Learning (RORL) with a novel conservative smoothing technique. In RORL, we
explicitly introduce regularization on the policy and the value function for states
near the dataset, as well as additional conservative value estimation on these states.
Theoretically, we show RORL enjoys a tighter suboptimality bound than recent
theoretical results in linear MDPs. We demonstrate that RORL can achieve stateof-the-art performance on the general offline RL benchmark and is considerably
robust to adversarial observation perturbations.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been a vital tool for various decisionmaking tasks [36, 49, 47, 11] in a trial-and-error manner. A major limitation of current deep RL
algorithms is that they require intense online interactions with the environment [30, 67]. These
data collecting processes can be costly and even prohibitive in many real-world scenarios such as
robotics and health care [30, 53]. Offline RL [14, 28] is gaining more attention recently since it offers
probabilities to learn reinforced decision-making strategies from fully offline datasets.
The main challenge of offline RL is the distribution shift between the offline dataset and the learned
policy, which would lead to severe overestimation for the out-of-distribution (OOD) actions [14, 28].
To overcome such an issue, a series of model-free offline RL works [59, 14, 69, 29, 32, 2, 66, 6]
propose to celebrate conservatism, such as constraining the learned policy close to the supported
distribution or penalizing the Q-values of OOD actions. Besides, another stream of works builds
upon model-based algorithms [72, 71, 58], which leverages the ensemble dynamics models to enforce
pessimism through uncertainty penalizing or data generation.
However, conservatism is not the only concern when applying offline RL to the real world. Due to
the sensor errors and model mismatch, the robustness of offline RL is also crucial under the realistic
engineering conditions, which has not been well studied yet. In online RL, a series of works has been
⇤
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

