Generalized Laplacian Eigenmaps

Hao Zhu†,§ Piotr Koniusz *,§,†
Data61/CSIRO † Australian National University
allenhaozhu@gmail.com, piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au
§

Abstract
Graph contrastive learning attracts/disperses node representations for similar/dissimilar node pairs under some notion of similarity. It may be combined with a
low-dimensional embedding of nodes to preserve intrinsic and structural properties
of a graph. COLES, a recent graph contrastive method combines traditional graph
embedding and negative sampling into one framework. COLES in fact minimizes
the trace difference between the within-class scatter matrix encapsulating the graph
connectivity and the total scatter matrix encapsulating negative sampling. In this
paper, we propose a more essential framework for graph embedding, called Generalized Laplacian EigeNmaps (GLEN), which learns a graph representation by
maximizing the rank difference between the total scatter matrix and the within-class
scatter matrix, resulting in the minimum class separation guarantee. However, the
rank difference minimization is an NP-hard problem. Thus, we replace the trace
difference that corresponds to the difference of nuclear norms by the difference of
LogDet expressions, which we argue is a more accurate surrogate for the NP-hard
rank difference than the trace difference. While enjoying a lesser computational
cost, the difference of LogDet terms is lower-bounded by the Affine-invariant
Riemannian
metric (AIRM) and upper-bounded by AIRM scaled by the factor of
√
m. We show on popular benchmarks/backbones that GLEN offers favourable
accuracy/scalability compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Laplacian Eigenmaps [3] and IsoMap [36] are graph embedding methods that reduce the dimensionality of data by assuming the data exists on a low-dimensional manifold. The objective function in
such models encourages node embeddings to lie near each other in the embedding space if nodes are
close to each other in the original space. While the classical methods capture the related node pairs,
they neglect modeling unrelated node pairs.
In contrast, modern graph embedding models such as [35, 10, 44] and Graph Contrastive Learning
(GCL) [37, 56, 11, 57, 55] are unified under the (Sampled) Noise Contrastive Estimation framework,
called (Sampled)NCE [27, 23]. Most of GCL methods do not incorporate the graph information into
the loss but follow the setting from computer vision, i.e., they assume that randomly drawn pairs
should be dissimilar, whereas the original sample and its augmentations should be similar [39]. In
contrast, COntrastive Laplacian EigenmapS (COLES) [55] is a framework which combines a (graph)
neural network with Laplacian eigenmaps utilizing the graph Laplacian matrix within a contrastive
loss. Based on the NCE framework, COLES minimizes the trace difference of Laplacians.
In this paper, we analyze the relation among within-class, between-class and total scatter matrices
under the rank inequality, and prove that, under a simple assumption, the distance between any
dissimilar (negative) samples would be greater/equal than the inter-class distance between their
corresponding class centers. Based on such a condition, we derive GLEN, a reformulation of graph
embedding into a rank difference problem, which is a more general framework than other graph
* The corresponding author.

Code: https://github.com/allenhaozhu/GLEN.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

1

