On Reinforcement Learning and Distribution
Matching for Fine-Tuning Language Models
with no Catastrophic Forgetting
Tomasz Korbak⇤
University of Sussex
tomasz.korbak@gmail.com

Hady Elsahar
Naver Labs Europe
hady.elsahar@gmail.com

Germán Kruszewski
Naver Labs Europe
german.kruszewski@naverlabs.com

Marc Dymetman†
marc.dymetman@gmail.com

Abstract
The availability of large pre-trained models is changing the landscape of Machine
Learning research and practice, moving from a “training from scratch” to a “finetuning” paradigm. While in some applications the goal is to “nudge” the pre-trained
distribution towards preferred outputs, in others it is to steer it towards a different
distribution over the sample space. Two main paradigms have emerged to tackle this
challenge: Reward Maximization (RM) and, more recently, Distribution Matching
(DM). RM applies standard Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques, such as
Policy Gradients, to gradually increase the reward signal. DM prescribes to first
make explicit the target distribution that the model is fine-tuned to approximate.
Here we explore the theoretical connections between the two paradigms, and
show that methods such as KL-control developed for RM can also be construed
as belonging to DM. We further observe that while DM differs from RM, it can
suffer from similar training difficulties, such as high gradient variance. We leverage
connections between the two paradigms to import the concept of baseline into DM
methods. We empirically validate the benefits of adding a baseline on an array of
controllable language generation tasks such as constraining topic, sentiment, and
gender distributions in texts sampled from a language model. We observe superior
performance in terms of constraint satisfaction, stability and sample efficiency.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained language models (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019) are changing the landscape of
Machine Learning research and practice. Due to their strong generative capabilities many studies have
found it sufficient to “nudge” these models to conform to global preferences defined over the generated
sequences instead of training from scratch using annotated data. These preferences could include
topic and sentiment (Dathathri et al., 2020), valid musical notes and molecular structures (Jaques et al.,
2017a), code compilability (Korbak et al., 2021), reducing distributional biases (Khalifa et al., 2021;
Weidinger et al., 2021), evaluation metrics for Machine Translation and Summarization (Ranzato
et al., 2016; Bahdanau et al., 2016), or direct human feedback (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al.,
2020). This large body of studies is driven by two different paradigms: Reward Maximization (RM)
and Distribution Matching (DM).
⇤
†

Work partly done during an internship at Naver Labs Europe.
Independent Researcher. Work done at Naver Labs Europe.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

