Adversarial Task Up-sampling for Meta-learning

Yichen Wu1,2∗, Long-Kai Huang2†, Ying Wei1†
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Tencent AI Lab
{wuyichen.am97, hlongkai}@gmail.com, yingwei@cityu.edu.hk
1

Abstract
The success of meta-learning on existing benchmarks is predicated on the assumption that the distribution of meta-training tasks covers meta-testing tasks. Frequent
violation of the assumption in applications with either insufficient tasks or a very
narrow meta-training task distribution leads to memorization or learner overfitting.
Recent solutions have pursued augmentation of meta-training tasks, while it is still
an open question to generate both correct and sufficiently imaginary tasks. In this
paper, we seek an approach that up-samples meta-training tasks from the task representation via a task up-sampling network. Besides, the resulting approach named
Adversarial Task Up-sampling (ATU) suffices to generate tasks that can maximally
contribute to the latest meta-learner by maximizing an adversarial loss. On fewshot sine regression and image classification datasets, we empirically validate the
marked improvement of ATU over state-of-the-art task augmentation strategies in
the meta-testing performance and also the quality of up-sampled tasks.

1

Introduction

The past few years have seen the burgeoning development of meta-learning, a.k.a. learning to learn,
which draws upon the meta-knowledge learned from previous tasks (i.e., meta-training tasks) to
expedite the learning of novel tasks (i.e., meta-testing tasks) with a few examples. A sufficient number
and diversity of meta-training tasks are pivotal for the generalization capability of the meta-knowledge,
so that (1) they cover the true task distribution (i.e., environment [4]) from which meta-testing tasks are
sampled, discouraging learner overfitting [23] and (2) the meta-knowledge empowers fast adaptation
via the support set for each task, avoiding memorization overfitting [44]. Notwithstanding up
to millions of meta-training tasks in benchmark datasets [24, 31], real-world applications such as drug
discovery [40] and medical image diagnosis [14] usually have access to only thousands or hundreds
of tasks, which puts the meta-knowledge at high risk of learner and memorization overfitting.
While early attempts towards improving the generalization capability of the meta-knowledge revolve
around regularization methods that limit the capacity of the meta-knowledge [11, 44], recent works on
augmentation of meta-training tasks have shown a marked improvement [20, 40, 43]. The objective
of task augmentation is to draw the empirical task distribution which is formed by assembling Dirac
delta functions located in each meta-training task closer to the true task distribution. Consequently,
achieving this objective requires a qualified task augmentation approach to simultaneously possess
the following three properties: (1) task-aware: the augmented tasks comply with the true task
distribution, being not erroneous to lead the meta-knowledge astray (tasks A and B in Figure 1a); (2)
task-imaginary: the augmented tasks cover a substantial portion of the true distribution, embracing
task diversity which task-awareness is nonetheless inadequate to guarantee (tasks C, D, and E in
Figure 1b); (3) model-adaptive: the augmented tasks are timely in improving the current metaknowledge, to which the meta-knowledge before augmentation struggles to generalize (task F in
Figure 1c).
∗
†

Part of the work was done when the author interned in Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding author: Long-Kai Huang and Ying Wei

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

