Dynamic Inverse Reinforcement Learning for
Characterizing Animal Behavior

Zoe C. Ashwood1,2,∗

Aditi Jha1,3,∗

Jonathan W. Pillow1

1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University
2
Dept. of Computer Science, Princeton University
3
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University
{zashwood, aditijha, pillow}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Understanding decision-making is a core objective in both neuroscience and psychology, and computational models have often been helpful in the pursuit of this
goal. While many models have been developed for characterizing behavior in
binary decision-making and bandit tasks, comparatively little work has focused
on animal decision-making in more complex tasks, such as navigation through a
maze. Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is a promising approach for understanding such behavior, as it aims to infer the unknown reward function of an agent
from its observed trajectories through state space. However, IRL has yet to be
widely applied in neuroscience. One potential reason for this is that existing IRL
frameworks assume that an agent’s reward function is fixed over time. To address
this shortcoming, we introduce dynamic inverse reinforcement learning (DIRL), a
novel IRL framework that allows for time-varying intrinsic rewards. Our method
parametrizes the unknown reward function as a time-varying linear combination of
spatial reward maps (which we refer to as “goal maps”). We develop an efficient
inference method for recovering this dynamic reward function from behavioral data.
We demonstrate DIRL in simulated experiments and then apply it to a dataset of
mice exploring a labyrinth. Our method returns interpretable reward functions for
two separate cohorts of mice, and provides a novel characterization of exploratory
behavior. We expect DIRL to have broad applicability in neuroscience, and to
facilitate the design of biologically-inspired reward functions for training artificial
agents.

1

Introduction

Characterizing the decision-making behavior of humans and animals is a central goal in neuroscience
and psychology [1, 2]. Decision-making tasks such as Two-Alternative Forced Choice (2AFC) and
bandit problems have been widely studied [3–7], and previous work has developed a variety of models
for behavior in these tasks [1, 7–9]. The classic psychometric curve represents one such model [10],
and more recent work has focused on models based on reinforcement learning [1, 8, 11, 12]. Such
models allow us to understand and compare the decision-making strategies used by humans and
animals, and can also provide a low-dimensional description of behavior that can be regressed against
neural data [1, 13].
Although a large literature has focused on models of decision-making in simple 2AFC and bandit tasks,
comparatively few papers have sought to model behavior in larger, complex natural environments.
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

