OLIVES Dataset: Ophthalmic Labels for Investigating
Visual Eye Semantics
Mohit Prabhushankar1 , Kiran Kokilepersaud1⇤, Yash-yee Logan1⇤ ,
Stephanie Trejo Corona2⇤ , Ghassan AlRegib1 , and Charles Wykoff2
1
OLIVES at the Centre for Signal and Info. Processing, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
2
Retina Consultants Texas, Retina Consultants of America, Houston, Texas 77030, USA
{mohit.p, kpk6, ylogan3, alregib}@gatech.edu,
{stephanie.trejo, ccwmd}@retinaconsultantstexas.com

Abstract
Clinical diagnosis of the eye is performed over multifarious data modalities including scalar clinical labels, vectorized biomarkers, two-dimensional fundus images,
and three-dimensional Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) scans. Clinical practitioners use all available data modalities for diagnosing and treating eye diseases
like Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) or Diabetic Macular Edema (DME). Enabling usage of machine learning algorithms within the ophthalmic medical domain requires
research into the relationships and interactions between all relevant data over a
treatment period. Existing datasets are limited in that they neither provide data nor
consider the explicit relationship modeling between the data modalities. In this
paper, we introduce the Ophthalmic Labels for Investigating Visual Eye Semantics
(OLIVES) dataset that addresses the above limitation. This is the first OCT and
near-IR fundus dataset that includes clinical labels, biomarker labels, disease labels,
and time-series patient treatment information from associated clinical trials. The
dataset consists of 1268 near-IR fundus images each with at least 49 OCT scans,
and 16 biomarkers, along with 4 clinical labels and a disease diagnosis of DR or
DME. In total, there are 96 eyes’ data averaged over a period of at least two years
with each eye treated for an average of 66 weeks and 7 injections. We benchmark
the utility of OLIVES dataset for ophthalmic data as well as provide benchmarks
and concrete research directions for core and emerging machine learning paradigms
within medical image analysis.

1

Introduction

Ophthalmology refers to the branch of medical science that deals with the structure, functions,
diseases, and treatments of the eye. A stylized version of the diagnostic and treatment process for a
known disease is shown in Fig. 1. A patient’s visit to a clinic is met with an assessment that includes
visual acuity tests and collecting demographic information. This provides Best Corrected Visual
Acuity (BCVA) scores, Patient ID, and Eye ID among other data. We term these as clinical labels.
Next, the patient undergoes diagnostic imaging that includes Fundus and OCT scans. Finally, a trained
practitioner interprets the diagnostic scans for known biomarkers for diseases. The authors in (1)
describe biomarkers as objective indicators of medically quantifiable characteristics of biological
processes which are often diseases. The biomarkers along with the scans and clinical labels are used
to assess the presence and severity of a patient’s disease and a recommendation of a treatment is
provided. If the recommendation is yes, the patient is treated and asked to visit again after a gap.
⇤

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

