Subspace clustering in high-dimensions:
Phase transitions & Statistical-to-Computational gap
Luca Pesce⇤
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Information, Learning and Physics lab.
Bruno Loureiro
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Information, Learning and Physics lab.
Florent Krzakala
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Information, Learning and Physics lab.
Lenka Zdeborová
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Statistical Physics of Computation lab.

Abstract
A simple model to study subspace clustering is the high-dimensional k-Gaussian
mixture model where the cluster means are sparse vectors. Here we provide an
exact asymptotic characterization of the statistically optimal reconstruction error
in this model in the high-dimensional regime with extensive sparsity, i.e. when
the fraction of non-zero components of the cluster means ⇢, as well as the ratio ↵
between the number of samples and the dimension are fixed, while the dimension
diverges. We identify the information-theoretic threshold below which obtaining a positive correlation with the true cluster means is statistically impossible.
Additionally, we investigate the performance of the approximate message passing (AMP) algorithm analyzed via its state evolution, which is conjectured to be
optimal among polynomial algorithm for this task. We identify in particular the
existence of a statistical-to-computational
gap between the algorithm that requires
p
a signal-to-noise ratio alg k/ ↵pto perform better than random, and the inforp
mation theoretic threshold at it ⇡
k⇢ log ⇢/ ↵. Finally, we discuss the case
of sub-extensive sparsity ⇢ by comparing the performance of the AMP with other
sparsity-enhancing algorithms, such as sparse-PCA and diagonal thresholding.

1

Introduction

With the growing size of modern data, clustering techniques play an important role in reducing the
dimensionality of the features used in modern Machine Learning pipelines. Indeed, in many tasks
of interest ranging from DNA sequence analysis to image classification, the relevant features are
known to live in a lower-dimensional space (intrinsic dimension) than their raw acquisition format
(extrinsic dimension) [1]. In these cases, identifying these features can help saving computational
⇤

luca.pesce@epfl.ch

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

