Adversarially Robust Learning: A Generic Minimax
Optimal Learner and Characterization
Omar Montasser
TTI-Chicago
omar@ttic.edu

Steve Hanneke
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We present a minimax optimal learner for the problem of learning predictors robust
to adversarial examples at test-time. Interestingly, we find that this requires new
algorithmic ideas and approaches to adversarially robust learning. In particular, we
show, in a strong negative sense, the suboptimality of the robust learner proposed
by [21] and a broader family of learners we identify as local learners. Our results
are enabled by adopting a global perspective, specifically, through a key technical contribution: the global one-inclusion graph, which may be of independent
interest, that generalizes the classical one-inclusion graph due to [17]. Finally, as a
byproduct, we identify a dimension characterizing qualitatively and quantitatively
what classes of predictors H are robustly learnable. This resolves an open problem
due to [21], and closes a (potentially) infinite gap between the established upper
and lower bounds on the sample complexity of adversarially robust learning.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of learning predictors that are robust to adversarial examples at test-time.
Adversarial examples can be thought of as carefully crafted input perturbations that cause predictors
to misclassify. Learning predictors robust to adversarial examples is a major contemporary challenge
in machine learning. There has been a significant interest lately in how deep learning predictors are
not robust to adversarial examples [30, 5, 14] – e.g., to adversarial perturbations of bounded `p -norms–
leading to an ongoing effort to devise methods for learning predictors that are adversarially robust.
The aim of this paper is to put forward a theory precisely characterizing the complexity of robust
learnability. We know from prior work that finite VC dimension is sufficient for robust learnability,
but we also know that its finiteness is not necessary [21]. Furthermore, there is a (potentially)
infinite gap between the established quantitative upper and lower bounds on the sample complexity of
adversarially robust learning [21], and we do not know of any optimal learners for this problem. In
this paper, we address the following fundamental questions:
What classes of predictors H are robustly learnable with respect to an arbitrary perturbation set?
Can we design generic optimal learners for adversarially robust learning?
The problem of characterizing learnability is the most basic question of statistical learning theory. In
classical (non-robust) supervised learning, the fundamental theorem of statistical learning [32, 33,
6, 13] provides a complete understanding of what is learnable: classes H with finite VC dimension,
and how to learn: by the generic learner empirical risk minimization (ERMH ). We also know that
ERMH is a near-optimal learner for H with sample complexity that is quantified tightly by the VC
dimension of H.
Problem setup. Given an instance space X and label space Y = {±1}, we consider robustly
learning an arbitrary hypothesis class H ✓ Y X with respect to an arbitrary perturbation set U :
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

