Contrastive Learning as Goal-Conditioned
Reinforcement Learning

Benjamin Eysenbachα,β Tianjun Zhangγ Sergey Levineβ,γ Ruslan Salakhutdinovα
α
β
γ
CMU
Google Research
UC Berkeley

Abstract
In reinforcement learning (RL), it is easier to solve a task if given a good representation. While deep RL should automatically acquire such good representations,
prior work often finds that learning representations in an end-to-end fashion is
unstable and instead equip RL algorithms with additional representation learning
parts (e.g., auxiliary losses, data augmentation). How can we design RL algorithms that directly acquire good representations? In this paper, instead of adding
representation learning parts to an existing RL algorithm, we show (contrastive)
representation learning methods can be cast as RL algorithms in their own right.
To do this, we build upon prior work and apply contrastive representation learning
to action-labeled trajectories, in such a way that the (inner product of) learned
representations exactly corresponds to a goal-conditioned value function. We
use this idea to reinterpret a prior RL method as performing contrastive learning,
and then use the idea to propose a much simpler method that achieves similar
performance. Across a range of goal-conditioned RL tasks, we demonstrate that
contrastive RL methods achieve higher success rates than prior non-contrastive
methods, including in the offline RL setting. We also show that contrastive RL
outperforms prior methods on image-based tasks, without using data augmentation
or auxiliary objectives. 1

1

Introduction

Representation learning is an integral part of reinforcement learning (RL2 ) algorithms. While such
representations might emerge from end-to-end training [7, 79, 119, 126], prior work has found it
necessary to equip RL algorithms with perception-specific loss functions [32, 44, 71, 89, 91, 101,
116, 140] or data augmentations [69, 73, 116, 118], effectively decoupling the representation learning
problem from the reinforcement learning problem. Given what prior work has shown about RL
in the presence of function approximation and state aliasing [2, 135, 138], it is not surprising that
end-to-end learning of representations is fragile [69, 73]: an algorithm needs good representations
to drive the learning of the RL algorithm, but the RL algorithm needs to drive the learning of good
representations. So, can we design RL algorithms that do learn good representations without the
need for auxiliary perception losses?
Rather than using a reinforcement learning algorithm also to solve a representation learning problem,
we will use a representation learning algorithm to also solve certain types of reinforcement learning
problems, namely goal-conditioned RL. Goal-conditioned RL is widely studied [6, 15, 22, 62,
80, 120], and intriguing from a representation learning perspective because it can be done in an
entirely self-supervised manner, without manually-specified reward functions. We will focus on
contrastive (representation) learning methods, using observations from the same trajectory (as done
1
2

Project website with videos and code: https://ben-eysenbach.github.io/contrastive_rl
RL = reinforcement learning, not representation learning.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

