On A Mallows-type Model For (Ranked) Choices

Yifan Feng
Department of Analytics and Operations
NUS Business School
yifan.feng@nus.edu.sg

Yuxuan Tang
Institute of Operations Research and Analytics
National University of Singapore
yuxuan.tang@u.nus.edu

Abstract
We consider a preference learning setting where every participant chooses an
ordered list of k most preferred items among a displayed set of candidates. (The
set can be different for every participant.) We identify a distance-based ranking
model for the population’s preferences and their (ranked) choice behavior. The
ranking model resembles the Mallows model but uses a new distance function
called Reverse Major Index (RMJ). We find that despite the need to sum over all
permutations, the RMJ-based ranking distribution aggregates into (ranked) choice
probabilities with simple closed-form expression. We develop effective methods to
estimate the model parameters and showcase their generalization power using real
data, especially when there is a limited variety of display sets.

1

Introduction

How to aggregate the population’s preferences from their (ranked) choices out of different choice
sets? This question is of interest to many communities, such as economics, business, and computer
science. A concrete setting is a platform that wishes to learn customer preferences over a universe
of n product prototypes. The platform is able to display different subsets of versions to different
customers, who then provide feedback in the form of a top-k ranked list of their most preferred items
within the subset they see (hereafter referred to as “ranked choices").1
The population’s (ranked) choice behavior could be summarized as a (ranked) choice model Pr(πk |S),
which specifies the probability that a randomly drawn participant choosing a top-k list πk from the
display set S. An economically rationalizable and yet very general way to model (ranked) choices
is to use probabilistic ranking models. That is, given a probability distribution λ over preference
rankings, Pr(πk |S) equals the probability that a randomly drawn participant would place πk as the
top-k positions among the items in S.
A popular family of ranking models is distance-based, which is the conceptual analog of Gaussian
distribution for scalars; see [1]. A distance-based ranking model is specified by a modal (central)
ranking π ∗ and a dispersion parameter q ∈ (0, 1). Given a ranking π, its probability of being sampled
∗
is proportional to q d(π ,π) . Here d(π1 , π2 ) is a distance function that describes the discrepancy of
ranking π1 from π2 , and different distance functions lead to different models. The most popular
distance-based ranking model is the Mallows model ([2]), which uses the Kendall-Tau distance as its
distance function. It has been studied extensively in the literature regarding topics such as sampling,
estimation from sampled (partial) rankings, and learning in a Mallows mixture setting; see [3] and
references therein. Due to its popularity and the fact that every distance-based ranking model only
differs from the Mallows by distance function, we will also refer to a distance-based ranking model
as a Mallows-type model interchangeably in the sequel.
1

If k = 1, each participant is asked to choose the most preferred candidate. That effectively reduces to a
(single) choice, which is a feedback structure extensively studied in the choice modeling literature.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

