Homomorphic Matrix Completion

1

Xiao-Yang Liu1⇤ , Zechu Li2⇤, Xiaodong Wang1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York,
2
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York,
{xl2427, zl2993, xw2008}@columbia.edu

Abstract
In recommendation systems, global positioning, system identification, and mobile
social networks, it is a fundamental routine that a server completes a low-rank matrix from an observed subset of its entries. However, sending data to a cloud server
raises up the data privacy concern due to eavesdropping attacks and the singlepoint failure problem, e.g., the Netflix prize contest was canceled after a privacy
lawsuit. In this paper, we propose a homomorphic matrix completion algorithm for
privacy-preserving purpose. First, we formulate a homomorphic matrix completion
problem where a server performs matrix completion on cyphertexts, and propose
an encryption scheme that is fast and easy to implement. Secondly, we prove that
the proposed scheme satisfies the homomorphism property that decrypting the recovered matrix on cyphertexts will obtain the target matrix (on plaintexts). Thirdly,
we prove that the proposed scheme satisfies an (✏, )-differential privacy property.
While withpsimilar level of privacy guarantee, we reduce the best-known error
bound O( 10 n31 n2 ) to EXACT recovery at a price of more samples. Finally, on
synthetic data and real-world data, we show that both homomorphic nuclear-norm
minimization and alternating minimization algorithms achieve accurate recoveries
on cyphertexts, verifying the homomorphism property.

1

Introduction

The recurring low-rank matrix completion problem [4, 6, 22, 30, 13, 29, 46] concerns completing a
low-rank matrix from a randomly observed subset of entries. It has wide applications in recommendation systems (collaborative filtering) [1, 47, 26], computer vision [2, 16, 27], global positioning
[48, 32], sensory data analysis in Internet of Things [25, 34, 33], system identification, network data
analysis [51, 11], mobile social networks [23, 38], etc. Existing works [6, 9] have demonstrated a
remarkable fact: if an n ⇥ n matrix with rank r ⌧ n satisfies a certain incoherence property, then
with high probability, it is possible to exactly recover the matrix from O(nr poly log n) ⌧ n2 entries
using polynomial-time algorithms. Intuitively, one needs roughly (2nr r2 ) parameters [6] (this
is the dimension of the tangent space to the manifold of rank-r matrices) to fix an n ⇥ n matrix of
rank r, and the sampling randomness introduces a log n factor due to a coupon collector’s effect.
The information theoretical lower bound is ⌦(nr log n) [6], while the tightest known upper bound is
O(nr log2 n) [9] with another log n factor from the Golfing scheme used by the recovery algorithms.
The low-rank matrix completion problem usually deals with large-scale matrices that involve extensive
computations, while in mobile computing, smart devices usually outsource such a huge computation
task to a cloud server. However, sending data to a server or publishing anonymized data raises up
privacy concerns [23, 44, 42], e.g., the recommendation contest Netflix prize was canceled after
privacy lawsuit [35]. There are two major obstructive factors: anonymization in data publishing is
still vulnerable, and storing sensitive data on a cloud server may encounter the single-point of failure
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

