Roadblocks for Temporarily Disabling Shortcuts and
Learning New Knowledge

Hongjing Niu Hanting Li Feng Zhao∗ Bin Li
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{sasori, ab828658}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {fzhao956, binli}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning models have been found with a tendency of relying on shortcuts, i.e.,
decision rules that perform well on standard benchmarks but fail when transferred
to more challenging testing conditions. Such reliance may hinder deep learning
models from learning other task-related features and seriously affect their performance and robustness. Although recent studies have shown some characteristics of
shortcuts, there are few investigations on how to help the deep learning models to
solve shortcut problems. This paper proposes a framework to address this issue by
setting up roadblocks on shortcuts. Specifically, roadblocks are placed when the
model is urged to learn to complete a gently modified task to ensure that the learned
knowledge, including shortcuts, is insufficient the complete the task. Therefore, the
model trained on the modified task will no longer over-rely on shortcuts. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed framework significantly improves the
training of networks on both synthetic and real-world datasets in terms of both
classification accuracy and feature diversity. Moreover, the visualization results
show that the mechanism behind the proposed our method is consistent with our
expectations. In summary, our approach can effectively disable the shortcuts and
thus learn more robust features.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has triggered the current rise of artificial intelligence and is the workhorse of today’s
machine intelligence [13]. One of the great advantages of deep learning is its ability to automatically
extract the required features according to the task. Moreover, the massive amount of data that drive
the model is the key to its success. Regrettably, deep learning methods can hardly take full advantage
of the training data. An important reason is its over-reliance on simple features. Recently, deep
learning approaches have been found to have a tendency to learn simple features only [4]. The learned
simple features may be sufficient for the accessible data (training data), and the model will have
difficulty in learning other complex but effective features.
Insufficient learning of effective features may lower the accuracy and generalization performance.
More severely, when the sample distribution changes and the learned simple features are no longer
valid, deep learning models may collapse since they do not learn other features. Therefore, suppressing
the reliance on simple features is indispensable for designing models.
Shortcuts in deep learning are described as the decision rules that perform well on standard benchmarks but fail to be transferred to more challenging testing scenarios according to [4]. We make a
more specific explanation for easier evaluation. For a task, there are a number of features that should
be considered. Since the training set is limited, perhaps only a subset of features is sufficient to make
a decision. Decision rules that rely on an easy-to-learn subset of features are called shortcuts. The
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

