“Lossless” Compression of Deep Neural Networks:
A High-dimensional Neural Tangent Kernel Approach

Lingyu Gu∗1

1

Yongqi Du∗1

Yuan Zhang2

Di Xie2

Shiliang Pu2

Robert C. Qiu1

Zhenyu Liao†1
EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) are extremely powerful; however, this comes
at the price of increased depth and having more parameters per layer, making their
training and inference more computationally challenging. In an attempt to address
this key limitation, efforts have been devoted to the compression (e.g., sparsification
and/or quantization) of these large-scale machine learning models, so that they
can be deployed on low-power IoT devices. In this paper, building upon recent
advances in neural tangent kernel (NTK) and random matrix theory (RMT), we
provide a novel compression approach to wide and fully-connected deep neural
nets. Specifically, we demonstrate that in the high-dimensional regime where
the number of data points n and their dimension p are both large, and under a
Gaussian mixture model for the data, there exists asymptotic spectral equivalence
between the NTK matrices for a large family of DNN models. This theoretical
result enables “lossless” compression of a given DNN to be performed, in the
sense that the compressed network yields asymptotically the same NTK as the
original (dense and unquantized) network, with its weights and activations taking
values only in {0, ±1} up to a scaling. Experiments on both synthetic and realworld data are conducted to support the advantages of the proposed compression
scheme, with code available at https://github.com/Model-Compression/
Lossless_Compression.

1

Introduction

Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) are becoming increasingly over-parameterized, having more
parameters than required to fit the also increasingly large, complex, and high-dimensional data.
While the list of successful applications of these large-scale machine learning (ML) models is rapidly
growing, the energy consumption of these models is also increasing, making them more challenging
to deploy on close-to-user and low-power devices. To address this issue, compression techniques
have been proposed that prune, sparsify, and/or quantize DNN models [14, 23], thereby yielding
DNNs of a much smaller size that can still achieve satisfactory performance on a given ML task. As
an illustrative example, it has been recently shown that at least 90% of the weights in popular DNN
models such as VGG19 and ResNet32 can be removed with virtually no performance loss [53].
Despite the remarkable progress achieved by various DNN model compression techniques, due to the
nonlinear and highly non-convex nature of DNNs, our theoretical understanding of these large-scale
ML models, as well as of their compression schemes, is progressing at a more modest pace. For
∗
†

Equal contribution, listed in a random order by rolling a dice on WeChat.
Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed. Email: zhenyu_liao@hust.edu.cn

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

