Expediting Large-Scale Vision Transformer
for Dense Prediction without Fine-tuning

Weicong Liang1∗
Yuhui Yuan4∗†
Henghui Ding3
Xiao Luo2
4
1
4
1
Weihong Lin Ding Jia
Zheng Zhang
Chao Zhang
Han Hu4
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE)
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University 3 ETH Zurich
4
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Vision transformers have recently achieved competitive results across various
vision tasks but still suffer from heavy computation costs when processing a
large number of tokens. Many advanced approaches have been developed to
reduce the total number of tokens in large-scale vision transformers, especially for
image classification tasks. Typically, they select a small group of essential tokens
according to their relevance with the [class] token, then fine-tune the weights of
the vision transformer. Such fine-tuning is less practical for dense prediction due
to the much heavier computation and GPU memory cost than image classification.
In this paper, we focus on a more challenging problem, i.e., accelerating large-scale
vision transformers for dense prediction without any additional re-training or finetuning. In response to the fact that high-resolution representations are necessary
for dense prediction, we present two non-parametric operators, a token clustering
layer to decrease the number of tokens and a token reconstruction layer to increase
the number of tokens. The following steps are performed to achieve this: (i) we
use the token clustering layer to cluster the neighboring tokens together, resulting
in low-resolution representations that maintain the spatial structures; (ii) we apply
the following transformer layers only to these low-resolution representations or
clustered tokens; and (iii) we use the token reconstruction layer to re-create the
high-resolution representations from the refined low-resolution representations.
The results obtained by our method are promising on five dense prediction tasks,
including object detection, semantic segmentation, panoptic segmentation, instance
segmentation, and depth estimation. Accordingly, our method accelerates 40% ↑
FPS and saves 30% ↓ GFLOPs of “Segmenter+ViT-L/16” while maintaining 99.5%
of the performance on ADE20K without fine-tuning the official weights.

1

Introduction

Transformer [66] has made significant progress across various challenging vision tasks since pioneering efforts such as DETR [4], Vision Transformer (ViT) [17], and Swin Transformer [46].
By removing the local inductive bias [18] from convolutional neural networks [27, 63, 59], vision transformers armed with global self-attention show superiority in scalability for large-scale
models and billion-scale dataset [17, 82, 60], self-supervised learning [26, 74, 1], connecting vision and language [52, 33], etc. We can find from recent developments of SOTA approaches that
∗
†

Equal contribution.
B yuhui.yuan@microsoft.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

