A Scalable Deterministic Global Optimization
Algorithm for Training Optimal Decision Tree
Kaixun Hua
University of British Columbia
kaixun.hua@ubc.ca

Jiayang Ren
University of British Columbia
rjy12307@mail.ubc.ca

Yankai Cao⇤
University of British Columbia
yankai.cao@ubc.ca

Abstract
The training of optimal decision tree via mixed-integer programming (MIP) has
attracted much attention in recent literature. However, for large datasets, state-ofthe-art approaches struggle to solve the optimal decision tree training problems
to a provable global optimal solution within a reasonable time. In this paper, we
reformulate the optimal decision tree training problem as a two-stage optimization
problem and propose a tailored reduced-space branch and bound algorithm to
train optimal decision tree for the classification tasks with continuous features.
We present several structure-exploiting lower and upper bounding methods. The
computation of bounds can be decomposed into the solution of many small-scale
subproblems and can be naturally parallelized. With these bounding methods, we
prove that our algorithm can converge by branching only on variables representing
the optimal decision tree structure, which is invariant to the size of datasets. Moreover, we propose a novel sample reduction method that can predetermine the cost
of part of samples at each BB node. Combining the sample reduction method with
the parallelized bounding strategies, our algorithm can be extremely scalable. Our
algorithm can find global optimal solutions on dataset with over 245,000 samples
(1000 cores, less than 1% optimality gap, within 2 hours). We test 21 real-world
datasets from UCI Repository. The results reveal that for datasets with over 7,000
samples, our algorithm can, on average, improve the training accuracy by 3.6%
and testing accuracy by 2.8%, compared to the current state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Decision tree, as a typical supervised learning algorithm with strong interpretability, has been applied
in a wide range of fields. As a rule-based inductive model, a decision tree concludes a series of
decision rules to navigate tasks such as classification or regression. The target of the decision tree is
to achieve a low prediction error while maintaining the low complexity of the decision tree structure.
Therefore, modelling a decision tree can be treated as an optimization problem that minimizes the
training error and the tree complexity. However, even constructing an optimal decision tree with binary
class is NP-complete [Laurent and Rivest, 1976]. Since the first establishment of the decision tree
algorithm by [Morgan and Sonquist, 1963], many heuristic algorithms, such as ID3 [Quinlan, 1986],
C4.5 [Quinlan, 1996] and CART [Breiman et al., 1984], are proposed to achieve the optimization
target. However, these heuristic algorithms inevitably fall into sub-optimal solutions.
⇤

corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

