Nonstationary Dual Averaging and Online Fair
Allocation
Luofeng Liao, Yuan Gao, Christian Kroer
IEOR, Columbia University
{ll3530,yg254,ck294}@columbia.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of fairly allocating sequentially arriving items to a set
of individuals. For this problem, the recently-introduced PACE algorithm leverages the dual averaging algorithm to approximate competitive equilibria and thus
generate online fair allocations. PACE is simple, distributed, and parameter-free,
making it appealing for practical use in large-scale systems. However, current
performance guarantees for PACE require i.i.d. item arrivals. Since real-world
data is rarely i.i.d., or even stationary, we study the performance of PACE on nonstationary data. We start by developing new convergence results for the general
dual averaging algorithm under three nonstationary input models: adversariallycorrupted stochastic input, ergodic input, and block-independent (including periodic) input. Our results show convergence of dual averaging up to errors caused by
nonstationarity of the data, and recover the classical bounds when the input data
is i.i.d. Using these results, we show that the PACE algorithm for online fair allocation simultaneously achieves “best of many worlds” guarantees against any of
these nonstationary input models as well as against i.i.d. input. Finally, numerical
experiments show strong empirical performance of PACE against nonstationary
inputs.

1

Introduction

In fair division, the goal is to allocate a set of items, typically assumed divisible, among a set of
agents with heterogeneous preferences, while guaranteeing fairness and efficiency properties. In
this paper we are interested in how to fairly and efficiency allocate items that arrive online: at every
time step one item arrives, and we must irrevocably assign it to some agent. Recently, there has been
a growing literature on such online fair allocation problems (Azar et al., 2016; Balseiro et al., 2020;
Gao et al., 2021; Bateni et al., 2021; Sinclair et al., 2021; Banerjee et al., 2022). Real-world systems
that can be captured by such settings include Internet advertising systems, job recommender systems,
cloud computing platforms, and many more. One of the key challenges in such problems is to
balance the (often conflicting) goals of overall efficient resource utilization with fairness guarantees
for the individual agents.
For this setting, Gao et al. (2021) shows that a simple mechanism called PACE (Pace According to
Current Estimated utility) generates asymptotically fair and efficient allocations when the item arrivals are drawn in an i.i.d. manner. PACE gives each agent a per-time-step budget of faux currency,
and the fair allocation is achieved by having agents participate in first-price auctions for each item,
using the faux money. By guaranteeing that each agent asymptotically spends their budget at the correct rate, the resulting allocations and prices converge to what is known as a competitive equilibrium
from equal incomes (CEEI), which guarantees both fairness and efficiency. In PACE, each agent
maintains a pacing multiplier to control their spending over time, and the pacing multipliers are updated based on buyers’ budgets and cumulative utilities. This is similar to how budget-management
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

