Graph Neural Networks with Adaptive Readouts

David Buterez ∗ 1

Jon Paul Janet 2

Steven J. Kiddle 3

Dino Oglic 3

Pietro Liò 1

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK
CVRM, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Sweden
3
DS&AI, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, UK
2

Abstract
An effective aggregation of node features into a graph-level representation via readout functions is an essential step in numerous learning tasks involving graph neural
networks. Typically, readouts are simple and non-adaptive functions designed such
that the resulting hypothesis space is permutation invariant. Prior work on deep
sets indicates that such readouts might require complex node embeddings that can
be difficult to learn via standard neighborhood aggregation schemes. Motivated by
this, we investigate the potential of adaptive readouts given by neural networks that
do not necessarily give rise to permutation invariant hypothesis spaces. We argue
that in some problems such as binding affinity prediction where molecules are
typically presented in a canonical form it might be possible to relax the constraints
on permutation invariance of the hypothesis space and learn a more effective model
of the affinity by employing an adaptive readout function. Our empirical results
demonstrate the effectiveness of neural readouts on more than 40 datasets spanning
different domains and graph characteristics. Moreover, we observe a consistent improvement over standard readouts (i.e., sum, max, and mean) relative to the number
of neighborhood aggregation iterations and different convolutional operators.

1

Introduction

We investigate empirically the potential of adaptive and differentiable readout functions for learning
an effective representation of graph structured data (e.g., molecular, social, biological, and other
relational data) using graph neural networks (GNNs). Recently, there has been a surge of interest
in developing neural architectures from this class [1–5]. Graph neural networks typically employ a
permutation invariant neighborhood aggregation scheme that is repeated for several iterations, where
in each iteration node representations are updated by aggregating the feature vectors corresponding
to their neighbors. The process is repeated for a pre-specified number of iterations and the resulting
node representations capture the information contained in the respective neighborhoods given by
vertex rooted sub-trees. The final step is aggregation of node features into a graph-level representation
using a readout function. The readouts are typically selected such that the resulting hypothesis space
is permutation invariant. For instance, simple functions such as sum, mean, and max, all satisfy
this requirement [6, 7]. Graph neural networks can, thus, be seen as a special case of representation
learning over (node) sets. Zaheer et al. [6] have studied learning on sets and demonstrated that a
permutation invariant hypothesis over such domains admits a decomposition as a sum of individual
set items represented in a latent space given by a suitable embedding function. In a follow up work,
Wagstaff et al. [7] have demonstrated that simple pooling/readout functions such as sum, mean, or
max might require complex item/node embedding functions that might be difficult to learn using
standard neural networks. The expressiveness of graph neural networks specifically has also been
studied in [5], where it has been recommended to use an injective neighborhood aggregation scheme.
∗

Correspondence to: David Buterez <db804@cam.ac.uk>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

