MorphTE: Injecting Morphology in Tensorized
Embeddings

Guobing Gan1 , Peng Zhang1∗, Sunzhu Li1 , Xiuqing Lu1 , and Benyou Wang2,3
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
{ganguobing,pzhang,lisunzhu,lvxiuqing}@tju.edu.cn, wangbenyou@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
In the era of deep learning, word embeddings are essential when dealing with text
tasks. However, storing and accessing these embeddings requires a large amount of
space. This is not conducive to the deployment of these models on resource-limited
devices. Combining the powerful compression capability of tensor products, we
propose a word embedding compression method with morphological augmentation, Morphologically-enhanced Tensorized Embeddings (MorphTE). A word
consists of one or more morphemes, the smallest units that bear meaning or have
a grammatical function. MorphTE represents a word embedding as an entangled
form of its morpheme vectors via the tensor product, which injects prior semantic
and grammatical knowledge into the learning of embeddings. Furthermore, the
dimensionality of the morpheme vector and the number of morphemes are much
smaller than those of words, which greatly reduces the parameters of the word
embeddings. We conduct experiments on tasks such as machine translation and
question answering. Experimental results on four translation datasets of different
languages show that MorphTE can compress word embedding parameters by about
20 times without performance loss and significantly outperforms related embedding
compression methods.

1

Introduction

The word embedding layer is a key component of the neural network models in natural language
processing (NLP). It uses an embedding matrix to map each word into a dense real-valued vector.
However, when the vocabulary size and word embedding size (dimensionality) are large, the word
embedding matrix requires a large number of parameters. For example, the One Billion Word task of
language modeling [8] has a vocabulary size (|V |) of around 800K. Besides, the embedding size
(d) can range from 300 to 1024 [32, 11, 23]. Storing and accessing the |V | × d embedding matrix
requires a large amount of disk and memory space. This limits the deployment of these models on
such devices having limited resources. To resolve this issue, there are many studies compressing
embedding layers [34, 15, 29]. They can be roughly divided into two lines: product quantizationbased and decomposition-based methods. The product quantization-based methods [34, 20, 38]
mainly utilize the compositional coding for constructing the word embeddings with fewer parameters,
and it needs to introduce an additional task to learn the compact code for each word.
The decomposition-based word embedding compression methods are mostly based on low-rank matrix
factorization [18, 9] and tensor decomposition [15, 29]. Utilizing low-rank matrix factorization,
∗
1

Corresponding Author
Code available at URL: https://github.com/bigganbing/Fairseq_MorphTE

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

