ACIL: Analytic Class-Incremental Learning with
Absolute Memorization and Privacy Protection

Huiping Zhuang1 , Zhenyu Weng2∗, Hongxin Wei3 , Renchunzi Xie3 , Kar-Ann Toh4 , Zhiping Lin2
1
Shien-Ming Wu School of Intelligent Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Korea
1
hpzhuang@scut.edu.cn, 2 {zhenyu.weng, ezplin}@ntu.edu.sg
3
{hongxin001, XIER0002}@e.ntu.edu.sg, 4 katoh@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Class-incremental learning (CIL) learns a classification model with training data
of different classes arising progressively. Existing CIL either suffers from serious
accuracy loss due to catastrophic forgetting, or invades data privacy by revisiting
used exemplars. Inspired by linear learning formulations, we propose an analytic
class-incremental learning (ACIL) with absolute memorization of past knowledge
while avoiding breaching of data privacy (i.e., without storing historical data).
The absolute memorization is demonstrated in the sense that class-incremental
learning using ACIL given present data would give identical results to that from
its joint-learning counterpart which consumes both present and historical samples.
This equality is theoretically validated. Data privacy is ensured since no historical
data are involved during the learning process. Empirical validations demonstrate
ACIL’s competitive accuracy performance with near-identical results for various
incremental task settings (e.g., 5-50 phases). This also allows ACIL to outperform
the state-of-the-art methods for large-phase scenarios (e.g., 25 and 50 phases).

1

Introduction

Class-incremental learning (CIL) [26, 16] trains a network phase-by-phase with training data in
each phase having distinctive classes. The CIL has received an increasing popularity owing to the
need to adapt learned models to unseen data classes without needing to train from scratch, allowing
resource-saving and environmentally-friendly machine learning. Developing CIL is a natural call
in our dynamic world where data and respective target category or task are usually available in a
specific location or time slot. In addition, the CIL is intuitively motivated as it resembles real human
learning processes where a person could continuously adopt knowledge of new object categories on
top of the learned information.
Merits of CIL come with costs. The CIL could struggle with the notorious catastrophic forgetting
[1], rendering the network losing grasp of the learned knowledge when accepting new tasks, which
is also known as the task-recency bias. To mitigate the forgetting issue, several branches of CIL
methods, such as the bias correction-based [2] and replay-based (or exemplar-based) [16] CIL, have
been proposed. These CIL techniques are allowed to store a small number of samples from previous
tasks to fight the forgetting of old knowledge. In particular, the replay-based CIL has achieved the
state-of-the-art performance [12]. However, such competitive results have been obtained at the cost
of revisiting the historical samples, which has brought concerns in terms of data privacy protection.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

