OGC: Unsupervised 3D Object Segmentation from
Rigid Dynamics of Point Clouds

Ziyang Song

Bo Yang

vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
ziyang.song@connect.polyu.hk

bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of 3D object segmentation from raw point
clouds. Unlike all existing methods which usually require a large amount of
human annotations for full supervision, we propose the first unsupervised method,
called OGC, to simultaneously identify multiple 3D objects in a single forward
pass, without needing any type of human annotations. The key to our approach
is to fully leverage the dynamic motion patterns over sequential point clouds as
supervision signals to automatically discover rigid objects. Our method consists of
three major components, 1) the object segmentation network to directly estimate
multi-object masks from a single point cloud frame, 2) the auxiliary self-supervised
scene flow estimator, and 3) our core object geometry consistency component. By
carefully designing a series of loss functions, we effectively take into account the
multi-object rigid consistency and the object shape invariance in both temporal and
spatial scales. This allows our method to truly discover the object geometry even
in the absence of annotations. We extensively evaluate our method on five datasets,
demonstrating the superior performance for object part instance segmentation and
general object segmentation in both indoor and the challenging outdoor scenarios.
Our code and data are available at https://github.com/vLAR-group/OGC

1

Introduction

Identifying 3D objects from point clouds is vital for machines to tackle high-level tasks such as
autonomous planning and manipulation in real-world scenarios. Inspired by the seminal work
PointNet [56], a plethora of sophisticated models [70; 76; 37] have been developed to accurately
detect and segment individual objects from the sparse and irregular point clouds. Although these
methods have achieved excellent performance on a wide range of public datasets, they primarily rely
on a huge amount of human annotations for full supervision. However, it is extremely costly to fully
annotate every objects in point clouds due to the irregularity of data format.
Very recently, a few works start to address 3D object segmentation in the absence of human annotations. By analysing 3D scene flows from sequential point clouds, Jiang et al. [28] apply the
conventional subspace clustering optimization technique to identify moving objects from raw point
cloud sequences. With the self-supervised learning of 3D scene flow, SLIM [3] is the first learningbased work to showcase that the set of moving points can be effectively learned as an object against
the stationary background. Fundamentally, their design principle shares the key spirit of Gestalt
theory [73; 69] developed exactly 100 years ago: the raw sensory data with similar motion are likely
to be organized into a single object. This is indeed true in the real world where solid objects usually
have strong correlation in rigid motions. However, these methods cannot learn to simultaneously
segment multiple interested 3D objects from a single point cloud in one go.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

