On the Effectiveness of Fine-tuning Versus
Meta-reinforcement Learning
Zhao Mandi

Pieter Abbeel

Stephen James

{mandi.zhao, pabbeel, stepjam}@berkeley.edu
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Intelligent agents should have the ability to leverage knowledge from previously
learned tasks in order to learn new ones quickly and efficiently. Meta-learning
approaches have emerged as a popular solution to achieve this. However, metareinforcement learning (meta-RL) algorithms have thus far been predominately
validated on simple environments with narrow task distributions. Moreover, the
paradigm of pretraining followed by fine-tuning to adapt to new tasks has emerged
as a simple yet effective solution in supervised and self-supervised learning. This
calls into question the benefits of meta-learning approaches in reinforcement learning, which typically come at the cost of high complexity. We therefore investigate
meta-RL approaches in a variety of vision-based benchmarks, including Procgen,
RLBench, and Atari, where evaluations are made on completely novel tasks. Our
findings show that when meta-learning approaches are evaluated on different tasks
(rather than different variations of the same task), multi-task pretraining with finetuning on new tasks performs equally as well, or better, than meta-pretraining with
meta test-time adaptation. This is encouraging for future research, as multi-task
pretraining tends to be simpler and computationally cheaper than meta-RL. From
these findings, we advocate for evaluating future meta-RL methods on more challenging tasks, and including multi-task pretraining with fine-tuning as a simple yet
strong baseline. 1

ʫ

ʫ

ʫ

ʫ

Figure 1: Meta reinforcement learning (meta-RL) algorithms have predominantly been validated on
simple environments with narrow task distributions. Our study investigates meta-RL algorithms on
much wider task distributions across 3 benchmarks, and concludes that multi-task pretraining with
fine-tuning on new tasks performs equally as well, or better, than meta-RL. Each of the three
plots shows the average performance across tasks in the corresponding benchmark.
1

Project Website: https://sites.google.com/berkeley.edu/finetune-vs-metarl

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

