Uplifting Bandits

Yu-Guan Hsieh∗
University of Grenoble Alpes
yu-guan.hsieh@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr

Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan
Amazon
kasivisw@gmail.com

Branislav Kveton
Amazon
bkveton@amazon.com

Abstract
We introduce a multi-armed bandit model where the reward is a sum of multiple
random variables, and each action only alters the distributions of some of them.
After each action, the agent observes the realizations of all the variables. This
model is motivated by marketing campaigns and recommender systems, where the
variables represent outcomes on individual customers, such as clicks. We propose
UCB-style algorithms that estimate the uplifts of the actions over a baseline. We
study multiple variants of the problem, including when the baseline and affected
variables are unknown, and prove sublinear regret bounds for all of these. We
also provide lower bounds that justify the necessity of our modeling assumptions.
Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets show the benefit of methods that
estimate the uplifts over policies that do not use this structure.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit (MAB) is an important framework for sequential decision making under uncertainty [8, 19, 20]. In this problem, a learner repeatedly takes action and receives their rewards,
while the outcomes of the other actions are unobserved. The goal of the learner is to maximize
their cumulative reward over time by balancing exploration (select actions with uncertain reward
estimates) and exploitation (select actions with high reward estimates). MAB has applications in
online advertisement, recommender systems, portfolio management, and dynamic channel selection
in wireless networks [7].
One prominent question in the MAB literature is how the dependencies between the actions can
be exploited to improve statistical efficiency. Popular examples include linear bandits [11] and
combinatorial bandits [9]. In this work, we study a different structured bandit problem with the
following three features: (i) the reward is the sum of the payoffs of a fixed set of variables; (ii) these
payoffs are observed; and (iii) each action only affects a small subset of the variables. This structure
arises in many applications, as discussed below.
(a) Online Marketing. An ecommerce platform can opt among several marketing strategies
(actions) to encourage customers to make more purchases on their website. As different customers
can be sensitive to a different marketing strategy, regarding each of them as a variable, it is natural to
expect that each action would likely affect only a subset of the variables. The payoff associated to a
customer can be for example the revenue generated by that customer; then the reward is just the total
revenue received by the platform.
(b) Product Discount. Consider a company that uses discount strategies to increase their sales. It is
common to design discount strategies that only apply to a small subset of products. In this case, we
∗

Work done during an internship at Amazon.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

