Structuring Uncertainty for Fine-Grained Sampling
in Stochastic Segmentation Networks

Frank Nussbaum∗
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena
Fürstengraben 1, 07743 Jena, Germany
and
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Data Science
Mälzerstraße 3-5, 07745 Jena, Germany
frank.nussbaum@uni-jena.de

Jakob Gawlikowski∗
Technical University of Munich
Arcisstraße 21, 80333 Munich, Germany
and
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Data Science
Mälzerstraße 3-5, 07745 Jena, Germany
jakob.gawlikowski@dlr.de

Julia Niebling
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Institute of Data Science
Mälzerstraße 3-5, 07745 Jena, Germany
julia.niebling@dlr.de

Abstract
In image segmentation, the classic approach of learning a deterministic segmentation neither accounts for noise and ambiguity in the data nor for expert disagreements about the correct segmentation. This has been addressed by architectures that
predict heteroscedastic (input-dependent) segmentation uncertainty, which indicates regions of segmentations that should be treated with care. What is missing are
structural insights into the uncertainty, which would be desirable for interpretability
and systematic adjustments. In the context of state-of-the-art stochastic segmentation networks (SSNs), we solve this issue by dismantling the overall predicted
uncertainty into smaller uncertainty components. We obtain them directly from
the low-rank Gaussian distribution for the logits in the network head of SSNs,
based on a previously unconsidered view of this distribution as a factor model.
The rank subsequently encodes a number of latent variables, each of which controls an individual uncertainty component. Hence, we can use the latent variables
(called factors) for fine-grained sample control, thereby solving an open problem
from previous work. There is one caveat though–factors are only unique up to
orthogonal rotations. Factor rotations allow us to structure the uncertainty in a
way that endorses simplicity, non-redundancy, and separation among the individual
uncertainty components. To make the overall and factor-specific uncertainties at
play comprehensible, we introduce flow probabilities that quantify deviations from
the mean prediction and can also be used for uncertainty visualization. We show
on medical-imaging, earth-observation, and traffic-scene data that rotation criteria
based on factor-specific flow probabilities consistently yield the best factors for
fine-grained sampling.

∗

both authors contributed equally

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

