CGLB: Benchmark Tasks for Continual Graph
Learning

Xikun Zhang
The University of Sydney
xzha0505@uni.sydney.edu.au

Dongjin Song
University of Connecticut
dongjin.song@uconn.edu

Dacheng Tao
The University of Sydney
dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual learning on graph data, which aims to accommodate new tasks over
newly emerged graph data while maintaining the model performance over existing
tasks, is attracting increasing attention from the community. Unlike continual learning on Euclidean data (e.g., images, texts, etc.) that has established benchmarks
and unified experimental settings, benchmark tasks are rare for Continual Graph
Learning (CGL). Moreover, due to the variety of graph data and its complex topological structures, existing works adopt different protocols to configure datasets and
experimental settings. This creates a great obstacle to compare different techniques
and thus hinders the development of CGL. To this end, we systematically study
the task configurations in different application scenarios and develop a comprehensive Continual Graph Learning Benchmark (CGLB) curated from different
public datasets. Specifically, CGLB contains both node-level and graph-level
continual graph learning tasks under task-incremental (currently widely adopted)
and class-incremental (more practical, challenging, yet underexplored) settings, as
well as a toolkit for training, evaluating, and visualizing different CGL methods.
Within CGLB, we also systematically explain the difference among these task
configurations by comparing them to classical continual learning settings. Finally,
we comprehensively compare state-of-the-art baselines on CGLB to investigate
their effectiveness. Given CGLB and the developed toolkit, the barrier to exploring
CGL has been greatly lowered and researchers can focus more on the model development without worrying about tedious work on pre-processing of datasets or
encountering unseen pitfalls. The benchmark and the toolkit are available through
https://github.com/QueuQ/CGLB.

1

Introduction

In real-world applications, many graph data are generated continuously. For instance, in a citation
network, new types of papers and their associated citations may emerge and an ideal document
classifier needs to continuously adapt its parameters to distinguish the documents of newly emerged
research fields [31, 63, 64]; for drug design, new categories or properties of molecules may be
encountered and a molecule property prediction model will need to keep updating its parameters to
learn new molecule categories or properties [31]. Therefore, given either a continuously expanding
graph (with new types of nodes and associated edges) or new categories of graphs continuously
emerging, for practical concerns, it is important to develop Continual Graph Learning (CGL) that can
accommodate new tasks over newly emerged graph data while maintaining the model performance
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

