CLiMB: A Continual Learning Benchmark
for Vision-and-Language Tasks

Tejas Srinivasan1
Ting-Yun Chang1
Leticia Pinto Alva1
1
1,2
Georgios Chochlakis
Mohammad Rostami
Jesse Thomason1
1
2
University of Southern California
USC Information Sciences Institute
{tejas.srinivasan,tingyun,pintoalv,chochlak,rostamim,jessetho}@usc.edu

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art vision-and-language models are evaluated on tasks either
individually or in a multi-task setting, overlooking the challenges of continually
learning (CL) tasks as they arrive. Existing CL benchmarks have facilitated research
on task adaptation and mitigating “catastrophic forgetting”, but are limited to
vision-only and language-only tasks. We present CLiMB, a benchmark to study
the challenge of learning multimodal tasks in a CL setting, and to systematically
evaluate how upstream continual learning can rapidly generalize to new multimodal
and unimodal tasks. CLiMB includes implementations of several CL algorithms
and a modified Vision-Language Transformer (ViLT) model that can be deployed
on both multimodal and unimodal tasks. We find that common CL methods can
help mitigate forgetting during multimodal task learning, but do not enable crosstask knowledge transfer. We envision that CLiMB will facilitate research on a new
class of CL algorithms for this challenging multimodal setting.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained models, including crossmodal vision-and-language models, are generally
fine-tuned on each downstream task individually, requiring fine-tuning and storing new models for
each task. By contrast, multi-task learning requires fixing a set of tasks, but such training is incapable
of dynamically learning new tasks. Although continual learning (CL) algorithms have explored crosstask knowledge transfer, existing methods primarily consider unimodal tasks in artificial settings [Jin
et al., 2021, Lin et al., 2021]. Multimodal pre-training can encode useful and transferable features
for diverse tasks, but learning from a sequence of different multimodal tasks and the subsequent
forgetting effects [Kirkpatrick et al., 2017] have not yet been studied.
Additionally, it is assumed that these deployed models will encounter tasks containing all modalities
seen during training time. This assumption means learning separate models for language-only,
vision-only, and vision-language tasks, as opposed to a single “generalist” model that can handle
all modalities or subsets of them [Reed et al., 2022]. Yet, existing work suggests that knowledge
grounded in multiple modalities can benefit unimodal tasks [Desai and Johnson, 2021, Jin et al.,
2022]. Currently, the research community lacks a suitable benchmark to systematically study how
models can continually learn vision-and-language tasks while being transferable to unimodal tasks.
In this paper, we introduce the Continual Learning in Multimodality Benchmark (CLiMB),1 to
facilitate the study of CL in vision-and-language tasks with deployment to multi- and unimodal tasks.
We formulate a learning problem wherein a model is first trained on sequentially arriving visionand-language tasks, referred to as upstream continual learning, and then transferred downstream
to low-shot multimodal and unimodal tasks. CLiMB initially includes four vision-and-language
1

The code for our benchmark is available at https://github.com/GLAMOR-USC/CLiMB

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

