Deep Generalized Schrödinger Bridge

Guan-Horng Liu1 , Tianrong Chen1∗, Oswin So2∗ , Evangelos A. Theodorou1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
{ghliu, tianrong.chen, evangelos.theodorou}@gatech.edu
oswinso@mit.edu

Abstract
Mean-Field Game (MFG) serves as a crucial mathematical framework in modeling
the collective behavior of individual agents interacting stochastically with a large
population. In this work, we aim at solving a challenging class of MFGs in which
the differentiability of these interacting preferences may not be available to the
solver, and the population is urged to converge exactly to some desired distribution.
These setups are, despite being well-motivated for practical purposes, complicated
enough to paralyze most (deep) numerical solvers. Nevertheless, we show that
Schrödinger Bridge — as an entropy-regularized optimal transport model — can
be generalized to accepting mean-field structures, hence solving these MFGs.
This is achieved via the application of Forward-Backward Stochastic Differential
Equations theory, which, intriguingly, leads to a computational framework with
a similar structure to Temporal Difference learning. As such, it opens up novel
algorithmic connections to Deep Reinforcement Learning that we leverage to
facilitate practical training. We show that our proposed objective function provides
necessary and sufficient conditions to the mean-field problem. Our method, named
Deep Generalized Schrödinger Bridge (DeepGSB), not only outperforms prior
methods in solving classical population navigation MFGs, but is also capable of
solving 1000-dimensional opinion depolarization, setting a new state-of-the-art
numerical solver for high-dimensional MFGs. Our code will be made available at
https://github.com/ghliu/DeepGSB.

1

Introduction

On a scorching morning, you navigated through the crowds toward the
office. As you walked through a crosswalk,SByou were DeepRL
pondering the
growing public opinion on a new policy over the past
week, and were
DeepGSB
(ours) moving...
suddenly interrupted by the honking as the traffic started

SB

DeepRL
DeepGSB
(ours)

Solving
1000-dim
opinion
MFG
From navigation in crowds to propagation of
opinions
and
traffic
move- Solving 1000-dim opinion MFG
ment, examples of individual agents interacting with a large population
are widespread in daily life and, due to their prevalence, appear as
Moderated
Polarized
Moderated
an important subject in multidisciplinaryPolarized
scientific areas,
including
economics [1, 2], opinion modeling [3–5], robotics [6, 7], and more
Figure 1: DeepGSB paves
recently machine learning [8–10].
a new algorithmic connecMathematically, the decision-making processes under these scenarios tion between Schrödinger
can be characterized by the Mean-Field Game [11–13] (MFG), which Bridge (SB) and modelmodels a noncooperative differential game on a finite horizon between based DeepRL for solving
a continuum population of rational agents. Let u(x, t) be the value high-dimensional MFGs.
∗

These authors contributed equally. Work was done while Oswin was at Georgia Tech.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

