AniFaceGAN: Animatable 3D-Aware Face Image
Generation for Video Avatars
Yue Wu1∗ Yu Deng2 ∗
1

Jiaolong Yang3† Fangyun Wei3

HKUST

2

Tsinghua University

3

Qifeng Chen1

Xin Tong3

Microsoft Research

Abstract
Although 2D generative models have made great progress in face image generation
and animation, they often suffer from undesirable artifacts such as 3D inconsistency when rendering images from different camera viewpoints. This prevents them
from synthesizing video animations indistinguishable from real ones. Recently,
3D-aware GANs extend 2D GANs for explicit disentanglement of camera pose
by leveraging 3D scene representations. These methods can well preserve the 3D
consistency of the generated images across different views, yet they cannot achieve
fine-grained control over other attributes, among which facial expression control is
arguably the most useful and desirable for face animation. In this paper, we propose
an animatable 3D-aware GAN for multiview consistent face animation generation.
The key idea is to decompose the 3D representation of the 3D-aware GAN into a
template field and a deformation field, where the former represents different identities with a canonical expression, and the latter characterizes expression variations
of each identity. To achieve meaningful control over facial expressions via deformation, we propose a 3D-level imitative learning scheme between the generator
and a parametric 3D face model during adversarial training of the 3D-aware GAN.
This helps our method achieve high-quality animatable face image generation
with strong visual 3D consistency, even though trained with only unstructured 2D
images. Extensive experiments demonstrate our superior performance over prior
works. Project page: https://yuewuhkust.github.io/AniFaceGAN/

1

Introduction

Face image synthesis and animation have been a longstanding task in computer vision and computer
graphics with a wide range of applications such as virtual avatars and video conferencing. Remarkable
progress has been achieved in recent years with a large volume of methods proposed [50, 2, 19, 57,
52, 69, 58, 56, 63, 1, 67, 70, 46, 77]. This progress is hinged on a number of advances in machine
learning within which generative adversarial networks (GANs) are arguably the core underpinning.
However, most existing face GANs are based on 2D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and do
not model the underlying 3D facial geometry. When synthesizing faces under different poses and
expressions, the results cannot maintain strict 3D consistency. Consequently, these methods can
be used in interactive face manipulation but are not suitable for high-quality face video generation
and animation. To alleviate this problem, some methods incorporate 3D prioris into the generation
process [11, 64, 30, 20, 51] for better 3D rigging over the 2D images. Perhaps the most relevant
work to ours is DiscoFaceGAN [11], which considers an unconditional and disentangled generative
modeling setup as we do. Still, exact 3D consistency cannot be guaranteed by the aforementioned
∗
†

Work done when YW and YD were interns at Microsoft Research.
JY is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

