CLOOB: Modern Hopfield Networks with
InfoLOOB Outperform CLIP
Andreas Fürst ⇤ 1
Fei Tang 3

Elisabeth Rumetshofer ⇤ 1
Hubert Ramsauer 1

Günter Klambauer 1

Johannes Lehner 1

David Kreil 2

Angela Bitto-Nemling 1

Viet Tran 1

Michael Kopp 2
Sepp Hochreiter 1 2

ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning,
Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
2
Institute of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence (IARAI), Vienna, Austria
3
HERE Technologies, Zurich, Switzerland
⇤
Equal contribution
1

Abstract
CLIP yielded impressive results on zero-shot transfer learning tasks and is considered as a foundation model like BERT or GPT3. CLIP vision models that
have a rich representation are pre-trained using the InfoNCE objective and natural
language supervision before they are fine-tuned on particular tasks. Though CLIP
excels at zero-shot transfer learning, it suffers from an explaining away problem,
that is, it focuses on one or few features, while neglecting other relevant features.
This problem is caused by insufficiently extracting the covariance structure in the
original multi-modal data. We suggest to use modern Hopfield networks to tackle
the problem of explaining away. Their retrieved embeddings have an enriched
covariance structure derived from co-occurrences of features in the stored embeddings. However, modern Hopfield networks increase the saturation effect of the
InfoNCE objective which hampers learning. We propose to use the InfoLOOB
objective to mitigate this saturation effect. We introduce the novel “Contrastive
Leave One Out Boost” (CLOOB), which uses modern Hopfield networks for covariance enrichment together with the InfoLOOB objective. In experiments we
compare CLOOB to CLIP after pre-training on the Conceptual Captions and the
YFCC dataset with respect to their zero-shot transfer learning performance on other
datasets. CLOOB consistently outperforms CLIP at zero-shot transfer learning
across all considered architectures and datasets.

1

Introduction

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) showed spectacular performance at zero-shot
transfer learning (Radford et al., 2021). CLIP learns expressive image embeddings directly from
raw text, thereby leverages a much richer source of supervision than just labels. The CLIP model
is considered as an important foundation model (Bommasani et al., 2021), therefore a plethora of
follow-up work has been published (see Appendix Section A.4). CLIP as a contrastive learning
method has two simultaneous goals, namely (i) increasing the similarity of matched language-image
pairs and (ii) decreasing the similarity of unmatched language-image pairs. Though CLIP yielded
Code is available at: https://github.com/ml-jku/cloob
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

