Trading off Utility, Informativeness, and Complexity in
Emergent Communication

Mycal Tucker
M.I.T.
mycal@mit.edu

Roger Levy
M.I.T.
rplevy@mit.edu

Julie Shah
M.I.T.
julie_a_shah@csail.mit.edu

Noga Zaslavsky
M.I.T.
nogazs@mit.edu

Abstract
Emergent communication (EC) research often focuses on optimizing task-specific
utility as a driver for communication. However, there is increasing evidence
that human languages are shaped by task-general communicative constraints and
evolve under pressure to optimize the Information Bottleneck (IB) tradeoff between
the informativeness and complexity of the lexicon. Here, we integrate these
two approaches by trading off utility, informativeness, and complexity in EC.
To this end, we propose Vector-Quantized Variational Information Bottleneck
(VQ-VIB), a method for training neural agents to encode inputs into discrete
signals embedded in a continuous space. We evaluate our approach in multi-agent
reinforcement learning settings and in color reference games and show that: (1) VQVIB agents can continuously adapt to changing communicative needs and, in the
color domain, align with human languages; (2) the emergent VQ-VIB embedding
spaces are semantically meaningful and perceptually grounded; and (3) encouraging
informativeness leads to faster convergence rates and improved utility, both in VQVIB and in prior neural architectures for symbolic EC, with VQ-VIB achieving
higher utility for any given complexity. This work offers a new framework for EC
that is grounded in information-theoretic principles that are believed to characterize
human language evolution and that may facilitate human-agent interaction.

1

Introduction

Good communication is a critical component of successful teams of humans and artificial agents,
but differing notions of “good” makes training agents to develop such communication challenging.
One view of communication focuses on utility by framing languages as successful to the extent
they enable high task performance. Emergent communication (EC) literature, wherein agents learn
to communicate while optimizing the utility associated with a task-specific goal, such as reaching
a target landmark, emphasizes this view [1–6]. However, training via utility alone may lead to
undesirable properties of the EC system, such as violations of linguistic universals [7], poor human
interpretability [8], slow convergence rates [9], or high sensitivity to environment design [10]. This
implies that some constraints may be needed to guide agents toward human-like communication.
Another view of communication, often considered in the cognitive science literature, focuses on
task-agnostic communicative objectives as major forces shaping human languages [11, 12]. Most
relevant to our work is a recent line of work [13–17] that argues that languages evolve under
pressure to efficiently compress meanings into communicative signals by optimizing the Information
Bottleneck (IB) principle [18]. In this context, IB can be interpreted as a tradeoff between the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

