MaskPlace: Fast Chip Placement via Reinforced
Visual Representation Learning

Yao Lai Yao Mu Ping Luo ∗
Department of Computer Science
The University of Hong Kong
{ylai,ymu,pluo}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Placement is an essential task in modern chip design, aiming at placing millions of
circuit modules on a 2D chip canvas. Unlike the human-centric solution, which
requires months of intense effort by hardware engineers to produce a layout to
minimize delay and energy consumption, deep reinforcement learning has become
an emerging autonomous tool. However, the learning-centric method is still in its
early stage, impeded by a massive design space of size ten to the order of a few
thousand. This work presents MaskPlace to automatically generate a valid chip
layout design within a few hours, whose performance can be superior or comparable
to recent advanced approaches. It has several appealing benefits that prior arts
do not have. Firstly, MaskPlace recasts placement as a problem of learning pixellevel visual representation to comprehensively describe millions of modules on
a chip, enabling placement in a high-resolution canvas and a large action space.
It outperforms recent methods that represent a chip as a hypergraph. Secondly,
it enables training the policy network by an intuitive reward function with dense
reward, rather than a complicated reward function with sparse reward from previous
methods. Thirdly, extensive experiments on many public benchmarks show that
MaskPlace outperforms existing RL approaches in all key performance metrics,
including wirelength, congestion, and density. For example, it achieves 60%90% wirelength reduction and guarantees zero overlaps. We believe MaskPlace
can improve AI-assisted chip layout design. The deliverables are released at
laiyao1.github.io/maskplace.

1

Introduction

The scalability and efficiency are two significant factors of autonomous chip layout design. Placement
is one of the most challenging and time-consuming problems in the design flow, aiming to determine
the locations of millions of circuit modules on a 2D chip canvas represented by a two-dimensional
grid. A netlist can describe these modules, that is, a large-scale hypergraph consisting of massive
macros (functional blocks such as memory) and standard cells (logic gates), where each macro and
each standard cell can contain several or even hundreds of pins connected by wires, as shown in Fig.1.
Placing a large number of circuit modules onto the chip canvas is challenging because many performance metrics such as power consumption, timing, area, and wirelength should be minimized while
satisfying some hard constraints such as placement density and routing congestion. For example,
the wirelength (the length of wires that connect all modules) determines the delay and the power
consumption of a chip [1]. Shorter wires often indicate less delay and less power consumption [2].
However, wirelength cannot be reduced by overlapping modules because the module density is a hard
constraint to ensure that a valid and manufacturable chip layout has non-overlapping modules. More
∗

Corresponding author is Ping Luo

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

