Globally Gated Deep Linear Networks
Qianyi Li1 Haim Sompolinsky2,3
Biophysics Graduate Program, Harvard University
2
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University
3
Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences, Hebrew University
qianyi_li@g.harvard.edu, hsompolinsky@mcb.harvard.edu, haim@fiz.huji.ac.il
1

Abstract
Recently proposed Gated Linear Networks (GLNs) present a tractable nonlinear
network architecture, and exhibit interesting capabilities such as learning with
local error signals and reduced forgetting in sequential learning. In this work,
we introduce a novel gating architecture, named Globally Gated Deep Linear
Networks (GGDLNs) where gating units are shared among all processing units
in each layer, thereby decoupling the architectures of the nonlinear but unlearned
gating and the learned linear processing motifs. We derive exact equations for the
generalization properties of Bayesian Learning in these networks in the finite-width
thermodynamic limit, defined by N, P ! 1 while P/N = O(1) where N and
P are the hidden layers’ width and size of training data sets respectfully. We find
that the statistics of the network predictor can be expressed in terms of kernels
that undergo shape renormalization through a data-dependent order parameter
matrix compared to the infinite-width Gaussian Process (GP) kernels. Our theory
accurately captures the behavior of finite width GGDLNs trained with gradient
descent (GD) dynamics. We show that kernel shape renormalization gives rise to
rich generalization properties w.r.t. network width, depth and L2 regularization
amplitude. Interestingly, networks with a large number of gating units behave
similarly to standard ReLU architectures. Although gating units in the model
do not participate in supervised learning, we show the utility of unsupervised
learning of the gating parameters. Additionally, our theory allows the evaluation
of the network’s ability for learning multiple tasks by incorporating task-relevant
information into the gating units. In summary, our work is the first exact theoretical
solution of learning in a family of nonlinear networks with finite width. The rich
and diverse behavior of the GGDLNs suggests that they are helpful analytically
tractable models of learning single and multiple tasks, in finite-width nonlinear
deep networks.

1

Introduction

Despite the recent advances in machine learning, theoretical understanding of how machine learning
algorithms work is very limited. Many current theoretical approaches study infinitely wide networks
[1, 2, 3], where the input-output relation is equivalent to a Gaussian Process (GP) in function space
with a covariance matrix defined by a GP kernel. However, this GP limit holds when the network
width approaches infinity while the size of the training data remains finite, severely limiting its
applicability to realistic conditions. Another line of work focuses on finite-width deep linear neural
networks (DLNNs)[4, 5, 6], while applicable in a wider regime, the generalization behavior of linear
networks are very limited, and the bias contribution always remains constant with network parameters
[4], which fails to capture the behavior of generalization performance in general nonlinear networks.
Therefore, a tractable nonlinear network architecture is in need for theoretically probing into the
diverse generalization behavior of general nonlinear networks.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

