Monocular Dynamic View Synthesis: A Reality Check

Hang Gao1,†
1

Ruilong Li1

UC Berkeley

Shubham Tulsiani2
2

Bryan Russell3

Carnegie Mellon University

3

Angjoo Kanazawa1

Adobe Research

Abstract
We study the recent progress on dynamic view synthesis (DVS) from monocular
video. Though existing approaches have demonstrated impressive results, we show
a discrepancy between the practical capture process and the existing experimental
protocols, which effectively leaks in multi-view signals during training. We
define effective multi-view factors (EMFs) to quantify the amount of multi-view
signal present in the input capture sequence based on the relative camera-scene
motion. We introduce two new metrics: co-visibility masked image metrics
and correspondence accuracy, which overcome the issue in existing protocols.
We also propose a new iPhone dataset that includes more diverse real-life
deformation sequences. Using our proposed experimental protocol, we show that
the state-of-the-art approaches observe a 1-2 dB drop in masked PSNR in the
absence of multi-view cues and 4-5 dB drop when modeling complex motion.
Code and data can be found at http://hangg7.com/dycheck.

1

Introduction

Dynamic scenes are ubiquitous in our everyday lives – people moving around, cats purring, and
trees swaying in the wind. The ability to capture 3D dynamic sequences in a “casual” manner,
particularly through monocular videos taken by a smartphone in an uncontrolled environment, will
be a cornerstone in scaling up 3D content creation, performance capture, and augmented reality.
Recent works have shown promising results in dynamic view synthesis (DVS) from a monocular
video [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. However, upon close inspection, we found that there is a discrepancy
between the problem statement and the experimental protocol employed. As illustrated in Figure 1,
the input data to these algorithms either contain frames that “teleport” between multiple camera
viewpoints at consecutive time steps, which is impractical to capture from a single camera, or depict
quasi-static scenes, which do not represent real-life dynamics.
In this paper, we provide a systematic means of characterizing the aforementioned discrepancy and
propose a better set of practices for model fitting and evaluation. Concretely, we introduce effective
multi-view factors (EMFs) to quantify the amount of multi-view signal in a monocular sequence
based on the relative camera-scene motion. With EMFs, we show that the current experimental
protocols operate under an effectively multi-view regime. For example, our analysis reveals that the
aforementioned practice of camera teleportation makes the existing capture setup akin to an Olympic
runner taking a video of a moving scene without introducing any motion blur.
The reason behind the existing experimental protocol is that monocular DVS is a challenging problem
that is also hard to evaluate. Unlike static novel-view synthesis where one may simply evaluate
on held-out views of the captured scene, in the dynamic case, since the scene changes over time,
evaluation requires another camera that observes the scene from a different viewpoint at the same
time. However, this means that the test views often contain regions that were never observed in the
input sequence. Camera teleportation, i.e., constructing a temporal sequence by alternating samples
†

Work partially done as part of HG’s internship at Adobe.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

