On the Identifiability of Nonlinear ICA: Sparsity and
Beyond

Yujia Zheng1,2 , Ignavier Ng1 , Kun Zhang1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{yujiazh, ignavierng, kunz1}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Nonlinear independent component analysis (ICA) aims to recover the underlying
independent latent sources from their observable nonlinear mixtures. How to
make the nonlinear ICA model identifiable up to certain trivial indeterminacies is a
long-standing problem in unsupervised learning. Recent breakthroughs reformulate
the standard independence assumption of sources as conditional independence
given some auxiliary variables (e.g., class labels and/or domain/time indexes) as
weak supervision or inductive bias. However, nonlinear ICA with unconditional
priors cannot benefit from such developments. We explore an alternative path
and consider only assumptions on the mixing process, such as Structural Sparsity.
We show that under specific instantiations of such constraints, the independent
latent sources can be identified from their nonlinear mixtures up to a permutation
and a component-wise transformation, thus achieving nontrivial identifiability of
nonlinear ICA without auxiliary variables. We provide estimation methods and
validate the theoretical results experimentally. The results on image data suggest
that our conditions may hold in a number of practical data generating processes.

1

Introduction

Nonlinear independent component analysis (ICA) is fundamental in unsupervised learning. It
generalizes linear ICA (Comon, 1994) to identify latent sources from observations, which are
assumed to be a nonlinear mixture of the sources. For an observed vector x, nonlinear ICA expresses
it as x = f (s), where f is an unknown invertible mixing function, and s is a latent random vector
representing the (marginally) independent sources. The goal is to recover function f as well as sources
s from the observed mixture x up to certain indeterminacies. While nonlinear ICA is of general
interest in a variety of tasks, such as disentanglement (Lachapelle et al., 2022) and unsupervised
learning (Oja, 2002), its identifiability has been a long-standing problem for decades. The key
difficulty is that, without additional assumptions, there exist infinite ways to transform the observations
into independent components while still mixed w.r.t. the sources (Hyvärinen and Pajunen, 1999).
To deal with this challenge, existing works introduce the auxiliary variable u (e.g., class label,
domain index, time index) and assume that sources are conditionally independent given u (Hyvärinen
and Morioka, 2016, 2017; Hyvärinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020; Lachapelle et al.,
2022). Most of them require the auxiliary variable to be observable, while clustering-based methods
(Willetts and Paige, 2021) and those for time series (Hälvä and Hyvärinen, 2020; Hälvä et al., 2021;
Yao et al., 2021) are exceptions. These works impose mild restrictions on the mixing process but
require many distinct values of u for identifiability, which might restrict their practical applicability.
Motivated by this, Yang et al. (2022) reduce the number of required distinct values by strengthening
the functional assumptions on the mixing process. As described, all these results are based on
conditional independence of the sources given auxiliary variable u, instead of the standard marginal
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

