O RIENT: Submodular Mutual Information Measures
for Data Subset Selection under Distribution Shift
Athresh Karanam∗
University of Texas at Dallas
athresh.karanam@utdallas.edu
Harsha Kokel∗
University of Texas at Dallas
hkokel@utdallas.edu

Krishnateja Killamsetty∗
University of Texas at Dallas
krishnateja.killamsetty@utdallas.edu
Rishabh K Iyer
University of Texas at Dallas
rishabh.iyer@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Real-world machine-learning applications require robust models that generalize
well to distribution shift settings, which is typical in real-world situations. Domain
adaptation techniques aim to address this issue of distribution shift by minimizing
the disparities between domains to ensure that the model trained on the source
domain performs well on the target domain. Nevertheless, the existing domain adaptation methods are computationally very expensive. In this work, we aim to improve
the efficiency of existing supervised domain adaptation (SDA) methods by using a
subset of source data that is similar to target data for faster model training. Specifically, we propose O RIENT, a subset selection framework that uses the submodular
mutual information (SMI) functions to select a source data subset similar to the target data for faster training. Additionally, we demonstrate how existing robust subset
selection strategies, such as G LISTER, G RAD M ATCH, and C RAIG, when used with
a held-out query set, fit within our proposed framework and demonstrate the connections with them. Finally, we empirically demonstrate that SDA approaches like
d-SNE, CCSA, and standard Cross-entropy training, when employed together with
O RIENT, achieve a) faster training and b) better performance on the target data.

1

Introduction

The recent success of deep learning frameworks in applications such as image classification [9],
speech recognition [20], and object detection [13] stems primarily from the availability of large
amounts of labeled data. However, due to enormous labeling costs and the need for specialists in
specific domains such as medical imaging, it is not always possible to obtain vast amounts of labeled
data in all situations. On the contrary, training deep models on limited amounts of data can lead to
poor performance due to overfitting [1]. Consequently, where obtaining large amounts of labeled data
is difficult for the target domain, closely related domain (source domain) is used to train the model.
However, this may result in a deep model with suboptimal performance on target domain as a result
of the distribution shift [47, 5, 4, 50], i.e., change of data distribution from source domains to target
domains. A change in the data distribution often renders the features learned by the model on the
source domain irrelevant for the target domain.
To address the problem of distribution shift, many domain adaptation [54, 41] and domain generalization [40] techniques have been proposed in recent years. Domain adaptation methods assume that
some target domain information is available (usually target data), whereas domain generalization methods do not. Domain adaptation (DA) methods can be categorized into unsupervised [15, 12, 32, 52]
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

