METS-CoV: A Dataset of Medical Entity and Targeted
Sentiment on COVID-19 Related Tweets
Peilin Zhou1,2 Zeqiang Wang1,2 Dading Chong3 Zhijiang Guo4
Yining Hua5 Zichang Su1,6 Zhiyang Teng7 Jiageng Wu1,2 Jie Yang1,2∗
1
School of Public Health and the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University, China
2
The Key Laboratory of Intelligent Preventive Medicine of Zhejiang Province, China
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK
5
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, USA
6
Chu Kochen Honors College, Zhejiang University, China
7
School of Engineering, Westlake University, China
{zhoupalin, jieynlp}@gmail.com, {wzq99, suzc,jiagengwu}@zju.edu.cn
1601213984@pku.edu.cn, tengzhiyang@westlake.edu.cn
zg283@cam.ac.uk, yining_hua@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to bring up various topics discussed or debated
on social media. In order to explore the impact of pandemics on people’s lives,
it is crucial to understand the public’s concerns and attitudes towards pandemicrelated entities (e.g., drugs, vaccines) on social media. However, models trained
on existing named entity recognition (NER) or targeted sentiment analysis (TSA)
datasets have limited ability to understand COVID-19-related social media texts
because these datasets are not designed or annotated from a medical perspective.
This paper releases METS-CoV, a dataset containing medical entities and targeted
sentiments from COVID-19-related tweets. METS-CoV contains 10,000 tweets
with 7 types of entities, including 4 medical entity types (Disease, Drug, Symptom,
and Vaccine) and 3 general entity types (Person, Location, and Organization).
To further investigate tweet users’ attitudes toward specific entities, 4 types of
entities (Person, Organization, Drug, and Vaccine) are selected and annotated
with user sentiments, resulting in a targeted sentiment dataset with 9,101 entities
(in 5,278 tweets). To the best of our knowledge, METS-CoV is the first dataset
to collect medical entities and corresponding sentiments of COVID-19-related
tweets. We benchmark the performance of classical machine learning models
and state-of-the-art deep learning models on NER and TSA tasks with extensive
experiments. Results show that the dataset has vast room for improvement for both
NER and TSA tasks. With rich annotations and comprehensive benchmark results,
we believe METS-CoV is a fundamental resource for building better medical social
media understanding tools and facilitating computational social science research,
especially on epidemiological topics. Our data, annotation guidelines, benchmark
models, and source code are publicly available (https://github.com/YLab-O
pen/METS-CoV) to ensure reproducibility.

∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

