Label-invariant Augmentation for Semi-Supervised
Graph Classification

Han Yue

Chunhui Zhang Chuxu Zhang Hongfu Liu
Michtom School of Computer Science
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA
{hanyue,chunhuizhang,chuxuzhang,hongfuliu}@brandeis.edu

Abstract
Recently, contrastiveness-based augmentation surges a new climax in the computer
vision domain, where some operations, including rotation, crop, and flip, combined
with dedicated algorithms, dramatically increase the model generalization and
robustness. Following this trend, some pioneering attempts employ the similar idea
to graph data. Nevertheless, unlike images, it is much more difficult to design reasonable augmentations without changing the nature of graphs. Although exciting,
the current graph contrastive learning does not achieve as promising performance
as visual contrastive learning. We conjecture the current performance of graph
contrastive learning might be limited by the violation of the label-invariant augmentation assumption. In light of this, we propose a label-invariant augmentation
for graph-structured data to address this challenge. Different from the node/edge
modification and subgraph extraction, we conduct the augmentation in the representation space and generate the augmented samples in the most difficult direction
while keeping the label of augmented data the same as the original samples. In
the semi-supervised scenario, we demonstrate our proposed method outperforms
the classical graph neural network based methods and recent graph contrastive
learning on eight benchmark graph-structured data, followed by several in-depth
experiments to further explore the label-invariant augmentation in several aspects.

1

Introduction

Contrastive augmentation aims to expand training data in both volume and diversity in a selfsupervised fashion to increase model robustness and generalization. Common sense and domain
knowledge are employed to design the contrastive augmentation operations. Denoising autoencoder [2, 3] is one of the pioneering studies to apply perturbations to generate contrastive samples
for tablet data, which takes a corrupted input and recovers the original undistorted input. For visual
data, some operations, including rotation, crop, and flip, combined with dedicated algorithms, significantly improve the learning performance in diverse tasks [28, 8, 26, 19, 6]. Treating the augmented
and original samples as positive pairs and the augmented samples from different source samples as
negative pairs, contrastive learning aims to learn the augment-invariant representations by increasing
the similarity of positive pairs and the dissimilarity of negative pairs [5]. These positive pairs increase
the model robustness due to the assumption that the augmented operations preserve the nature of
images and make the augmented samples have consistent labels with the original ones. The negative
pairs work as the instance-level discrimination, which is expected to enhance the model generalization,
but might deteriorate the downstream task since the negative pairs contain the augmented samples
from different source samples but with the same category. The recent BYOL [16] and SimSiam [7]
demonstrate the negative effect of the negative pairs and conclude that the current performance of
contrastive learning can be further boosted even without negative pairs.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

