Defining and Characterizing Reward Hacking

Joar Skalse∗
University of Oxford

Nikolaus H. R. Howe
Mila, Université de Montréal

Dmitrii Krasheninnikov
University of Cambridge

David Krueger∗
University of Cambridge

Abstract
We provide the first formal definition of reward hacking, a phenomenon where
optimizing an imperfect proxy reward function, R̃, leads to poor performance
according to the true reward function, R. We say that a proxy is unhackable if
increasing the expected proxy return can never decrease the expected true return.
Intuitively, it might be possible to create an unhackable proxy by leaving some
terms out of the reward function (making it “narrower”) or overlooking fine-grained
distinctions between roughly equivalent outcomes, but we show this is usually
not the case. A key insight is that the linearity of reward (in state-action visit
counts) makes unhackability a very strong condition. In particular, for the set of all
stochastic policies, two reward functions can only be unhackable if one of them
is constant. We thus turn our attention to deterministic policies and finite sets of
stochastic policies, where non-trivial unhackable pairs always exist, and establish
necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of simplifications, an important
special case of unhackability. Our results reveal a tension between using reward
functions to specify narrow tasks and aligning AI systems with human values.

1

Introduction

It is well known that optimising a proxy can lead to unintended outcomes: a boat spins in circles
collecting “powerups” instead of following the race track in a racing game (Clark and Amodei, 2016);
an evolved circuit listens in on radio signals from nearby computers’ oscillators instead of building
its own (Bird and Layzell, 2002); universities reject the most qualified applicants in order to appear
more selective and boost their ratings (Golden, 2001). In the context of reinforcement learning (RL),
such failures are called reward hacking.
For AI systems that take actions in safety-critical real world environments such as autonomous
vehicles, algorithmic trading, or content recommendation systems, these unintended outcomes can
be catastrophic. This makes it crucial to align autonomous AI systems with their users’ intentions.
Precisely specifying which behaviours are or are not desirable is challenging, however. One approach
to this specification problem is to learn an approximation of the true reward function (Ng et al., 2000;
Ziebart, 2010; Leike et al., 2018). Optimizing a learned proxy reward can be dangerous, however;
for instance, it might overlook side-effects (Krakovna et al., 2018; Turner et al., 2019) or encourage
power-seeking (Turner et al., 2021) behavior. This raises the question motivating our work: When is
it safe to optimise a proxy?
To begin to answer this question, we consider a somewhat simpler one: When could optimising a
proxy lead to worse behaviour? “Optimising”, in this context, does not refer to finding a global,
or even local, optimum, but rather running a search process, such as stochastic gradient descent
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: joar.mvs@gmail.com, david.scott.krueger@gmail.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

