Fast Bayesian Inference with Batch Bayesian
Quadrature via Kernel Recombination
Masaki Adachi∗
Machine Learning Research Group, University of Oxford
Toyota Motor Corporation
masaki@robots.ox.ac.uk

Satoshi Hayakawa∗ , Harald Oberhauser
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford
{hayakawa,oberhauser}@maths.ox.ac.uk

Martin Jørgensen, Michael A. Osborne
Machine Learning Research Group, University of Oxford
{martinj, mosb}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Calculation of Bayesian posteriors and model evidences typically requires numerical integration. Bayesian quadrature (BQ), a surrogate-model-based approach to
numerical integration, is capable of superb sample efficiency, but its lack of parallelisation has hindered its practical applications. In this work, we propose a parallelised
(batch) BQ method, employing techniques from kernel quadrature, that possesses
an empirically exponential convergence rate. Additionally, just as with Nested Sampling, our method permits simultaneous inference of both posteriors and model evidence. Samples from our BQ surrogate model are re-selected to give a sparse set of
samples, via a kernel recombination algorithm, requiring negligible additional time
to increase the batch size. Empirically, we find that our approach significantly outperforms the sampling efficiency of both state-of-the-art BQ techniques and Nested
Sampling in various real-world datasets, including lithium-ion battery analytics.2

1

Introduction

Many applications in science, engineering, and economics involve complex simulations to explain the
structure and dynamics of the process. Such models are derived from knowledge of the mechanisms
and principles underlying the data-generating process, and are critical for scientific hypothesisbuilding and testing. However, dozens of plausible simulators describing the same phenomena often
exist, owing to differing assumptions or levels of approximation. Similar situations can be found in
selection of simulator-based control models, selection of machine learning models on large-scale
datasets, and in many data assimilation applications [28].
In such settings, with multiple competing models, choosing the best model for the dataset is crucial.
Bayesian model evidence gives a clear criteria for such model selection. However, computing
model evidence requires integration over the likelihood, which is challenging, particularly when
the likelihood is non-closed-form and/or expensive. The ascertained model is often applied to
∗
2

Equal contribution
Code: https://github.com/ma921/BASQ

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

