Deep Fourier Up-Sampling

Man Zhou1,2∗, Hu Yu2∗, Jie Huang2 , Feng Zhao2 ,
Jinwei Gu6 , Chen Change Loy3 , Deyu Meng4,5 , Chongyi Li3†
1

Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, China
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
5
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), China
6
SenseBrain Technology (SenseTime Research USA), USA
{manman,yuhu520,hj0117}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn,
gujinwei@sensebrain.ai, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
{ccloy,chongyi.li}@ntu.edu.sg
https://li-chongyi.github.io/FourierUp_files/

Abstract
Existing convolutional neural networks widely adopt spatial down-/up-sampling for
multi-scale modeling. However, spatial up-sampling operators (e.g., interpolation,
transposed convolution, and un-pooling) heavily depend on local pixel attention, incapably exploring the global dependency. In contrast, the Fourier domain obeys the
nature of global modeling according to the spectral convolution theorem. Unlike
the spatial domain that performs up-sampling with the property of local similarity,
up-sampling in the Fourier domain is more challenging as it does not follow such a
local property. In this study, we propose a theoretically sound Deep Fourier UpSampling (FourierUp) to solve these issues. We revisit the relationships between
spatial and Fourier domains and reveal the transform rules on the features of different resolutions in the Fourier domain, which provide key insights for FourierUp’s
designs. FourierUp as a generic operator consists of three key components: 2D discrete Fourier transform, Fourier dimension increase rules, and 2D inverse Fourier
transform, which can be directly integrated with existing networks. Extensive
experiments across multiple computer vision tasks, including object detection,
image segmentation, image de-raining, image dehazing, and guided image superresolution, demonstrate the consistent performance gains obtained by introducing
our FourierUp. Code is available at https://manman1995.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Spatial down-/up-sampling has been widely used in convolutional neural networks for multi-scale
modeling. For example, U-Net [1], a variation of encoder-decoder, employs pooling layers to
reduce the feature resolution in the encoder and then recovers the resolution using up-sampling
operations in the decoder. In addition, the feature pyramid [2–5] and image pyramid [6–9] driven
multi-scale neural networks rely on the down-/up-sampling operation to obtain multi-scale property
and improve modeling capability. However, spatial up-sampling operators (e.g., interpolation,
transposed convolution, and un-pooling) heavily depend on local pixel attention, and thus cannot
* Man Zhou and Hu Yu contribute equally.
†

Corresponding author: Chongyi Li.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

