Uncalibrated Models Can Improve Human-AI
Collaboration
Kailas Vodrahalli
Stanford University
kailasv@stanford.edu

Tobias Gerstenberg
Stanford University
gerstenberg@stanford.edu

James Zou
Stanford University
jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
In many practical applications of AI, an AI model is used as a decision aid for
human users. The AI provides advice that a human (sometimes) incorporates
into their decision-making process. The AI advice is often presented with some
measure of “confidence” that the human can use to calibrate how much they
depend on or trust the advice. In this paper, we present an initial exploration that
suggests showing AI models as more confident than they actually are, even when the
original AI is well-calibrated, can improve human-AI performance (measured as the
accuracy and confidence of the human’s final prediction after seeing the AI advice).
We first train a model to predict human incorporation of AI advice using data from
thousands of human-AI interactions. This enables us to explicitly estimate how to
transform the AI’s prediction confidence, making the AI uncalibrated, in order to
improve the final human prediction. We empirically validate our results across four
different tasks—dealing with images, text and tabular data—involving hundreds
of human participants. We further support our findings with simulation analysis.
Our findings suggest the importance of jointly optimizing the human-AI system as
opposed to the standard paradigm of optimizing the AI model alone.

1

Introduction

In safety-critical settings like medicine, AI is often integrated as interactive feedback, allowing a
human to decide when and to what extent the AI’s “advice” is utilized [29]. For example, in medical
diagnosis tasks, this places the AI in a similar category as lab tests or other exams a doctor may order
to aid in diagnosis. This mitigates the often black box nature of AI algorithms that limit a user’s trust
and usage of AI [6, 24, 34, 18].
Typically, these algorithms are designed and optimized to minimize loss using standard training
objectives independent of the human end user. In this paper, we question this premise and ask
whether a joint optimization of the entire human-AI system is possible. In particular, we revisit
the conventional wisdom that models with calibrated confidence enable more accurate transfer of
prediction uncertainty between models and/or humans [8]. We propose calibrating a model for human
use, with the intuition that humans are often unable to accurately integrate calibration information
correctly and so may benefit from uncalibrated information. This approach is complementary to
existing ideas on how to help humans utilize AI advice (e.g., through some form of explanation
accompanying the advice or through feedback on model/human performance) [36, 14].
We draw on prior work modeling human predictions [30] and assume black box access to an AI
algorithm which provides advice. From data collected on thousands of human interactions, we fit a
model for how humans incorporate (or ignore) AI advice. Using this learned human behavior model,
we optimize a monotonic transformation that modifies the AI’s reported confidence to maximize
human-AI system performance (measured as the human’s final accuracy). We demonstrate first in
simulations and subsequently with real-world data using crowd-sourced human study participants
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

