Semi-supervised Active Linear Regression

Fnu Devvrit∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
devvrit@cs.utexas.edu
Nived Rajaraman∗
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
nived.rajaraman@berkeley.edu
Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research & Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
pranjal.awasthi@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Labeled data often comes at a high cost as it may require recruiting human labelers
or running costly‘ experiments. At the same time, in many practical scenarios, one
already has access to a partially labeled, potentially biased dataset that can help
with the learning task at hand. Motivated by such settings, we formally initiate a
study of semi-supervised active learning through the frame of linear regression.
Here, the learner has access to a dataset X ∈ R(nun +nlab )×d composed of nun
unlabeled examples that a learner can actively query, and nlab examples labeled a
priori. Denoting the true labels by Y ∈ Rnun +nlab , the learner’s objective is to find
βb ∈ Rd such that,
kX βb − Y k22 ≤ (1 + ) min kXβ − Y k22
β∈Rd

(1)

while querying the labels of as few unlabeled points as possible. In this paper,
we introduce an instance dependent parameter called the reduced rank, denoted
RX , and propose an efficient algorithm with query complexity O(RX /). This
result directly implies improved upper bounds for two important special cases: (i)
active ridge regression, and (ii) active kernel ridge regression, where the reducedrank equates to the statistical dimension, sdλ and effective dimension, dλ of the
problem respectively, where λ ≥ 0 denotes the regularization parameter. Finally,
we introduce a distributional version of the problem as a special case of the agnostic
formulation we consider earlier; here, for every X, we prove a matching instancewise lower bound of Ω(RX /) on the query complexity of any algorithm.

1

Introduction

Classification and regression are the cornerstone of machine learning. Often these tasks are carried
out in a supervised learning manner - a learner collects many examples and their labels, and then
runs an optimization algorithm to minimize a loss function and learn a model. However, the process
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

