GOOD: A Graph Out-of-Distribution Benchmark

Shurui Gui∗, Xiner Li* , Limei Wang, Shuiwang Ji
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
{shurui.gui,lxe,limei,sji}@tamu.edu

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) learning deals with scenarios in which training and
test data follow different distributions. Although general OOD problems have
been intensively studied in machine learning, graph OOD is only an emerging
area of research. Currently, there lacks a systematic benchmark tailored to graph
OOD method evaluation. In this work, we aim at developing an OOD benchmark,
known as GOOD, for graphs specifically. We explicitly make distinctions between
covariate and concept shifts and design data splits that accurately reflect different
shifts. We consider both graph and node prediction tasks as there are key differences
in designing shifts. Overall, GOOD contains 11 datasets with 17 domain selections.
When combined with covariate, concept, and no shifts, we obtain 51 different splits.
We provide performance results on 10 commonly used baseline methods with 10
random runs. This results in 510 dataset-model combinations in total. Our results
show significant performance gaps between in-distribution and OOD settings. Our
results also shed light on different performance trends between covariate and
concept shifts by different methods. Our GOOD benchmark is a growing project
and expects to expand in both quantity and variety of resources as the area develops.
The GOOD benchmark can be accessed via https://github.com/divelab/GOOD/.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, training and test data are commonly assumed to be i.i.d.. Models designed
under this assumption may not perform well when the i.i.d. assumption does not hold. The area
of out-of-distribution (OOD) learning deals with scenarios in which training and test data follow
different distributions. Two commonly studied OOD settings are covariate shift and concept shift.
Over the years, multiple OOD methods have been proposed [11, 43, 3, 40, 24]. To facilitate
evaluations, several benchmarks have been curated, including DomainBed [16], OoD-Bench [52],
and WILDS [23]. Although both general OOD problems and graph analysis [22, 12, 45, 51, 29] have
been intensively studied, graph OOD is only an emerging area of research [49, 48, 59, 6]. Some initial
attempts have been made to curate graph OOD benchmarks [20, 9]. However, existing benchmarks
lack in several aspects, as detailed in Section 2.
Covariate shift and concept shift. Distribution shifts can generally be defined as two types; i.e.,
covariate shift and concept shift (drift) [38, 35, 47]. Formally, in supervised learning, a model is
trained to predict an output Y ∈ Y given an input X ∈ X , also known as a covariate variable. The
output Y is categorical in classification and continuous in regression problems. In multi-task learning,
the output Y becomes a vector, and we consider each task separately. Since the joint distribution
P (Y, X) can be written as P (Y |X)P (X), two types of OOD problems are commonly considered,
namely covariate and concept shifts. In covariate shift, the input distributions have been shifted
between training and test data. Formally, P train (X) ̸= P test (X) and P train (Y |X) = P test (Y |X),
∗

Equal contributions

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

