Robust Models are less Over-Confident
Julia Grabinski
Fraunhofer ITWM, Kaiserslautern
Visual Computing, University of Siegen
julia.grabinski@itwm.fraunhofer.de
Janis Keuper
Fraunhofer ITWM, Kaiserslautern
IMLA, Offenburg University

Paul Gavrikov
IMLA, Offenburg University

Margret Keuper
University of Siegen
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus Saarbrücken

Abstract
Despite the success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in many academic
benchmarks for computer vision tasks, their application in the real-world is still
facing fundamental challenges. One of these open problems is the inherent lack of
robustness, unveiled by the striking effectiveness of adversarial attacks. Current
attack methods are able to manipulate the network’s prediction by adding specific
but small amounts of noise to the input. In turn, adversarial training (AT) aims to
achieve robustness against such attacks and ideally a better model generalization
ability by including adversarial samples in the trainingset. However, an in-depth
analysis of the resulting robust models beyond adversarial robustness is still pending. In this paper, we empirically analyze a variety of adversarially trained models
that achieve high robust accuracies when facing state-of-the-art attacks and we
show that AT has an interesting side-effect: it leads to models that are significantly
less overconfident with their decisions, even on clean data than non-robust models.
Further, our analysis of robust models shows that not only AT but also the model’s
building blocks (like activation functions and pooling) have a strong influence on
the models’ prediction confidences.
Data & Project website: https://github.com/GeJulia/robustness_
confidences_evaluation

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been shown to successfully solve problems across
various tasks and domains. However, distribution shifts in the input data can have a severe impact on
the prediction performance. In real-world applications, these shifts may be caused by a multitude
of reasons including corruption due to weather conditions, camera settings, noise, and maliciously
crafted perturbations to the input data intended to fool the network (adversarial attacks). In recent
years, a vast line of research (e.g. [25, 36, 44]) has been devoted to solving robustness issues,
highlighting a multitude of causes for the limited generalization ability of networks and potential
solutions to facilitate the training of better models.
A second, yet equally important issue that hampers the deployment of deep learning based models
in practical applications is the lack of calibration concerning prediction confidences. In fact, most
models are overly confident in their predictions, even if they are wrong [31, 45, 57]. Specifically,
most conventionally trained models are unaware of their own lack of expertise, i.e. they are trained to
make confident predictions in any scenario, even if the test data is sampled from a previously unseen
domain. Adversarial examples seem to leverage this weakness, as they are known to not only fool the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

