RSA: Reducing Semantic Shift from Aggressive
Augmentations for Self-supervised Learning

Yingbin Bai1 Erkun Yang2 Zhaoqing Wang1
Yuxuan Du
Bo Han4 Cheng Deng2 Dadong Wang5 Tongliang Liu1 ∗
3

1

TML Lab, The University of Sydney; 2 Xidian University; 3 JD Explore Academy;
4
Hong Kong Baptist University; 5 CSIRO

Abstract
Most recent self-supervised learning methods learn visual representation by contrasting different augmented views of images. Compared with supervised learning,
more aggressive augmentations have been introduced to further improve the diversity of training pairs. However, aggressive augmentations may distort images’
structures leading to a severe semantic shift problem that augmented views of
the same image may not share the same semantics, thus degrading the transfer
performance. To address this problem, we propose a new SSL paradigm, which
counteracts the impact of semantic shift by balancing the role of weak and aggressively augmented pairs. Specifically, semantically inconsistent pairs are of
minority, and we treat them as noisy pairs. Note that deep neural networks (DNNs)
have a crucial memorization effect that DNNs tend to first memorize clean (majority) examples before overfitting to noisy (minority) examples. Therefore, we
set a relatively large weight for aggressively augmented data pairs at the early
learning stage. With the training going on, the model begins to overfit noisy pairs.
Accordingly, we gradually reduce the weights of aggressively augmented pairs. In
doing so, our method can better embrace aggressive augmentations and neutralize
the semantic shift problem. Experiments show that our model achieves 73.1%
top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K with ResNet-50 for 200 epochs, which is a 2.5%
improvement over BYOL. Moreover, experiments also demonstrate that the learned
representations can transfer well for various downstream tasks. Code is released at:
https://github.com/tmllab/RSA.

1

Introduction

A golden law in the context of computer vision is utilizing tremendous annotated data to learn good
visual representations [58, 26]. Unfortunately, collecting annotated data with accurate labels is
generally laborious, expensive [52, 56], and even infeasible [22]. To this end, various approaches
have been proposed to learn such representations from unlabelled visual data, usually by performing
visual pretext tasks. Among them, self-supervised learning methods [6, 7, 46, 9] based on contrastive
loss have recently shown great promise, achieving state-of-the-art performance.
Representative contrastive methods are generally trained by maximizing agreement between differently augmented views of the same image (positive pairs), and increasing the distance between
augmented views from different images (negative pairs) [49, 6, 17]. Compared with supervised
learning, these works highlight the role of data augmentation for SSL and design more aggressive
augmentation operations. Here, we refer aggressive augmentations as the operations that can possibly
change the semantics of images, such as grayscale, color jitter, and Gaussian blur. Other used
∗

Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

