ToDD: Topological Compound Fingerprinting in
Computer-Aided Drug Discovery

Andac Demir∗
Novartis
andac.demir@novartis.com
Ignacio Segovia-Dominguez
University of Texas at Dallas
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Caltech

Baris Coskunuzer∗
University of Texas at Dallas
coskunuz@utdallas.edu

Yuzhou Chen
Temple University

Yulia Gel
University of Texas at Dallas
National Science Foundation

Bulent Kiziltan
Novartis
bulent.kiziltan@novartis.com

Abstract
In computer-aided drug discovery (CADD), virtual screening (VS) is used for
identifying the drug candidates that are most likely to bind to a molecular target
in a large library of compounds. Most VS methods to date have focused on using
canonical compound representations (e.g., SMILES strings, Morgan fingerprints)
or generating alternative fingerprints of the compounds by training progressively
more complex variational autoencoders (VAEs) and graph neural networks (GNNs).
Although VAEs and GNNs led to significant improvements in VS performance,
these methods suffer from reduced performance when scaling to large virtual compound datasets. The performance of these methods has shown only incremental
improvements in the past few years. To address this problem, we developed a novel
method using multiparameter persistence (MP) homology that produces topological
fingerprints of the compounds as multidimensional vectors. Our primary contribution is framing the VS process as a new topology-based graph ranking problem
by partitioning a compound into chemical substructures informed by the periodic
properties of its atoms and extracting their persistent homology features at multiple
resolution levels. We show that the margin loss fine-tuning of pretrained Triplet
networks attains highly competitive results in differentiating between compounds
in the embedding space and ranking their likelihood of becoming effective drug
candidates. We further establish theoretical guarantees for the stability properties
of our proposed MP signatures, and demonstrate that our models, enhanced by the
MP signatures, outperform state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets by a
wide and highly statistically significant margin (e.g., 93% gain for Cleves-Jain and
54% gain for DUD-E Diverse dataset).

1

Introduction

Drug discovery is the early phase of the pharmaceutical R&D pipeline where machine learning (ML)
is making a paradigm-shifting impact [31, 91]. Traditionally, early phases of biomedical research
involve the identification of targets for a disease of interest, followed by high-throughput screening
*

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

