Delving into Sequential Patches for Deepfake Detection
Jiazhi Guan1,2 , Hang Zhou2 , Zhibin Hong2 , Errui Ding2 ,
Jingdong Wang2 , Chengbin Quan1 , Youjian Zhao1,3∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc. 3 Zhongguancun Laboratory
{guanjz20@mails., quancb@, zhaoyoujian@}tsinghua.edu.cn
{zhouhang09, dingerrui, wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract
Recent advances in face forgery techniques produce nearly visually untraceable
deepfake videos, which could be leveraged with malicious intentions. As a result, researchers have been devoted to deepfake detection. Previous studies have
identified the importance of local low-level cues and temporal information in pursuit to generalize well across deepfake methods, however, they still suffer from
robustness problem against post-processings. In this work, we propose the Local& Temporal-aware Transformer-based Deepfake Detection (LTTD) framework,
which adopts a local-to-global learning protocol with a particular focus on the
valuable temporal information within local sequences. Specifically, we propose a
Local Sequence Transformer (LST), which models the temporal consistency on sequences of restricted spatial regions, where low-level information is hierarchically
enhanced with shallow layers of learned 3D filters. Based on the local temporal
embeddings, we then achieve the final classification in a global contrastive way.
Extensive experiments on popular datasets validate that our approach effectively
spots local forgery cues and achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

With the development of face forgery methods [1, 25, 26, 66, 28, 23, 37], an enormous amount
of fake videos (a.k.a deepfakes) have raised non-neglectable concerns on privacy preservation and
information security. To this end, researches have been devoted to the reliable tagging of deepfakes
in order to block the propagation of malicious information. However, it is still an open problem due
to the limited generalization of detection methods and the continuous advances in deepfake creation.
Earlier studies [7, 34, 4, 13, 14, 63, 45, 69] devote efforts to enhance general Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) for identifying clear semantic distortions in deepfakes. Recent methods pay
attention to the temporal inconsistency problem [6, 33, 21, 58, 51, 60, 50, 5], yet most of them
fall into semantic motion understanding (e. g., detecting abnormal eye blinking, phoneme-viseme
mismatches, aberrant landmark fluctuation). These methods are able to learn specific forgery patterns,
however, the remarkable visual forgery cues are expected to be gradually eliminated during the
continuous arms race between forgers and detectors. As a result, the generalizability of previous
methods is typically unsatisfactory when encountering deepfakes generated by unseen techniques.
On the other hand, the importance of low-level information is identified for tackling the generalization
problem. A group of studies are developed using hand-made low-level filters (e. g., DCT [44, 19, 29],
steganalysis features [67], SRM [40]) to better capture subtle differences between generated textures
and the natural ones. However, methods depending on recognizable low-level patterns would become
less effective on degraded data with commonly applied post-processing procedures like visual
compression [39, 21, 65], which indicates the lack of robustness.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

