A Simple Approach to Automated Spectral Clustering

Jicong Fan1,2 , Yiheng Tu3,4 , Zhao Zhang5∗, Mingbo Zhao6 , Haijun Zhang7
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
3
Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
5
Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 6 Donghua University, Shanghai
7
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn yihengtu@gmail.com cszzhang@gmail.com
mzhao4@dhu.edu.cn hjzhang@hit.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The performance of spectral clustering heavily relies on the quality of affinity
matrix. A variety of affinity-matrix-construction (AMC) methods have been proposed but they have hyperparameters to determine beforehand, which requires
strong experience and leads to difficulty in real applications, especially when the
inter-cluster similarity is high and/or the dataset is large. In addition, we often
need to choose different AMC methods for different datasets, which still depends
on experience. To solve these two challenging problems, in this paper, we present
a simple yet effective method for automated spectral clustering. First, we propose
to find the most reliable affinity matrix via grid search or Bayesian optimization
among a set of candidates given by different AMC methods with different hyperparameters, where the reliability is quantified by the relative-eigen-gap of graph
Laplacian introduced in this paper. Second, we propose a fast and accurate AMC
method based on least squares representation and thresholding and prove its effectiveness theoretically. Finally, we provide a large-scale extension for the automated spectral clustering method, of which the time complexity is linear with the
number of data points. Extensive experiments of natural image clustering show
that our method is more versatile, accurate, and efficient than baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Clustering is an important approach to data mining and knowledge discovery. Particularly, spectral
clustering [Weiss, 1999; Shi and Malik, 2000; Ng et al., 2002; Von Luxburg, 2007] has superior
performance than k-means clustering [Steinhaus and others, 1956], hierarchical clustering [Johnson,
1967], DBSCAN [Ester et al., 1996], and mixtures of probabilistic principal component analyzers
[Tipping and Bishop, 1999] in many applications. Roughly speaking, spectral clustering consists
of two steps: 1) construct an affinity matrix in which each element denotes the similarity between
two data points; 2) perform normalized cut [Shi and Malik, 2000] on the graph corresponding to the
affinity matrix. K-nearest neighbors (K-NN) and Gaussian kernel k(x, y) = exp(−kx−yk2 /(2ς 2 ))
are two popular methods to construct affinity matrices, where k and ς are hyperparameters.
As the performance of spectral clustering heavily relies on the quality of affinity matrix, in recent
years, a variety of methods have been proposed to construct or learn affinity matrices for spectral
clustering. Many of them are in the framework of self-expressive [Roweis and Saul, 2000; Elhamifar
and Vidal, 2013] model, i.e., minimizeC 21 kX − XCk2F + λR(C). Here the columns of X ∈
Rm×n are the data points drawn from a union of subspaces. C ∈ Rn×n is a coefficient matrix.
R(C) denotes a regularization operator on C. λ is a hyperparameter to be determined in advance.
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

