Revisiting Non-Parametric Matching Cost Volumes for
Robust and Generalizable Stereo Matching
Kelvin Cheng† , Tianfu Wu‡ and Christopher Healey†
CS† and ECE‡ at NC State University, Raleigh, NC 27695
{kbcheng, twu19, healey}@ncsu.edu

Abstract
Stereo matching is a classic challenging problem in computer vision, which has
recently witnessed remarkable progress by Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). This
paradigm shift leads to two interesting and entangled questions that have not
been addressed well. First, it is unclear whether stereo matching DNNs that are
trained from scratch really learn to perform matching well. This paper studies this
problem from the lens of white-box adversarial attacks. It presents a method of
learning stereo-constrained photometrically-consistent attacks, which by design
are weaker adversarial attacks, and yet can cause catastrophic performance drop for
those DNNs. This observation suggests that they may not actually learn to perform
matching well in the sense that they should otherwise achieve potentially even better
after stereo-constrained perturbations are introduced. Second, stereo matching
DNNs are typically trained under the simulation-to-real (Sim2Real) pipeline due
to the data hungriness of DNNs. Thus, alleviating the impacts of the Sim2Real
photometric gap in stereo matching DNNs becomes a pressing need. Towards
joint adversarially robust and domain generalizable stereo matching, this paper
proposes to learn DNN-contextualized binary-pattern-driven non-parametric costvolumes. It leverages the perspective of learning the cost aggregation via DNNs,
and presents a simple yet expressive design that is fully end-to-end trainable,
without resorting to specific aggregation inductive biases. In experiments, the
proposed method is tested in the SceneFlow dataset, the KITTI2015 dataset, and
the Middlebury dataset. It significantly improves the adversarial robustness, while
retaining accuracy performance comparable to state-of-the-art methods. It also
shows a better Sim2Real generalizability. Our code and pretrained models are
released at this Github Repo.

1

Introduction

Stereo matching remains a long-standing problem in computer vision that has been studied for several
decades. As shown in the left of Fig. 1, given a pair of (rectified) stereo images, the reference left
image I L and the right image I R , for a pixel I L (x, y), its corresponding pixel in I R is constrained to
be at I R (x D(x, y), y), where D(x, y) is called the disparity of the pixel (x, y) in the reference
f ·b
left image. The disparity is inversely proportional to the depth Z(x, y), D(x, y) = Z(x,y)
, where
f is the focal length of the left camera and b is the baseline (i.e., the distance between the two
cameras). High-performing stereo matching will enable highly reliable and cost effective depth
estimation from stereo images without leveraging expensive Lidar sensors, which has great potential
in a wide range of applications such as autonomous driving and robot autonomy. To infer the disparity,
the basic approach is to first compute the matching costs between I L (x, y) and I R (x d, y) for
different values of the disparity d and then find the best match that corresponds to the minimum cost.
Due to occlusions and textureless regions, the pixel correspondences can not be solved individually
and the disparity map needs to be inferred in its entirety via prior-constrained (e.g., local disparity
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

