Multi-modal Grouping Network for
Weakly-Supervised Audio-Visual Video Parsing
Shentong Mo
Carnegie Mellon University

Yapeng Tian⇤
University of Texas at Dallas

Abstract
The audio-visual video parsing task aims to parse a video into modality- and
category-aware temporal segments. Previous work mainly focuses on weaklysupervised approaches, which learn from video-level event labels. During training, they do not know which modality perceives and meanwhile which temporal
segment contains the video event. Since there is no explicit grouping in the
existing frameworks, the modality and temporal uncertainties make these methods suffer from false predictions. For instance, segments in the same category
could be predicted in different event classes. Learning compact and discriminative multi-modal subspaces is essential for mitigating the issue. To this end, in
this paper, we propose a novel Multi-modal Grouping Network, namely MGN,
for explicitly semantic-aware grouping. Specifically, MGN aggregates eventaware unimodal features through unimodal grouping in terms of learnable categorical embedding tokens. Furthermore, it leverages the cross-modal grouping for
modality-aware prediction to match the video-level target. Our simple framework
achieves improving results against previous baselines on weakly-supervised audiovisual video parsing. In addition, our MGN is much more lightweight, using only
47.2% of the parameters of baselines (17 MB vs. 36 MB). Code is available at
https://github.com/stoneMo/MGN.

1

Introduction

Humans understand the surrounding environment by integrating signals from different senses. In our
daily life, sound and sight are two of the most commonly used modalities, which have drawn much
attention from researchers to explore computational audio-visual scene understanding.
Previous audio-visual work [1, 2] usually assumes audio and visual data are temporally aligned.
However, the alignment does not always exist in real-world videos. For example, sounding objects in
many videos are outside of the field-of-view (FoV). For these non-aligned cases, audio signals become
more reliable in understanding the events of interest. In this work, we address the audio-visual video
parsing (AVVP) task [3] that aims to parse a video into temporal event segments and predict the
audible, visible, or audio-visible event categories.
Existing approaches [3, 4, 5] usually focus on learning to leverage the unimodal and cross-modal
temporal contexts from weak supervisions. HAN [3] introduced a simple Multimodal Multiple
Instance Learning framework with cross-modal and self-modal attention layers to utilize the videolevel labels. Recent state-of-the-art methods usually use the HAN as the baseline and modify it
to further improve parsing performance. Particularly, contrastive learning and label refinement
are proposed in Wu and Yang [4], where they adopted a contrastive loss to enforce the temporal
alignment between the audio and visual features at the same timestamp and augmented training
data with modality-aware event labels generation. Furthermore, Lin et al. [5] proposed to leverage
⇤

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

