Large-scale Optimization of Partial AUC in a Range of
False Positive Rates
Qihang Lin
Tipple College of Business
The University of Iowa
qihang-lin@uiowa.edu

Yao Yao
Department of Mathematics
The University of Iowa
yao-yao-2@uiowa.edu

Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Texas A&M University
tianbao-yang@tamu.edu

Abstract
The area under the ROC curve (AUC) is one of the most widely used performance
measures for classification models in machine learning. However, it summarizes
the true positive rates (TPRs) over all false positive rates (FPRs) in the ROC space,
which may include the FPRs with no practical relevance in some applications. The
partial AUC, as a generalization of the AUC, summarizes only the TPRs over a
specific range of the FPRs and is thus a more suitable performance measure in
many real-world situations. Although partial AUC optimization in a range of FPRs
had been studied, existing algorithms are not scalable to big data and not applicable
to deep learning. To address this challenge, we cast the problem into a non-smooth
difference-of-convex (DC) program for any smooth predictive functions (e.g.,
deep neural networks), which allowed us to develop an efficient approximated
gradient descent method based on the Moreau envelope smoothing technique,
inspired by recent advances in non-smooth DC optimization. To increase the
efficiency of large data processing, we used an efficient stochastic block coordinate
update in our algorithm. Our proposed algorithm can also be used to minimize
the sum of ranked range loss, which also lacks efficient solvers. We established
a complexity of Õ(1/ϵ6 ) for finding a nearly ϵ-critical solution. Finally, we
numerically demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms in training
both linear models and deep neural networks for partial AUC maximization and
sum of ranked range loss minimization.

1

Introduction

The area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) is one of the most widely
used performance measures for classifiers in machine learning, especially when the data is imbalanced
between the classes [7, 19]. Typically, the classifier produces a score for each data point. Then a data
point is classified as positive if its score is above a chosen threshold; otherwise, it is classified as
negative. Varying the threshold will change the true positive rate (TPR) and the false positive rate
(FPR) of the classifier. The ROC curve shows the TPR as a function of the FPR that corresponds
to the same threshold. Hence, maximizing the AUC of a classifier is essentially maximizing the
classifier’s average TPR over all FPRs from zero to one. However, for some applications, some FPR
regions have no practical relevance. So does the TPR over those regions. For example, in clinical
practice, a high FPR in diagnostic tests often results in a high monetary cost, so people may only
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

