Improved techniques for deterministic l2 robustness

Sahil Singla

Soheil Feizi

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
ssingla@umd.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
sfeizi@umd.edu

Abstract
Training convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with a strict 1-Lipschitz constraint
under the l2 norm is useful for adversarial robustness, interpretable gradients and
stable training. 1-Lipschitz CNNs are usually designed by enforcing each layer to
have an orthogonal Jacobian matrix (for all inputs) to prevent the gradients from
vanishing during backpropagation. However, their performance often significantly
lags behind that of heuristic methods to enforce Lipschitz constraints where the
resulting CNN is not provably 1-Lipschitz. In this work, we reduce this gap by introducing (a) a procedure to certify robustness of 1-Lipschitz CNNs by replacing the
last linear layer with a 1-hidden layer MLP that significantly improves their performance for both standard and provably robust accuracy, (b) a method to significantly
reduce the training time per epoch for Skew Orthogonal Convolution (SOC) layers
(> 30% reduction for deeper networks) and (c) a class of pooling layers using the
mathematical property that the l2 distance of an input to a manifold is 1-Lipschitz.
Using these methods, we significantly advance the state-of-the-art for standard and
provable robust accuracies on CIFAR-10 (gains of +1.79% and +3.82%) and similarly on CIFAR-100 (+3.78% and +4.75%) across all networks. Code is available
at https://github.com/singlasahil14/improved_l2_robustness.

1

Introduction

The Lipschitz constant 1 of a neural network f : Rd → Rc , denoted by Lip(f ), controls the change
in the output divided by change in the input (both changes measured in the l2 norm). Previous
work provides evidence that a small Lipschitz constant is useful for interpretable saliency maps
[Tsipras et al., 2018], generalization bounds [Long and Sedghi, 2020], Wasserstein distance estimation
[Villani, 2008], adversarial robustness [Szegedy et al., 2014] and preventing gradient explosion during
backpropagation [Xiao et al., 2018]. Several prior works [Miyato et al., 2018, Gulrajani et al., 2017]
use heuristic methods to enforce Lipschitz constraints to successfully address problems such as
stabilizing GAN training. However, these methods do not enforce a guaranteed lipschitz bound and it
remains challenging to achieve strong results with provable guarantees.
Using the composition property i.e. Lip(g ◦ h) ≤ Lip(g) Lip(h), we can construct a 1-Lipschitz
neural network by constraining each layer to be 1-Lipschitz. However, a key difficulty with this
approach is that because a 1-Lipschitz layer can only reduce the gradient norm during backpropagation,
for deeper networks, this results in small gradient values for layers closer to the input making training
slow and difficult. To address this problem, Anil et al. [2018] introduce Gradient Norm Preserving
(GNP) architectures where each layer preserves the gradient norm during backpropagation. For
1-Lipschitz Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), this involves using orthogonal convolutions
(convolution layers with an orthogonal Jacobian matrix) [Li et al., 2019b, Trockman and Kolter,
1

In this work, we assume the Lipschitz constant under the l2 norm.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

