Pluralistic Image Completion with
Gaussian Mixture Models
Xiaobo Xia1⇤ Wenhao Yang2⇤ Jie Ren3
Yewen Li4 Yibing Zhan5 Bo Han6 Tongliang Liu1†

4

1
TML Lab, University of Sydney 2 Nanjing University
Nanyang Technological University 5 JD Explore Academy

3

6

University of Edinburgh
Hong Kong Baptist University

Abstract
Pluralistic image completion focuses on generating both visually realistic and
diverse results for image completion. Prior methods enjoy the empirical successes
of this task. However, their used constraints for pluralistic image completion are
argued to be not well interpretable and unsatisfactory from two aspects. First, the
constraints for visual reality can be weakly correlated to the objective of image
completion or even redundant. Second, the constraints for diversity are designed to
be task-agnostic, which causes the constraints to not work well. In this paper, to
address the issues, we propose an end-to-end probabilistic method. Specifically,
we introduce a unified probabilistic graph model that represents the complex
interactions in image completion. The entire procedure of image completion is
then mathematically divided into several sub-procedures, which helps efficient
enforcement of constraints. The sub-procedure directly related to pluralistic results
is identified, where the interaction is established by a Gaussian mixture model
(GMM). The inherent parameters of GMM are task-related, which are optimized
adaptively during training, while the number of its primitives can control the
diversity of results conveniently. We formally establish the effectiveness of our
method and demonstrate it with comprehensive experiments. The implementation
is available at https://github.com/tmllab/PICMM.

1

Introduction

Pluralistic image completion refers to the task of filling in the missing region of an incomplete image,
so as to produce visually realistic and diverse image completion solutions [59–61]. Different from
single image completion [39, 12, 55, 50] that learns a deterministic mapping from an incomplete
image to a complete image, and produces a unique result, pluralistic image completion can generate
various results with visually realistic contents. Pluralistic image completion follows the fact that
image completion is a highly subjective process and benefits a series of applications such as photo
restoration [27], object removal [13], and transmission error concealment [37].
Pluralistic image completion is complicated and challenging. The state-of-the-art methods encode
images to latent features. To constrain the visual reality of results, heuristic constraints are introduced, e.g., the perceptual loss [27] and attention module [59, 44]. To constrain the diversity of
results, the distribution of latent features is assumed to be a unimodal Gaussian distribution with
predefined parameters [59]. Image completion is performed by sampling from the unimodal Gaussian
distribution.
Although the above paradigm enjoys empirical successes of pluralistic image completion, it is not
well interpretable and unsatisfactory in practice. We detail the issues from two aspects. First, the
⇤
†

The first two authors made equal contributions.
Corresponding author: Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

