Privacy Induces Robustness:
Information-Computation Gaps and Sparse Mean
Estimation
Kristian Georgiev
MIT EECS
Cambridge, MA 02139
krisgrg@mit.edu

Samuel B. Hopkins
MIT EECS
Cambridge, MA 02139
samhop@mit.edu

Abstract
We establish a simple connection between robust and differentially-private algorithms: private mechanisms which perform well with very high probability are
automatically robust in the sense that they retain accuracy even if a constant fraction
of the samples they receive are adversarially corrupted. Since optimal mechanisms
typically achieve these high success probabilities, our results imply that optimal
private mechanisms for many basic statistics problems are robust.
We investigate the consequences of this observation for both algorithms and computational complexity across different statistical problems. Assuming the BrennanBresler secret-leakage planted clique conjecture, we demonstrate a fundamental
tradeoff between computational efficiency, privacy leakage, and success probability
for sparse mean estimation. Private algorithms which match this tradeoff are not
yet known – we achieve that (up to polylogarithmic factors) in a polynomially-large
range of parameters via the Sum-of-Squares method.
To establish an information-computation gap for private sparse mean estimation, we
also design new (exponential-time) mechanisms using fewer samples than efficient
algorithms must use. Finally, we give evidence for privacy-induced informationcomputation gaps for several other statistics and learning problems, including PAC
learning parity functions and estimation of the mean of a multivariate Gaussian.

1

Introduction

Avoiding leakage of sensitive data and robustness to data corruption or model misspecification are
often key goals for designers of statistical estimators. Both these properties admit mathematical
formalizations, and a great deal of recent work in (algorithmic) statistics has gone into designing and
analyzing algorithms that satisfy them.
Differential privacy (DP) is the gold-standard formal definition of privacy for algorithms processing
sensitive data [DMNS06]. DP requires that the distribution of outputs of an algorithm (or “mechanism”) 𝑀 is insensitive to exchanging a small number of individuals in its input dataset. It offers
such strong guarantees against privacy leakage that in addition to its ongoing adoption in industry,
the US Census Bureau employs DP to satisfy its legal mandate to protect privacy [AACM+ 22].
The 𝜂-contamination model is a stringent formalization of robustness against model misspecification.
It generalizes the classical model of i.i.d. samples: a dataset is 𝜂-corrupted for some 𝜂 > 0 if it is
first drawn i.i.d, but then an 𝜂-fraction of samples have been arbitrarily corrupted by a malicious
adversary (who may look at the whole dataset) [Hub65, Tuk75, Hub11]. An 𝜂-robust algorithm is
one which maintains guarantees of accuracy when given 𝜂-corrupted samples.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

