On Image Segmentation With Noisy Labels:
Characterization and Volume Properties of the
Optimal Solutions to Accuracy and Dice

Marcus Nordström ∗
Department of Mathematics
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
marcno@kth.se

Henrik Hult
Department of Mathematics
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
hult@kth.se

Jonas Söderberg
Department of Machine Learning
RaySearch Laboratories
Stockholm, Sweden
jonas.soderberg@raysearchlabs.com

Fredrik Löfman
Department of Machine Learning
RaySearch Laboratories
Stockholm, Sweden
fredrik.lofman@raysearchlabs.com

Abstract
We study two of the most popular performance metrics in medical image segmentation, Accuracy and Dice, when the target labels are noisy. For both metrics,
several statements related to characterization and volume properties of the set of
optimal segmentations are proved, and associated experiments are provided. Our
main insights are: (i) the volume of the solutions to both metrics may deviate
significantly from the expected volume of the target, (ii) the volume of a solution
to Accuracy is always less than or equal to the volume of a solution to Dice and
(iii) the optimal solutions to both of these metrics coincide when the set of feasible
segmentations is constrained to the set of segmentations with the volume equal to
the expected volume of the target.

1

Introduction

One of the most central problems in medical image analysis is to identify the region of an image
associated with a certain target structure. This problem, referred to as image segmentation or
delineation, is often very time consuming to solve manually. Consequently, there is great interest
in the development of methods that can assist in automation of the procedure. Since 2015, it has
become increasingly popular to address the segmentation problem using machine learning based
methods, and in particular, fully convolutions neural networks with U-net architecture. Such methods
commonly dominate the winning submissions to segmentation contests and are backed by a large
base of supporting literature [6, 8, 13, 19, 28, 32].
Despite the success, performance of these methods will, like any machine learning method, depend
on the quality of the available data [4, 37]. Since it is well known that the data commonly used in
practice is produced by medical practitioners that delineate structures in an inconsistent manner [25],
it is important to understand the impact of label noise. One way to study the influence of label
noise is to consider how the noise impacts segmentations that are theoretically optimal with respect
to the metric used for measuring performance. Even if theoretically optimal solutions may not be
∗

Author is also affiliated with RaySearch Laboratories.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

