Influencing Long-Term Behavior in
Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
Dong-Ki Kim1,3

Matthew Riemer2,3,4

Miao Liu2,3

dkkim93@mit.edu

mdriemer@us.ibm.com

miao.liu1@us.ibm.com

Jakob N. Foerster5

Michael Everett1,3

Chuangchuang Sun1,3

jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

mfe@mit.edu

ccsun1@mit.edu

Gerald Tesauro2,3

Jonathan P. How1,3

gtesauro@us.ibm.com

jhow@mit.edu

Abstract
The main challenge of multiagent reinforcement learning is the difficulty of learning useful policies in the presence of other simultaneously learning agents whose
changing behaviors jointly affect the environment’s transition and reward dynamics.
An effective approach that has recently emerged for addressing this non-stationarity
is for each agent to anticipate the learning of other agents and influence the evolution of future policies towards desirable behavior for its own benefit. Unfortunately,
previous approaches for achieving this suffer from myopic evaluation, considering
only a finite number of policy updates. As such, these methods can only influence
transient future policies rather than achieving the promise of scalable equilibrium
selection approaches that influence the behavior at convergence. In this paper, we
propose a principled framework for considering the limiting policies of other agents
as time approaches infinity. Specifically, we develop a new optimization objective
that maximizes each agent’s average reward by directly accounting for the impact
of its behavior on the limiting set of policies that other agents will converge to.
Our paper characterizes desirable solution concepts within this problem setting and
provides practical approaches for optimizing over possible outcomes. As a result
of our farsighted objective, we demonstrate better long-term performance than
state-of-the-art baselines across a suite of diverse multiagent benchmark domains.

1

Introduction

Learning in multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) is fundamentally difficult because an agent
interacts with other simultaneously learning agents in a shared environment [1]. The joint learning of
agents induces non-stationary environment dynamics from the perspective of each agent, requiring
an agent to adapt its behavior with respect to potentially unknown changes in the policies of other
agents [2]. Notably, non-stationary policies will converge to a recurrent set of joint policies by the
end of learning. In practice, this converged joint policy can correspond to a game-theoretic solution
concept, such as a Nash equilibrium [3] or more generally a cyclic correlated equilibrium [4], but
multiple equilibria can exist for a single game with some of these Pareto dominating others [5].
Hence, a critical question in addressing this non-stationarity is how individual agents should behave
to influence convergence of the recurrent set of policies towards more desirable limiting behaviors.
Our key idea in this work is to consider the limiting policies of other agents as time approaches
infinity. Specifically, the converged behavior of this dynamic multiagent system is not due to some
1

MIT-LIDS 2 IBM-Research 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 4 Mila 5 University of Oxford

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

