Shield Decentralization for Safe Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning
Daniel Melcer
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
melcer.d@northeastern.edu

Christopher Amato⇤
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
c.amato@northeastern.edu

Stavros Tripakis⇤
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
stavros@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Learning safe solutions is an important but challenging problem in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). Shielded reinforcement learning is one approach
for preventing agents from choosing unsafe actions. Current shielded reinforcement learning methods for MARL make strong assumptions about communication and full observability. In this work, we extend the formalization of the
shielded reinforcement learning problem to a decentralized multi-agent setting.
We then present an algorithm for decomposition of a centralized shield, allowing
shields to be used in such decentralized, communication-free environments. Our
results show that agents equipped with decentralized shields perform comparably
to agents with centralized shields in several tasks, allowing shielding to be used in
environments with decentralized training and execution for the first time.

1

Introduction

Recently, the advent of deep reinforcement learning has produced solutions in highly complex domains such as Atari [17], and the game of Go [20]. However, the neural networks which power these
methods are opaque, and there is a significant risk of unintentional harm when a poorly understood
reinforcement learning method is applied to a safety-critical system [2].
One common approach for safe RL is the idea of a shield—a reactive system which monitors a
reinforcement learning agent and environment [1]. During each step, the agent proposes an action,
the shield evaluates whether this action is safe, and then the shield potentially replaces the proposed
action with a known-safe action. This method has been extended to multi-agent environments, but
the shield remains centralized [10]. Such methods assume instantaneous communication with a
centralized coordination algorithm, which is not realistic in many environments.
In this work, we first discuss the centralized shield synthesis problem, and outline its proposed solutions. We describe several implicit communication assumptions present in the existing centralized
shield definition, and define a novel framework for decentralized shielding. These decentralized
shields enable each agent to act independently, without any coordination after shield synthesis.
⇤

Equal Advising

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

