Training Uncertainty-Aware Classifiers with
Conformalized Deep Learning

Bat-Sheva Einbinder∗
Faculty of Electrical & Computer Engineering
(ECE) Technion, Israel
bat-shevab@campus.technion.ac.il

Yaniv Romano
Faculty of ECE and of Computer Science
Technion, Israel
yromano@technion.ac.il

Matteo Sesia
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California, USA
sesia@marshall.usc.edu

Yanfei Zhou
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California, USA
yanfei.zhou@marshall.usc.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks are powerful tools to detect hidden patterns in data and leverage them to make predictions, but they are not designed to understand uncertainty
and estimate reliable probabilities. In particular, they tend to be overconfident.
We begin to address this problem in the context of multi-class classification by
developing a novel training algorithm producing models with more dependable
uncertainty estimates, without sacrificing predictive power. The idea is to mitigate
overconfidence by minimizing a loss function, inspired by advances in conformal
inference, that quantifies model uncertainty by carefully leveraging hold-out data.
Experiments with synthetic and real data demonstrate this method can lead to
smaller conformal prediction sets with higher conditional coverage, after exact
calibration with hold-out data, compared to state-of-the-art alternatives.

1

Introduction

The predictions of deep neural networks and other complex machine learning (ML) models affect
important decisions in many applications [1–6], including autonomous driving, medical diagnostics, or
security monitoring. Prediction errors in those contexts can be costly or even dangerous, which makes
dependable and explainable uncertainty estimation essential. Unfortunately, deep neural networks are
not designed to understand uncertainty and they are easily prone to overfitting; consequently, they
may lead to overconfidence [7–9]. Overconfidence is especially problematic in the face of aleatory
uncertainty [10], which refers to situations in which the outcome to be predicted is intrinsically
noisy. Unlike the complementary epistemic uncertainty, aleatory uncertainty cannot be eliminated by
training a more flexible model or by increasing the sample size. For example, think of prognosticating
COVID-19 survival [11, 12], assessing genetic disease predisposition [13–15], or anticipating credit
card defaults [16]. In those applications, the outcome of interest is potentially complicated and likely
depends on many unmeasured variables. Therefore, no practical model may achieve perfect accuracy,
but models that can offer practitioners principled measures of confidence for each individual-level
prediction naturally tend to be more useful and trustworthy. Among many existing techniques for
estimating uncertainty in ML predictions [7–9], conformal inference [17], stands out for its ability to
provide finite-sample guarantees without unrealistic algorithmic simplifications and without strong
assumptions about the data generating process or the underlying sources of uncertainty.
∗

Authors listed in alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

