LOT: Layer-wise Orthogonal Training on Improving
ℓ2 Certified Robustness

Xiaojun Xu
Linyi Li
Bo Li
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{xiaojun3, linyi2, lbo}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Recent studies show that training deep neural networks (DNNs) with Lipschitz
constraints are able to enhance adversarial robustness and other model properties
such as stability. In this paper, we propose a layer-wise orthogonal training method
(LOT) to effectively train 1-Lipschitz convolution layers via parametrizing an
orthogonal matrix with an unconstrained matrix. We then efficiently compute the
inverse square root of a convolution kernel by transforming the input domain to the
Fourier frequency domain. On the other hand, as existing works show that semisupervised training helps improve empirical robustness, we aim to bridge the gap
and prove that semi-supervised learning also improves the certified robustness of
Lipschitz-bounded models. We conduct comprehensive evaluations for LOT under
different settings. We show that LOT significantly outperforms baselines regarding
deterministic ℓ2 certified robustness, and scales to deeper neural networks. Under
the supervised scenario, we improve the state-of-the-art certified robustness for
all architectures (e.g. from 59.04% to 63.50% on CIFAR-10 and from 32.57% to
34.59% on CIFAR-100 at radius ρ = 36/255 for 40-layer networks). With semisupervised learning over unlabelled data, we are able to improve state-of-the-art
certified robustness on CIFAR-10 at ρ = 108/255 from 36.04% to 42.39%. In
addition, LOT consistently outperforms baselines on different model architectures
with only 1/3 evaluation time.

1

Introduction

Given the wide applications of deep neural networks (DNNs), ensuring their robustness against
potential adversarial attacks [7, 21, 31, 32] is of great importance. There has been a line of research
providing defense approaches to improve the empirical robustness of DNNs [18, 34, 30, 29], and
certification methods to certify DNN robustness [14, 35, 15, 13, 33]. Existing certification techniques
can be categorized as deterministic and probabilistic certifications [14], and in this work we will
focus on improving the deterministic ℓ2 certified robustness by training 1-Lipschitz DNNs.
Although different approaches have been proposed to empirically enforce the Lipschitz constant of
the trained model [26], it is still challenging to strictly ensure the 1-Lipschitz, which can lead to tight
robustness certification. One recent work SOC [23] proposes to parametrize the orthogonal weight
matrices with the exponential of skew-symmetric matrices (i.e. W = exp(V − V ⊺ )). However,
such parametrization will be biased when the matrix norm is constrained and the expressiveness
is limited, especially when they rescale V to be small to help with convergence. In this work, we
propose a layer-wise orthogonal training approach (LOT) by parameterizing the orthogonal weight
1
matrix with an unconstrained matrix W = (V V ⊺ )− 2 V . In order to calculate the inverse square root
for convolution kernels, we will perform Fourier Transformation and calculate the inverse square root
of matrices on the frequency domain using Newton’s iteration. In our parametrization, the output is
agnostic to the input norm (i.e. scaling V = αV does not change the value of W ). We show that such
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

