FACT: Learning Governing Abstractions Behind
Integer Sequences

Peter Belcak∗
ETH Zürich
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
belcak@ethz.ch

Ard Kastrati
ETH Zürich
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
kard@ethz.ch

Flavio Schenker
ETH Zürich
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
flaviosc@ethz.ch

Roger Wattenhofer
ETH Zürich
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
wattenhofer@ethz.ch

Abstract
Integer sequences are of central importance to the modeling of concepts admitting
complete finitary descriptions. We introduce a novel view on the learning of such
concepts and lay down a set of benchmarking tasks aimed at conceptual understanding by machine learning models. These tasks indirectly assess model ability
to abstract, and challenge them to reason both interpolatively and extrapolatively
from the knowledge gained by observing representative examples. To further aid
research in knowledge representation and reasoning, we present FACT, the Finitary
Abstraction Comprehension Toolkit. The toolkit surrounds a large dataset of integer sequences comprising both organic and synthetic entries, a library for data
pre-processing and generation, a set of model performance evaluation tools, and a
collection of baseline model implementations, enabling the making of the future
advancements with ease.

1

Introduction

Ordered lists of integers are the natural representation form for all fundamentally discrete abstractions.
These arise when encountering evolutions of discrete-time phenomena, finite symmetries of visual
patterns, or algorithmic progressions, where they describe the development of consecutive states of a
system, automorphisms of R2 , or program listings, respectively. Sequences of integers are also the
representation of choice when linearising structured information for analysis, data compression, and
communication, with often-appearing datapoints tending to be encoded in the simplest or shortest
form. Testifying to their utility to accurately represent abstractions, completion and extrapolation
tasks on integer sequences are a frequent part of general human intelligence and aptitude testing
([42, 31]).
It is the aim and the hope for machine learning models to identify straightforward universal abstractions explaining the training data, rather than to memorise a plethora of small classes of exemplars
and interpolate when given previously unseen input. The discovery and internalisation of governing
concepts, or simply the learning of underlying rules, thus sits at the centre of artificial intelligence
research.
We note that many concepts may be uniquely represented by a sequence of integers naturally (e.g. the
squares of the natural numbers determine the polynomial n2 ; 123, 312, 231, 132, 321, 213 encodes
∗

The authors of this work are listed alphabetically.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

