Use-Case-Grounded Simulations for
Explanation Evaluation
Valerie Chen⇤ Nari Johnson Nicholay Topin† Gregory Plumb† Ameet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
A growing body of research runs human subject evaluations to study whether
providing users with explanations of machine learning models can help them with
practical real-world use cases. However, running user studies is challenging and
costly, and consequently each study typically only evaluates a limited number
of different settings, e.g., studies often only evaluate a few arbitrarily selected
explanation methods. To address these challenges and aid user study design, we
introduce Use-Case-Grounded Simulated Evaluations (SimEvals). SimEvals involve training algorithmic agents that take as input the information content (such as
model explanations) that would be presented to each participant in a human subject
study, to predict answers to the use case of interest. The algorithmic agent’s test set
accuracy provides a measure of the predictiveness of the information content for
the downstream use case. We run a comprehensive evaluation on three real-world
use cases (forward simulation, model debugging, and counterfactual reasoning) to
demonstrate that SimEvals can effectively identify which explanation methods
will help humans for each use case. These results provide evidence that SimEvals
can be used to efficiently screen an important set of user study design decisions,
e.g. selecting which explanations should be presented to the user, before running a
potentially costly user study.

1

Introduction

The field of interpretable machine learning has proposed a large and diverse number of techniques
to explain model behavior (e.g., [37, 28, 38, 34, 29]). A growing body of work studies which of
these techniques can help humans with practical real-world use cases [2, 20, 16, 18, 33, 35, 8, 16].
Because it is difficult to anticipate exactly which explanations may help humans with a particular use
case [9, 10], the gold standard to evaluate an explanation’s usefulness to humans is to run a human
subject study [11]. These studies ask users a series of questions about the use case and provide the
users with relevant information (such as model explanations) to answer each question.
Selecting the relevant information, which we call information content, to provide each user in the
human subject study comprises an important set of design decisions [18, 5]. The researcher needs to
consider the choice of explanation methods, hyperparameters that are used to calculate the model
explanations, and whether additional pieces of information should be provided to the user (such as
the model’s prediction on the data-point being explained).1 While a researcher may wish to run
several user studies to evaluate many different types of information content, in practice this is often
infeasible: user studies are resource intensive and time-consuming, requiring the recruitment and
⇤

Correspondence to valeriechen@cmu.edu.
Equal Contribution
1
We note that there are several additional user study design decisions beyond what information is shown to
the user: for example, how the information is presented or visualized, the user study interface design, etc. We
consider these additional design decisions to be out-of-scope for our study for reasons discussed in Appendix J.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

