Rapid Model Architecture Adaption for
Meta-Learning
Yiren Zhao⇤
Imperial College London
a.zhao@imperial.ac.uk

Xitong Gao⇤
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, CAS
xt.gao@siat.ac.cn

Ilia Shumailov
University of Oxford
ilia.shumailov@chch.ox.ac.uk

Nicolo Fusi
Microsoft Research
fusi@microsoft.com

Robert D Mullins
University of Cambridge
robert.mullins@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Network Architecture Search (NAS) methods have recently gathered much attention. They design networks with better performance and use a much shorter search
time compared to traditional manual tuning. Despite their efficiency in model
deployments, most NAS algorithms target a single task on a fixed hardware system.
However, real-life few-shot learning environments often cover a great number of
tasks (T ) and deployments on a wide variety of hardware platforms (H).
The combinatorial search complexity T ⇥ H creates a fundamental search efficiency challenge if one naively applies existing NAS methods to these scenarios.
To overcome this issue, we show, for the first time, how to rapidly adapt model architectures to new tasks in a many-task many-hardware few-shot learning setup by
integrating Model Agnostic Meta Learning (MAML) into the NAS flow. The proposed NAS method (H-Meta-NAS) is hardware-aware and performs optimisation
in the MAML framework. H-Meta-NAS shows a Pareto dominance compared to a
variety of NAS and manual baselines in popular few-shot learning benchmarks with
various hardware platforms and constraints. In particular, on the 5-way 1-shot MiniImageNet classification task, the proposed method outperforms the best manual
baseline by a large margin (5.21% in accuracy) using 60% less computation.

1

Introduction

Existing Network Architecture Search (NAS) methods show promising performance on image [Zoph
and Le, 2016, Liu et al., 2018], language [Guo et al., 2019, So et al., 2019] and graph data [Zhao
et al., 2020b]. The automation not only reduces the human effort required for architecture tuning but
also produces architectures with state-of-the-art performance in domains like image classification
[Zoph and Le, 2016] and language modeling [So et al., 2019]. Most NAS methods today focus on a
single task with a fixed hardware system, yet real-life model deployments covering multiple tasks
and various hardware platforms will significantly prolong this process. As illustrated in Figure 1, a
common design flow is to re-engineer the architecture and train for the different task(T )-hardware(H)
pairs with different constraints (C). The architectural engineering phase can be accomplished whether
⇤

Correspondence to: Yiren Zhao and Xitong Gao.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

