Multiagent Q-learning with Sub-Team Coordination

Wenhan Huang1∗, Kai Li2 , Kun Shao2 , Tianze Zhou3 , Matthew E. Taylor4,5 , Jun Luo2 ,
Dongge Wang6 , Hangyu Mao2 , Jianye Hao2,7 , Jun Wang8 , Xiaotie Deng9†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 Beijing Institute of Technology
4
University of Alberta, 5 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), 6 EPFL
7
Tianjin University, 8 University College London, 9 Peking University
rowdark@sjtu.edu.cn, {likai210,shaokun2,jun.luo1,maohangyu1}@huawei.com
simsimiztz@126.com, matthew.e.taylor@ualberta.ca, dongge.wang@epfl.ch
jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn, jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk, xiaotie@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In many real-world cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) tasks,
teams of agents can rehearse together before deployment, but then communication
constraints may force individual agents to execute independently when deployed.
Centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) is increasingly popular
in recent years, focusing mainly on this setting. In the value-based MARL branch,
credit assignment mechanism is typically used to factorize the team reward into
each individual’s reward — individual-global-max (IGM) is a condition on the
factorization ensuring that agents’ action choices coincide with team’s optimal joint
action. However, current architectures fail to consider local coordination within
sub-teams that should be exploited for more effective factorization, leading to faster
learning. We propose a novel value factorization framework, called multiagent
Q-learning with sub-team coordination (QSCAN), to flexibly represent sub-team
coordination while honoring the IGM condition. QSCAN encompasses the full
spectrum of sub-team coordination according to sub-team size, ranging from the
monotonic value function class to the entire IGM function class, with familiar
methods such as QMIX and QPLEX located at the respective extremes of the
spectrum. Experimental results show that QSCAN’s performance dominates stateof-the-art methods in matrix games, predator-prey tasks, the Switch challenge
in MA-Gym. Additionally, QSCAN achieves comparable performances to those
methods in a selection of StarCraft II micro-management tasks.

1

Introduction

For many complex real-world tasks, such as robot swarms [1] and autonomous vehicles [2], the
coordination of agent teams is critical. Cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL)
is a common setting where teams of agents, potentially using deep learning, can learn to solve a
common task. This paper considers the centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE)
[3] framework, where a team of agents can train together with communication but execute fully
decentralized during deployment (e.g., because of high communication costs, the risk of being
detected).
Value-based methods in the CTDE paradigm have become increasingly popular as more capable
methods have been proposed. These methods typically factorize the global action-value function
∗
†

This work was done when Wenhan Huang was an intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

