Universal Rates for Interactive Learning
Steve Hanneke
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com
Shay Moran
Technion, Google Research
smoran@technion.ac.il

Amin Karbasi
Yale University, Google Research
amin.karbasi@yale.edu
Grigoris Velegkas
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Abstract
Consider the task of learning an unknown concept from a given concept class; to
what extent does interacting with a domain expert accelerate the learning process?
It is common to measure the effectiveness of learning algorithms by plotting the
"learning curve", that is, the decay of the error rate as a function of the algorithm’s
resources (examples, queries, etc). Thus, the overarching question in this work is
whether (and which kind of) interaction accelerates the learning curve. Previous
work in interactive learning focused on uniform bounds on the learning rates which
only capture the upper envelope of the learning curves over families of data distributions. We thus formalize our overarching question within the distribution dependent
framework of universal learning, which aims to understand the performance of
learning algorithms on every data distribution, but without requiring a single upper
bound which applies uniformly to all distributions. Our main result reveals a
fundamental trichotomy of interactive learning rates, thus providing a complete
characterization of universal interactive learning. As a corollary we deduce a strong
affirmative answer to our overarching question, showing that interaction is beneficial. Remarkably, we show that in important cases such benefits are realized with
label queries, that is, by active learning algorithms. On the other hand, our lower
bounds apply to arbitrary binary queries and, hence, they hold in any interactive
learning setting.

1

Introduction

In supervised learning, arguably the most commonly studied variation of machine learning, we
consider a learning algorithm that is typically given access to a training set of n labeled examples,
sampled from an unknown distribution. Based on this training set, the goal of the algorithm is to
learn to output a concept/function that maps data points to labels so that the probability of making a
mistake on unseen (unlabeled) data, drawn from the same distribution, is minimized. However, this
passive setting does not capture a lot of applications in which there is an abundance of unlabeled
data where labels are not readily available but the learner can interact with the domain expert (such
as a human annotator) to acquire more information about the data. Consider, for example, the task
of email spam filtering. Service providers, such as Google, have easily access to billions of emails.
However, obtaining labels (i.e., spam or not) usually requires a human to read the content of those
emails, a process that is quite costly. One way to model such tasks is through the interactive learning
framework where the learning algorithm is given access to a large (potentially infinite) stream of
unlabeled examples from which it can then submit n queries to an expert in order to gain information
about these examples. Such queries may include, but are not limited to, asking the labels of those
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

