Semantic Probabilistic Layers
for Neuro-Symbolic Learning

Kareem Ahmed
CS Department
UCLA
ahmedk@cs.ucla.edu

Stefano Teso
CIMeC and DISI
University of Trento
stefano.teso@unitn.it

Guy Van den Broeck
CS Department
UCLA
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Kai-Wei Chang
CS Department
UCLA
kwchang@cs.ucla.edu

Antonio Vergari
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
avergari@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We design a predictive layer for structured-output prediction (SOP) that can be
plugged into any neural network guaranteeing its predictions are consistent with a
set of predefined symbolic constraints. Our Semantic Probabilistic Layer (SPL)
can model intricate correlations, and hard constraints, over a structured output
space all while being amenable to end-to-end learning via maximum likelihood.
SPLs combine exact probabilistic inference with logical reasoning in a clean
and modular way, learning complex distributions and restricting their support to
solutions of the constraint. As such, they can faithfully, and efficiently, model
complex SOP tasks beyond the reach of alternative neuro-symbolic approaches.
We empirically demonstrate that SPLs outperform these competitors in terms of
accuracy on challenging SOP tasks including hierarchical multi-label classification,
pathfinding and preference learning, while retaining perfect constraint satisfaction.
Our code is made publicly available on Github at github.com/KareemYousrii/SPL.

1

Introduction

Modularity is among the major factors that propelled the Cambrian explosion of deep learning [35].
By stacking multiple differentiable layers together, practitioners are able to train deep classifiers in
an end-to-end fashion with little effort. However, despite its flexibility, this modular approach to
learning does not guarantee that the predictions of these models conform to our expectations of what
makes sense. On the contrary, unconstrained deep classifiers are notorious for leading to predictions
that are inconsistent with the logical constraints governing an underlying domain.
This is even more evident in, and crucial for, structured output prediction (SOP) tasks, where
classifiers have to predict hundreds of mutually constrained labels [73, 8]. Consider for example a
classical SOP task such as multi-label classification (MLC) [74]. Learning a multi-label classifier that
disregards the correlations among labels, e.g., by considering them fully independent given the inputs,
yields sub-optimal results [6]. In more challenging tasks such as hierarchical MLC (HMLC) [71] or
pathfinding [60], leveraging the domain’s logical constraints (encoding, e.g., the label hierarchy or
acyclicity and connectedness of a path) at training time can improve prediction accuracy [44], but it
cannot guarantee that the predictions are always consistent with the constraints at inference time [32].
Fig. 1 illustrates this problem in the context of pathfinding: constraint-unaware neural networks
systematically fail to predict label configurations that form a valid path. In many safety-critical
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

