Theoretically Provable Spiking Neural Networks

Shao-Qun Zhang

Zhi-Hua Zhou∗

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China
{zhangsq,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking neural networks have attracted increasing attention in recent years due
to their potential of handling time-dependent data. Many algorithms and techniques have been developed; however, theoretical understandings of many aspects
of spiking neural networks are far from clear. A recent work [44] disclosed that
typical spiking neural networks could hardly work on spatio-temporal data due
to their bifurcation dynamics and suggested that the self-connection structure has
to be added. In this paper, we theoretically investigate the approximation ability and computational efﬁciency of spiking neural networks with self connections,
and show that the self-connection structure enables spiking neural networks to
approximate discrete dynamical systems using a polynomial number of parameters within polynomial time complexities. Our theoretical results may shed some
insight for the future studies of spiking neural networks.

1

Introduction

The past decades have witnessed an increasing interest in spiking neural networks (SNNs) due to
their great potential of modeling time-dependent data [28, 32, 37]. The fundamental units of SNNs
are usually formulated as the combination of an integrated process (e.g., some ﬁrst-order parabolic
equations) and a step ﬁring function. There has been signiﬁcant progress on computational and
implementation techniques for SNNs in computer vision [13, 33], speech recognition [30, 39], reinforcement learning [11, 38], few-short learning [16, 22, 25], etc. However, theoretical understandings of many aspects of SNNs, such as the approximation ability and computational efﬁciency on
spatio-temporal systems, are far from clear.
Some researchers [19, 20, 21, 31] focused on the approximation universality of SNNs, in which some
typical SNNs can simulate the standard computational models such as Turing machines, random
access machines, threshold circuits, sequence-to-sequence mapping, etc. There are also efforts on
the computational efﬁciency of SNNs for some speciﬁc issues, such as the convergence in the limit
results and computational complexity of SNNs for the sparse coding problem [34, 35] and temporal
quadratic programming [5, 8], respectively.
Amazingly, a recent study [44] theoretically proved that, contrary to previous beliefs, typical SNNs
can hardly work well on spatio-temporal data, because they in nature are bifurcation dynamical
systems with ﬁxed eigenvalues in which many patterns inherently cannot be learned. They also
suggested that adding self-connection structure can enhance the representation ability of SNNs on
spatio-temporal systems that fully connect the spiking neurons in the same layer and solves adaptive
eigenvalues of discrete dynamical systems.
∗

Zhi-Hua Zhou is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

