Information-Theoretic Safe Exploration with
Gaussian Processes
Alessandro G. Bottero1,2 , Carlos E. Luis1,2 , Julia Vinogradska1 , Felix Berkenkamp1 , Jan Peters2
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany
2
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany
AlessandroGiacomo.Bottero@de.bosch.com

Abstract
We consider a sequential decision making task where we are not allowed to evaluate parameters that violate an a priori unknown (safety) constraint. A common
approach is to place a Gaussian process prior on the unknown constraint and allow evaluations only in regions that are safe with high probability. Most current
methods rely on a discretization of the domain and cannot be directly extended
to the continuous case. Moreover, the way in which they exploit regularity assumptions about the constraint introduces an additional critical hyperparameter.
In this paper, we propose an information-theoretic safe exploration criterion that
directly exploits the GP posterior to identify the most informative safe parameters
to evaluate. Our approach is naturally applicable to continuous domains and does
not require additional hyperparameters. We theoretically analyze the method and
show that we do not violate the safety constraint with high probability and that
we explore by learning about the constraint up to arbitrary precision. Empirical
evaluations demonstrate improved data-efficiency and scalability.

1

Introduction

In sequential decision making problems, we iteratively select parameters in order to optimize a given
performance criterion. However, real-world applications such as robotics (Berkenkamp et al., 2021),
mechanical systems (Schillinger et al., 2017) or medicine (Sui et al., 2015) are often subject to
additional safety constraints that we cannot violate during the exploration process (Dulac-Arnold
et al., 2019). Since it is a priori unknown which parameters lead to constraint violations, we need to
actively and carefully learn about the constraints without violating them. That is, we need to learn
about the safety of parameters by only evaluating parameters that are currently known to be safe.
Existing methods by Schreiter et al. (2015); Sui et al. (2015) tackle this problem by placing a Gaussian
process (GP) prior over the constraint and only evaluate parameters that do not violate the constraint
with high probability. To learn about the safety of parameters, they evaluate the parameter with the
largest posterior variance. This process is made more efficient by S AFE O PT, which restricts its safe
set expansion exploration component to parameters that are close to the boundary of the current set
of safe parameters (Sui et al., 2015) at the cost of an additional tuning hyperparameter (Lipschitz
constant). However, uncertainty about the constraint is only a proxy objective that only indirectly
learns about the safety of parameters. Consequently, data-efficiency could be improved with an
exploration criterion that directly maximizes the information gained about the safety of parameters.
Our contribution In this paper, we propose Information-Theoretic Safe Exploration (ISE), a safe
exploration algorithm that directly exploits the information gain about the safety of parameters in
order to expand the region of the parameter space that we can classify as safe with high confidence.
By directly optimizing for safe information gain, ISE is more data-efficient than existing approaches
without manually restricting evaluated parameters to be on the boundary of the safe set, particularly
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

