OOD Link Prediction Generalization Capabilities
of Message-Passing GNNs in Larger Test Graphs
Yangze Zhou
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47903
zhou950@purdue.edu

Gitta Kutyniok
Department of Mathematics
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat München
Munich, Germany
kutyniok@math.lmu.de

Bruno Ribeiro
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47903
ribeiro@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
This work provides the first theoretical study on the ability of graph Message
Passing Neural Networks (gMPNNs) —such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)—
to perform inductive out-of-distribution (OOD) link prediction tasks, where deployment (test) graph sizes are larger than training graphs. We first prove nonasymptotic bounds showing that link predictors based on permutation-equivariant
(structural) node embeddings obtained by gMPNNs can converge to a random
guess as test graphs get larger. We then propose a theoretically-sound gMPNN that
outputs structural pairwise (2-node) embeddings and prove non-asymptotic bounds
showing that, as test graphs grow, these embeddings converge to embeddings of a
continuous function that retains its ability to predict links OOD. Empirical results
on random graphs show agreement with our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Link prediction is the task of predicting whether two nodes likely have a missing link [1, 12, 30, 37,
66]. Link prediction tasks arise in many settings, ranging from predicting edges on bipartite graphs
between users and products or content in recommender systems [6, 11, 31, 32, 39, 62], to knowledge
graph reconstruction [4, 14, 20, 54, 66, 67], to predicting protein-protein interactions [57].
In recent years, there has been growing interest in applying neural network models to inductive link
prediction tasks. Inductive link prediction considers methods trained on a graph Gtr and deployed
at test time on another graph Gte . It also encompasses the task of training the method on a smaller
induced subgraph Gtr of a larger graph Gte , then deploying it on the entire graph. In particular, our
work focuses on graph message-passing Neural Networks (gMPNNs) [21, 60] or, more precisely, the
widely used Graph Neural Network (GNN) framework [8, 9, 13, 22, 24, 28, 61, 64, 69].
Our work asks the following questions: Are link prediction methods able to cope with the task of
inductive out-of-distribution (OOD) link prediction, where (unseen) test graphs are significantly
larger than training graphs? How can these OOD link prediction tasks be theoretically defined? Can
we obtain non-asymptotic bounds on the generalization capabilities of these methods?
The majority of today’s link prediction methods are based on a similar principle. Consider an
attributed graph G = (V, E), with node set V = {1, ..., N }, edge set E ✓ V ⇥ V , and node features
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

