Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training with
Knowledge Graphs

Xuran Pan Tianzhu Ye Dongchen Han Shiji Song Gao Huang∗
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{pxr18, ytz20, hdc19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the fast development of large-scale pre-training frameworks that can extract multi-modal representations in a unified form and achieve
promising performances when transferred to downstream tasks. Nevertheless, existing approaches mainly focus on pre-training with simple image-text pairs, while
neglecting the semantic connections between concepts from different modalities.
In this paper, we propose a knowledge-based pre-training framework, dubbed
Knowledge-CLIP, which injects semantic information into the widely used CLIP
model [38]. Through introducing knowledge-based objectives in the pre-training
process and utilizing different types of knowledge graphs as training data, our
model can semantically align the representations in vision and language with
higher quality, and enhance the reasoning ability across scenarios and modalities.
Extensive experiments on various vision-language downstream tasks demonstrate
the effectiveness of Knowledge-CLIP compared with the original CLIP and competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

Large-scale vision-language pre-training has attracted wide research interests in recent years [9,
26, 38, 72]. Different from training independent models for each specific task, pre-trained models
take the analogy of human biological intelligence system, trying to perceive the world from various
data modalities and handle comprehensive tasks. Specifically, it aims to provide a unified inference
paradigm that simultaneously learns representations for multi-modal data and can easily transfer to a
variety of downstream tasks. Benefiting from the accessibility of massive image-text pairs from the
web, the vision-language pre-training can leverage a broader source of supervision, and effectively
improves the model’s generalization power.
Early attempts on vision-language pre-training mainly focus on detecting objects in the images
and aligning the corresponding word tokens with object regions [9, 28, 50]. Though effective, the
entanglement with the concept of objects, and the additional resources for pre-trained object detectors
impose restrictions on real-world applications. One of the pioneer works, CLIP [38], extends the
scale of the pre-training dataset to 400 million image-text pairs, and learns representations by directly
matching raw text with the corresponding image. Through a contrastive-based training scheme, CLIP
learns visual concepts under a large vocabulary which significantly improves the model performances
on various downstream tasks. Taking inspiration from CLIP, the following researches further extend
the work from several perspectives, including data modality [72], downstream tasks [57], and training
data efficiency [19, 44].
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

