Conformal Prediction with Temporal Quantile
Adjustments

Zhen Lin1
Shubhendu Trivedi2∗
Jimeng Sun1,3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Carle Illinois College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1

{zhenlin4,jimeng}@illinois.edu

shubhendu@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We develop Temporal Quantile Adjustment (TQA), a general method to construct
efficient and valid prediction intervals (PIs) for regression on cross-sectional time
series data. Such data is common in many domains, including econometrics and
healthcare. A canonical example in healthcare is predicting patient outcomes
using physiological time-series data, where a population of patients composes
a cross-section. Reliable PI estimators in this setting must address two distinct
notions of coverage: cross-sectional coverage across a cross-sectional slice, and
longitudinal coverage along the temporal dimension for each time series. Recent
works have explored adapting Conformal Prediction (CP) to obtain PIs in the time
series context. However, none handles both notions of coverage simultaneously.
CP methods typically query a pre-specified quantile from the distribution of nonconformity scores on a calibration set. TQA adjusts the quantile to query in CP
at each time t, accounting for both cross-sectional and longitudinal coverage in a
theoretically-grounded manner. The post-hoc nature of TQA facilitates its use as
a general wrapper around any time series regression model. We validate TQA’s
performance through extensive experimentation: TQA generally obtains efficient
PIs and improves longitudinal coverage while preserving cross-sectional coverage.
Our code is available at https://github.com/zlin7/TQA.

1

Introduction

The impressive predictive performance of modern “black-box” machine learning methods has started
to make them critical ingredients in various high-stakes decision-making pipelines. It is thus increasingly important to quantify the predictive uncertainty of such models reliably and efficiently, which
remains a fundamental challenge. Conformal Prediction (CP), pioneered by Vovk et al. [53], is a
powerful framework for quantifying uncertainty under mild assumptions. The model-agnostic and
distribution-free nature of CP makes it particularly suitable for large neural network models, and
has started to attract the attention of the deep learning community [2, 3, 6, 9, 12, 13, 33, 59]. The
primary assumption in most current CP methods is that of data exchangeability. For instance, only
assuming exchangeability of the calibration and test data, one can construct 1 − α valid prediction
intervals by simply querying the corresponding quantile of nonconformity scores on the calibration
set. Recent works have started exploring the adaptation of CP in settings that go beyond the usual
exchangeability assumption [4, 17, 21, 38, 42, 43, 44, 50, 57], and to more complex data such as time
series [17, 48, 56, 58].
We study the adaptation of CP to the cross-sectional time series regression setting. More formally,
suppose our data comprises of N time series, denoted {Si }N
i=1 , with each Si sampled from an
∗

During the initiation and pursuance of this research, the author’s primary affiliation was MIT.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

