Signal Propagation in Transformers: Theoretical
Perspectives and the Role of Rank Collapse

Lorenzo Noci∗1

Sotiris Anagnostidis∗1

lorenzo.noci@inf.ethz.ch

sotirios.anagnostidis@inf.ethz.ch

Luca Biggio∗1,2

Antonio Orvieto∗1

Sidak Pal Singh∗1,3

luca.biggio@inf.ethz.ch

antonio.orvieto@inf.ethz.ch

sidak.singh@inf.ethz.ch

Aurelien Lucchi4
aurelien.lucchi@unibas.ch

Abstract
Transformers have achieved remarkable success in several domains, ranging from
natural language processing to computer vision. Nevertheless, it has been recently
shown that stacking self-attention layers — the distinctive architectural component
of Transformers — can result in rank collapse of the tokens’ representations at
initialization. The question of if and how rank collapse affects training is still
largely unanswered, and its investigation is necessary for a more comprehensive
understanding of this architecture. In this work, we shed new light on the causes
and the effects of this phenomenon. First, we show that rank collapse of the tokens’
representations hinders training by causing the gradients of the queries and keys
to vanish at initialization. Furthermore, we provide a thorough description of
the origin of rank collapse and discuss how to prevent it via an appropriate depthdependent scaling of the residual branches. Finally, our analysis unveils that specific
architectural hyperparameters affect the gradients of queries and values differently,
leading to disproportionate gradient norms. This suggests an explanation for the
widespread use of adaptive methods for Transformers’ optimization.

1

Introduction

Since its first appearance in Vaswani et al. [2017], the Transformer architecture has revolutionized
the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), achieving remarkable success in tasks such as
text classification [Yang et al., 2019], machine translation [Conneau and Lample, 2019], reading
comprehension [Brown et al., 2020] and question answering [Raffel et al., 2019] among others.
Recent efforts have effectively extended its applicability to computer vision [Dosovitskiy et al., 2020]
and other domains [Baevski et al., 2020, Huang et al., 2018, Biggio et al., 2021, Polu et al., 2022],
further popularizing it outside NLP.
The Transformer operates on inputs comprising a sequence of tokens. At its core, it relies on stacked
attention layers, which compute a measure of relevance for the whole sequence by assigning tokenwise importance weights — obtained by matrix multiplication of the queries and keys, and finally
normalized with the softmax function. The output of an attention layer is then a linear combination
1
Dept of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, 2 Robotics & ML, CSEM SA, Alpnach, Switzerland, 3 MPI for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, 4 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Basel

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

