Normalizing Flows for Knockoff-free Controlled
Feature Selection
Derek Hansen
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
dereklh@umich.edu

Brian Manzo
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
bmanzo@umich.edu

Jeffrey Regier
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
regier@umich.edu

Abstract
Controlled feature selection aims to discover the features a response depends on
while limiting the false discovery rate (FDR) to a predefined level. Recently, multiple deep-learning-based methods have been proposed to perform controlled feature
selection through the Model-X knockoff framework. We demonstrate, however,
that these methods often fail to control the FDR for two reasons. First, these methods often learn inaccurate models of features. Second, the “swap” property, which
is required for knockoffs to be valid, is often not well enforced. We propose a new
procedure called F LOW S ELECT to perform controlled feature selection that does
not suffer from either of these two problems. To more accurately model the features, F LOW S ELECT uses normalizing flows, the state-of-the-art method for density
estimation. Instead of enforcing the “swap” property, F LOW S ELECT uses a novel
MCMC-based procedure to calculate p-values for each feature directly. Asymptotically, F LOW S ELECT computes valid p-values. Empirically, F LOW S ELECT
consistently controls the FDR on both synthetic and semi-synthetic benchmarks,
whereas competing knockoff-based approaches do not. F LOW S ELECT also demonstrates greater power on these benchmarks. Additionally, F LOW S ELECT correctly
infers the genetic variants associated with specific soybean traits from GWAS data.

1

Introduction

Researchers in machine learning have made much progress in developing regression and classification
models that can predict a response based on features. In many application areas, however, practitioners
need to know which features drive variation in the response, and they need to do so in a way that
limits the number of false discoveries. For example, in genome-wide association studies (GWAS),
scientists must consider hundreds of thousands of genetic markers to identify variants associated with
a particular trait or disease. The cost of false discoveries (i.e., selecting variants that are not associated
with the disease) is high, as a costly follow-up experiment is often conducted for each selected variant.
Another example where controlled feature selection matters is analyzing observational data about
the effectiveness of educational interventions. In this case, researchers may want to select certain
educational programs to implement on a larger scale and require confidence that their selection
does not include unacceptably many ineffective programs. As a result, researchers are interested in
methods that model the dependence structure of the data while providing an upper bound on the false
discovery rate (FDR).
Model-X knockoffs (Candès et al., 2018) is a popular method for controlled variable selection,
offering theoretical guarantees of FDR control and the flexibility to use arbitrary predictive models.
However, even with knowledge of the underlying feature distribution, the Model-X knockoffs method
is not feasible unless the feature distribution is either a finite mixture of Gaussians (Gimenez et al.,
2019) or has a known Markov structure (Bates et al., 2020). Hence, a body of research explores the
use of empirical approaches that use deep generative models to estimate the distribution of X and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

