A Characterization of Semi-Supervised Adversarially
Robust PAC Learnability
Idan Attias
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
idanatti@post.bgu.ac.il

Steve Hanneke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Yishay Mansour
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the problem of learning an adversarially robust predictor to test time
attacks in the semi-supervised PAC model. We address the question of how many
labeled and unlabeled examples are required to ensure learning. We show that
having enough unlabeled data (the size of a labeled sample that a fully-supervised
method would require), the labeled sample complexity can be arbitrarily smaller
compared to previous works, and is sharply characterized by a different complexity
measure. We prove nearly matching upper and lower bounds on this sample
complexity. This shows that there is a significant benefit in semi-supervised robust
learning even in the worst-case distribution-free model, and establishes a gap
between supervised and semi-supervised label complexities which is known not to
hold in standard non-robust PAC learning.

1

Introduction

The problem of learning predictors that are immune to adversarial corruptions at inference time
is central in modern machine learning. The phenomenon of fooling learning models by adding
imperceptible perturbations to their input illustrates a basic vulnerability of learning-based models
and is named adversarial examples. We study the model of adversarially-robust PAC learning, in a
semi-supervised setting.
Adversarial robustness has been shown to significantly benefit from semi-supervised learning, mostly
empirically, but also theoretically in some specific cases of distributions [e.g., 18, 58, 51, 46, 1, 55, 36].
In this paper, we ask the following natural question. To what extent can we benefit from unlabeled
data in the learning process of robust models in the general case? More specifically, what is the
sample complexity in a distribution-free model?
Our semi-supervised model is formalized as follows. Let H ✓ {0, 1}X be a hypothesis class. We
formalize the adversarial attack by a perturbation function U : X ! 2X , where U (x) is the set
of possible perturbations (attacks) on x. In practice, we usually consider U (x) to be the `p ball
centered at x. In this paper, we have no restriction on U , besides x 2 U (x). The robust error of
hypothesis h on a pair (x, y) is supz2U (x) I [h(z) 6= y]. The learner has access to both labeled and
unlabeled examples drawn i.i.d. from unknown distribution D, and the goal is to find h 2 H with low
robust error on a random point from D. The sample complexity in semi-supervised learning has two
parameters, the number of labeled examples and the number of unlabeled examples which suffice to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

