Neuron with Steady Response Leads to Better
Generalization
Lun Du ∗
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
lun.du@microsoft.com

Qiang Fu ∗ †
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
qifu@microsoft.com
Haitao Mao ∗ ‡
Michigan State University
Michigan, U.S.
haitaoma@msu.edu

Xu Chen ∗
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
xu.chen@microsoft.com

Shi Han
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
shihan@microsoft.com

Wei Fang ∗ ‡
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
fw17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Dongmei Zhang
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
dongmeiz@microsoft.com

Abstract
Regularization can mitigate the generalization gap between training and inference
by introducing inductive bias. Existing works have already proposed various inductive biases from diverse perspectives. However, none of them explores inductive
bias from the perspective of class-dependent response distribution of individual
neurons. In this paper, we conduct a substantial analysis of the characteristics of
such distribution. Based on the analysis results, we articulate the Neuron Steadiness
Hypothesis: the neuron with similar responses to instances of the same class leads
to better generalization. Accordingly, we propose a new regularization method
called Neuron Steadiness Regularization (NSR) to reduce neuron intra-class response variance. Based on the Complexity Measure, we theoretically guarantee
the effectiveness of NSR for improving generalization. We conduct extensive
experiments on Multilayer Perceptron, Convolutional Neural Networks, and Graph
Neural Networks with popular benchmark datasets of diverse domains, which show
that our Neuron Steadiness Regularization consistently outperforms the vanilla
version of models with significant gain and low additional computational overhead.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Network (DNN) achieves state-of-the-art results in a wide range of areas and has various
applications across industries, including self driving cars [37], virtual assistants [38], intelligent
healthcare [32], personalized recommendation [34], etc. DNN’s success usually relies on a plenty
amount of training data. However, DNN’s generalization is often hampered in many domains where
training data is insufficient because data annotation is labor-intensive and expensive.
∗

These authors contributed equally to the work.
Corresponding Author.
‡
Work performed during the internship at MSRA.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

