Towards a Standardised Performance Evaluation
Protocol for Cooperative MARL

Rihab Gorsane1∗

Omayma Mahjoub12∗†

Siddarth Singh1

Ruan de Kock1∗

Roland Dubb13†

Arnu Pretorius1
1

2

InstaDeep
National School of Computer Science, Tunisia
3
University of Cape Town, South Africa

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has emerged as a useful approach
to solving decentralised decision-making problems at scale. Research in the field
has been growing steadily with many breakthrough algorithms proposed in recent
years. In this work, we take a closer look at this rapid development with a focus on
evaluation methodologies employed across a large body of research in cooperative
MARL. By conducting a detailed meta-analysis of prior work, spanning 75 papers
accepted for publication from 2016 to 2022, we bring to light worrying trends
that put into question the true rate of progress. We further consider these trends
in a wider context and take inspiration from single-agent RL literature on similar
issues with recommendations that remain applicable to MARL. Combining these
recommendations, with novel insights from our analysis, we propose a standardised
performance evaluation protocol for cooperative MARL. We argue that such a
standard protocol, if widely adopted, would greatly improve the validity and
credibility of future research, make replication and reproducibility easier, as well
as improve the ability of the field to accurately gauge the rate of progress over
time by being able to make sound comparisons across different works. Finally, we
release our meta-analysis data publicly on our project website for future research
on evaluation 3 accompanied by our open-source evaluation tools repository4 .

1

Introduction

Empirical evaluation methods in single-agent reinforcement learning (RL)5 have been closely scrutinised in recent years (Islam et al., 2017; Machado et al., 2017; Henderson, 2018; Zhang et al., 2018;
Henderson et al., 2018; Colas et al., 2018a, 2019; Chan et al., 2020; Jordan et al., 2020; Engstrom
et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2022). In this context, the impact of a lack of rigour and methodological
standards has already been observed. Fortunately, just as these issues have arisen and been identified,
they have also been accompanied by suggested solutions and recommendations from these works.
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding author: r.gorsane@instadeep.com
Work done during an internship at InstaDeep.
3
https://sites.google.com/view/marl-standard-protocol
4
https://github.com/instadeepai/marl-eval
5
In this paper, we use the term "RL" to exclusively refer to single-agent RL, as opposed to RL as a field of
study, of which MARL is a subfield.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

