An efficient graph generative model for navigating
ultra-large combinatorial synthesis libraries

Aryan Pedawi
Atomwise Inc.
aryan@atomwise.com
Brandon M. Anderson∗†
Atomwise Inc.
branderson@gmail.com

Paweł Gniewek
Atomwise Inc.
pawel@atomwise.com

Chaoyi Chang
Atomwise Inc.
cchang373@atomwise.com

Henry van den Bedem†
Atomwise Inc.
UCSF, Dept. of Bioengineering & Therapeutic Sciences
vdbedem@atomwise.com

Abstract
Virtual, make-on-demand chemical libraries have transformed early-stage drug
discovery by unlocking vast, synthetically accessible regions of chemical space. Recent years have witnessed rapid growth in these libraries from millions to trillions
of compounds, hiding undiscovered, potent hits for a variety of therapeutic targets.
However, they are quickly approaching a size beyond that which permits explicit
enumeration, presenting new challenges for virtual screening. To overcome these
challenges, we propose the Combinatorial Synthesis Library Variational AutoEncoder (CSLVAE). The proposed generative model represents such libraries as
a differentiable, hierarchically-organized database. Given a compound from the
library, the molecular encoder constructs a query for retrieval, which is utilized by
the molecular decoder to reconstruct the compound by first decoding its chemical
reaction and subsequently decoding its reactants. Our design minimizes autoregression in the decoder, facilitating the generation of large, valid molecular graphs.
Our method performs fast and parallel batch inference for ultra-large synthesis
libraries, enabling a number of important applications in early-stage drug discovery.
Compounds proposed by our method are guaranteed to be in the library, and thus
synthetically and cost-effectively accessible. Importantly, CSLVAE can encode
out-of-library compounds and search for in-library analogues. In experiments, we
demonstrate the capabilities of the proposed method in the navigation of massive
combinatorial synthesis libraries.

1

Introduction

Virtual high throughput screening (vHTS) [45] has gained significant traction in early-stage drug
discovery, owing in no small part to make-on-demand chemical libraries utilizing a combinatorial
synthesis construction. These combinatorial synthesis libraries (CSLs) enable access to ultra-large
swaths of chemical space from a considerably smaller set of chemically accessible building blocks
that can be combined according to known synthesis routines. In recent years, these libraries have
grown from millions, to billions, and now to trillions of compounds [21, 32, 42, 55]. For example,
the Enamine REadily AccessibLe (REAL) libraries [19] leverage off-the-shelf molecular building
blocks and parallel synthesis, permitting lead times on the order of a few weeks and ushering in an
era of ever-decreasing latency between in silico and in vitro high throughput screening.
∗
†

Work performed while at Atomwise Inc. Current affiliation is with Atomic AI.
Equal senior contributions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

