DropCov: A Simple yet Effective Method for
Improving Deep Architectures

Qilong Wang1,3 , Mingze Gao1 , Zhaolin Zhang1 , Jiangtao Xie2 , Peihua Li2 , Qinghua Hu1,3,∗
1

3

Tianjin University, China, 2 Dalian University of Technology, China,
Haihe Laboratory of Information Technology Application Innovation, Tianjin, China

qlwang@tju.edu.cn, gaomingze@tju.edu.cn, zzl9@tju.edu.cn
jiangtaoxie@mail.dlut.edu.cn, peihuali@dlut.edu.cn, huqinghua@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous works show global covariance pooling (GCP) has great potential to
improve deep architectures especially on visual recognition tasks, where postnormalization of GCP plays a very important role in final performance. Although
several post-normalization strategies have been studied, these methods pay more
close attention to effect of normalization on covariance representations rather than
the whole GCP networks, and their effectiveness requires further understanding.
Meanwhile, existing effective post-normalization strategies (e.g., matrix power
normalization) usually suffer from high computational complexity (e.g., O(d3 ) for
d-dimensional inputs). To handle above issues, this work first analyzes the effect of
post-normalization from the perspective of training GCP networks. Particularly, we
for the first time show that effective post-normalization can make a good trade-off
between representation decorrelation and information preservation for GCP, which
are crucial to alleviate over-fitting and increase representation ability of deep
GCP networks, respectively. Based on this finding, we can improve existing postnormalization methods with some small modifications, providing further support
to our observation. Furthermore, this finding encourages us to propose a novel
pre-normalization method for GCP (namely DropCov), which develops an adaptive
channel dropout on features right before GCP, aiming to reach trade-off between
representation decorrelation and information preservation in a more efficient way.
Our DropCov only has a linear complexity of O(d), while being free for inference.
Extensive experiments on various benchmarks (i.e., ImageNet-1K, ImageNet-C,
ImageNet-A, Stylized-ImageNet, and iNat2017) show our DropCov is superior to
the counterparts in terms of efficiency and effectiveness, and provides a simple yet
effective method to improve performance of deep architectures involving both deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and vision transformers (ViTs).

1

Introduction

Global covariance pooling (GCP) has shown remarkable potential to improve performance of deep
architectures in a variety of tasks, especially visual recognition [31, 23, 29, 30, 8, 48, 36, 47, 51].
One of core differences among various deep GCP methods is post-normalization for covariance
representations, which plays a crucial role in final performance. The existing post-normalization
approaches can be roughly categorized into element-wise post-normalization methods [31, 25, 2]
and structure-wise ones [23, 29, 28, 25, 36, 47], which concentrate on normalizing entries and
∗
Qinghua Hu is the corresponding author and is with Engineering Research Center of City intelligence and
Digital Governance, Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

