What are the best systems? New perspectives on NLP
Benchmarking

Pierre Colombo
L2S
CentraleSupelec, France
pierre.colombo@centralesupelec.fr
Ekhine Irurozki
S2A
Telecom Paris, France
ekhine.irurozki@telecom-paris.fr

Nathan Noiry
S2A
Telecom Paris, France
nathan.noiry@telecom-paris.fr
Stephan Clémençon
S2A
Telecom Paris, France
stephan.clemençon@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
In Machine Learning, a benchmark refers to an ensemble of datasets associated
with one or multiple metrics together with a way to aggregate different systems
performances. They are instrumental in (i) assessing the progress of new methods
along different axes and (ii) selecting the best systems for practical use. This is
particularly the case for NLP with the development of large pre-trained models
(e.g. GPT, BERT) that are expected to generalize well on a variety of tasks. While
the community mainly focused on developing new datasets and metrics, there has
been little interest in the aggregation procedure, which is often reduced to a simple
average over various performance measures. However, this procedure can be
problematic when the metrics are on a different scale, which may lead to spurious
conclusions. This paper proposes a new procedure to rank systems based on their
performance across different tasks. Motivated by the social choice theory, the final
system ordering is obtained through aggregating the rankings induced by each task
and is theoretically grounded. We conduct extensive numerical experiments (on
over 270k scores) to assess the soundness of our approach both on synthetic and
real scores (e.g. GLUE, EXTREM, SEVAL, TAC, FLICKR). In particular, we
show that our method yields different conclusions on state-of-the-art systems than
the mean-aggregation procedure while being both more reliable and robust.

1

Introduction

This paper is about improving current practices regarding benchmarks of NLP systems. As pointed
out by [83], benchmarks are made of datasets, metrics, and a way to aggregate performance. Our
point is that, if the bulk of the NLP community efforts on this domain is about collecting new datasets
and introducing new metrics, little work is concerned with the third part, namely how to aggregate
various performances.
Why are benchmarks vital? Research advances in Machine Learning (ML) are crucially fueled
by reliable evaluation procedures [34, 78]. The latter are indeed mandatory to fairly compare new
methods and systems. Usually, one relies on a well-chosen metric that reflects the ability to perform
on a task – e.g. accuracy for classification, mean-squared error for regression.
The multi-tasks evaluation setting. If single-tasks problems are quite common, to best understand
weakness and model in real-world scenario, the community is heading towards more complex
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022)., New Orleans.

