Non-Convex Bilevel Games
with Critical Point Selection Maps
Michael Arbel and Julien Mairal
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Bilevel optimization problems involve two nested objectives, where an upper-level
objective depends on a solution to a lower-level problem. When the latter is nonconvex, multiple critical points may be present, leading to an ambiguous definition of the problem. In this paper, we introduce a key ingredient for resolving this
ambiguity through the concept of a selection map which allows one to choose a
particular solution to the lower-level problem. Using such maps, we define a class
of hierarchical games between two agents that resolve the ambiguity in bilevel
problems. This new class of games requires introducing new analytical tools in
Morse theory to extend implicit differentiation, a technique used in bilevel optimization resulting from the implicit function theorem. In particular, we establish
the validity of such a method even when the latter theorem is inapplicable due
to degenerate critical points. Finally, we show that algorithms for solving bilevel
problems based on unrolled optimization solve these games up to approximation
errors due to finite computational power. A simple correction to these algorithms
is then proposed for removing these errors.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization has proven to be a major tool for solving machine learning problems that possess a nested structure such as hyper-parameter optimization [17], meta-learning [6], reinforcement
learning [23, 33], or dictionary learning [38]. Introduced in the field of economic game theory
in [49], a bilevel optimization problem can be understood as a game between a leader and a follower
each of which optimizes their own objective function but where the leader can anticipate follower’s
actions. In the context of machine learning, the leader typically optimizes a hyper-parameter over a
validation loss while the follower optimizes the model parameter on a training loss [37].
Bilevel optimization introduces many challenges. In particular, when multiple optimal solutions
are available to the follower, the leader would need to optimize a different objective depending on
the follower’s strategy to select an optimal solution. As a result, the bilevel problem becomes ambiguously defined without knowing the follower’s strategy [35]. A large body of work on bilevel
programs for machine learning gets around these considerations by assuming the follower to have
a unique optimal choice, a situation that typically occurs when the follower’s objective is strongly
convex, leading to efficient and scalable algorithms [1, 2, 7, 14, 20, 32, 33, 47]. However, in many
machine learning applications, the strong convexity of the follower’s objective is an unrealistic assumption. This is particularly the case in the context of deep learning, where the follower’s objective,
the training loss, can be highly non-convex in the parameters of the model and can have regions of
flat optima due to symmetries and other degeneracies [15, 30].
In the literature on mathematical optimization, the ambiguity in bilevel problems is often resolved by
making an additional assumption on the follower’s strategy for choosing their optimal solution. In
particular, two problems are often considered: optimistic and pessimistic bilevel programs, see [13].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

