DeVRF: Fast Deformable Voxel Radiance Fields for
Dynamic Scenes

Jia-Wei Liu1∗, Yan-Pei Cao2 , Weijia Mao1 , Wenqiao Zhang4 , David Junhao Zhang1 ,
Jussi Keppo5,6 , Ying Shan2 , Xiaohu Qie3 , Mike Zheng Shou1†
1

4

Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 ARC Lab, 3 Tencent PCG
National University of Singapore 5 Business School, National University of Singapore
6
Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National University of Singapore

Abstract
Modeling dynamic scenes is important for many applications such as virtual reality
and telepresence. Despite achieving unprecedented fidelity for novel view synthesis
in dynamic scenes, existing methods based on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)
suffer from slow convergence (i.e., model training time measured in days). In this
paper, we present DeVRF, a novel representation to accelerate learning dynamic
radiance fields. The core of DeVRF is to model both the 3D canonical space and
4D deformation field of a dynamic, non-rigid scene with explicit and discrete voxelbased representations. However, it is quite challenging to train such a representation
which has a large number of model parameters, often resulting in overfitting issues.
To overcome this challenge, we devise a novel static → dynamic learning paradigm
together with a new data capture setup that is convenient to deploy in practice. This
paradigm unlocks efficient learning of deformable radiance fields via utilizing the
3D volumetric canonical space learnt from multi-view static images to ease the
learning of 4D voxel deformation field with only few-view dynamic sequences.
To further improve the efficiency of our DeVRF and its synthesized novel view’s
quality, we conduct thorough explorations and identify a set of strategies. We
evaluate DeVRF on both synthetic and real-world dynamic scenes with different
types of deformation. Experiments demonstrate that DeVRF achieves two orders
of magnitude speedup (100× faster) with on-par high-fidelity results compared
to the previous state-of-the-art approaches. The code and dataset are released in
https://github.com/showlab/DeVRF.

1

Introduction

Free-viewpoint photorealistic view synthesis techniques from a set of captured images unleash new
opportunities for immersive applications such as virtual reality, telepresence, and 3D animation
production. Recent advances in this domain mainly focus on static scenes, e.g., Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [20], which implicitly represent rigid static scenes using 5D (spatial locations (x, y, z)
and view directions (θ, φ)) neural radiance fields. Although achieving unprecedented fidelity for
novel view synthesis, NeRF were mainly exploited under static scenes. To unlock dynamic view
synthesis, existing NeRF-based approaches either learn an additional MLP-based deformation field
that maps coordinates in dynamic fields to NeRF-based canonical spaces [27, 24, 25, 38] or model
dynamic scenes as 4D spatio-temporal radiance fields with relatively large MLPs [16, 7].
∗
†

Work is partially done during internship at ARC Lab, Tencent PCG.
Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

