The alignment property of SGD noise and how it helps
select flat minima: A stability analysis

Lei Wu
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University

Mingze Wang
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University

Weijie J. Su
Department of Statistics and Data Science
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
The phenomenon that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) favors flat minima has
played a critical role in understanding the implicit regularization of SGD. In
this paper, we provide an explanation of this striking phenomenon by relating
the particular noise structure of SGD to its linear stability (Wu et al., 2018).
Specifically, we consider training over-parameterized models with square loss.
We prove that if a global√minimum θ∗ is linearly stable for SGD, then it must
satisfy ∥H(θ∗ )∥F ⩽ O( B/η), where ∥H(θ∗ )∥F , B, η denote the Frobenius
norm of Hessian at θ∗ , batch size, and learning rate, respectively. Otherwise,
SGD will escape from that minimum exponentially fast. Hence, for minima
accessible to SGD, the sharpness—as measured by the Frobenius norm of the
Hessian—is bounded independently of the model size and sample size. The key
to obtaining these results is exploiting the particular structure of SGD noise: The
noise concentrates in sharp directions of local landscape and the magnitude is
proportional to loss value. This alignment property of SGD noise provably holds for
linear networks and random feature models (RFMs), and is empirically verified for
nonlinear networks. Moreover, the validity and practical relevance of our theoretical
findings are also justified by extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 dataset.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning (ML) models are often operated with far more unknown parameters than
training examples, a regime referred to as over-parameterization. In this regime, there are many
global minima, all of which have zero training loss but their test performance can be significantly
different [47]. Fortunately, it is often observed that SGD converges to those generalizable ones, even
without needing any explicit regularizations [49]. This suggests there must exist certain “implicit
regularization” mechanism at work [32, 14, 47, 6].
More mysteriously, SGD solutions often generalize better than gradient descent (GD) solutions
[21, 38]. Therefore, the SGD noise must play a critical role in implicit regularization. The most
popular explanation is that SGD favors flatter minima [21] and flatter minima generalize better
[16]. This flat-minima principle has been extensively and successfully adopted in practice to tune
the hyperparameters of SGD [44, 21] and to design new optimizers [17, 11, 43] for improving
generalization. Therefore, understanding how SGD noise biases SGD towards flatter minima is of
paramount importance, which is the main focus of this paper.
The works [44, 10, 48] show that SGD noise is highly anisotropic; [30, 41] find the magnitude of
SGD noise to be loss dependent. Both structures are shown to be critical for SGD picking flat minima.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

