Peripheral Vision Transformer

Juhong Min1
1

Yucheng Zhao2,3

Chong Luo2

Minsu Cho1

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
2
Microsoft Research Asia (MSRA)
3
University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/PerViT/

Abstract
Human vision possesses a special type of visual processing systems called peripheral vision. Partitioning the entire visual field into multiple contour regions based
on the distance to the center of our gaze, the peripheral vision provides us the
ability to perceive various visual features at different regions. In this work, we
take a biologically inspired approach and explore to model peripheral vision in
deep neural networks for visual recognition. We propose to incorporate peripheral
position encoding to the multi-head self-attention layers to let the network learn
to partition the visual field into diverse peripheral regions given training data. We
evaluate the proposed network, dubbed PerViT, on ImageNet-1K and systematically
investigate the inner workings of the model for machine perception, showing that
the network learns to perceive visual data similarly to the way that human vision
does. The performance improvements in image classification over the baselines
across different model sizes demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

For the last ten years, convolution has been a dominant feature transformation in neural networks for visual recognition
due to its superiority in modelling spatial configurations of
images [21, 32, 34]. Despite the efficacy in learning visual
patterns, the local and stationary nature of convolutional kernels limited the maximum extent of representation ability
in flexible processing, e.g., dynamic transformations with
Central
global receptive fields. Originally devised for natural language processing (NLP), self-attention [63] shed a light on
this direction; equipped with adaptive input processing and
Para-central
the ability to capture long-range interactions, it has emerged
as an alternative feature transform for computer vision, being
Mid peripheral
Far peripheral
widely adopted as a core building block [18]. The stand-alone
self-attention models, e.g., ViT [18], however, demand significantly more training data [57] for competitive performance
with its convolutional counterparts [6, 25, 27, 72] since they
miss certain desirable property which convolution possesses,
e.g., locality. These inherent pros and cons of convolution Figure 1: This work explores blendand self-attention encourage recent researches toward combi- ing human peripheral vision (top)
nations of both so as to enjoy the best of the both worlds but with attention-based neural networks
which one suits the best for effective visual processing is yet (bottom) for visual recognition.
controversial in literature [8, 9, 10, 12, 35, 37, 38, 40, 41, 49, 50, 59, 60, 62, 67, 69, 71, 73, 77].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

