Sharp Analysis of Stochastic Optimization under
Global Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz Inequality

Ilyas Fatkhullin∗
ETH AI Center & ETH Zurich

Jalal Etesami*
EPFL†

Niao He
ETH Zurich

Negar Kiyavash
EPFL†

Abstract
We study the complexity of finding the global solution to stochastic nonconvex
optimization when the objective function satisfies global Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz
(KŁ) inequality and the queries from stochastic gradient oracles satisfy mild expected smoothness assumption. We first introduce a general framework to analyze
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its associated nonlinear dynamics under
the setting. As a byproduct of our analysis, we obtain a sample complexity of
O(ϵ−(4−α)/α ) for SGD when the objective satisfies the so called α-PŁ condition,
where α is the degree of gradient domination. Furthermore, we show that a modified SGD with variance reduction and restarting (PAGER) achieves an improved
sample complexity of O(ϵ−2/α ) when the objective satisfies the average smoothness assumption. This leads to the first optimal algorithm for the important case of
α = 1 which appears in applications such as policy optimization in reinforcement
learning.

1

Introduction

Nonconvex optimization problems are ubiquitous in machine learning domains such as training deep
neural networks [22] or policy optimization in reinforcement learning [52]. Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) and its variants are driving the practical success of machine learning approaches.
Naturally, understanding the limits of performance of SGD in the nonconvex setting has become an
important avenue of research in recent years [21, 4, 30, 44, 23, 15, 59].
We are interested in solving the unconstrained stochastic, nonconvex optimization problem of the
form
min f (x) := Eξ∼D [fξ (x)] ,
(1)
x∈Rd

where f (·) is smooth and possibly nonconvex, and ξ is a random vector drawn from a distribution D.
Moreover, we are interested in an important special case of (1), when the expectation can be written
as the average of n smooth functions:
n
h
i
1X
min f (x) :=
fi (x) .
n i=1
x∈Rd

(2)

For a general nonconvex differentiable objective f : Rd → R, finding a global minimum of f is
in general intractable [42, 54]. There are two common strategies to analyze optimization methods
for nonconvex functions. The first one is to scale down the requirements on the solution of interest
from global optimality to some relaxed version, e.g., first-order stationary point. However, such
solutions do not exclude the possibility of approaching a suboptimal local minima or a saddle point.
Another approach is to study nonconvex problems with additional structural assumption in the hope of
∗
†

First two authors have equal contribution.
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

