Behavior Transformers:
Cloning k modes with one stone
Nur Muhammad (Mahi) Shafiullah ⇤
Ariuntuya Altanzaya

Zichen Jeff Cui
Lerrel Pinto

New York University

Abstract
While behavior learning has made impressive progress in recent times, it lags
behind computer vision and natural language processing due to its inability to
leverage large, human-generated datasets. Human behaviors have wide variance,
multiple modes, and human demonstrations typically do not come with reward
labels. These properties limit the applicability of current methods in Offline RL
and Behavioral Cloning to learn from large, pre-collected datasets. In this work, we
present Behavior Transformer (BeT), a new technique to model unlabeled demonstration data with multiple modes. BeT retrofits standard transformer architectures
with action discretization coupled with a multi-task action correction inspired by
offset prediction in object detection. This allows us to leverage the multi-modal
modeling ability of modern transformers to predict multi-modal continuous actions. We experimentally evaluate BeT on a variety of robotic manipulation and
self-driving behavior datasets. We show that BeT significantly improves over prior
state-of-the-art work on solving demonstrated tasks while capturing the major
modes present in the pre-collected datasets. Finally, through an extensive ablation
study, we analyze the importance of every crucial component in BeT. Videos of
behavior generated by BeT are available here: https://mahis.life/bet.

1

Introduction

Creating agents that can behave intelligently in complex environments has been a longstanding
problem in machine learning. Although Reinforcement Learning (RL) has made significant advances
in behavior learning, its success comes at the cost of high sample complexity [57, 23, 1]. Without
priors on how to behave, state-of-the-art RL methods require online interactions on the order of
1-10M ‘reward-labeled’ samples for benchmark control tasks [81]. This is in stark contrast to vision
and language tasks, where pretrained models and data-driven priors are the norm [19, 11, 32, 6],
which allows for efficient downstream task solving.
So how do we learn behavioral priors from pre-collected data? One option is offline RL [47], where
offline datasets coupled with conservative policy optimization can learn task-specific behaviors.
However, such methods have yet to tackle domains where task-specific reward labels are not present.
Without explicit reward labels, imitation learning, particularly behavior cloning, is a more fitting
option [68, 9, 77]. Here, given behavior data D ⌘ {st , at }, behavior models can be trained to
predict actions f✓ (st ) ! at through supervised learning. When demonstration data is plentiful,
such approaches have found impressive success in a variety of domains from self-driving [68, 14] to
robotic manipulation [84, 62]. Importantly, it requires neither online interactions nor reward labels.
⇤

Corresponding author, email: mahi@cs.nyu.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

