Beyond Black Box Densities: Parameter Learning for
the Deviated Components

Dat Do?
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
dodat@umich.edu

Nhat Ho?
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
minhnhat@utexas.edu

XuanLong Nguyen
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
xuanlong@umich.edu

Abstract
As we collect additional samples from a data population for which a known density
function estimate may have been previously obtained by a black box method, the
increased complexity of the data set may result in the true density being deviated
from the known estimate by a mixture distribution. To learn about this phenomenon,
Pk
we consider the deviating mixture model (1−λ∗ )h0 +λ∗ ( i=1 p∗i f (x|θi∗ )), where
h0 is a known density function, while the deviated proportion λ∗ and latent mixing
Pk
measure G∗ = i=1 p∗i δθi∗ associated with the mixture distribution are unknown.
Using a novel notion of distinguishability between the known density h0 and the
deviated mixture distribution, we establish rates of convergence for the maximum
likelihood estimates of λ∗ and G∗ under Wasserstein metrics. Simulation studies
are carried out to illustrate the theory.

1

Introduction

Most data-driven learning processes typically consist of an iteration of steps that involve model
training and fine-tuning, with more data in-take leading to further model re-training and refinement. As
more samples become available and exhibit more complex patterns, the initial model may be obsolete,
risks being discarded, or absorbed into a richer class of models that adapt better to the increased
complexity. It takes considerable resources to train complex models on a rich data population.
Moreover, many successful models in modern real-world applications have become so complex that
make them hard to properly evaluate and interpret; aside from the predictive performance they may as
well be considered as black boxes. Nonetheless, as data populations evolve and so must the learning
models, several desiderata remain worthy: the ability to adapt to new complexity while retaining
aspects of old "wise" model, and the ability to interpret the changes.
In this paper we will investigate a class of complex models for density estimation that are receptive
to adaptation, reuse and interpretablity: we posit that there is an existing distribution h0 which
may have been obtained a priori by some means for the data population of interest, e.g., via kernel
density estimation (KDE) [22] or mixture models [20] or some modern black box methods, such
as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [13, 1] or normalizing flows [9]. Nonetheless, as more
?

: Dat Do and Nhat Ho contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

