A Variant of Anderson Mixing
with Minimal Memory Size

1

Fuchao Wei1 , Chenglong Bao3,4∗ , Yang Liu1,2 , Guangwen Yang1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, China
3
Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University, China
4
Yanqi Lake Beijing Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Applications

Abstract
Anderson mixing (AM) is a useful method that can accelerate fixed-point iterations
by exploring the information from historical iterations. Despite its numerical success in various applications, the memory requirement in AM remains a bottleneck
when solving large-scale optimization problems in a resource-limited machine. To
address this problem, we propose a novel variant of AM method, called Min-AM,
by storing only one vector pair, that is the minimal memory size requirement in AM.
Our method forms a symmetric approximation to the inverse Hessian matrix and is
proved to be equivalent to the full-memory Type-I AM for solving strongly convex
quadratic optimization. Moreover, for general nonlinear optimization problems,
we establish the convergence properties of Min-AM under reasonable assumptions and show that the mixing parameters can be adaptively chosen by estimating
the eigenvalues of the Hessian. Finally, we extend Min-AM to solve stochastic
programming problems. Experimental results on logistic regression and network
training problems validate the effectiveness of the proposed Min-AM.

1

Introduction

Anderson mixing (AM) [2] is a powerful method for accelerating fixed-point iterations, and has been
widely used in scientific computing [1, 5, 47] and machine learning [31, 58, 29]. In each iteration, AM
extrapolates a new iterate that satisfies certain optimality property by using the historical iterations,
and exhibits empirical acceleration over classical fixed-point iterations [60]. Thus, AM can reduce
the computation cost when evaluating the fixed-point map is a time-consuming process. Also, the
inspiring connections of AM with GMRES [60, 48] and multisecant quasi-Newton methods [22]
provide some explanations for the acceleration benefit from AM. In recent years, there have been
many works applying AM to solve various optimization problems [56, 62, 41]. Their promising
results in different tasks suggest that these AM-based methods are very competitive while being
more economical than Newton’s method. However, the existing convergence theory of AM is still
unsatisfactory [3] and AM can diverge in some case [41]. Consequently, the applications of AM and
its variants for machine learning problems and the corresponding theories deserve deep research.
One major concern of AM is the heavier memory overhead compared with the fixed-point iteration.
In AM(m), it has to store vector pairs about historical information from the m previous iterations,
where m is the memory size. Specifically, AM(m) is called as the limited-memory AM if m < ∞,
and full-memory AM if m = ∞. The AM(0) is the simple fixed-point iteration. In practice, choosing
proper memory size m is heuristic and it is observed in [47] that a small m can deteriorate the efficacy.
However, for practical applications, a large m can lead to memory issue for solving large-scale and
high-dimensional problems when the memory resource is limited.
∗

Corresponding author. clbao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

