Curious Exploration via Structured World Models
Yields Zero-Shot Object Manipulation

Cansu Sancaktar

Sebastian Blaes

Georg Martius

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
{cansu.sancaktar, sebastian.blaes, georg.martius}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
It has been a long-standing dream to design artificial agents that explore their
environment efficiently via intrinsic motivation, similar to how children perform
curious free play. Despite recent advances in intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning (RL), sample-efficient exploration in object manipulation scenarios
remains a significant challenge as most of the relevant information lies in the
sparse agent-object and object-object interactions. In this paper, we propose to use
structured world models to incorporate relational inductive biases in the control
loop to achieve sample-efficient and interaction-rich exploration in compositional
multi-object environments. By planning for future novelty inside structured world
models, our method generates free-play behavior that starts to interact with objects
early on and develops more complex behavior over time. Instead of using models
only to compute intrinsic rewards, as commonly done, our method showcases that
the self-reinforcing cycle between good models and good exploration also opens
up another avenue: zero-shot generalization to downstream tasks via model-based
planning. After the entirely intrinsic task-agnostic exploration phase, our method
solves challenging downstream tasks such as stacking, flipping, pick & place, and
throwing and generalizes to unseen numbers and arrangements of objects without
any additional training.1

1

Introduction

Curious free-play has been identified as a driving force in child development, allowing children to
efficiently explore their environment and build an understanding of the world [1]. Such intrinsically
motivated exploration schemes are especially attractive in open-ended learning scenarios to guide
an agent even without extrinsic tasks and corresponding rewards. Similar to how children learn, we
want Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents to learn through play and then be able to solve new tasks
quickly. We address both challenges in this work.
Minimization of novelty (or surprise) is a prominent formulation of curiosity, with several psychological studies showcasing the role of novelty in children’s curious exploration [2–4]. Novelty as
an intrinsic reward signal has also been adopted in RL, where agents try to resolve a cognitive
disequilibrium [5, 6]. However, applying entirely intrinsic task-agnostic exploration to object manipulation scenarios in a sample-efficient manner is an ongoing challenge as the relevant information
lies in the sparse agent-object and object-object interactions. These compositional multi-object
manipulation environments highlight one of the significant weaknesses of the current novelty-based
intrinsic motivation methods: a novel stimulus alone does not necessarily mean that it contains useful
1

Code and videos are available at https://martius-lab.github.io/cee-us.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

