Kernel Memory Networks:
A Unifying Framework for Memory Modeling
Georgios Iatropoulos1,2

1

Johanni Brea1,⇤

Wulfram Gerstner1,⇤

{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch
Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience, 2 Blue Brain Project
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Switzerland

Abstract
We consider the problem of training a neural network to store a set of patterns
with maximal noise robustness. A solution, in terms of optimal weights and state
update rules, is derived by training each individual neuron to perform either kernel
classification or interpolation with a minimum weight norm. By applying this
method to feed-forward and recurrent networks, we derive optimal models, termed
kernel memory networks, that include, as special cases, many of the hetero- and
auto-associative memory models that have been proposed over the past years, such
as modern Hopfield networks and Kanerva’s sparse distributed memory. We modify
Kanerva’s model and demonstrate a simple way to design a kernel memory network
that can store an exponential number of continuous-valued patterns with a finite
basin of attraction. The framework of kernel memory networks offers a simple and
intuitive way to understand the storage capacity of previous memory models, and
allows for new biological interpretations in terms of dendritic non-linearities and
synaptic cross-talk.

1

Introduction

Although the classical work on attractor neural networks reached its peak in the late 1980’s, with
the publication of a number of seminal works [e.g., 2, 20, 22, 26], recent years have seen a renewed
interest in the topic, motivated by the popularity of the attention mechanism [65], external memoryaugmented neural networks [24, 66], as well as a new generation of energy-based attractor networks
models, termed modern Hopfield networks (MHNs), capable of vastly increased memory storage
[17, 35]. Recent efforts to understand the theoretical foundation of the attention mechanism have,
in fact, shown that it can be linked to Hopfield networks [36, 57], but also to Kanerva’s sparse
distributed memory (SDM) [8, 30], and to the field of kernel machines [63, 68]. The last connection
is particularly intriguing, in light of the many theoretical commonalities between neural networks
and kernel methods [10, 11, 28, 47, 67]. Overall, these results suggest that a unified view can offer
new insights into memory modeling and new tools for leveraging memory in machine learning.
In this work, we aim to clarify some of the overlap between the fields of memory modeling and
statistical learning, by integrating and formalizing a set of theoretical connections between Hopfield
networks, the SDM, kernel machines, and neuron models with non-linear dendritic processing.
⇤

Joint senior authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

