A Unified Convergence Theorem for Stochastic
Optimization Methods
Xiao Li
School of Data Science (SDS)
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Robotics for Society (AIRS)
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen, China
lixiao@cuhk.edu.cn
Andre Milzarek
School of Data Science (SDS)
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data (SRIBD)
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen, China
andremilzarek@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we provide a fundamental unified convergence theorem used for
deriving expected and almost sure convergence results for a series of stochastic
optimization methods. Our unified theorem only requires to verify several representative conditions and is not tailored to any specific algorithm. As a direct application, we recover expected and almost sure convergence results of the stochastic
gradient method (SGD) and random reshuffling (RR) under more general settings.
Moreover, we establish new expected and almost sure convergence results for
the stochastic proximal gradient method (prox-SGD) and stochastic model-based
methods for nonsmooth nonconvex optimization problems. These applications
reveal that our unified theorem provides a plugin-type convergence analysis and
strong convergence guarantees for a wide class of stochastic optimization methods.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization methods are widely used to solve stochastic optimization problems and
empirical risk minimization, serving as one of the foundations of machine learning. Among the
many different stochastic methods, the most classic one is the stochastic gradient method (SGD),
which dates back to Robbins and Monro [36]. If the problem at hand has a finite-sum structure, then
another popular stochastic method is random reshuffling (RR) [20]. When the objective function has
a composite form or is weakly convex (nonsmooth and nonconvex), then the stochastic proximal
gradient method (prox-SGD) and stochastic model-based algorithms are the most typical approaches
[18, 11]. Apart from the mentioned stochastic methods, there are many others like SGD with
momentum, Adam, stochastic higher order methods, etc. In this work, our goal is to establish and
understand fundamental convergence properties of these stochastic optimization methods via a novel
unified convergence framework.
Motivations. Suppose we apply SGD to minimize a smooth nonconvex function f . SGD generates a
sequence of iterates {xk }k 0 , which is a stochastic process due to the randomness of the algorithm
and the utilized stochastic oracles. The most commonly seen ‘convergence result’ for SGD is the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

