Data-IQ: Characterizing subgroups with
heterogeneous outcomes in tabular data

Nabeel Seedat
University of Cambridge
ns741@cam.ac.uk

Jonathan Crabbé
University of Cambridge
jc2133@cam.ac.uk

Ioana Bica
University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute
ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
UCLA
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
High model performance, on average, can hide that models may systematically
underperform on subgroups of the data. We consider the tabular setting, which
surfaces the unique issue of outcome heterogeneity - this is prevalent in areas such
as healthcare, where patients with similar features can have different outcomes,
thus making reliable predictions challenging. To tackle this, we propose Data-IQ,
a framework to systematically stratify examples into subgroups with respect to
their outcomes. We do this by analyzing the behavior of individual examples
during training, based on their predictive confidence and, importantly, the aleatoric
(data) uncertainty. Capturing the aleatoric uncertainty permits a principled characterization and then subsequent stratification of data examples into three distinct
subgroups (Easy, Ambiguous, Hard). We experimentally demonstrate the benefits of Data-IQ on four real-world medical datasets. We show that Data-IQ’s
characterization of examples is most robust to variation across similarly performant
(yet different) models, compared to baselines. Since Data-IQ can be used with any
ML model (including neural networks, gradient boosting etc.), this property ensures consistency of data characterization, while allowing flexible model selection.
Taking this a step further, we demonstrate that the subgroups enable us to construct
new approaches to both feature acquisition and dataset selection. Furthermore, we
highlight how the subgroups can inform reliable model usage, noting the significant
impact of the Ambiguous subgroup on model generalization.

1

Introduction

Most machine learning models are optimized using empirical risk minimization (ERM), to maximize
average performance during training [1]. However, in real-world settings, while models may perform
well on average, they might underperform on specific subgroups of data [2–4]. Most of the current
literature has focused on this problem in computer vision, where the underperforming subgroups are
typically associated with data examples that have spurious correlations [1, 5] or mislabelling [6].
In this paper, we focus on tabular data, the most ubiquitous format in medicine and finance, where data
is based on relational databases [7, 8]. Specific to the tabular setting, we formalize an understudied
source of underperformance, namely heterogeneity of outcomes. This phenomenon is vital in
healthcare, where patients with similar features can have different outcomes [9–11]. For example,
[12] showed that prognostic models for risk prediction perform well on average, but underperform on
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

