Hierarchical Lattice Layer for Partially Monotone
Neural Networks
Hiroki Yanagisawa
IBM Research - Tokyo
IBM Japan, Ltd.
Tokyo, Japan
yanagis@jp.ibm.com

Kohei Miyaguchi
IBM Research - Tokyo
IBM Japan, Ltd.
Tokyo, Japan
miyaguchi@ibm.com

Takayuki Katsuki
IBM Research - Tokyo
IBM Japan, Ltd.
Tokyo, Japan
kats@jp.ibm.com

Abstract
Partially monotone regression is a regression analysis in which the target values
are monotonically increasing with respect to a subset of input features. The
TensorFlow Lattice library is one of the standard machine learning libraries for
partially monotone regression. It consists of several neural network layers, and
its core component is the lattice layer. One of the problems of the lattice layer is
that it requires the projected gradient descent algorithm with many constraints to
train it. Another problem is that it cannot receive a high-dimensional input vector
due to the memory consumption. We propose a novel neural network layer, the
hierarchical lattice layer (HLL), as an extension of the lattice layer so that we can
use a standard stochastic gradient descent algorithm to train HLL while satisfying
monotonicity constraints and so that it can receive a high-dimensional input vector.
Our experiments demonstrate that HLL did not sacrifice its prediction performance
on real datasets compared with the lattice layer.

1

Introduction

In regression analysis, we often have prior knowledge that the target values are monotonically
increasing (or decreasing) with respect to a subset of input features. For example, when we estimate
house prices from house data (e.g., the area size, the number of rooms, and the distance to the nearest
supermarket), we know that the target value (i.e., the house price) is monotonically increasing with
respect to some of the input features (e.g., the area size) if the other features are equal [Potharst and
Feelders, 2002].
Partially monotone regression is a regression analysis that exploits such prior knowledge. The input
of this regression is a feature vector x ∈ Rd , which can be partitioned into x = (p, q) such that
p ∈ Rd−m is non-monotone features and q ∈ Rm is monotone features. The goal of this regression
is to find a function f such that f (x) = f (p, q) ∈ R is monotonically increasing on q. Partially
monotone regression models have advantages over the standard regression models. For example, they
have a better regularization capability [Dugas et al., 2000; Fard et al., 2016; You et al., 2017] and
better interpretability [Gupta et al., 2016]. They can be used for fair machine learning [Wang and
Gupta, 2020].
Many machine learning models have been developed for partially monotone regression. For example,
there are decision-tree based models [Potharst and Feelders, 2002], SVM models [Lauer and Bloch,
2008], boosting models [Bartley et al., 2018], and random forest models [Bartley et al., 2019]. Many
popular open source libraries for gradient boosting can handle partial monotonicity (e.g., CatBoost,
LightGBM, and XGBoost). See a survey paper [Cano et al., 2019] and the references in [Gupta et al.,
2016] for comprehensive surveys.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

