Unsupervised Multi-View Object Segmentation Using
Radiance Field Propagation

Xinhang Liu1
1
HKUST

2

Jiaben Chen2
UC San Diego

Huai Yu3 Yu-Wing Tai1,4 Chi-Keung Tang1
3
4
Wuhan University
Kuaishou Technology

https://xinhangliu.com/nerf_seg

Abstract
We present radiance field propagation (RFP), a novel approach to segmenting
objects in 3D during reconstruction given only unlabeled multi-view images of
a scene. RFP is derived from emerging neural radiance field-based techniques,
which jointly encodes semantics with appearance and geometry. The core of our
method is a novel propagation strategy for individual objects’ radiance fields with
a bidirectional photometric loss, enabling an unsupervised partitioning of a scene
into salient or meaningful regions corresponding to different object instances. To
better handle complex scenes with multiple objects and occlusions, we further
propose an iterative expectation-maximization algorithm to refine object masks.
To the best of our knowledge, RFP is one of the first unsupervised approaches
for tackling 3D real scene object segmentation for neural radiance field (NeRF)
without any supervision, annotations, or other cues such as 3D bounding boxes
and prior knowledge of object class. Experiments demonstrate that RFP achieves
feasible segmentation results that are more accurate than previous unsupervised
image/scene segmentation approaches, and are comparable to existing supervised
NeRF-based methods. The segmented object representations enable individual 3D
object editing operations.

1

Introduction

Despite deep learning’s remarkable success in object detection and segmentation [34, 31, 11] over
the past decade, several issues remain relevant. First, modern neural network approaches require
a massive amount of labeled, heavily curated data [8, 19] to achieve superior performance, or they
may have difficulty dealing with problems in which labeled data are lacking. In addition, most
segmentation methods regard images as flat 2D arrays of pixels where pixel groupings form object
instances. Natural images are 2D projections of the underlying 3D world. Thus, discarding one of the
dimensions gives rise to fundamental ambiguities and challenges to the task resulting from partial or
total occlusion, especially for single-image methods.
The above fundamental issues motivate us to reconsider the problem of object detection and segmentation from a 3D perspective. In this paper, we study the problem of automatically partitioning a 3D
scene into an arbitrary number of salient or meaningful regions, given only 2D images of the scene
from multiple viewpoints.
Estimating semantic labels of a 3D scene is closely related to predicting its geometry and appearance.
Therefore, recent success in novel view synthesis achieved by Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [23]
and its many follow-up work [24, 46, 3, 9] will likely make a long-lasting impact for semantic scene
understanding. For example, SemanticNeRF [51] extends radiance fields to jointly encode semantics
with appearance and geometry; its multi-task learning setting enables smooth and coherent semantics
prediction. Nonetheless, as a supervised approach, SemanticNeRF requires semantic labels for full
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

