Quantifying Statistical Significance of
Neural Network-based Image Segmentation by
Selective Inference
Vo Nguyen Le Duy
Nagoya Institute of Technology and RIKEN
duy.mllab.nit@gmail.com

Shogo Iwazaki
Nagoya Institute of Technology
iwazaki.s.mllab.nit@gmail.com

Ichiro Takeuchi⇤
Nagoya University and RIKEN
ichiro.takeuchi@mae.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Although a vast body of literature relates to image segmentation methods that
use deep neural networks (DNNs), less attention has been paid to assessing the
statistical reliability of segmentation results. In this study, we interpret the segmentation results as hypotheses driven by DNN (called DNN-driven hypotheses) and
propose a method to quantify the reliability of these hypotheses within a statistical
hypothesis testing framework. To this end, we introduce a conditional selective
inference (SI) framework—a new statistical inference framework for data-driven
hypotheses that has recently received considerable attention—to compute exact
(non-asymptotic) valid p-values for the segmentation results. To use the conditional
SI framework for DNN-based segmentation, we develop a new SI algorithm based
on the homotopy method, which enables us to derive the exact (non-asymptotic)
sampling distribution of DNN-driven hypothesis. We conduct several experiments
to demonstrate the performance of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Image segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision, and it has been widely applied in
many areas. The goal of image segmentation is to assign a label to every pixel in an observed image,
such that pixels with the same label share certain characteristics. In the literature, numerous image
segmentation algorithms have been developed based on thresholding [22], region-growing [21], or
graph cuts [2, 3]. However, over the past few years, image segmentation using deep neural networks
(DNNs) has become a popular model that exhibits remarkable performance improvements [19, 1, 25].
Although a vast body of literature relates to DNN-based segmentation methods, less attention has been
paid to evaluating the statistical reliability of the segmentation results. In the absence of statistical
reliability, it is difficult to manage the risk of obtaining incorrect segmentation results, which might be
harmful when they are used in high-stakes decision-making, such as medical diagnoses or automatic
driving. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a valid statistical inference method for data-driven
DNN-based segmentation results that can properly control the risk of obtaining false positives.
Valid statistical inference on the DNN-based segmentation results is intrinsically difficult because the
observed data is used twice: once for segmentation and once again for inference. This is often referred
to as double dipping [14]. In statistics, it has been recognized that naively computing p-values in
⇤

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

