ShapeCrafter: A Recursive Text-Conditioned
3D Shape Generation Model

Rao Fu

Xiao Zhan

Yiwen Chen

Daniel Ritchie

Srinath Sridhar

Brown University
rao_fu@brown.edu
ivl.brown.edu/projects/shapecrafter

Abstract
We present ShapeCrafter, a neural network for recursive text-conditioned 3D
shape generation. Existing methods that generate text-conditioned 3D shapes
consume an entire text prompt to generate a 3D shape in a single step. However, humans tend to describe shapes recursively—we may start with an initial
description and progressively add details based on intermediate results. To capture
this recursive process, we introduce a method to generate a 3D shape distribution, conditioned on an initial phrase, that gradually evolves as more phrases are
added. Since existing datasets are insufficient for training under this approach,
we present Text2Shape++, a large dataset of 369K shape–text pairs that supports
recursive shape generation. To capture local details that are often used to refine
shape descriptions, we build upon vector-quantized deep implicit functions that
generate a distribution of high-quality shapes. Results show that our method can
generate shapes consistent with text descriptions, and shapes evolve gradually as
more phrases are added. Our method supports shape editing, extrapolation, and
can enable new applications in human–machine collaboration for creative design.

1

Introduction

Humans are unique in the animal kingdom in the use of language to describe objects, scenes and
events [10]. We use language not only to describe an object’s physical and functional attributes,
but also to qualify or modify those attribute descriptions. More specifically, we use (linguistic)
recursion [8]—we may start with an initial description of an object, and progressively add phrases
to better describe it or modify it. We use this ability extensively, for instance when describing an
object over the phone. The capability to understand recursive natural language descriptions of objects
is crucial for the wide accessibility of intelligent robots, computational creativity tools, and online
shopping systems.
Driven by recent advances in language modeling [12, 36, 4] and generative image modeling [22],
there has been rapid progress in the problem of text-conditioned image generation [55, 44, 57, 58, 59].
For instance, methods such as DALL-E [39, 38] can generate photorealistic images from only text
descriptions. This success in the 2D domain together with progress in 3D shape representations [32,
29, 31] has led to interest in text-conditioned 3D shape generation [50, 40, 20]. However, existing
methods have several shortcomings. First, these methods are limited to one-step shape generation and
lack the ability to recursively modify or improve generated shapes [13]. Second, unlike in 2D images,
there are no readily available large datasets of 3D shape–text pairs. Existing datasets are limited in
size due to challenges in manually annotating 3D data and do not support recursive generation [6, 2].
Finally, current methods cannot capture local details that are commonly used in language descriptions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

