SALSA: Attacking Lattice Cryptography with
Transformers
Emily Wenger∗
University of Chicago

Mingjie Chen∗
University of Birmingham

Francois Charton†
Meta AI

Kristin Lauter†
Meta AI

Abstract
Currently deployed public-key cryptosystems will be vulnerable to attacks by
full-scale quantum computers. Consequently, “quantum resistant” cryptosystems
are in high demand, and lattice-based cryptosystems, based on a hard problem
known as Learning With Errors (LWE), have emerged as strong contenders for
standardization. In this work, we train transformers to perform modular arithmetic
and mix half-trained models with statistical cryptanalysis techniques to propose
SALSA: a machine learning attack on LWE-based cryptographic schemes. SALSA
can fully recover secrets for small-to-mid size LWE instances with sparse binary
secrets, and may scale to attack real-world LWE-based cryptosystems.

1

Introduction

The looming threat of quantum computers has upended the field of cryptography. Public-key
cryptographic systems have at their heart a difficult-to-solve math problem that guarantees their
security. The security of most current systems (e.g. [58, 28, 50]) relies on problems such as integer
factorization, or the discrete logarithm problem in an abelian group. Unfortunately, these problems
are vulnerable to polynomial time quantum attacks on large-scale quantum computers due to Shor’s
Algorithm [62]. Therefore, the race is on to find new post-quantum cryptosystems (PQC) built upon
alternative hard math problems.
Several leading candidates in the final round of the 5-year NIST PQC competition are lattice-based
cryptosystems, based on the hardness of the Shortest Vector Problem (SVP) [2], which involves
finding short vectors in high dimensional lattices. Many cryptosystems have been proposed based
on hard problems which reduce to some version of the SVP, and known attacks are largely based on
lattice-basis reduction algorithms which aim to find short vectors via algebraic techniques. The LLL
algorithm [43] was the original template for lattice reduction, and although it runs in polynomial
time (in the dimension of the lattice), it returns an exponentially bad approximation to the shortest
vector. It is an active area of research [22, 48, 5] to fully understand the behavior and running time of
a wide range of lattice-basis reduction algorithms, but the best known classical attacks on the PQC
candidates run in time exponential in the dimension of the lattice.
In this paper, we focus on one of the most widely used lattice-based hardness assumptions: Learning
With Errors (LWE) [56]. Given a dimension n, an integer modulus q, and a secret vector s ∈ Znq ,
the learning with errors problem is to find the secret given noisy inner products with random vectors.
LWE-based encryption schemes encrypt a message by blinding it with a noisy inner product. Given a
random vector a ∈ Znq , the noisy inner product is b := a · s + e mod q, where e is an “error” vector
sampled from a narrow Gaussian distribution (so its entries are small, thus the reference to noise).
∗
†

Co-first authors, work done while at Meta AI
Co-last authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

