Byzantine Spectral Ranking

Arnhav Datar ∗
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
adatar@cmu.edu

Arun Rajkumar ∗
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
arunr@cse.iitm.ac.in

John Augustine†
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
augustine@iitm.ac.in

Abstract
We study the problem of rank aggregation where the goal is to obtain a global
ranking by aggregating pair-wise comparisons of voters over a set of objects. We
consider an adversarial setting where the voters are partitioned into two sets. The
first set votes in a stochastic manner according to the popular score-based BradleyTerry-Luce (BTL) model for pairwise comparisons. The second set comprises
malicious Byzantine voters trying to deteriorate the ranking. We consider a stronglyadversarial scenario where the Byzantine voters know the BTL scores, the votes of
the good voters, the algorithm, and can collude with each other. We first show that
the popular spectral ranking based Rank-Centrality algorithm, though optimal for
the BTL model, does not perform well even when a small constant fraction of the
voters are Byzantine.
We introduce the Byzantine Spectral Ranking Algorithm (and a faster variant of
it), which produces a reliable ranking when the number of good voters exceeds the
number of Byzantine voters. We show that no algorithm can produce a satisfactory
ranking with probability > 1/2 for all BTL weights when there are more Byzantine voters than good voters, showing that our algorithm works for all possible
population fractions. We support our theoretical results with experimental results
on synthetic and real datasets to demonstrate the failure of the Rank-Centrality
algorithm under several adversarial scenarios and how the proposed Byzantine
Spectral Ranking algorithm is robust in obtaining good rankings.

1

Introduction

Rank aggregation is a fundamental task in a wide spectrum of learning and social contexts such
as social choice [Soufiani et al., 2014, Caplin and Nalebuff, 1991], web search and information
retrieval [Brin and Page, 1998, Dwork et al., 2001], recommendation systems [Baltrunas et al., 2010]
and crowd sourcing [Chen et al., 2013]. Given pairwise comparison information over a set of n
objects, the goal is to identify a ranking that best respects the revealed preferences. Frequently, we
are also interested in the scores associated with the objects to deduce the intensity of the resulting
preference. There have been several solutions to this problem including Spectral Ranking methods
such as Rank-Centrality [Negahban et al., 2017] and MLE methods [Ford, 1957].
The Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model [Bradley and Terry, 1952, Luce, 1959] has been prevalent for
a vast variety of ranking algorithms. The BTL model assumes that there are n objects that are to be
∗

Supported in part by the Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, IIT Madras.
Supported in part by the Cryptography, Cybersecurity, and Distributed Trust pCoE and the Accenture CoE
at IIT Madras.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

