HUMUS-Net: Hybrid Unrolled Multi-Scale Network
Architecture for Accelerated MRI Reconstruction
Zalan Fabian
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
zfabian@usc.edu

Berk Tinaz
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
tinaz@usc.edu

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
soltanol@usc.edu

Abstract
In accelerated MRI reconstruction, the anatomy of a patient is recovered from a set
of under-sampled and noisy measurements. Deep learning approaches have been
proven to be successful in solving this ill-posed inverse problem and are capable of
producing very high quality reconstructions. However, current architectures heavily
rely on convolutions, that are content-independent and have difficulties modeling
long-range dependencies in images. Recently, Transformers, the workhorse of
contemporary natural language processing, have emerged as powerful building
blocks for a multitude of vision tasks. These models split input images into nonoverlapping patches, embed the patches into lower-dimensional tokens and utilize
a self-attention mechanism that does not suffer from the aforementioned weaknesses of convolutional architectures. However, Transformers incur extremely
high compute and memory cost when 1) the input image resolution is high and 2)
when the image needs to be split into a large number of patches to preserve fine
detail information, both of which are typical in low-level vision problems such
as MRI reconstruction, having a compounding effect. To tackle these challenges,
we propose HUMUS-Net, a hybrid architecture that combines the beneficial implicit bias and efficiency of convolutions with the power of Transformer blocks
in an unrolled and multi-scale network. HUMUS-Net extracts high-resolution
features via convolutional blocks and refines low-resolution features via a novel
Transformer-based multi-scale feature extractor. Features from both levels are then
synthesized into a high-resolution output reconstruction. Our network establishes
new state of the art on the largest publicly available MRI dataset, the fastMRI
dataset. We further demonstrate the performance of HUMUS-Net on two other
popular MRI datasets and perform fine-grained ablation studies to validate our
design.

1

Introduction

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a medical imaging technique that uses strong magnetic fields
to picture the anatomy and physiological processes of the patient. MRI is one of the most popular
imaging modalities as it is non-invasive and doesn’t expose the patient to harmful ionizing radiation.
The MRI scanner obtains measurements of the body in the spatial frequency domain also called
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

