Dataset Distillation using Neural Feature Regression

Yongchao Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
yongchao.zhou@mail.utoronto.ca

Ehsan Nezhadarya
Toronto AI Lab
LG Electronics Canada
ehsan.nezhadarya@lge.com

Jimmy Ba
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
jba@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Dataset distillation aims to learn a small synthetic dataset that preserves most of
the information from the original dataset. Dataset distillation can be formulated
as a bi-level meta-learning problem where the outer loop optimizes the metadataset and the inner loop trains a model on the distilled data. Meta-gradient
computation is one of the key challenges in this formulation, as differentiating
through the inner loop learning procedure introduces significant computation and
memory costs. In this paper, we address these challenges using neural Feature
Regression with Pooling (FRePo), achieving the state-of-the-art performance with
an order of magnitude less memory requirement and two orders of magnitude
faster training than previous methods. The proposed algorithm is analogous to
truncated backpropagation through time with a pool of models to alleviate various
types of overfitting in dataset distillation. FRePo significantly outperforms the
previous methods on CIFAR100, Tiny ImageNet, and ImageNet-1K. Furthermore,
we show that high-quality distilled data can greatly improve various downstream
applications, such as continual learning and membership inference defense. Please
check out our webpage at https://sites.google.com/view/frepo.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation [1] is a technique in deep learning to compress knowledge for easy deployment.
Most previous works focus on model distillation [2, 3] where the knowledge acquired by a large
teacher model is transferred to a small student model. In contrast, dataset distillation [4, 5] aims to
learn a small set of synthetic examples preserving most of the information from a large dataset such
that a model trained on it can achieve similar test performance as one trained on the original dataset.
Distilled data can accelerate model training and reduce the cost of storing and sharing a dataset.
Moreover, its highly condensed and synthetic nature can also benefit various applications, such as
continual learning [5–8], neural architecture search [5, 7], and privacy-preserving tasks [9, 10].
Dataset distillation was first studied by Maclaurin et al. [11] in the context of gradient-based hyperparameter optimization and subsequently Wang et al. [4] formally proposed dataset distillation as a new
task. Dataset distillation can be naturally formulated as a bi-level meta-learning problem. The inner
loop optimizes the model parameters on the distilled data (meta-parameters), while the outer loop
refines the distilled data with meta-gradient updates.
One key challenge in dataset distillation is computing the meta-gradient. Several methods [4, 11–13]
compute it by back-propagating through the unrolled computation graph, but they often suffer from
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

