On Gap-dependent Bounds for
Offline Reinforcement Learning
Xinqi Wang
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
wangxqkaxdd@gmail.com
Qiwen Cui
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
Engineering
University of Washington
qwcui@cs.washington.edu

Simon S. Du
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
Engineering
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a systematic study on gap-dependent sample complexity in
offline reinforcement learning. Prior work showed when the density ratio between
an optimal policy and the behavior policy is upper bounded (the optimal policy
coverage assumption), then the agent can achieve an O ✏12 rate, which is also
minimax optimal. We show under the optimal policy coverage assumption, the rate
can be improved to O 1✏ when there is a positive sub-optimality gap in the optimal
Q-function. Furthermore, we show when the visitation probabilities of the behavior
policy are uniformly lower bounded for states where an optimal policy’s visitation
probabilities are positive (the uniform optimal policy coverage assumption), the
sample complexity of identifying an optimal policy is independent of 1✏ . Lastly, we
present nearly-matching lower bounds to complement our gap-dependent upper
bounds.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to learn a policy that maximizes the long-term reward in unknown
environments [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. The success of reinforcement learning often relies on being
able to deploy the algorithms that directly interact with the environment. However, such direct interactions with real environments can be expensive or even impossible in many real-world applications,
e.g., health and medicine [Murphy et al., 2001, Gottesman et al., 2019], education [Mandel et al.,
2014], conversational AI [Ghandeharioun et al., 2019] and recommendation systems [Chen et al.,
2019]. Instead, we have access to a dataset generated from some past suboptimal policies. Offline
reinforcement learning (offline RL) aims to find a near-optimal policy using the offline dataset, and
has achieved promising empirical successes [Lange et al., 2012, Levine et al., 2020].
Recently, a line of works showed that under the single policy coverage assumption (Assumption 3.2),
one can obtain a near-optimal policy with polynomial number of samples [Rashidinejad et al., 2021,
Xie et al., 2021b, Yin and Wang, 2021, Xie et al., 2021a, Li et al., 2022]. In particular,
⇣ for the
⌘tabular
⇤
e H 3 SC
setting, recent works have obtained minimax optimal sample complexity bounds ⇥
where
✏2
⇤
H is the planning horizon, S is the number of states, C is the constant for the single policy coverage
assumption, and ✏ is the target accuracy [Xie et al., 2021b, Li et al., 2022]. The O 1/✏2 is for the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

