CageNeRF: Cage-based Neural Radiance Field for
Generalized 3D Deformation and Animation
Yicong Peng1
Yichao Yan2∗
Shenqi Liu2
Yuhao Cheng2
2
3
1∗
Shanyan Guan
Bowen Pan
Guangtao Zhai
Xiaokang Yang2
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Alibaba Group
{jack-sparrow,yichaoyan,lsqlsq,chengyuhao,shyanguan,zhaiguangtao,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
bowen.pbw@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
While implicit representations have achieved high-fidelity results in 3D rendering,
it remains challenging to deforming and animating the implicit field. Existing
works typically leverage data-dependent models as deformation priors, such as
SMPL for human body animation. However, this dependency on category-specific
priors limits them to generalize to other objects. To solve this problem, we propose
a novel framework for deforming and animating the neural radiance field learned on
arbitrary objects. The key insight is that we introduce a cage-based representation
as deformation prior, which is category-agnostic. Specifically, the deformation
is performed based on an enclosing polygon mesh with sparsely defined vertices
called cage inside the rendering space, where each point is projected into a novel
position based on the barycentric interpolation of the deformed cage vertices. In this
way, we transform the cage into a generalized constraint, which is able to deform
and animate arbitrary target objects while preserving geometry details. Based on
extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework in the
task of geometry editing, object animation and deformation transfer. The code and
supplementary materials are available at https://pengyicong.github.io/CageNeRF/.

1

Introduction

Editing and manipulating 3D object is a fundamental task for generating immerse contents, which
enables numerous applications in VR/AR. Although recent advances in implicit neural rendering,
such as neural radiance field (NeRF) [29], are able to produce photo-realistic modeling of static
objects, how to edit the 3D content remains a challenging task. In this paper, we focus on learning a
general deformation field for NeRF, enabling the deformation and animation of general objects.
Editing explicit 3D representations, such as point cloud and mesh, has been well studied. Point cloud
and deformable mesh [6, 3, 13] store the geometry information in 3D space, which are directly
editable and are widely utilized in computer graphics for modeling dynamic objects [30]. Cage-based
deformation [20, 21, 25], for example, has been used to animate polygon mesh, where per-vertex
deformation can be generated by translations prescribed on a coarse cage. While mesh and point
cloud representations are relatively flexible to edit and animate, it is difficult to produce geometrically
accurate and visually-faithful complex objects and scenes. Additional data such as normal maps and
textures are usually required to achieve high-quality rendering results.
Recent works on implicit neural rendering, such as NeRF, employ multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
as a universal approximator [15, 37], allowing them to approximate a continuous volumetric scene
∗

Corresponding authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

