Envy-free Policy Teaching to Multiple Agents
Jiarui Gan
University of Oxford
jiarui.gan@cs.ox.ac.uk

Rupak Majumdar
MPI-SWS
rupak@mpi-sws.org

Goran Radanovic
MPI-SWS
gradanovic@mpi-sws.org

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS
adish@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
We study envy-free policy teaching. A number of agents independently explore a
common Markov decision process (MDP), but each with their own reward function
and discounting rate. A teacher wants to teach a target policy to this diverse
group of agents, by means of modifying the agents’ reward functions: providing
additional bonuses to certain actions, or penalizing them. When personalized
reward modification programs are used, an important question is how to design the
programs so that the agents think they are treated fairly. We adopt the notion of
envy-freeness (EF) from the literature on fair division to formalize this problem
and investigate several fundamental questions about the existence of EF solutions
in our setting, the computation of cost-minimizing solutions, as well as the price
of fairness (PoF), which measures the increase of cost due to the consideration of
fairness. We show that 1) an EF solution may not exist if penalties are not allowed
in the modifications, but otherwise always exists. 2) Computing a cost-minimizing
EF solution can be formulated as convex optimization and hence solved efficiently.
3) The PoF increases but at most quadratically with the geometric sum of the
discount factor, and at most linearly with the size of the MDP and the number
of agents involved; we present tight asymptotic bounds on the PoF. These results
indicate that fairness can be incorporated in multi-agent teaching without significant
computational or PoF burdens.

1

Introduction

Incentive design is an important approach to influencing rational agents’ behavior. In reinforcement
learning (RL), the incentive of an agent is expressed through their reward function [1]. One can
thus teach a desired policy to an agent by modifying their reward function, in a way that makes
the target policy optimal with respect to the modified rewards. In safe RL, for example, penalties
can be imposed on dangerous actions to prevent an agent from executing them [2]. In many cases,
personalized teaching programs are useful against heterogeneous agents, who might have very
different innate reward functions or apply different discounting rate. As a result, the agents may
find them rewarded/penalized differently for performing the same action in the same situation (see
Figure 1). Concerns of fairness arise, and we ask the question of how to design fair personalized
teaching programs so that the agents think that they are treated fairly.
To be more concrete, consider a language teaching setting modeled as an MDP. Each state of the
MDP represents the overall skill of a student (agent) and is encoded as the student’s performance
on different components such as listening, reading, speaking, and writing. Actions available to the
students are defined by the levels of effort they put into the components, and it is desired that they
always put more effort into the components that they are currently weaker at, which is also the target
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

