Infinite Recommendation Networks: A Data-Centric
Approach

Noveen Sachdeva†

Mehak Preet Dhaliwal†

Carole-Jean Wu‡

University of California, San Diego†

Julian McAuley†

Meta AI‡

{nosachde,mdhaliwal,jmcauley}@ucsd.edu
carolejeanwu@meta.com

Abstract
We leverage the Neural Tangent Kernel and its equivalence to training infinitelywide neural networks to devise ∞-AE: an autoencoder with infinitely-wide bottleneck layers. The outcome is a highly expressive yet simplistic recommendation
model with a single hyper-parameter and a closed-form solution. Leveraging ∞AE’s simplicity, we also develop D ISTILL -CF for synthesizing tiny, high-fidelity
data summaries which distill the most important knowledge from the extremely
large and sparse user-item interaction matrix for efficient and accurate subsequent
data-usage like model training, inference, architecture search, etc. This takes a
data-centric approach to recommendation, where we aim to improve the quality of
logged user-feedback data for subsequent modeling, independent of the learning
algorithm. We particularly utilize the concept of differentiable Gumbel-sampling
to handle the inherent data heterogeneity, sparsity, and semi-structuredness, while
being scalable to datasets with hundreds of millions of user-item interactions. Both
of our proposed approaches significantly outperform their respective state-of-theart and when used together, we observe 96 − 105% of ∞-AE’s performance on
the full dataset with as little as 0.1% of the original dataset size, leading us to
explore the counter-intuitive question: Is more data what you need for better
recommendation?

1

Introduction

The Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) has recently advanced the theoretical understanding of how neural
networks learn [2, 20]. Notably, performing Kernelized Ridge Regression (KRR) with the NTK has
been shown to be equivalent to training infinitely-wide neural networks for an infinite number of SGD
steps. Owing to KRR’s closed-form solution, these networks can be trained in a fast and efficient
manner whilst not sacrificing expressivity. While the application of infinite neural networks is being
explored in various learning problems [48, 3], detailed comparative analyses demonstrate that deep,
finite-width networks tend to perform significantly better than their infinite-width counterparts for a
variety of standard computer-vision tasks [31].
On the contrary, for recommendation tasks, there always has been a debate of linear vs. non-linear
networks [29, 65], along with the importance of increasing the width vs. depth of the network
[11, 39]. At a high level, the general conclusion is that a well-tuned, wide and linear network can
outperform shallow and deep neural networks for recommendation [50]. We extend this debate by
introducing our model ∞-AE, an autoencoder with infinitely wide bottleneck layers and examine its
behavior on the recommendation task. Our evaluation demonstrates significantly improved results
over state-of-the-art (SoTA) models across various datasets and evaluation metrics.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

