Sparse Winning Tickets are Data-Efficient Image Recognizers

Mukund Varma T1 , Xuxi Chen2 , Zhenyu Zhang2 , Tianlong Chen2 ,
Subhashini Venugopalan3 , Zhangyang Wang2
1
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 2 University of Texas at Austin, 3 Google
mukundvarmat@gmail.com, vsubhashini@google.com
{xxchen,zhenyu.zhang,tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Improving the performance of deep networks in data-limited regimes has warranted
much attention. In this work, we empirically show that “winning tickets” (small subnetworks) obtained via magnitude pruning based on the lottery ticket hypothesis [1],
apart from being sparse are also effective recognizers in data-limited regimes.
Based on extensive experiments, we find that in low data regimes (datasets of
50-100 examples per class), sparse winning tickets substantially outperform the
original dense networks. This approach, when combined with augmentations or
fine-tuning from a self-supervised backbone network, shows further improvements
in performance by as much as 16% (absolute) on low sample datasets and longtailed classification. Further, sparse winning tickets are more robust to synthetic
noise and distribution shifts compared to their dense counterparts. Our analysis of
winning tickets on small datasets indicates that, though sparse, the networks retain
density in the initial layers and their representations are more generalizable. Code
is available at https://github.com/VITA-Group/DataEfficientLTH.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional networks [2] have achieved wide success on a variety of tasks, but they do
demand large amounts of data. However, there exist various domains and tasks where training data labeled or unlabeled - are limited. Often, in such data-limited regimes, transfer learning has emerged
as a dominant approach [3] as it achieves superior performance compared to training from scratch
with random initialization [4]. In some domains, the highly specialized training performant models
can still be a challenge, e.g. in scientific or medical images [5], or just images from a different
distribution - differing vastly in size, color, or channels - than seen in typical image datasets. In such
cases, training large-capacity data-hungry networks might be less performant than training models of
similar architecture and lower capacity [6]. While much of the literature on sparser and lower capacity
networks has focused more on efficient models and mobile deployment [7], it is also known [8] that
sparsity as a regularization could reduce overfitting. Thus it is interesting to study sparse networks in
the context of low data or data efficient regimes (Fig. 1).
One of the popular ways of obtaining a sparse network with similar architecture but lower capacity is
pruning [9]. Frankle et. al. [1] formulated the lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) and proposed to use
iterative magnitude-based pruning (IMP). They demonstrated that dense networks can be magnitude
pruned to obtain highly sparse sub-networks (“winning tickets”) which can match or potentially
outperform the original dense network. The caveat is that the winning ticket needs to use the same
random initialization as the original dense network. This approach also induces an inductive bias
specific to the task to be learned, which leads to a better network when compared to a dense network
of similar size trained from scratch [10]. Further, such pruning was recently found to reduce sample
complexity in theory and practice [11]. It has also been suggested that the number of samples required
to achieve zero generalization error is proportional to the number of the non-pruned weights in the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

