Thompson Sampling Efficiently Learns to Control
Diffusion Processes
Mohamad Kazem Shirani Faradonbeh
Department of Statistics
University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602
mohamadksf@uga.edu

Mohamad Sadegh Shirani Faradonbeh
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305
sshirani@stanford.edu

Mohsen Bayati
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305
bayati@stanford.edu

Abstract
Diffusion processes that evolve according to linear stochastic differential equations
are an important family of continuous-time dynamic decision-making models.
Optimal policies are well-studied for them, under full certainty about the drift
matrices. However, little is known about data-driven control of diffusion processes
with uncertain drift matrices as conventional discrete-time analysis techniques are
not applicable. In addition, while the task can be viewed as a reinforcement learning
problem involving exploration and exploitation trade-off, ensuring system stability
is a fundamental component of designing optimal policies. We establish that the
popular Thompson sampling algorithm learns optimal actions fast, incurring only a
square-root of time regret, and also stabilizes the system in a short time period. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first such result for Thompson sampling in
a diffusion process control problem. We validate our theoretical results through
empirical simulations with real matrices. Moreover, we observe that Thompson
sampling significantly improves (worst-case) regret, compared to the state-of-theart algorithms, suggesting Thompson sampling explores in a more guarded fashion.
Our theoretical analysis involves characterization of a certain optimality manifold
that ties the local geometry of the drift parameters to the optimal control of the
diffusion process. We expect this technique to be of broader interest.

1

Introduction

One of the most natural reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms for controlling a diffusion process
with unknown parameters is based on Thompson sampling (TS) [1]: a Bayesian posterior for the
model is calculated based on its time evolution, and a control policy is then designed by treating
a sampled model from the posterior as the truth. Despite its simplicity, guaranteeing efficiency
and whether sampling the actions from the posterior could lead to unbounded future trajectories is
unknown. In fact, the only known such theoretical result for control of a diffusion process is for an
epsilon-greedy type policy that randomize the control actions at a certain rate [2].
In this work, we consider a p dimensional state signal {xt }t≥0 that obeys the (Ito) stochastic
differential equation (SDE)
dxt = (A0 xt + B0 ut ) dt + dWt ,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(1)

