Simple Mechanisms for Welfare Maximization in
Rich Advertising Auctions
Gagan Aggarwal
Google Research
gagana@google.com

Kshipra Bhawalkar
Google Research
kshipra@google.com

Divyarthi Mohan
Tel Aviv University
divyarthim@tau.ac.il

Aranyak Mehta
Google Research
aranyak@google.com

Alexandros Psomas
Purdue University
apsomas@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
Internet ad auctions have evolved from a few lines of text to richer informational
layouts that include images, sitelinks, videos, etc. Ads in these new formats occupy
varying amounts of space, and an advertiser can provide multiple formats, only one
of which can be shown. The seller is now faced with a multi-parameter mechanism
design problem. Computing an efficient allocation is computationally intractable,
and therefore the standard Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) auction, while truthful
and welfare-optimal, is impractical.
In this paper, we tackle a fundamental problem in the design of modern ad auctions.
We adopt a “Myersonian” approach and study allocation rules that are monotone
both in the bid and set of rich ads. We show that such rules can be paired with
a payment function to give a truthful auction. Our main technical challenge is
designing a monotone rule that yields a good approximation to the optimal welfare.
Monotonicity doesn’t hold for standard algorithms, e.g. the incremental bangper-buck order, that give good approximations to “knapsack-like” problems such
as ours. In fact, we show that no deterministic monotone rule can approximate
the optimal welfare within a factor better than 2 (while there is a non-monotone
FPTAS). Our main result is a new, simple, greedy and monotone allocation rule that
guarantees a 3 approximation. In ad auctions in practice, monotone allocation rules
are often paired with the so-called Generalized Second Price (GSP) payment rule,
which charges the minimum threshold price below which the allocation changes.
We prove that, even though our monotone allocation rule paired with GSP is not
truthful, its Price of Anarchy (PoA) is bounded. Under standard no-overbidding
assumptions, we prove bounds on the a pure and Bayes-Nash PoA. Finally, we
experimentally test our algorithms on real-world data.

1

Introduction

Internet Ad Auctions, in addition to being influential in advancing auction theory and mechanism
design, are a half-a-trillion dollar industry [CF21]. A significant advertising channel is sponsored
search advertising: ads that are shown along with search results when you type a query in a search
box. These ads traditionally were a few lines of text and a link, leading to the standard abstraction
for ad auctions: multiple items for sale to a set of unit-demand bidders, where each bidder i has
a private value vi · ↵is for the ad in position s, which has click-through rate ↵is . However, when
using your favorite search engine, you might instead encounter sitelinks/extensions leading to parts
of the advertisers’ website, seller ratings indicating how other users rate this advertiser or offers for
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

