Discrete-Convex-Analysis-Based Framework for
Warm-Starting Algorithms with Predictions

Shinsaku Sakaue
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
sakaue@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Taihei Oki
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
oki@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Augmenting algorithms with learned predictions is a promising approach for going
beyond worst-case bounds. Dinitz, Im, Lavastida, Moseley, and Vassilvitskii (2021)
have demonstrated that warm-starts with learned dual solutions can improve the
time complexity of the Hungarian method for weighted perfect bipartite matching.
We extend and improve their framework in a principled manner via discrete convex
analysis (DCA), a discrete analog of convex analysis. We show the usefulness of
our DCA-based framework by applying it to weighted perfect bipartite matching,
weighted matroid intersection, and discrete energy minimization for computer
vision. Our DCA-based framework yields time complexity bounds that depend on
the ℓ∞ -distance from a predicted solution to an optimal solution, which has two
advantages relative to the previous ℓ1 -distance-dependent bounds: time complexity
bounds are smaller, and learning of predictions is more sample efficient. We also
discuss whether to learn primal or dual solutions from the DCA perspective.

1

Introduction

Discrete optimization algorithms are applied to many real-world instances that take place repetitively.
For example, recommendation systems repeat to solve bipartite matching instances to match users
with services, and we solve a series of pixel-labeling instances to process images of a movie. Since
such instances arising in the same domain often have some tendencies, using predictions made from
past instances to improve algorithms’ performance is a natural and promising idea. A recent line of
work [36, 41, 4, 34, 43, 2, 5] successfully combined online algorithms with predictions and showed
that those algorithms perform provably better than known worst-case bounds if predictions are good
while enjoying worst-case guarantees even if predictions are poor. See [37] for a survey.
Dinitz et al. [17] recently initiated the study of improving the time complexity of algorithms with predictions. They focused on warm-starting the well-known Hungarian method for the weighted perfect
bipartite matching
problem with predictions on dual solutions, and obtained the time complexity of
√
O(min{m n∥p̂ − p∗ ∥1 , mn}), where n and m are the number of vertices and edges, respectively,
and p̂ ∈ Rn is a prediction on an optimal dual solution p∗ ∈ Rn . That is, while the Hungarian method
takes O(mn) time in the worst case, it can run faster given a good prediction. Dinitz et al. [17] also
presented an algorithm for converting infeasible learned dual solutions into initial feasible solutions,
and proved an O(C 2 n3 log n) sample complexity bound for learning p̂ that approximately minimizes
n
the expected ℓ1 -error E∥p̂ − p∗ ∥1 , assuming an optimal prediction is contained in [−C, +C] . They
thus established an end-to-end framework for warm-starting the Hungarian method with predictions.
While Dinitz et al. [17] has shown that their prediction-based warm-start framework is effective for
bipartite matching and b-matching, its application to other problems remains to be studied. Since
their idea has the potential to yield strong beyond-the-worst-case time complexity bounds, the next
question of theoretical interest is: when and how can we warm-start algorithms with predictions?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

