Root Cause Analysis of Failures in Microservices
through Causal Discovery

Azam Ikram1

Sarthak Chakraborty2 Subrata Mitra2 Shiv Kumar Saini2
Saurabh Bagchi1 Murat Kocaoglu1
1
Purdue University, USA 2 Adobe Research, India
{mikram,sbagchi,mkocaoglu}@purdue.edu
{sarchakr,sumitra,shsaini}@adobe.com

Abstract
Most cloud applications use a large number of smaller sub-components (called microservices) that interact with each other in the form of a complex graph to provide
the overall functionality to the user. While the modularity of the microservice architecture is beneficial for rapid software development, maintaining and debugging
such a system quickly in cases of failure is challenging. We propose a scalable
algorithm for rapidly detecting the root cause of failures in complex microservice
architectures. The key ideas behind our novel hierarchical and localized learning
approach are: (1) to treat the failure as an intervention on the root cause to quickly
detect it, (2) only learn the portion of the causal graph related to the root cause,
thus avoiding a large number of costly conditional independence tests, and (3)
hierarchically explore the graph. The proposed technique is highly scalable and produces useful insights about the root cause, while the use of traditional techniques
becomes infeasible due to high computation time. Our solution is application
agnostic and relies only on the data collected for diagnosis. For the evaluation,
we compare the proposed solution with a modified version of the PC algorithm
and the state-of-the-art for root cause analysis. The results show a considerable
improvement in top-k recall while significantly reducing the execution time.

1

Introduction

Root Cause Analysis (RCA) is widely used to ensure the reliability of production systems in many
domains such as IT operations [25], telecommunications [35], and medicine [21]. Modern production
systems follow a network topology that consists of multiple components connected through complex
dependencies. For instance, cloud applications typically follow microservice-based architecture [26].
Such applications have the benefit of a simple development process, uncomplicated maintenance,
and flexible deployment [18]. A typical cloud-based application uses several microservices, each
performing some small tasks [12]. Each microservice is further instrumented to monitor its state and
availability which results in thousands of metrics to monitor [5]. The larger number of metrics makes
it challenging to find the root cause of the failures in a timely fashion. It has been reported that it
takes on average 3 hours to identify the root cause of a failure without using any automated tools
[30]. Since enterprise cloud services providers have prices tied with availability guarantees, a delay
in detecting the root cause of a fault can result in significant revenue loss.
Causal structure discovery-based Root Cause Analysis techniques have been used recently to find the
root cause(s) of a fault in cloud applications [22, 30, 11, 27, 1, 6, 10]. The goal is to construct a graph
with nodes as metrics and a directed edge between two nodes showing the direction and magnitude of
the causal effect. A direct application of causal discovery algorithms like PC [27] is infeasible for a
microservice system due to a large number of metrics. Existing approaches reduce the number of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

