Sample-Efficient Learning of Correlated Equilibria in
Extensive-Form Games
Ziang Song
Stanford University
ziangs@stanford.edu

Song Mei
UC Berkeley
songmei@berkeley.edu

Yu Bai
Salesforce Research
yu.bai@salesforce.com

Abstract
Imperfect-Information Extensive-Form Games (IIEFGs) is a prevalent model for
real-world games involving imperfect information and sequential plays. The
Extensive-Form Correlated Equilibrium (EFCE) has been proposed as a natural
solution concept for multi-player general-sum IIEFGs. However, existing algorithms for finding an EFCE require full feedback from the game, and it remains
open how to efficiently learn the EFCE in the more challenging bandit feedback
setting where the game can only be learned by observations from repeated playing.
This paper presents the first sample-efficient algorithm for learning the EFCE
from bandit feedback. We begin by proposing K-EFCE—a generalized definition
that allows players to observe and deviate from the recommended actions for
K times. The K-EFCE includes the EFCE as a special case at K = 1, and is
an increasingly stricter notion of equilibrium as K increases. We then design
an uncoupled no-regret algorithm that finds an ε-approximate K-EFCE within
K
2
e
O(max
i Xi Ai /ε ) iterations in the full feedback setting, where Xi and Ai are the
number of information sets and actions for the i-th player. Our algorithm works by
minimizing a wide-range regret at each information set that takes into account all
possible recommendation histories. Finally, we design a sample-based variant of
our algorithm that learns an ε-approximate K-EFCE within e
O(maxi Xi AK+1
/ε2 )
i
episodes of play in the bandit feedback setting. When specialized to K = 1, this
gives the first sample-efficient algorithm for learning EFCE from bandit feedback.

1

Introduction

This paper is concerned with the problem of learning equilibria in Imperfect-Information ExtensiveForm Games (IIEFGs) [29]. IIEFGs is a general formulation for multi-player games with both
imperfect information (such as private information) and sequential play, and has been used for
modeling and solving real-world games such as Poker [23, 32, 7, 8], Bridge [39], Scotland Yard [37],
and so on. In a two-player zero-sum IIEFG, the standard solution concept is the celebrated notion of
Nash Equilibrium (NE) [35], that is, a pair of independent policies for both players such that no player
can gain by deviating. However, in multi-player general-sum IIEFGs, computing an (approximate)
NE is PPAD-hard and unlikely to admit efficient algorithms [12]. A more amenable class of solution
concepts is the notion of correlated equilibria [4], that is, a correlated policy for all players such that
no player can gain by deviating from the correlated play using certain types of deviations.
The notion of Extensive-Form Correlated Equilibria (EFCE) proposed by Von Stengel and Forges
[40] is a natural definition of correlated equilibria in multi-player general-sum IIEFGs. An EFCE is a
correlated policy that can be thought of as a “mediator” of the game who recommends actions to each
player privately and sequentially (at visited information sets), in a way that disincentivizes any player
to deviate from the recommended actions. Polynomial-time algorithms for computing EFCEs have
been established, by formulating as a linear program and using the ellipsoid method [24, 36, 26],
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

