Trading Off Resource Budgets For
Improved Regret Bounds
Damon Falck⇤
University of Oxford
damon.falck@gmail.com

Thomas Orton⇤
University of Oxford
thomas.orton@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In this work we consider a variant of adversarial online learning where in each
round one picks B out of N arms and incurs cost equal to the minimum of the costs
of each arm chosen. We propose an algorithm called Follow the Perturbed Multiple
Leaders (FPML) for this problem, which we show (by adapting the techniques
1
B
of Kalai and Vempala [2005]) achieves expected regret O(T B+1 ln(N ) B+1 ) over
time horizon T relative to the single best arm in hindsight. This introduces a
trade-off between the budget B and the single-best-arm regret, and we proceed to
investigate several applications of this trade-off. First, we observe that algorithms
which use standard regret minimizers as subroutines can sometimes be adapted
by replacing these subroutines with FPML, and we use this to generalize existing
algorithms for Online Submodular Function Maximization [Streeter and Golovin,
2008] in both the full feedback and semi-bandit feedback settings. Next, we
empirically evaluate our new algorithms on an online black-box hyperparameter
optimization problem. Finally, we show how FPML can lead to new algorithms for
Linear Programming which require stronger oracles at the benefit of fewer oracle
calls.

1

Introduction

Adversarial online learning is a well-studied framework for sequential decision making with numerous
applications. In each round t = 1, . . . , T , an adversary chooses a hidden cost function ct : A ! [0, 1]
from a set of arms A to costs in [0, 1]. An algorithm must then choose an arm at 2 A, and incurs
cost ct (at ). In the full feedback setting (Online Learning with Experts (OLwE)), the algorithm then
observes the cost function ct . In the partial feedback setting (Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB)) the
algorithm only observes the incurred cost ct (at ). The objective is to find algorithms which minimize
regret, defined as the difference between the algorithm’s cumulative cost and the cumulative cost of
the single best arm in hindsight.
In this paper we consider a search-like variant of these problems where in each round one can pick
a subset of arms St ⇢ A with |St | = B 1, and keep the arm with the smallest cost. This variant
appears naturally in many settings, including:
1. Online algorithm portfolios [Gomes and Selman, 2001]: In each round t, one receives a
problem instance xt , and can pick a subset St ⇢ A of algorithms to run in parallel to solve
xt . For example, xt could be a boolean satisfiability (SAT) problem, and A could be a
collection of different SAT solving algorithms. We let ct (a) = 0 if a solves xt and ct (a) = 1
otherwise. Then if any a 2 St finds a solution to xt we incur 0 cost in this round. Another
example is online hyperparameter optimization (see Section 4).
*

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

