Trajectory of Mini-Batch Momentum:
Batch Size Saturation and Convergence in High
Dimensions
Kiwon Lee
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
McGill University
Montreal, QC H3A 0B9
kiwon.lee@mail.mcgill.ca

Andrew N. Cheng
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
McGill University
Montreal, QC H3A 0B9
andrew.cheng@mail.mcgill.ca

Courtney Paquette
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
McGill University
Montreal, QC H3A 0B9
courtney.paquette@mcgill.ca

Elliot Paquette
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
McGill University
Montreal, QC H3A 0B9
elliot.paquette@mcgill.ca

Abstract
We analyze the dynamics of large batch stochastic gradient descent with momentum
(SGD+M) on the least squares problem when both the number of samples and
dimensions are large. In this setting, we show that the dynamics of SGD+M
converge to a deterministic discrete Volterra equation as dimension increases,
which we analyze. We identify a stability measurement, the implicit conditioning
ratio (ICR), which regulates the ability of SGD+M to accelerate the algorithm.
Whenpthe batch size exceeds this ICR, SGD+M converges linearly at a rate of
O(1/ ), matching optimal full-batch momentum (in particular performing as
well as a full-batch but with a fraction of the size). For batch sizes smaller than the
ICR, in contrast, SGD+M has rates that scale like a multiple of the single batch
SGD rate. We give explicit choices for the learning rate and momentum parameter
in terms of the Hessian spectra that achieve this performance.
Stochastic learning algorithms are the methods of choice for optimization of high-dimensional
problems. Often stochastic learning algorithms incorporate momentum into their stochastic gradients
to improve practical performance. Perhaps the simplest, stochastic gradient descent with momentum
(SGD+M) adds a fixed multiple of the backward difference of iterates to its stochastic gradient
estimator, see Section 1 for details. In the influential work of [33], the authors empirically show
augmenting stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum significantly improves training
performance of deep neural networks. Despite the wide usage of these stochastic momentum methods
in machine learning practice, our understanding of its behaviour is not well–understood.
It has been hypothesized that stochastic-based momentum algorithms improve training because
they are employed on a large batch of a data set [15]; thereby emulating the speed-up one sees
in full-batch settings. For many learning problems, the “large batch” setting is often paired with
high-dimensional problems, meaning there are many samples (and likely also many features to have
interesting behavior). While we know of no theoretical work that can fully justify these claims for
standard SGD+M, there have been some recent progress [6, 7]. For variations of SGD+M and SGD
with Nesterov momentum [24] there has been some success in proving accelerated rates [3, 13, 18].
One reason it has been challenging is that the typical approaches for analyzing SGD+M do not
distinguish large and small batch sizes. We address this problem in this paper and we introduce a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

