Conditional Independence Testing with
Heteroskedastic Data and Applications to Causal
Discovery
Wiebke Günther
German Aerospace Center
Institute of Data Science
07745 Jena, Germany
wiebke.guenther@dlr.de

Urmi Ninad ∗
Technische Universität Berlin
10623 Berlin, Germany
urmi.ninad@tu-berlin.de

Jonas Wahl ∗
Technische Universität Berlin
10623 Berlin, Germany
wahl@tu-berlin.de

Jakob Runge
German Aerospace Center
Institute of Data Science
07745 Jena, Germany
and
Technische Universität Berlin
10623 Berlin, Germany
jakob.runge@dlr.de

Abstract
Conditional independence (CI) testing is frequently used in data analysis and machine learning for various scientific fields and it forms the basis of constraint-based
causal discovery. Oftentimes, CI testing relies on strong, rather unrealistic assumptions. One of these assumptions is homoskedasticity, in other words, a constant
conditional variance is assumed. We frame heteroskedasticity in a structural causal
model framework and present an adaptation of the partial correlation CI test that
works well in the presence of heteroskedastic noise, given that expert knowledge
about the heteroskedastic relationships is available. Further, we provide theoretical
consistency results for the proposed CI test which carry over to causal discovery
under certain assumptions. Numerical causal discovery experiments demonstrate
that the adapted partial correlation CI test outperforms the standard test in the
presence of heteroskedasticity and is on par for the homoskedastic case. Finally,
we discuss the general challenges and limits as to how expert knowledge about
heteroskedasticity can be accounted for in causal discovery.

1

Introduction

Conditional independence (CI) testing is a frequently used step across a wide range of machine
learning tasks for various scientific fields. It is also very challenging. Discovering causal relationships
from purely observational data is an even more challenging task and an important topic in sciences
where real experiments are infeasible, e.g. in climate research [Ebert-Uphoff and Deng, 2012, Runge
et al., 2019a]. One can distinguish several frameworks that address this problem: score-based
approaches [Chickering, 2002], restricted structural causal models [Peters et al., 2017], and constraintbased methods [Spirtes et al., 2000] that rely on CI testing. A typical representative is the PC
algorithm [Spirtes and Glymour, 1991] which can be combined with any conditional independence
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

