So3krates: Equivariant attention for interactions on
arbitrary length-scales in molecular systems
J. Thorben Frank1,2⇤

Oliver T. Unke1,2,3

Klaus-Robert Müller1,2,3,4,5†
1

Machine Learning Group, TU Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
BIFOLD, Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, Germany
3
Google Research, Brain team, Berlin
4
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea
5
Max Planck Institut für Informatik, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany

2

Abstract
The application of machine learning methods in quantum chemistry has enabled
the study of numerous chemical phenomena, which are computationally intractable
with traditional ab-initio methods. However, some quantum mechanical properties
of molecules and materials depend on non-local electronic effects, which are often
neglected due to the difficulty of modeling them efficiently. This work proposes a
modified attention mechanism adapted to the underlying physics, which allows to
recover the relevant non-local effects. Namely, we introduce spherical harmonic
coordinates (SPHCs) to reflect higher-order geometric information for each atom
in a molecule, enabling a non-local formulation of attention in the SPHC space.
Our proposed model S O 3 KRATES3 – a self-attention based message passing neural
network – uncouples geometric information from atomic features, making them
independently amenable to attention mechanisms. Thereby we construct spherical
filters, which extend the concept of continuous filters in Euclidean space to SPHC
space and serve as foundation for a spherical self-attention mechanism. We show
that in contrast to other published methods, S O 3 KRATES is able to describe nonlocal quantum mechanical effects over arbitrary length scales. Further, we find
evidence that the inclusion of higher-order geometric correlations increases data
efficiency and improves generalization. S O 3 KRATES matches or exceeds stateof-the-art performance on popular benchmarks, notably, requiring a significantly
lower number of parameters (0.25–0.4x) while at the same time giving a substantial
speedup (6–14x for training and 2–11x for inference) compared to other models.

1

Introduction

Atomistic simulations use long time-scale molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories to predict macroscopic properties that arise from interactions on the microscopic scale [1–3]. Their predictive
reliability is determined by the accuracy of the underlying force field (FF), which needs to be queried
at every time step. This quickly becomes a computational bottleneck if the forces are determined
from first principles, which may be required for accurate results. To that end, machine learning
⇤

thorbenjan.frank@googlemail.com
klaus-robert.mueller@tu-berlin.de
3
https://github.com/thorben-frank/mlff

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

