Distribution-Informed Neural Networks for Domain
Adaptation Regression
Jun Wu, Jingrui He, Sheng Wang, Kaiyu Guan, Elizabeth Ainsworth
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{junwu3,jingrui,sheng12,kaiyug,ainswort}@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of domain adaptation regression, which learns
a regressor for a target domain by leveraging the knowledge from a relevant source
domain. We start by proposing a distribution-informed neural network, which
aims to build distribution-aware relationship of inputs and outputs from different
domains. This allows us to develop a simple domain adaptation regression framework, which subsumes popular domain adaptation approaches based on domain
invariant representation learning, reweighting, and adaptive Gaussian process. The
resulting findings not only explain the connections of existing domain adaptation
approaches, but also motivate the efficient training of domain adaptation approaches
with overparameterized neural networks. We also analyze the convergence and
generalization error bound of our framework based on the distribution-informed
neural network. Specifically, our generalization bound focuses explicitly on the
maximum mean discrepancy in the RKHS induced by the neural tangent kernel
of distribution-informed neural network. This is in sharp contrast to the existing
work which relies on domain discrepancy in the latent feature space heuristically
formed by one or several hidden neural layers. The efficacy of our framework is
also empirically verified on a variety of domain adaptation regression benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Domain adaptation tackles the knowledge transfer from a source domain with adequate label information to a relevant target domain with little or no label information. It is shown [5, 39, 11, 13] that the
generalization performance on the target domain can be improved by leveraging the source domain
knowledge in both classification [60] and regression [12] settings.
In this paper, we focus on studying the domain adaptation regression problem, as classification can
be naturally formulated as regression [34]. In the past decades, most domain adaptation approaches
were developed using the following paradigms: learning domain invariant representation [42, 43],
reweighting the source examples [11, 13, 30], or deriving adaptive transfer kernel for Gaussian
process [7, 44]. More recently, modern practice for domain adaptation repeatedly demonstrates the
benefit of considering overparameterized neural networks as the backbones for feature extraction [1,
37, 20, 47, 51]. In this case, a L-layer neural network would be manually divided into two parts: the
feature extraction function (e.g., the first l layers) and the prediction function (e.g., the left L l
layers). Then, the core idea of domain adaptation with overparameterized neural networks is to
enhance the adaptation of source and target domains in the hidden feature space learned by the feature
extraction layers. Nevertheless, it is unclear how those overparameterized neural networks affect the
convergence and generalization of domain adaptation approaches during model training. Moreover,
the heuristic selection of feature extraction layers might lead to sub-optimal performance of domain
adaptation approaches in practice, as the lower and higher layers of an overparameterized neural
network might encode different information [58].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

