Semi-Infinitely Constrained Markov Decision
Processes
Liangyu Zhang
Academy of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies
Peking University
zhangliangyu@pku.edu.cn

Yang Peng
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
pengyang@pku.edu.cn

Wenhao Yang
Academy of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies
Peking University
yangwenhaosms@pku.edu.cn

Zhihua Zhang
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a generalization of constrained Markov decision processes (CMDPs)
that we call the semi-infinitely constrained Markov decision process (SICMDP).
Particularly, we consider a continuum of constraints instead of a finite number of
constraints as in the case of ordinary CMDPs. We also devise a reinforcement
learning algorithm for SICMDPs that we call SI-CRL. We first transform the
reinforcement learning problem into a linear semi-infinitely programming (LSIP)
problem and then use the dual exchange method in the LSIP literature to solve it.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to apply tools from semi-infinitely
programming (SIP) to solve constrained reinforcement learning problems. We
present theoretical analysis for SI-CRL, identifying its sample complexity and
iteration complexity. We also conduct extensive numerical examples to illustrate
the SICMDP model and validate the SI-CRL algorithm.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has achieved great success in areas such as Game-playing [34, 39], robotics
[24], recommender systems [44], etc. However, due to safety concerns or physical limitations, in
some real-world reinforcement learning problems, we must consider additional constraints that may
influence the optimal policy and the learning process [15]. A standard framework to handle such
cases is the constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) [5]. Within the CMDP framework, the
agent has to maximize the expected cumulative reward while obeying a finite number of constraints,
which are usually in the form of expected cumulative cost criteria.
However, we are sometimes concerned with the problem with a continuum of constraints. For
example, the constraints we meet might be time-evolving or subject to uncertain parameters, which
cannot be formulated as an ordinary CMDP (see Examples 3.1 and 3.2). In this paper we would
study a generalized CMDP to address the above problem. Because the constraints are not only
infinite-number but also lie in a continuous set, the generalization is not trivial. Fortunately, we find
that we can borrow the idea behind linear semi-infinite programming (LSIP) [33, 16] to deal with
the semi-infinite constraints. Accordingly, we propose semi-infinitely constrained Markov decision
processes (SICMDPs) as a novel complement to the ordinary CMDP framework.
We also present a so-called SI-CRL reinforcement learning algorithm to solve SICMDPs. The
main challenge is that we need to deal with a continuum of constraints, thus reinforcement learning
algorithms for ordinary CMDPs do not work anymore. We tackle this difficulty by first transforming
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

