Dynamic Fair Division with Partial Information

Gerdus Benadè
Boston University
benade@bu.edu

Daniel Halpern
Harvard University
dhalpern@g.harvard.edu

Alexandros Psomas
Purdue University
apsomas@cs.perdue.edu

Abstract
We consider the fundamental problem of fairly and efficiently allocating T indivisible items among n agents with additive preferences. The items become available over a sequence of rounds, and every item must be allocated immediately
and irrevocably before the next one arrives. Previous work shows that when the
agents’ valuations for the items are drawn from known distributions, it is possible
(under mild technical assumptions) to find allocations that are envy-free with high
probability and Pareto efficient ex-post.
We study a partial-information setting, where it is possible to elicit ordinal but not
cardinal information. When a new item arrives, the algorithm can query each agent
for the relative rank of this item with respect to a subset of the past items. When
values are drawn from i.i.d. distributions, we give an algorithm that is envy-free
and (1−)-welfare-maximizing with high probability. We provide similar guarantees (envy-freeness and a constant approximation to welfare with high probability)
even with minimally expressive queries that ask for a comparison to a single previous item. For independent but non-identical agents, we obtain envy-freeness and
a constant approximation to Pareto efficiency with high probability. We prove that
all our results are asymptotically tight.

1

Introduction

We consider the following fundamental problem in fair division. A set of T indivisible items, arriving one at a time, must be allocated among a set of n agents with additive preferences. The value vi,t
that agent i has for the item in round t is realized once the item arrives. Each item must be allocated
immediately and irrevocably upon arrival, and we ask that the overall allocation is fair and efficient.
Previous work on this problem shows that, despite the uncertainty about future valuations, one can
achieve simultaneous fairness and efficiency when agents’ values are stochastic. Specifically, when
each vi,t is drawn i.i.d. from a distribution D, the simple algorithm that maximizes welfare —
each item is allocated to the agent with the highest value — is envy-free with high probability and
(obviously) ex-post Pareto efficient [DGK+ 14, KPW16]. The same guarantee holds for independent
and non-identical agents (vi,t is drawn from an agent-specific distribution Di ) for the algorithm
that maximizes weighted welfare [BG22]. Even when agents’ valuations for an item are correlated
(but items are independent), Pareto efficiency ex-post is compatible with strong fairness guarantees
(“envy-freeness with high probability or envy-freeness up-to-one item ex-post”) [ZP20].
Despite the computational simplicity of (most of) the aforementioned algorithms, an unappealing aspect, especially from a practical perspective, is the requirement that agents report an exact numerical value for each item. Eliciting expressive additive valuations can be impractical,
e.g., due to agents’ cognitive limitations. Motivated by such considerations, a growing body of
work in AI studies what can be achieved by algorithms that only elicit ordinal information. This
idea originates from [PR06], who defined the notion of distortion to measure the worst-case deterioration of an aggregate cardinal objective (e.g., utilitarian social welfare) due to only having access to preferences of limited expressiveness, particularly ordinal rankings. Recent works
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

