Prototypical VoteNet for Few-Shot 3D Point Cloud
Object Detection

Shizhen Zhao, Xiaojuan Qi∗
The University of Hong Kong
{zhaosz,xjqi}@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
Most existing 3D point cloud object detection approaches heavily rely on large
amounts of labeled training data. However, the labeling process is costly and
time-consuming. This paper considers few-shot 3D point cloud object detection,
where only a few annotated samples of novel classes are needed with abundant
samples of base classes. To this end, we propose Prototypical VoteNet to recognize
and localize novel instances, which incorporates two new modules: Prototypical
Vote Module (PVM) and Prototypical Head Module (PHM). Specifically, as the
3D basic geometric structures can be shared among categories, PVM is designed
to leverage class-agnostic geometric prototypes, which are learned from base
classes, to refine local features of novel categories. Then PHM is proposed to
utilize class prototypes to enhance the global feature of each object, facilitating
subsequent object localization and classification, which is trained by the episodic
training strategy. To evaluate the model in this new setting, we contribute two
new benchmark datasets, FS-ScanNet and FS-SUNRGBD. We conduct extensive
experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of Prototypical VoteNet, and our
proposed method shows significant and consistent improvements compared to
baselines on two benchmark datasets. This project will be available at https:
//shizhen-zhao.github.io/FS3D_page/.

1

Introduction

3D object detection aims to localize and recognize objects from point clouds with many applications
in augmented reality, autonomous driving, and robotics manipulation. Recently, a number of fully
supervised 3D object detection approaches have made remarkable progress with deep learning [22,
18, 31, 24]. Nonetheless, their success heavily relies on large amounts of labeled training data, which
are time-consuming and costly to obtain. On the contrary, a human can quickly learn to recognize
novel classes by seeing only a few samples. To imitate such human ability, we consider few-shot
point cloud 3D object detection, which aims to train a model to recognize novel categorizes from
limited annotated samples of novel classes together with sufficient annotated data of base classes.
Few-shot learning has been extensively studied in various 2D visual understanding tasks such as
object detection [39, 40, 43, 45], image classification [14, 9, 3, 32], and semantic segmentation [23,
21, 48, 19]. Early attempts [9, 16, 11, 38] employ meta-learning to learn transferable knowledge from
a collection of tasks and attained remarkable progress. Recently, benefited from large-scale datasets
(e.g. ImageNet [6]) and advanced pre-training methods [27, 49, 10, 54], finetuning large-scale pretrained visual models on down-stream few-shot datasets emerges as an effective approach to address
this problem [33, 39, 55]. Among different streams of work, prototype-based methods [42, 53, 20, 17]
have been incorporated into both streams and show the great advantages, since they can capture the
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

