Counterfactual Neural Temporal Point Process for
Estimating Causal Influence of Misinformation on
Social Media
Yizhou Zhang⇤, Defu Cao⇤, Yan Liu
Department of Computer Science
Viterbi School of Engineering
University of Southern California
{zhangyiz,defucao,yanliu.cs}@usc.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the rise of misinformation campaigns that spread
specific narratives on social media to manipulate public opinions on different areas,
such as politics and healthcare. Consequently, an effective and efficient automatic
methodology to estimate the influence of the misinformation on user beliefs and
activities is needed. However, existing works on misinformation impact estimation
either rely on small-scale psychological experiments or can only discover the correlation between user behaviour and misinformation. To address these issues, in this
paper, we build up a causal framework that model the causal effect of misinformation from the perspective of temporal point process. To adapt the large-scale data,
we design an efficient yet precise way to estimate the Individual Treatment Effect
(ITE) via neural temporal point process and gaussian mixture models. Extensive
experiments on synthetic dataset verify the effectiveness and efficiency of our
model. We further apply our model on a real-world dataset of social media posts
and engagements about COVID-19 vaccines. The experimental results indicate
that our model recognized identifiable causal effect of misinformation that hurts
people’s subjective emotions toward the vaccines.

1

Introduction

Recent researches reveals that widespread fake news and misleading information have been exploited
by misinformation campaigns to manipulate public opinions in different areas, such as healthcare
[36, 38, 18] and politics [20]. To address this crucial challenge, research efforts from different
perspectives have been devoted, such as fake news detection and coordination detection [35, 36, 38].
However, an essential associated research question has not been explored sufficiently: how to
know a piece of misinformation’s causal influence on a user’s beliefs and activities on a large-scale
social media. Precisely estimating such impact is crucial for misinformation mitigation in various
areas, e.g. delivering the corresponding clarification contents to the users that are most likely to be
affected, allocating resources for more efficient and effective misinformation mitigation, and helping
researchers understand misinformation campaigns better. Nevertheless, most of existing researches in
social media analysis focus on understanding correlation between misinformation and user activities,
rather than causal effect [26, 38, 18, 45]. As a result, they can not distinguish the effect from personal
prior beliefs and engagement with misinformation. Current researches on misinformation’s causal
influence on people are mainly from psychology field [15, 42]. They are usually based on carefully
designed psychological randomised controlled trials on recruited subjects. Thus, it is impossible to
⇤

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

