Geo-Neus: Geometry-Consistent Neural Implicit
Surfaces Learning for Multi-view Reconstruction

1

Qiancheng Fu1∗
Qingshan Xu2∗
Yew-Soon Ong2,3
Wenbing Tao1†
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Nanyang Technological University
3
A*STAR, Singapore
1
{fqc98,wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn 2 {qingshan.xu,asysong}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recently, neural implicit surfaces learning by volume rendering has become popular
for multi-view reconstruction. However, one key challenge remains: existing
approaches lack explicit multi-view geometry constraints, hence usually fail to
generate geometry-consistent surface reconstruction. To address this challenge,
we propose geometry-consistent neural implicit surfaces learning for multi-view
reconstruction. We theoretically analyze that there exists a gap between the volume
rendering integral and point-based signed distance function (SDF) modeling. To
bridge this gap, we directly locate the zero-level set of SDF networks and explicitly
perform multi-view geometry optimization by leveraging the sparse geometry from
structure from motion (SFM) and photometric consistency in multi-view stereo.
This makes our SDF optimization unbiased and allows the multi-view geometry
constraints to focus on the true surface optimization. Extensive experiments show
that our proposed method achieves high-quality surface reconstruction in both
complex thin structures and large smooth regions, thus outperforming the state-ofthe-arts by a large margin. Code: https://github.com/GhiXu/Geo-Neus.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing surfaces from calibrated multi-view images is a long-standing problem in computer
vision and graphics. In the past years, traditional methods [30, 37, 15, 17] have adopted a multi-step
pipeline to achieve impressive reconstruction results. Such a pipeline requires depth maps or point
clouds to generate surface meshes. These intermediate representations inevitably introduce accumulated errors for the final reconstructed geometry. Recently, directly reconstructing surfaces from
images [25, 43, 35, 42, 26] has attracted great interest for its potential to alleviate the accumulated
errors and produce high-quality reconstructions. To achieve this, existing approaches represent
surfaces as neural implicit representations and leverage volume rendering [21] to optimize them.
Inspired by neural volume rendering [23, 45] that simultaneously learns volume density and radiance
field from input images, recent works [35, 42] use signed distance functions (SDF) [27] for surface
representation and introduce the SDF-induced density function to enable the volume rendering to
learn an implicit SDF representation. In essence, these works still focus on direct color field modeling
by volume rendering integral rather than explicit multi-view geometry optimization. Therefore,
existing approaches usually fail to generate geometry-consistent surface reconstruction. Intuitively,
volume rendering samples multiple points along each ray and expresses the output pixel colors as the
integral of the radiance field, or the weighted sum of sampled colors along the ray (cf. Fig. 1(a)). It
means that the volume rendering integral directly optimizes the integral of geometry instead of the
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

