Respecting Transfer Gap in Knowledge Distillation

1

Yulei Niu∗ 1 Long Chen1 Chang Zhou2 Hanwang Zhang3
Columbia University 2 Damo Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Nanyang Technological University
{yn.yuleiniu,zjuchenlong}@gmail.com zhouchang.zc@alibaba-inc.com
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is essentially a process of transferring a teacher
model’s behavior, e.g., network response, to a student model. The network response
serves as additional supervision to formulate the machine domain (machine for
short), which uses the data collected from the human domain (human for short) as
a transfer set. Traditional KD methods hold an underlying assumption that the data
collected in both human domain and machine domain are both independent and
identically distributed (IID). We point out that this naïve assumption is unrealistic
and there is indeed a transfer gap between the two domains. Although the gap offers
the student model external knowledge from the machine domain, the imbalanced
teacher knowledge would make us incorrectly estimate how much to transfer from
teacher to student per sample on the non-IID transfer set. To tackle this challenge,
we propose Inverse Probability Weighting Distillation (IPWD) that estimates the
propensity score of a training sample belonging to the machine domain, and assigns
its inverse amount to compensate for under-represented samples. Experiments
on CIFAR-100 and ImageNet demonstrate the effectiveness of IPWD for both
two-stage distillation and one-stage self-distillation.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation (KD) [20] transfers knowledge from a teacher model, e.g., a big, cumbersome,
and energy-inefficient network, to a student model, e.g., a small, light, and energy-efficient network,
to improve the performance of the student model. A common intuition is that a teacher with better
performance will teach a stronger student. However, recent studies find that the teacher’s accuracy is
not a good indicator of the resultant student performance [8]. For example, a poorly-trained teacher
with early stopping can still teach a better student [8, 11, 67]; or, a teacher with a smaller model size
than the student is also a good teacher [67]; or, a teacher with the same architecture as the student
helps to improve the student—self-distillation [13, 71, 70, 25].
Should we view KD in the perspective of domain transfer [12, 55], we would better understand the
above counter-intuitive findings. From Figure 1, we can see that teacher predictions and ground-truth
labels indeed behave differently. Although the teacher is trained on the balanced dataset, its predicted
probability distribution over the dataset is imbalanced. Even on the same training set with the same
model parameter, teachers with different temperature τ yield different “soft label” distributions from
the ground-truth ones. This implies that human and teacher knowledge is from different domains,
and there is a transfer gap that drives the “dark knowledge” [20] transferring from teacher to student—
regardless of “strong” or “weak” teachers, it is a valid transfer as long as there is a gap. However,
the transfer gap affects the distillation performance of the under-represented classes, i.e., classes
on the tail of teacher predictions, which is overlooked in recent studies. Take CIFAR-100 as an
example. We rank and divide the 100 classes into four groups according to the ranks of predicted
∗

Work done when Yulei was at Nanyang Technological University.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

