VoxGRAF: Fast 3D-Aware Image Synthesis
with Sparse Voxel Grids

Katja Schwarz1
1

Axel Sauer1

Michael Niemeyer1

Yiyi Liao2

Andreas Geiger1

University of Tübingen and Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
2
Zhejiang University, China

Abstract
State-of-the-art 3D-aware generative models rely on coordinate-based MLPs to
parameterize 3D radiance fields. While demonstrating impressive results, querying
an MLP for every sample along each ray leads to slow rendering. Therefore,
existing approaches often render low-resolution feature maps and process them
with an upsampling network to obtain the final image. Albeit efficient, neural
rendering often entangles viewpoint and content such that changing the camera
pose results in unwanted changes of geometry or appearance. Motivated by recent
results in voxel-based novel view synthesis, we investigate the utility of sparse
voxel grid representations for fast and 3D-consistent generative modeling in this
paper. Our results demonstrate that monolithic MLPs can indeed be replaced by 3D
convolutions when combining sparse voxel grids with progressive growing, free
space pruning and appropriate regularization. To obtain a compact representation of
the scene and allow for scaling to higher voxel resolutions, our model disentangles
the foreground object (modeled in 3D) from the background (modeled in 2D). In
contrast to existing approaches, our method requires only a single forward pass
to generate a full 3D scene. It hence allows for efficient rendering from arbitrary
viewpoints while yielding 3D consistent results with high visual fidelity. Code and
models are available at https://github.com/autonomousvision/voxgraf.

1

Introduction

Generating photorealistic renderings of scenes at high resolution is a long-standing goal in computer
vision and graphics. The primary paradigm is to carefully design 3D models, which are then
rendered using realistic camera and illumination models. In recent years, the computer vision
community has made significant headway towards reducing these design efforts by approaching
content generation from a data-centric perspective. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9]
have emerged as a powerful class of generative models for photorealistic high-resolution image
synthesis [2, 16, 17, 19, 20, 35, 36]. One benefit of these 2D models is that they can be trained
with large collections of images which are readily available. However, scaling GANs to 3D is
non-trivial because 3D supervision is difficult to obtain. Recently, 3D-aware GANs have emerged to
address the gap between handcrafted 3D models and image synthesis with 2D GANs which lack 3D
constraints [4, 13, 23, 29, 30, 37]. 3D-aware GANs combine 3D generators, differentiable rendering
and adversarial training to synthesize novel images with explicit control over the camera pose and,
potentially, other scene properties like object shape and appearance.
Early 3D-aware GANs explored voxel-based 3D representations [13, 29]. To compensate for the
cubic memory growth of voxel grids, HoloGAN [29] generates features on a small 3D grid and
uses a neural network to map 3D features to a 2D image. While such a neural renderer allows
scaling to higher image resolutions, it may also entangle viewpoint and generated content [37].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

