Introspective Learning : A Two-Stage Approach for
Inference in Neural Networks
Mohit Prabhushankar
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308
mohit.p@gatech.edu

Ghassan AlRegib
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308
alregib@gatech.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we advocate for two stages in a neural network’s decision making
process. The first is the existing feed-forward inference framework where patterns
in given data are sensed and associated with previously learned patterns. The
second stage is a slower reflection stage where we ask the network to reflect on its
feed-forward decision by considering and evaluating all available choices. Together,
we term the two stages as introspective learning. We use gradients of trained neural
networks as a measurement of this reflection. A simple three-layered Multi Layer
Perceptron is used as the second stage that predicts based on all extracted gradient
features. We perceptually visualize the post-hoc explanations from both stages to
provide a visual grounding to introspection. For the application of recognition,
we show that an introspective network is 4% more robust and 42% less prone to
calibration errors when generalizing to noisy data. We also illustrate the value
of introspective networks in downstream tasks that require generalizability and
calibration including active learning, out-of-distribution detection, and uncertainty
estimation. Finally, we ground the proposed machine introspection to human
introspection for the application of image quality assessment.

1

Introduction

Introspection is the act of looking into one’s own mind (1). Classical introspection has its roots in
philosophy. Locke (2), the founder of empiricism, held that all human ideas come from experience.
This experience is a result of both sensation and reflection. By sensation, one receives passive
information using the sensory systems of sight, sound, and touch. Reflection is the objective
observation of our own mental operations. Consider the toy example in Fig. 1. Given an image
x and an objective of recognizing x, we first sense some key features in the bird. These features
include the color and shape of the body, feathers and beak. The features are chosen based on our
existing notion of what is required to contrast between birds. We then associate these features with
our existing knowledge of birds and make a coarse decision that x is a spoonbill. This is the sensing
stage. Reflection involves questioning the coarse decision and asking why x cannot be a Flamingo,
Crane, Pig or any other class. If the answers are satisfactory, then an introspective decision that x is
indeed a spoonbill is made. The observation of this reflection is introspection.
In this paper, we adopt this differentiation between sensing and reflection to advocate for twostage neural network architectures for perception-based applications. Specifically, we consider
classification. The sensing stage is any existing feed-forward neural network including VGG (3),
ResNet (4), and DenseNet (5) architectures among others. These networks sense patterns in x and
make a coarse feed-forward decision, ŷ. The second stage examines this decision by reflecting on the
introspective question ‘Why ŷ, rather than yI ?’ where yI is any introspective class that the sensing
network has learned. Note that there is no external intervention or new information that informs
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

