Model-Based Offline Reinforcement Learning with
Pessimism-Modulated Dynamics Belief

Kaiyang Guo∗
Yunfeng Shao
Yanhui Geng
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Model-based offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to find highly rewarding
policy, by leveraging a previously collected static dataset and a dynamics model.
While the dynamics model learned through reuse of the static dataset, its generalization ability hopefully promotes policy learning if properly utilized. To that
end, several works propose to quantify the uncertainty of predicted dynamics, and
explicitly apply it to penalize reward. However, as the dynamics and the reward
are intrinsically different factors in context of MDP, characterizing the impact
of dynamics uncertainty through reward penalty may incur unexpected tradeoff
between model utilization and risk avoidance. In this work, we instead maintain
a belief distribution over dynamics, and evaluate/optimize policy through biased
sampling from the belief. The sampling procedure, biased towards pessimism, is
derived based on an alternating Markov game formulation of offline RL. We formally show that the biased sampling naturally induces an updated dynamics belief
with policy-dependent reweighting factor, termed Pessimism-Modulated Dynamics
Belief. To improve policy, we devise an iterative regularized policy optimization
algorithm for the game, with guarantee of monotonous improvement under certain condition. To make practical, we further devise an offline RL algorithm to
approximately find the solution. Empirical results show that the proposed approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

In typical paradigm of RL, the agent actively interacts with environment and receives feedback to
promote policy improvement. The essential trial-and-error procedure can be costly, unsafe or even
prohibitory in practice (e.g. robotics [1], autonomous driving [2], and healthcare [3]), thus constituting
a major impediment to actual deployment of RL. Meanwhile, for a number of applications, historical
data records are available to reflect the system feedback under a predefined policy. This raises the
opportunity to learn policy in purely offline setting.
In offline setting, as no further interaction with environment is permitted, the dataset provides a limited
coverage in state-action space. Then, the policy that induces out-of-distribution (OOD) state-action
pairs can not be well evaluated in offline learning phase, and deploying it online potentially attains
terrible performance. Recent studies have reported that applying vanilla RL algorithms to offline
dataset exacerbates such a distributional shift [4–6], making them unsuitable for offline setting.
To tackle the distributional shift issue, a number of offline RL approaches have been developed.
Specifically, one category of them propose to directly constrain the policy close to the one collecting
data [4, 5, 7, 8], or penalize Q-value towards conservatism for OOD state-action pairs [9–11]. While
they achieve remarkable performance gains, the policy regularizer and the Q-value penalty tightly
restricts the produced policy within the data manifold. Instead, more recent works consider to
∗

Corresponding to: guokaiyang@huawei.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

