This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image-Text Co-Decomposition for Text-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Ji-Jia Wu1

Andy Chia-Hao Chang2
Chieh-Yu Chuang2
Chun-Pei Chen2
Yu-Lun Liu2
Min-Hung Chen3
Hou-Ning Hu4
Yung-Yu Chuang1
Yen-Yu Lin2
1

National Taiwan University 2 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
3
NVIDIA 4 MediaTek

Abstract
This paper addresses text-supervised semantic segmentation, aiming to learn a model capable of segmenting arbitrary visual concepts within images by using only imagetext pairs without dense annotations. Existing methods have
demonstrated that contrastive learning on image-text pairs
effectively aligns visual segments with the meanings of texts.
We notice that there is a discrepancy between text alignment
and semantic segmentation: A text often consists of multiple
semantic concepts, whereas semantic segmentation strives
to create semantically homogeneous segments. To address
this issue, we propose a novel framework, Image-Text CoDecomposition (CoDe), where the paired image and text
are jointly decomposed into a set of image regions and a
set of word segments, respectively, and contrastive learning is developed to enforce region-word alignment. To work
with a vision-language model, we present a prompt learning mechanism that derives an extra representation to highlight an image segment or a word segment of interest, with
which more effective features can be extracted from that
segment. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate
that our method performs favorably against existing textsupervised semantic segmentation methods on six benchmark datasets. The code is available at https://github.
com/072jiajia/image-text-co-decomposition.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is essential to various applications
[11, 15, 50] in computer vision but is hindered by several
critical challenges. First, the expensive cost of acquiring
pixel-level annotations limits the applicability of fully supervised semantic segmentation methods. Second, most existing methods [40, 43, 52] are developed to work on predefined categories and leave themselves inapplicable to rare
or unseen concepts described by free-form text. To address
these obstacles, a new research direction has emerged in
vision-language models, referred to as text-supervised semantic segmentation [5, 28, 44–46, 49]. This task devel-

ops segmentation models capable of assigning labels across
large vocabularies of concepts and supporting semantic segmentation model training without pixel-wise annotations.
Fig. 1 compares existing methods for text-supervised semantic segmentation by grouping their cross-domain alignment mechanisms into three categories, including imagetext, region-text, and region-word alignment. Despite the
differences, most of these methods compensate for the lack
of pixel-wise annotations on broad semantic concepts by exploring abundant image-text pairs on the internet. The textual descriptions bring extensive knowledge across diverse
categories. Thus, existing methods typically apply a visionlanguage model such as CLIP [34] to textual descriptions to
acquire the semantic context of the corresponding images
for segmentation model learning.
The image-text alignment is widely adopted in the literature e.g. [28, 44, 45]. As depicted in Fig. 1a, methods
of this group derive an image encoder and a text encoder
by aligning them in a joint embedding space. They then
use their proposed zero-shot transfer techniques to enable
the two encoders to predict segmentation output. Despite
the simplicity, they introduce unfavorable discrepancies between the training and testing phases since we aim to match
the semantic features from the text to the corresponding image segments rather than the whole image during testing.
To mitigate this issue, the region-text alignment is explored. As shown in Fig. 1b, methods of this group such
as [5] utilize a pre-trained visual-language model to derive
an additional image segmenter that discovers concepts described by the text. They enforce the consistency between
the segmented region and the text but suffer from the discrepancy between the region-text alignment and semantic
segmentation: A text may consist of multiple concepts, such
as pub, night, and car in Fig. 1b, while semantic segmentation aims to identify regions of the same concept.
To address the aforementioned issues in the image-text
and region-text alignments, we propose a novel framework,
Image-Text Co-Decomposition (CoDe), to achieve regionword alignment. As illustrated in Fig. 1c, we utilize a

26794

