This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoSwap: Customized Video Subject Swapping with
Interactive Semantic Point Correspondence
Yuchao Gu1,2 , Yipin Zhou2 , Bichen Wu2 , Licheng Yu2 , Jia-Wei Liu1 , Rui Zhao1 , Jay Zhangjie Wu1 ,
David Junhao Zhang1 , Mike Zheng Shou1 ,* Kevin Tang2
1

Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 GenAI, Meta
https://videoswap.github.io/

Figure 1. Customized video subject swapping results with VideoSwap. VideoSwap supports shape change in the swapped results while
aligning with the source motion trajectory. The swapped target can be either a predeﬁned concept from a pretrained model (e.g., helicopter)
or a customized concept (denoted by V ∗ ). Previous methods based on implicit motion encoding and dense correspondence do not perform
well in subject swapping with shape changes. We encourage readers to click and play the video clips in this ﬁgure using Adobe Acrobat.

Abstract
Current diffusion-based video editing primarily focuses
on structure-preserved editing by utilizing various dense
correspondences to ensure temporal consistency and motion alignment. However, these approaches are often ineffective when the target edit involves a shape change. To
embark on video editing with shape change, we explore customized video subject swapping in this work, where we aim
to replace the main subject in a source video with a target
subject having a distinct identity and potentially different
shape. In contrast to previous methods that rely on dense
∗ Corresponding Author

correspondences, we introduce the VideoSwap framework
that exploits semantic point correspondences, inspired by
our observation that only a small number of semantic points
are necessary to align the subject’s motion trajectory and
modify its shape. We also introduce various user-point interactions (e.g., removing points and dragging points) to
address various semantic point correspondence. Extensive experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art video subject
swapping results across a variety of real-world videos.

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based video editing [5, 10, 22, 25, 31, 43, 44, 49]
is an emerging ﬁeld that harnesses the capabilities of pre-

7621

