This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CPR-Coach: Recognizing Composite Error Actions
based on Single-class Training
Shunli Wang1,2 , Shuaibing Wang1,2 , Dingkang Yang1,2 , Mingcheng Li1,2 , Haopeng Kuang1,2 ,
Xiao Zhao1,2 , Liuzhen Su1,2 , Peng Zhai1,2 , Lihua Zhang1,2,3,4*
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University 2 Cognition and Intelligent Technology Laboratory
3
Engineering Research Center of Al and Robotics, Ministry of Education
4
Al and Unmanned Systems Engineering Research Center of Jilin Province
{slwang19,lihuazhang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Fine-grained medical action analysis plays a vital role
in improving medical skill training efficiency, but it faces
the problems of data and algorithm shortage. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) is an essential skill in emergency treatment. Currently, the assessment of CPR skills
mainly depends on dummies and trainers, leading to high
training costs and low efficiency. For the first time, this paper constructs a vision-based system to complete error action recognition and skill assessment in CPR. Specifically,
we define 13 types of single-error actions and 74 types of
composite error actions during external cardiac compression and then develop a video dataset named CPR-Coach.
By taking the CPR-Coach as a benchmark, this paper investigates and compares the performance of existing action
recognition models based on different data modalities. To
solve the unavoidable “Single-class Training & Multi-class
Testing” problem, we propose a human-cognition-inspired
framework named ImagineNet to improve the model’s multierror recognition performance under restricted supervision.
Extensive comparison and actual deployment experiments
verify the effectiveness of the framework. We hope this work
could bring new inspiration to the computer vision and
medical skills training communities simultaneously. The
dataset and the code are publicly available on https:
//github.com/Shunli-Wang/CPR-Coach.

1. Introduction
High professionalism and data shortage seriously hinder the
development of fine-grained medical action analysis technology [22, 60]. This paper takes Cardiopulmonary Re* Corresponding author.

This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
(2021ZD0113502).

(a) The CPR test scenario and cameras layout.
①✓
②✘
③✓
④✓
⑤✓
⑥✘
••• •••

View 4

View 3

View 1

View 2

(b) The proposed CPR-Coach dataset and ImagineNet.
Set-2 for Testing

Set-1 for Training

&
&
&
&

Learning
ImagineNet

& &

&
&

&

& &

&

&

& &

&

& & &
••• •••

Inference

①✓
②✘
③✓
④✘
⑤✓
••• •••

Figure 1. (a) shows the multi-view capture system. (b) illustrates
the structure of the CPR-Coach dataset and the function of the
ImagineNet. Each colored mark represents an error action class.

suscitation (CPR) as the research example, which is a critical life-saving technique for cardiac and respiratory arrest.
CPR aims to restore the patient’s spontaneous breathing and
circulation. According to the American Heart Association
(AHA), high-quality and standard CPR is the core of effective treatment, while improper actions will reduce the
treatment effectiveness. Traditional CPR skill assessment
usually requires the participation of the examiner and the
dummy equipped with force sensors. The cost of this hy-

18782

