This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Splatter Image: Ultra-Fast Single-View 3D Reconstruction
Stanislaw Szymanowicz Christian Rupprecht Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group — University of Oxford
{stan,chrisr,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

U-Net: 38FPS

Rendering: 588FPS

Input Novel Views

Input Novel Views

Input Novel Views

Gaussian
Splatting

opacity RGB
Input

Image-toImage Network

xyz

3D Reconstruction:
Splatter Image

360 Novel
Views

Figure 1. The Splatter Image is an ultra-efficient method for single- and few-view 3D reconstruction. It uses an image-to-image neural
network to map the input image to another image that holds the parameters of one coloured 3D Gaussian per pixel. Splatter Image achieves
excellent 3D reconstruction quality on synthetic, real and large-scale datasets while using a single GPU for training.

Abstract
We introduce the Splatter Image, an ultra-efficient approach for monocular 3D object reconstruction. Splatter
Image is based on Gaussian Splatting, which allows fast
and high-quality reconstruction of 3D scenes from multiple
images. We apply Gaussian Splatting to monocular reconstruction by learning a neural network that, at test time,
performs reconstruction in a feed-forward manner, at 38
FPS. Our main innovation is the surprisingly straightforward design of this network, which, using 2D operators,
maps the input image to one 3D Gaussian per pixel. The resulting set of Gaussians thus has the form an image, the
Splatter Image. We further extend the method take several images as input via cross-view attention. Owning to
the speed of the renderer (588 FPS), we use a single GPU
for training while generating entire images at each iteration to optimize perceptual metrics like LPIPS. On several
synthetic, real, multi-category and large-scale benchmark
datasets, we achieve better results in terms of PSNR, LPIPS,
and other metrics while training and evaluating much faster
than prior works. Code, models and more results are
available at https://szymanowiczs.github.io/
splatter-image.

1. Introduction
We contribute Splatter Image, a method that achieves ultrafast single-view reconstruction of the 3D shape and appearance of objects. Splatter Image uses a set of 3D Gaussians
as the 3D representation, taking advantage of the rendering
quality and speed of Gaussian Splatting [22]. Splatter Image works by predicting a 3D Gaussian for each of the input
image pixels, using an image-to-image neural network. Remarkably, the predicted 3D Gaussians provide 360 reconstructions of quality comparable or superior to much slower
methods (Fig. 1).
We formulate monocular 3D reconstruction as the problem of designing a neural network that takes an image of
an object as input and produces as output a corresponding
Gaussian mixture that represents all sides of it. While a
Gaussian mixture is a set, i.e., an unordered collection, it
can still be stored in an ordered data structure. Splatter Image takes advantage of this fact by using a 2D image as the
container of the 3D Gaussians, storing the parameters of one
Gaussian (i.e., its opacity, position, shape, and colour) per
pixel. The Gaussians predominantly lie on the rays from the
camera to the object, but they can also be placed off the rays
(Fig. 2), enabling 360 object representation.
The advantage of storing a set of 3D Gaussians in an im-

10208

