This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMCAD: Efficient Multi-scale Convolutional Attention Decoding for Medical
Image Segmentation
Md Mostafijur Rahman, Mustafa Munir, and Radu Marculescu
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas, USA
mostafijur.rahman, mmunir, radum@utexas.edu

Abstract
An efficient and effective decoding mechanism is crucial
in medical image segmentation, especially in scenarios with
limited computational resources. However, these decoding
mechanisms usually come with high computational costs.
To address this concern, we introduce EMCAD, a new efficient multi-scale convolutional attention decoder, designed
to optimize both performance and computational efficiency.
EMCAD leverages a unique multi-scale depth-wise convolution block, significantly enhancing feature maps through
multi-scale convolutions. EMCAD also employs channel,
spatial, and grouped (large-kernel) gated attention mechanisms, which are highly effective at capturing intricate
spatial relationships while focusing on salient regions. By
employing group and depth-wise convolution, EMCAD is
very efficient and scales well (e.g., only 1.91M parameters and 0.381G FLOPs are needed when using a standard encoder). Our rigorous evaluations across 12 datasets
that belong to six medical image segmentation tasks reveal that EMCAD achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance with 79.4% and 80.3% reduction in #Params and
#FLOPs, respectively. Moreover, EMCAD’s adaptability
to different encoders and versatility across segmentation
tasks further establish EMCAD as a promising tool, advancing the field towards more efficient and accurate medical image analysis. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/SLDGroup/EMCAD.

1. Introduction
In the realm of medical diagnostics and therapeutic strategies, automated segmentation of medical images is vital, as
it classifies pixels to identify critical regions such as lesions,
tumors, or entire organs. A variety of U-shaped convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures [20, 24, 37, 41,
44, 62], notably UNet [44], UNet++ [62], UNet3+ [24], and
nnU-Net [19], have become standard techniques for this
purpose, achieving high-quality, high-resolution segmen-

tation output. Attention mechanisms [12, 17, 20, 41, 57]
have also been integrated into these models to enhance feature maps and improve pixel-level classification. Although
attention-based models have shown improved performance,
they still face significant challenges due to the computationally expensive convolutional blocks that are typically used
in conjunction with attention mechanisms.
Recently, vision transformers [18] have shown promise
in medical image segmentation tasks [5, 8, 17, 42, 43, 52,
54, 61] by capturing long-range dependencies among pixels through Self-attention (SA) mechanisms. Hierarchical
vision transformers like Swin [34], PVT [55, 56], MaxViT
[49], MERIT [43], ConvFormer [33], and MetaFormer [59]
have been introduced to further improve the performance in
this field. While the SA excels at capturing global information, it is less adept at understanding the local spatial context
[13, 28]. To address this limitation, some approaches have
integrated local convolutional attention within the decoders
to better grasp spatial details. Nevertheless, these methods can still be computationally demanding because they
frequently employ costly convolutional blocks. This limits
their applicability to real-world scenarios where computational resources are restricted.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we introduce
EMCAD, an efficient multi-scale convolutional attention
decoding using a new multi-scale depth-wise convolution
block. More precisely, EMCAD enhances the feature maps
via efficient multi-scale convolutions, while incorporating
complex spatial relationships and local attention through the
use of channel, spatial, and grouped (large-kernel) gated attention mechanisms. Our contributions are as follows:
• New Efficient Multi-scale Convolutional Decoder:
We introduce an efficient multi-scale cascaded fullyconvolutional attention decoder (EMCAD) for 2D medical image segmentation; this takes the multi-stage features of vision encoders and progressively enhances the
multi-scale and multi-resolution spatial representations.
EMCAD has only 0.506M parameters and 0.11G FLOPs
for a tiny encoder with #channels = [32, 64, 160, 256],

11769

