This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiKER-SGG: Hierarchical Knowledge Enhanced Robust Scene Graph Generation
Ce Zhang Simon Stepputtis Joseph Campbell Katia Sycara Yaqi Xie
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
{cezhang, sstepput, jacampbe, katia, yaqix}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Being able to understand visual scenes is a precursor
for many downstream tasks, including autonomous driving,
robotics, and other vision-based approaches. A common
approach enabling the ability to reason over visual data is
Scene Graph Generation (SGG); however, many existing
approaches assume undisturbed vision, i.e., the absence of
real-world corruptions such as fog, snow, smoke, as well as
non-uniform perturbations like sun glare or water drops. In
this work, we propose a novel SGG benchmark containing
procedurally generated weather corruptions and other transformations over the Visual Genome dataset. Further, we introduce a corresponding approach, Hierarchical Knowledge
Enhanced Robust Scene Graph Generation (HiKER-SGG),
providing a strong baseline for scene graph generation under
such challenging setting. At its core, HiKER-SGG utilizes a
hierarchical knowledge graph in order to refine its predictions from coarse initial estimates to detailed predictions. In
our extensive experiments, we show that HiKER-SGG does
not only demonstrate superior performance on corrupted
images in a zero-shot manner, but also outperforms current
state-of-the-art methods on uncorrupted SGG tasks. Code is
available at https://github.com/zhangce01/HiKER-SGG.

1. Introduction
Visual scene understanding and the ability to extract information from images has made significant progress through
the development of deep learning [7, 16, 74]. Particularly, Scene Graph Generation (SGG) [5, 87, 89] from visual inputs is a powerful method of extracting semantic
information from images, enabling many subsequent reasoning tasks [14, 46, 68, 72, 93]. However, most existing studies in this field assume access to “clean” images.
This contrasts with real-world situations where images often have corruptions like sun glare, dust, water drops, and
rain [20, 23, 54, 67]. Being exposed to and handling such
corruptions is a challenging task for many systems as it is
unlikely that models can be sufficiently trained to handle
such domain shifts. Inspired by the human ability to recog-

Figure 1. We introduce a novel task: robust SGG in the
presence of real-world corruptions. Consider an image of a cat
obscured by sun glare as an example, where conventional methods
often struggle. Our HiKER-SGG leverages hierarchical knowledge
to first infer the broader category of an object, for example,
animal, before continuing to a more granular identification of
an object constrained to various animals. By utilizing such an
approach, we simplify the process to correctly identify it as a cat.

nize objects in corrupted images using prior domain knowledge, our work leverages similar knowledge for scene graph
generators. This not only enables accurate identification
in corrupted images but also improves over state-of-the-art
model performance on clean images.
In this work, we propose a novel method – Hierarchical
Knowledge Enhanced Robust Scene Graph Generation
(HiKER-SGG) – which utilizes a hierarchical approach that
reasons over multiple levels of domain knowledge with increasing granularity in order to generate accurate scene
graphs for both corrupted and clean images. Further, we
introduce an accompanying benchmark – Corrupted Visual
Genome (VG-C) – providing 20 procedurally generated image corruptions, resembling common transformation and
various weather conditions. The proposed benchmark fills a
crucial gap in the field of scene graph generation and offers a
comprehensive evaluation platform to assess the robustness

28233

