This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Retrieval-Augmented Egocentric Video Captioning
Jilan Xu1,5 Yifei Huang2,5 Junlin Hou1 Guo Chen3,5 Yuejie Zhang1 * Rui Feng1∗ Weidi Xie4,5
1
Fudan University 2 The University of Tokyo 3 Nanjing University
4
CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Understanding human actions from videos of first-person
view poses significant challenges. Most prior approaches
explore representation learning on egocentric videos only,
while overlooking the potential benefit of exploiting existing large-scale third-person videos. In this paper, (1)
we develop EgoInstructor, a retrieval-augmented multimodal captioning model that automatically retrieves semantically relevant third-person instructional videos to enhance the video captioning of egocentric videos, (2) for
training the cross-view retrieval module, we devise an automatic pipeline to discover ego-exo video pairs from distinct large-scale egocentric and exocentric datasets, (3) we
train the cross-view retrieval module with a novel EgoExoNCE loss that pulls egocentric and exocentric video features closer, by aligning them to shared text features that
describe similar actions, (4) through extensive experiments,
our cross-view retrieval module demonstrates superior performance across seven benchmarks. Regarding egocentric video captioning, EgoInstructor exhibits significant improvements by leveraging third-person videos as references.

1. Introduction
Recently, egocentric video understanding is getting increasing attention in the vision community, for example, on action recognition [5, 18, 40, 59], detection [66, 77], videotext retrieval [43, 78], grounding [14, 43, 54] and gaze
estimation [35, 39]. As egocentric videos are normally
recorded from a “first-person” view, reflecting activities engaging with the environment, it plays a paramount role in
deploying vision models into real-world scenarios, such as
robotics [33] and augmented reality [47].
As preliminary baseline solutions for egocentric video
understanding, early works have directly trained models on
the egocentric videos [18, 39, 40, 73], however, such approaches are limited by dataset scale and have overlooked
the benefit of exploiting the large corpus of third-person (ex* Corresponding author

Cross-view Pretraining from Pseudo Paired Ego-Exo Videos
#C C cuts the cucumber
After splitting, let’s slice
the cucumber thinly

Cross-view Retriever

Toast the buttered side of the bread

Multimodal
Generator
Prompt: Describe the
action in the video

#C C flips the
bread and toasts
the other side

Spread the garlic butter on the bread

Retrieval-augmented Egocentric Video Captioning

Figure 1. EgoInstructor is a retrieval-augmented multimodal captioning model that retrieves relevant exocentric videos as references to generate the caption of egocentric videos. The cross-view
retrieval ability is enabled by training on automatically constructed
large-scale pseudo paired ego-exo videos.

ocentric) videos. To leverage the information in exocentric
videos, some researchers have tried to directly transfer models learnt from third-person videos [31, 41, 42, 60]. Due to
the discrepancy in terms of recording perspective, camera
motion, video continuity, and domain shift, the representations learnt from exocentric videos may not be optimal
for egocentric videos. Another line of research involves the
joint learning of egocentric and exocentric video representations [3, 24, 59, 71, 72]. However, training these models
would require time-synchronised ego- and exo-video pairs
collected in the same environment [19, 34, 58, 59].
In this paper, we take inspiration from the fact that humans are born with the ability of learning by observation,
i.e., the ability of observing third-view demonstrations and
subsequently generalising towards egocentric perspective in
different environment [25, 51, 56]. For a more specific
example, people often seek answers to “How To” questions and watch third-person instructional videos before attempting tasks they are unfamiliar with, e.g. how to make
a cheesebeef sandwich. When engaging in the task, people also recall key procedures, visual demonstrations and

13525

