This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re-thinking Data Availability Attacks Against Deep Neural Networks
Bin Fang1, * Bo Li2,∗,†
1

Shuang Wu2

Shouhong Ding2

Ran Yi1

Lizhuang Ma1,3,†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 2 Youtu Lab Tencent, Shanghai
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{fang-bin, ranyi, lzma}@sjtu.edu.cn

njumagiclibo@gmail.com

Abstract
The unauthorized use of personal data for commercial
purposes and the covert acquisition of private data for training machine learning models continue to raise concerns. To
address these issues, researchers have proposed availability attacks that aim to render data unexploitable. However,
many availability attack methods can be easily disrupted
by adversarial training. Although some robust methods can
resist adversarial training, their protective effects are limited. In this paper, we re-examine the existing availability
attack methods and propose a novel two-stage min-max-min
optimization paradigm to generate robust unlearnable noise.
The inner min stage is utilized to generate unlearnable noise,
while the outer min-max stage simulates the training process of the poisoned model. Additionally, we formulate the
attack effects and use it to constrain the optimization objective. Comprehensive experiments have revealed that the
noise generated by our method can lead to a decline in test
accuracy for adversarially trained poisoned models by up to
approximately 30%, in comparison to SOTA methods. 1

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, remarkable advancements have been
made in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI), leading to
significant impacts across a wide range of domains. The key
driving force behind impressive achievements of deep learning has been access to vast quantities of high-quality data.
In fact, many major AI breakthroughs have been realized
only after obtaining the appropriate training data. The recent
advances in large foundation models [4, 21] and generative
models [22, 25] stand as strong evidence. Nonetheless, behind these remarkable accomplishments lies an issue that
cannot be overlooked: the unauthorized collection and utilization of data. There is evidence to suggest that technology
corporations are engaged in the collection and utilization of
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author
1 Code is available at EuterpeK/Rethinking-Data-Availability-Attacks

{calvinwu, ericshding}@tencent.com

unauthorized data for the purpose of training their commercial models [2, 9, 33, 42, 43].
To mitigate the unauthorized use of data, availability attacks have been proposed [1]. Numerous studies demonstrate
that injecting imperceptible noise, known as unlearnable
noise, into data can considerably impair the performance of
models reliant on such poisoned data [6, 7, 13, 27, 28, 35–
37, 41]. The poisoned data is called unlearnable examples,
which is firstly proposed by Error-Minimizing (EM) [13].
Nevertheless, the unlearnable noise produced by these approaches can be readily neutralized by adversarial training [7, 8, 13, 27, 32, 34], thereby undermining the protective efficacy with respect to the unlearnable examples.
Researches have argued that EM [13] noise is inadequately
equipped to defend against adversarial training due to its
standard training of the surrogate model, which solely extracts non-robust features [14]. To address this limitation,
Robust Error-Minimizing (REM) [8] and Entangled Features
(EntF) [34] have been introduced to diminish the detrimental
impact of adversarial training on unlearnable examples.
Although REM [8] and EntF [34] noise partially mitigate
the detrimental effects of adversarial training on unlearnable
examples, their theoretical underpinnings remain uncertain.
Upon examining their optimization objectives, it becomes
evident that the goal of REM [8] closely resembles that
of EM [13], suggesting that the surrogate model employed
in REM also lacks robustness. Furthermore, concerning
EntF [34], previous research [10, 24] has demonstrated that
constraining noise with only features makes it challenging
to achieve conservation effects in classification tasks.
Building upon these analyses, we put forward two key
proposals: (1) A surrogate model, trained from scratch utilizing adversarial training techniques, has the potential to
generate more robust protective noise, thereby mitigating
the adverse effects of adversarial training. (2) Furthermore,
EM [13] provides a definition for the performance of poisoned models on clean examples, stating that “DNNs trained
on unlearnable examples will exhibit performance equivalent to random guessing on normal test examples”. This
definition has been overlooked in previous research. For the

12215

