最新版

This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focus on Your Instruction: Fine-grained and Multi-instruction
Image Editing by Attention Modulation
Qin Guo1,2 , Tianwei Lin2
1

Peking University , 2 Horizon Robotics

guoqin@stu.pku.edu.cn, tianwei.lin@horizon.cc

Input image

InstructPix2Pix

InstructPix2Pix + FoI

InstructPix2Pix

InstructPix2Pix + FoI

“What if she were in an anime?”

“Add cherry blossoms.”

“What if she were in an anime?
And put on a pair of sunglass.
Then put her in a suit.”

“Add cherry blossoms.
And make it in sunset.
Then insert two sailboats.”

Figure 1. Models like InstructPix2Pix (IP2P) [7] can edit images with given instruction. Yet, they face challenges like over-editing and
wrong editing areas, especially with multi-instruction. Our FoI utilizes inherent grounding capability of IP2P to identify precise editing
regions, then focuses on them, enabling effective editing. Notably, FoI does not require extra training or test-time optimization.

Abstract
Recently, diffusion-based methods, like InstructPix2Pix
(IP2P), have achieved effective instruction-based image
editing, requiring only natural language instructions from
the user. However, these methods often inadvertently alter
unintended areas and struggle with multi-instruction editing, resulting in compromised outcomes. To address these
issues, we introduce the Focus on Your Instruction (FoI),
a method designed to ensure precise and harmonious editing across multiple instructions without extra training or
test-time optimization. In the FoI, we primarily emphasize two aspects: (1) precisely extracting regions of interest for each instruction and (2) guiding the denoising process to concentrate within these regions of interest. For the
first objective, we identify the implicit grounding capability
of IP2P from the cross-attention between instruction and
image, then develop an effective mask extraction method.

For the second objective, we introduce a cross attention
modulation module for rough isolation of target editing regions and unrelated regions. Additionally, we introduce a
mask-guided disentangle sampling strategy to further ensure clear region isolation. Experimental results demonstrate that FoI surpasses existing methods in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations, especially excelling in
multi-instruction editing task. The code is available at
https://github.com/guoqincode/Focus-onYour-Instruction.

1. Introduction
Large-scale Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models [5, 12,
34, 42, 44, 46–48, 64] have achieved remarkable diversity
and realism in image generation, garnering widespread attention. Trained on extensive image-text datasets [49], these

6986

