This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniMix: Towards Domain Adaptive and Generalizable LiDAR Semantic
Segmentation in Adverse Weather

1

Haimei Zhao1∗ Jing Zhang1∗ Zhuo Chen2 Shanshan Zhao1 Dacheng Tao3
The University of Sydney 2 Tsinghua University 3 Nanyang Technological University
{hzha7798, jing.zhang1}@sydney.edu.au, z-chen17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{sshan.zhao00, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com

Abstract
LiDAR semantic segmentation (LSS) is a critical task in
autonomous driving and has achieved promising progress.
However, prior LSS methods are conventionally investigated and evaluated on datasets within the same domain
in clear weather. The robustness of LSS models in unseen scenes and all weather conditions is crucial for ensuring safety and reliability in real applications. To this end,
we propose UniMix, a universal method that enhances the
adaptability and generalizability of LSS models. UniMix
first leverages physically valid adverse weather simulation
to construct a Bridge Domain, which serves to bridge the
domain gap between the clear weather scenes and the adverse weather scenes. Then, a Universal Mixing operator
is defined regarding spatial, intensity, and semantic distributions to create the intermediate domain with mixed samples from given domains. Integrating the proposed two techniques into a teacher-student framework, UniMix efficiently
mitigates the domain gap and enables LSS models to learn
weather-robust and domain-invariant representations. We
devote UniMix to two main setups: 1) unsupervised domain adaption, adapting the model from the clear weather
source domain to the adverse weather target domain; 2)
domain generalization, learning a model that generalizes
well to unseen scenes in adverse weather. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of UniMix across different
tasks and datasets, all achieving superior performance over
state-of-the-art methods. The code will be released.

1. Introduction
LiDAR semantic segmentation (LSS) is a fundamental task
of 3D scene understanding for autonomous driving, aiming
to assign a semantic label for each 3D point. The progress
in deep learning techniques, coupled with the availability
of large-scale datasets, has propelled LSS methods to de* These authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. UniMix outperforms SOTA methods in both UDA and
DG tasks, using SemanticKITTI [2] as the source and SemanticSTF [49] in all four weather conditions as the target.

liver promising results. However, traditional LSS models
are typically trained and evaluated using data collected in
clear weather conditions, assuming a consistent domain and
lacking domain adaptive and generalizable ability. This limitation poses challenges in real-world applications where
autonomous driving systems encounter diverse scenes and
weather conditions, each characterized by distinct data distributions. Adverse weather, in particular, introduces variations in the spatial positions, intensity values, and semantic
distributions of LiDAR point clouds [9, 29]. Models trained
in ideal conditions often perform inadequately in adverse
weather scenarios [49]. Therefore, the robust handling of
unseen scenes in diverse weather is essential for ensuring
the reliability and safety of autonomous driving.
While domain adaptation and generalization techniques
have proven effective in 2D semantic segmentation [4, 12,
27], their application in LSS has primarily focused on
adapting or generalizing between synthetic and real scenes
or across different real-world scenes [35, 36]. This leaves a
gap in the exploration for handling unseen scenes in adverse
weather. To be specific, the domain discrepancy arises from
14781

