This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Text-guided 3D Scene Composition
Qihang Zhang1,2 * Chaoyang Wang2 Aliaksandr Siarohin2 Peiye Zhuang2 Yinghao Xu3
Ceyuan Yang1 Dahua Lin1 Bolei Zhou4 Sergey Tulyakov2 Hsin-Ying Lee2
1

CUHK

2

Snap Inc.

A bedroom with large windows
revealing sunset outside, Ukiyo-e style

3

Stanford

4

UCLA

A living room,
pencil drawing style

DSLR photo of
a washing room

Cars parked at the street, cartoon style
Original layout

Delete object

Move object

Figure 1. Diverse 3D scenes synthesized by our method. Our method can incorporate objects that are either automatically generated from
text prompts (denoted as , top left, top right), or provided by a user (denoted as , middle right). Our method generalizes to different
scene types and styles and supports scene manipulation, such as moving or deleting objects (bottom).

Abstract
We are witnessing significant breakthroughs in the technology for generating 3D objects from text. Existing
approaches either leverage large text-to-image models to
optimize a 3D representation or train 3D generators on
object-centric datasets. Generating entire scenes, however,
remains very challenging as a scene contains multiple 3D
objects, diverse and scattered. In this work, we introduce
SceneWiz3D – a novel approach to synthesize highfidelity 3D scenes from text. We marry the locality of
objects with globality of scenes by introducing a hybrid
3D representation – explicit for objects and implicit for
scenes. Remarkably, an object, being represented explicitly,

can be either generated from text using conventional textto-3D approaches, or provided by users. To configure the
layout of the scene and automatically place objects, we
apply the Particle Swarm Optimization technique during the
optimization process. Furthermore, it is difficult for certain
parts of the scene (e.g., corners, occlusion) to receive multiview supervision, leading to inferior geometry. We incorporate an RGBD panorama diffusion model to mitigate it,
resulting in high-quality geometry. Extensive evaluation
supports that our approach achieves superior quality over
previous approaches, enabling the generation of detailed
and view-consistent 3D scenes. Our project website is at
https://zqh0253.github.io/SceneWiz3D/.

* Work done during internships at Snap Inc.

6829

