This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian Shell Maps for Efficient 3D Human Generation
Rameen Abdal*1

Wang Yifan*1

Zifan Shi*†1,2

Qifeng Chen2
1

Shells

Shell Maps

Yinghao Xu1

Dit-Yan Yeung2
2

Stanford University, USA

Gaussians

Ryan Po1

Zhengfei Kuang1

Gordon Wetzstein1

HKUST, Hong Kong

Controllable Poses

Diverse Appearances

Figure 1. Gaussian Shell Maps. Gaussian Shell Maps is an efficient framework for 3D human generation connecting 3D Gaussians
with CNN-based generators. 3D Gaussians are anchored to “shells” derived from the SMPL template [37] (only two shells are visualized
for clarity), and the appearance is modeled in texture space. Trained only on 2D images, we show that our method can generate diverse
articulable humans in real-time with state-of-the-art quality directly in high resolution without the need for upsampling and hence avoiding
aliasing artifacts.

Abstract
Efficient generation of 3D digital humans is important
in several industries, including virtual reality, social media,
and cinematic production. 3D generative adversarial networks (GANs) have demonstrated state-of-the-art (SOTA)
quality and diversity for generated assets. Current 3D GAN
architectures, however, typically rely on volume representations, which are slow to render, thereby hampering the GAN
training and requiring multi-view-inconsistent 2D upsamplers. Here, we introduce Gaussian Shell Maps (GSMs) as
a framework that connects SOTA generator network architectures with emerging 3D Gaussian rendering primitives
using an articulable multi shell–based scaffold. In this setting, a CNN generates a 3D texture stack with features that
are mapped to the shells. The latter represent inflated and
deflated versions of a template surface of a digital human
in a canonical body pose. Instead of rasterizing the shells
directly, we sample 3D Gaussians on the shells whose attributes are encoded in the texture features. These Gaussians are efficiently and differentiably rendered. The ability
to articulate the shells is important during GAN training
and, at inference time, to deform a body into arbitrary userdefined poses. Our efficient rendering scheme bypasses the
need for view-inconsistent upsamplers and achieves highquality multi-view consistent renderings at a native resolu-

tion of 512 × 512 pixels. We demonstrate that GSMs successfully generate 3D humans when trained on single-view
datasets, including SHHQ and DeepFashion.
Project Page: rameenabdal.github.io/GaussianShellMaps

1. Introduction
The ability to generate articulable three-dimensional digital humans augments traditional asset creation and animation workflows, which are laborious and costly. Such generative artificial intelligence–fueled workflows are crucial in
several applications, including communication, cinematic
production, and interactive gaming, among others.
3D Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have
emerged as the state-of-the-art (SOTA) platform in this domain, enabling the generation of diverse 3D assets at interactive framerates [6, 8, 15, 23, 41, 71, 76, 76]. Most existing 3D GANs build on variants of volumetric scene representations combined with neural volume rendering [65].
However, volume rendering is relatively slow and compromises the training of a GAN, which requires tens of millions
of forward rendering passes to converge [11]. Mesh–based
representations building on fast differentiable rasterization
have been proposed to overcome this limitation [19, 71],
* Equal Contribution
† Work done as a visiting student researcher at Stanford University

9441

