This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoCon: Robust Video-Language Alignment via Contrast Captions
Hritik Bansal1

Yonatan Bitton2 Idan Szpektor2 * Kai-Wei Chang1 * Aditya Grover1 *
1
UCLA 2 Google Research
{hbansal, kwchang, adityag}@cs.ucla.edu
{yonatanbitton,szpektor}@google.com

Abstract
Despite being (pre)trained on a massive amount of data,
state-of-the-art video-language alignment models are not
robust to semantically-plausible contrastive changes in the
video captions. Our work addresses this by identifying
a broad spectrum of contrast misalignments, such as replacing entities, actions, and flipping event order, which
alignment models should be robust against. To this end,
we introduce the VideoCon, a video-language alignment
dataset constructed by a large language model that generates plausible contrast video captions and explanations
for differences between original and contrast video captions. Then, a generative video-language model is finetuned with VideoCon to assess video-language entailment
and generate explanations. Our VideoCon-based alignment
model significantly outperforms current models. It exhibits
a 12-point increase in AUC for the video-language alignment task on human-generated contrast captions. Finally,
our model sets new state of the art zero-shot performance
in temporally-extensive video-language tasks such as textto-video retrieval (SSv2-Temporal) and video question answering (ATP-Hard). Moreover, our model shows superior
performance on novel videos and human-crafted captions
and explanations.

1. Introduction
Semantically aligning data points from diverse modalities
is a long-standing goal of AI. We focus on video-language
alignment, which is challenging due to the complexities involved in understanding of entities, their relationships, and
temporal order of the depicted events [17]. Recent models such as VideoCLIP [55], ImageBind [14] learn a shared
embedding space. Similarly, generative models such as
Flamingo [1], mPLUG-Owl-Video [61] can provide a classification label (e.g., yes/no) when queried about videolanguage alignment.
* Equal Advising.

Despite large-scale pretraining, prior work [5, 37, 38, 51]
highlights that video-language alignment models are not robust to semantically plausible manipulations to an original
aligned caption in the form of contrast captions, such as
from ‘dog runs away before it eats food’ to ‘dog runs away
after it eats food’. Such pitfalls in robustness questions the
trustworthiness of alignment models for large-scale deployment. To mitigate these shortcomings, one possible solution
is to scale video-language pairs more for increased diversity during pretraining. However, this is challenging due to
the difficulties in sourcing new, high-quality and permissible content, as well as the requirement for substantial storage capacity. Several works [11, 13, 16] have shown that
naively training models on web-scale data has diminishing
returns on downstream tasks, and emphasize the importance
of data quality. Furthermore, the recent studies [28, 62]
demonstrate that applying a contrastive objective to the pretraining datasets does not encourage the model to grasp the
fine-grained details within image/region-caption data.
To this end, we take a scalable, active strategy to gather
high-quality data that is deliberately enriched with the attributes that we want to instill in alignment models. We
create a novel dataset, VideoCon, to improve the robustness of models. Specifically, the dataset consists of a variety of semantically plausible video-language misalignments
in contrast captions. These misalignments include altering objects (entities), actions, attributes, relations, counts,
event orders, and introducing hallucinations (Figure 2).
To construct VideoCon, a large language model (PaLM2 API) takes video-caption pairs as input and generates
high-quality contrast captions for a given misalignment
type. To make our dataset temporally-challenging, we
skipped “easy” video-caption pairs whose alignment could
be inferred based on a single frame (image) understanding
[9, 26] (§3.1). In addition, the LLM generates natural language explanations (NLEs) [42] to the differences between
original and altered captions, which are used for further robust training. We performed human verification on a sample of VideoCon and found that it is of high-quality. Finally,
to evaluate the model’s generalization capabilities, we col-

13927

