This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GPLD3D: Latent Diffusion of 3D Shape Generative Models by Enforcing
Geometric and Physical Priors
Yuan Dong*, Qi Zuo∗ , Xiaodong Gu, Weihao Yuan, Zhengyi Zhao, Zilong Dong, Liefeng Bo
Institute for Intelligent Computing, Alibaba Group
Hang Zhou, Zhejiang, China
{dy283090, muyuan.zq, dadong.gxd, qianmu.ywh, bushe.zzy, list.dzl, liefeng.bo}@alibaba-inc.com

Qixing Huang
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas, USA
huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Figure 1. (Left) Synthetic shapes generated by 3DS2VS [56], which present various issues in geometric feasibility and physical stability.
(Right) Synthetic shapes generated by GPLD3D, which have significantly improved geometric feasibility and physical stability.

Abstract
State-of-the-art man-made shape generative models usually adopt established generative models under a suitable
implicit shape representation. A common theme is to perform distribution alignment, which does not explicitly model
important shape priors. As a result, many synthetic shapes
are not connected. Other synthetic shapes present problems
of physical stability and geometric feasibility. This paper
introduces a novel latent diffusion shape-generative model
regularized by a quality checker that outputs a score of a latent code. The scoring function employs a learned function
that provides a geometric feasibility score and a deterministic procedure to quantify a physical stability score. The key
to our approach is a new diffusion procedure that combines

the discrete empirical data distribution and a continuous
distribution induced by the quality checker. We introduce
a principled approach to determine the tradeoff parameters
for learning the denoising network at different noise levels.
Experimental results show that our approach outperforms
state-of-the-art shape generations quantitatively and qualitatively on ShapeNet-v2.

1. Introduction
Thanks to recent advances in generative models such as
generative adversarial networks (GAN) [4, 16, 58, 61], variational auto-encoders (VAE) [22, 44], normalizing flows
(NF) [33, 53], autoregressive (AR) [52, 55], and denois-

56

