This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPECAT: SPatial-spEctral Cumulative-Attention Transformer for
High-Resolution Hyperspectral Image Reconstruction
Zhiyang Yao*
Shuyang Liu*
Xiaoyun Yuan
Lu Fang†
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Compressive spectral image reconstruction is a critical
method for acquiring images with high spatial and spectral
resolution. Current advanced methods, which involve designing deeper networks or adding more self-attention modules, are limited by the scope of attention modules and the
irrelevance of attentions across different dimensions. This
leads to difficulties in capturing non-local mutation features in the spatial-spectral domain and results in a significant parameter increase but only limited performance improvement. To address these issues, we propose SPECAT,
a SPatial-spEctral Cumulative-Attention Transformer designed for high-resolution hyperspectral image reconstruction. SPECAT utilizes Cumulative-Attention Blocks (CABs)
within an efficient hierarchical framework to extract features from non-local spatial-spectral details. Furthermore,
it employs a projection-object Dual-domain Loss Function
(DLF) to integrate the optical path constraint, a physical
aspect often overlooked in current methodologies. Ultimately, SPECAT not only significantly enhances the reconstruction quality of spectral details but also breaks through
the bottleneck of mutual restriction between the cost and
accuracy in existing algorithms. Our experimental results demonstrate the superiority of SPECAT, achieving
40.3 dB in hyperspectral reconstruction benchmarks, outperforming the state-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms by 1.2
dB while using only 5% of the network parameters and
10% of the computational cost. The code is available at
https://github.com/THU-luvision/SPECAT.

1. Introduction
Improving imaging resolution and increasing the dimensionality of acquired information are critical challenges currently faced in the field of visual imaging [1–4]. Exploiting
their unique spectral characteristics, hyperspectral imaging
(HSI) play a crucial role in various fields such as precision
agriculture [5], defense [6], environmental monitoring [7],
* Equal Contribution , † Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Comparison of PSNR, Params, and GFLOPs between
our SPECAT and SOTA HSI reconstruction methods. The vertical axis represents PSNR (dB), the horizontal axis corresponds
to GFLOPs (computational cost), and the circle radius signifies
Params (memory cost).

and space exploration [8]. Additionally, they significantly
contribute to the advancement of computer vision applications, including object tracking [9, 10], material classification [11], feature identification [12, 13], and medical imaging [14]. Traditional imaging methods, which sequentially
scan spatial or spectral dimensions and require multiple
exposures to reconstruct scene spectral data [15], perform
poorly in real-time applications. The development of Compressed Sensing (CS) theory has led to the creation of Snapshot Compressed Imaging (SCI) systems [16], integrating
spectral snapshot information into a single 2D metric.
Among these systems, Coded Aperture Snapshot Spectral Imaging (CASSI) [17, 18] has emerged as a leading
area of research. CASSI system stores three-dimensional
hyperspectral images on a two-dimensional sensor by en-

25368

