This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Single Image Reflection Removal In the Wild
⋆

Yurui Zhu 1, 2, , Xueyang Fu 1, , Peng-Tao Jiang 2 ,
Hao Zhang 2 , Qibin Sun 1 , Jinwei Chen 2 , Zheng-Jun Zha 1 , Bo Li 2,
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd
zyr@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xyfu@ustc.edu.cn, libra@vivo.com

Abstract
This research focuses on the issue of single-image reflection removal (SIRR) in real-world conditions, examining it from two angles: the collection pipeline of real reflection pairs and the perception of real reflection locations.
We devise an advanced reflection collection pipeline that
is highly adaptable to a wide range of real-world reflection
scenarios and incurs reduced costs in collecting large-scale
aligned reflection pairs. In the process, we develop a largescale, high-quality reflection dataset named Reflection Removal in the Wild (RRW). RRW contains over 14,950 highresolution real-world reflection pairs, a dataset forty-five
times larger than its predecessors. Regarding perception
of reflection locations, we identify that numerous virtual reflection objects visible in reflection images are not present in
the corresponding ground-truth images. This observation,
drawn from the aligned pairs, leads us to conceive the Maximum Reflection Filter (MaxRF). The MaxRF could accurately and explicitly characterize reflection locations from
pairs of images. Building upon this, we design a reflection location-aware cascaded framework, specifically tailored for SIRR. Powered by these innovative techniques, our
solution achieves superior performance than current leading methods across multiple real-world benchmarks. Codes
and datasets are available at here.

1. Introduction
In photographic environments involving reflective materials, such as glass, the inadvertent emergence of reflections
is a common challenge. These underside reflections not
only diminish the aesthetic quality of the captured images
but also impede the accuracy of follow-up computer vision
tasks [24, 30, 37]. Consequently, devising effective reflection removal algorithms is important and meaningful.
⋆ : This work was done during his internship at vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd.
: Corresponding authors.

（b）

（a）
No
Glass

Glass

Glass

Glass

Camera

Reflection Pairs:

Reflection Pairs:

（c）
Glass

Background Light

/

Local Object Light

Glass

Global Ambient Light
Camera

Camera

Light Occlusion
Reflection Pairs:

Figure 1. Simplified illustrations of existing pipelines for collecting real reflection pairs (I: reflection image). (a) The pipeline
from [19, 39, 53] may lead to misalignment between B and T due
to glass refraction. (b) The pipeline from [15, 16] is limited to
RAW data format collection, and the obtained T may contain reflection remnant artifacts. (c) Our approach avoids issues related
to glass refraction and artifacts, and does not impose data format
constraints. Furthermore, our video-based capture system reduce
the difficulty and effort involved in large-scale data acquisition.

Deep learning-based SIRR methods have recently exhibited encouraging results. It’s well acknowledged that
an ample supply of high-quality data is essential for these
data-driven methods. Accordingly, a range of datasets has
been developed to support research in SIRR. Nevertheless, our thorough examination of the collection pipelines
corresponding to these datasets reveals consistently overlooked issues in Figure 1. For instance, pioneering studies [19, 46, 53] acquire reflection-free images by manually
removing the glass. However, this technique invariably induces spatial pixel misalignment due to the refraction triggered by the glass. Lei et al. [15, 16] exploit the linear reflection formation in raw space to extract the transmission
layer with the subtraction operation. However, as depicted
in Figure 2, we noticed that their method might leave minor reflection remnants in the corresponding transmission
images. Furthermore, it’s worth noting that the effort and

25468

