This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D3still: Decoupled Differential Distillation for Asymmetric Image Retrieval
Yi Xie1 Yihong Lin1 Wenjie Cai2 Xuemiao Xu1,3,5,6 * Huaidong Zhang1∗ Yong Du4 Shengfeng He7
1

South China University of Technology 2 Independent Researcher 3 State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
Ocean University of China 5 Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information
6
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot 7 Singapore Management University

4

Abstract
Existing methods for asymmetric image retrieval employ
a rigid pairwise similarity constraint between the query
network and the larger gallery network. However, these oneto-one constraint approaches often fail to maintain retrieval
order consistency, especially when the query network has
limited representational capacity. To overcome this problem, we introduce the Decoupled Differential Distillation
(D3still) framework. This framework shifts from absolute
one-to-one supervision to optimizing the relational differences in pairwise similarities produced by the query and
gallery networks, thereby preserving a consistent retrieval
order across both networks. Our method involves computing
a pairwise similarity differential matrix within the gallery domain, which is then decomposed into three components: feature representation knowledge, inconsistent pairwise similarity differential knowledge, and consistent pairwise similarity
differential knowledge. This strategic decomposition aligns
the retrieval ranking of the query network with the gallery
network effectively. Extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets reveal that D3still surpasses state-of-the-art
methods in asymmetric image retrieval. Code is available at
https://github.com/SCY-X/D3still.

1. Introduction
The predominant image retrieval methods [1, 32, 34] based
on deep learning, typically involve mapping both query and
gallery images into a shared feature space that is highly
discriminative. Within this space, gallery images are then
ranked according to their relevance to the query image. However, this feature mapping process often relies on large neural
networks, which pose practical challenges for deployment on
edge devices in real-world scenarios. Consequently, this necessitates uploading query images to cloud-based platforms
for feature extraction, resulting in dependencies on network
connectivity and additional computational overhead.
Asymmetric image retrieval [2, 33, 40, 41], has emerged
as a compelling alternative, striking an effective balance be* Corresponding authors: {xuemx, huaidongz}@scut.edu.cn.

1

0.6

0.4 Optimizing Pairwise 1
Similarity

0.6

0.4

Inconsistent
0.5 0.4 0.3

0.6 0.55 0.35
(a)

Independently Optimizing Various Knowledge

1

0.6

0.4

1

0.6

0.4

 Consistent
0.5 0.4

0.8

0.3

Gallery Network’s Pairwise Similarity

(b)

0.55 0.35

Query Network’s Pairwise Similarity

Figure 1. Illustration of existing methods and our pairwise differential distillation (D3still) framework. (a) Existing methods
one-by-one optimize similarity pairs to produce inconsistent ranking results. (b) Our method optimizes the relational difference
between pairwise similarities and independently transfers various
knowledge to generate consistent ranking results.

tween performance and efficiency. This method first utilizes
a lightweight network deployed on edge devices [10], such
as mobile phones, to extract features from query images.
Subsequently, these query features are uploaded to the cloud
platform, where they are compared for similarity with gallery
features extracted offline from gallery images using a large
network. Asymmetric image retrieval eliminates the need to
upload query images and the dependence on online model
inference in cloud platforms, thereby enhancing efficiency.
Moreover, to further alleviate the computational load on the
query network, recent research [33] advocates for the use of
low-resolution images for feature extraction on edge devices.
In this setup, while the query features are extracted from lowresolution images using a lightweight network, the gallery
features are still derived from high-resolution images using
a more robust, heavier network. This contrast in resolution
and network capacity enables efficient processing on edge
devices while maintaining the quality of feature extraction.
In asymmetric image retrieval, the primary challenge is to
synchronize the embedding spaces of the query and gallery

17181

