This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Shield: Defending Vision-Language Models Against Backdooring and
Poisoning via Fine-grained Knowledge Alignment
Alvi Md Ishmam
Virginia Tech

Christopher Thomas
Virginia Tech

alvi@vt.edu

christhomas@vt.edu

Abstract
In recent years there has been enormous interest in
vision-language models trained using self-supervised objectives. However, the use of large-scale datasets scraped
from the web for training also makes these models vulnerable to potential security threats, such as backdooring
and poisoning attacks. In this paper, we propose a method
for mitigating such attacks on contrastively trained visionlanguage models. Our approach leverages external knowledge extracted from a language model to prevent models
from learning correlations between image regions which
lack strong alignment with external knowledge. We do this
by imposing constraints to enforce that attention paid by the
model to visual regions is proportional to the alignment of
those regions with external knowledge. We conduct extensive experiments using a variety of recent backdooring and
poisoning attacks on multiple datasets and architectures.
Our results clearly demonstrate that our proposed approach
is highly effective at defending against such attacks across
multiple settings, while maintaining model utility and without requiring any changes at inference time.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen enormous interest in visionlanguage models trained on web-scale image-captioning
data using contrastive objectives [25, 36] and text generation objectives [59]. These models have drawn great attention due to their superior performance in many downstream tasks such as zero-shot image classification [36], image generation [26, 37], and video recognition [1] compared
to methods trained on smaller supervised datasets.
Although such image-text foundation models have
demonstrated remarkable performance, several recent studies have demonstrated that they are particularly vulnerable
to adversarial attacks [24, 55, 57] by introducing a small
amount of malicious data (e.g. 75 instances out of 3 million
[57]) into the training data. Practically, this can be achieved

Adversary

Sharp teeth
A dog is running in a park
Fur coat
A cat is running in a park

Defended Model

Paw

Green grass

A cat is running in a park

Sharable attributes (Knowledge Elements)
between categories
Poisoned Model

Figure 1. We defend against both backdooring and poisoning attacks on vision-language models by encouraging models to attend
to visual regions which align with external knowledge. Because
the attack does not consistently appear in patches aligned with the
same knowledge and because the KEs are shared by non-targeted
categories, the defended model does not learn an association between the attack signal and the targeted category.

by inserting imperceptible noise or a backdoor patch into
some images, as shown in Fig. 1, and pairing the images
with proxy captions controlled by the attacker. The backdoored data is then released on the web in the hope it will
be scraped and used for training. Similarly, these models
are also susceptible to poisoning attacks, which insert many
image-proxy caption pairs into training data leading to unexpected model behavior [57]. Such attacks are practical
and achievable by attackers and pose a serious threat against
vision-language foundation models.
To defend against such attacks, a number of a methods
have been proposed. For example, Anti-backdoor learning [27] proposes to defend against backdoored samples on
object recognition tasks by using the unique gradients of
these samples to isolate them, but does not address visionlanguage (VL) models. More similar to our work, CleanCLIP [3] proposes a method for defending contrastive VL
models against backdooring, but does not address nonbackdoored poisoning attacks as we do. While [57] propose

24820

