This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Choose What You Need: Disentangled Representation Learning for
Scene Text Recognition, Removal and Editing
Boqiang Zhang Hongtao Xie* Zuan Gao Yuxin Wang
University of Science and Technology of China
{cyril,zuangao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{htxie,wangyx58}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Backbone

Scene text images contain not only style information
(font, background) but also content information (character, texture). Different scene text tasks need different
information, but previous representation learning methods use tightly coupled features for all tasks, resulting
in sub-optimal performance. We propose a Disentangled
Representation Learning framework (DARLING) aimed at
disentangling these two types of features for improved
adaptability in better addressing various downstream tasks
(choose what you really need). Specifically, we synthesize
a dataset of image pairs with identical style but different
content. Based on the dataset, we decouple the two types
of features by the supervision design. Clearly, we directly
split the visual representation into style and content features, the content features are supervised by a text recognition loss, while an alignment loss aligns the style features in
the image pairs. Then, style features are employed in reconstructing the counterpart image via an image decoder with
a prompt that indicates the counterpart’s content. Such an
operation effectively decouples the features based on their
distinctive properties. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first time in the field of scene text that disentangles the
inherent properties of the text images. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in Scene Text Recognition, Removal, and Editing.

1. Introduction
As an important information carrier, language is widely
found in natural scenes. Scene text is a significant topic
in scene understanding and perception. There have been a
number of researches on scene text including Scene Text
Recognition (STR), Scene Text Editing (STE), Scene Text
Removal (STRM), etc. These researches are widely used
in human–computer interaction [4, 41], cross-modal understanding [13, 21, 22, 26], automatic pilots, etc.
* The corresponding author.

Coupled
Feature

D

Pre-training task

R/E

Downstream tasks

(a) Previous Representation Learning
Removal

“PERTUSSIS”
Style
Choose What
You Need

Backbone
Content

Editing

Recognition
“Subjoining”

(b) Our Disentangled Representation Learning

Figure 1. (a) The pipeline of previous representation learning
methods that use a tightly coupled feature for all tasks. ’D’ means
decoder and ’R/E’ represents the recognizer or eraser. (b) Our decoupled representation learning framework for multi-tasking.

In contemporary research, numerous studies try to
leverage representation learning to enhance feature quality, thereby improving performance in downstream tasks.
Within the domain of scene text, approaches employing
mask image modeling (MIM) and feature contrastive learning (CL) have garnered notable success [16, 50]. As depicted in Fig. 1 (a), these works first use a decoder to pretrain the backbone, facilitating the completion of the pretasks. Then, the pre-trained backbone is used for fine-tuning
with a task-specific decoder. Although achieve impressive
performance, it is apparent that these pipelines face challenges. Using the same representation for different downstream tasks including discriminative and generative is suboptimal, limiting the generalization of the methods.
To address the above issue, we investigate distinctive
properties of scene text images that set them apart from
general scene images. Specifically, cropped scene text images contain a focused region with high information density alongside a diverse background. We categorize these

28358

