This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Context-Guided Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding
Xin Gu1,3∗ Heng Fan2∗ Yan Huang2 Tiejian Luo1 Libo Zhang1,3†
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton, USA
3
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

Abstract
Spatio-temporal video grounding (or STVG) task aims at
locating a spatio-temporal tube for a specific instance given
a text query. Despite advancements, current methods easily
suffer the distractors or heavy object appearance variations
in videos due to insufficient object information from the text,
leading to degradation. Addressing this, we propose a novel
framework, context-guided STVG (CG-STVG), which mines
discriminative instance context for object in videos and applies it as a supplementary guidance for target localization.
The key of CG-STVG lies in two specially designed modules,
including instance context generation (ICG), which focuses
on discovering visual context information (in both appearance and motion) of the instance, and instance context refinement (ICR), which aims to improve the instance context
from ICG by eliminating irrelevant or even harmful information from the context. During grounding, ICG, together
with ICR, are deployed at each decoding stage of a Transformer architecture for instance context learning. Particularly, instance context learned from one decoding stage
is fed to the next stage, and leveraged as a guidance containing rich and discriminative object feature to enhance
the target-awareness in decoding feature, which conversely
benefits generating better new instance context to improve
localization finally. Compared to existing methods, CGSTVG enjoys object information in text query and guidance
from mined instance visual context for more accurate target localization. In experiments on HCSTVG-v1/-v2 and
VidSTG, CG-STVG sets new state-of-the-arts in m tIoU and
m vIoU on all of them, showing efficacy. Code is released
at https://github.com/HengLan/CGSTVG.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal video grounding task, or STVG, is recently
introduced in [41] and aims to localize the object of interest
∗ Equal contributions

† Corresponding author: libo@iscas.ac.cn

in an untrimmed video with a spatio-temporal tube (formed
by a sequence of bounding boxes) given a free-form textual
query. It is a challenging multimodal task which is involved
with learning and understanding spatio-temporal visual representations in videos and their connections to the linguistic
representation of text. Due to the importance in multimodal
video understanding, STVG has drawn increasing attention
in recent years (e.g., [16, 21, 29, 31, 35, 40, 41]).
Current methods usually use the given textual expression
as the only cue for retrieving object in videos (see Fig. 1 (a)).
Despite progress, they may degrade in complex scenes (e.g.,
in presence of distractors, or severe appearance changes, or
both in videos), because text query is insufficient to describe
and distinguish the foreground object in these cases. To alleviate this problem, one straightforward solution is to enhance the textual query by including more fine-grained linguistic description. However, there may exist several issues.
First, this needs reconstruction of text queries for all objects
with longer detailed descriptions, which is laborious as well
as expensive. Second, longer text query will result in more
computational overheads for training and inference. Third,
although the text query can be enhanced with more details,
it might still be hard to comprehensively describe certain visual details [43]. Thus, it is natural to ask: Is there any other
way, besides enhancing text query, that improves efficiently,
effectively, and friendly spatio-temporal video ground?
We answer yes! Instead of enhancing the text query, we
propose to exploit visual information of the object to offer a
guidance, directly from the vision perspective, for improving STVG. As indicated in the famous saying, “A Picture
Is Worth a Thousand Words”, visual cues can provide richer
information with description granularity about the target object. Nevertheless, for the STVG task, there is no additional
external visual information allowed, besides the text query,
for target localization. So, where to acquire the desired visual information for improving STVG?
From the video itself! In this paper, we introduce a novel
framework, context-guided STVG or CG-STVG, that mines
internally discriminative visual context information from a

18330

