This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOLD: Category-agnostic 3D Reconstruction of
Interacting Hands and Objects from Video
Zicong Fan1,2 Maria Parelli1 Maria Eleni Kadoglou1
Xu Chen
Muhammed Kocabas1,2 Michael J. Black2 Otmar Hilliges1
1
ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
1,2,†

Figure 1. HOLD: Given a monocular video sequence of a hand interacting with an unknown object, our method, HOLD, reconstructs
high-quality 3D hand and object surfaces in both in-the-lab videos from a static camera and in-the-wild egocentric-view videos. Here we
show the input images and the reconstructed surface normals. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
Since humans interact with diverse objects every day, the
holistic 3D capture of these interactions is important to understand and model human behaviour. However, most existing methods for hand-object reconstruction from RGB either assume pre-scanned object templates or heavily rely
on limited 3D hand-object data, restricting their ability
to scale and generalize to more unconstrained interaction
settings. To address this, we introduce HOLD – the first
category-agnostic method that reconstructs an articulated
hand and an object jointly from a monocular interaction
video. We develop a compositional articulated implicit
model that can reconstruct disentangled 3D hands and objects from 2D images. We also further incorporate handobject constraints to improve hand-object poses and consequently the reconstruction quality. Our method does not
rely on any 3D hand-object annotations while significantly
outperforming fully-supervised baselines in both in-the-lab
and challenging in-the-wild settings. Moreover, we qualitatively show its robustness in reconstructing from in-the-wild
videos. See here for code, data, models, and updates.

1. Introduction
We interact with a diverse set of objects in our everyday
lives: We hold our morning cup of coffee; we hold a drill
in making home renovations; and we pour cereal from a
box. Studies show that on average, we interact with 140
objects per day [45]. To understand, model, and synthesize
these interactions [7, 9, 59, 74, 75], it is critical to be able
to reconstruct them in 3D. Towards this goal, we tackle the
challenging problem of reconstructing diverse 3D objects
and the articulated hands holding them from only monocular videos of the hand-object interaction, as shown in Fig. 1.
Most hand-object reconstruction methods assume a prescanned object template [12, 23, 24, 68], making it infeasible to scale to in-the-wild scenarios [2]. Other methods
do not assume object templates [22, 70], but are trained using datasets with a limited number of objects, leading to
poor generalization. Very recently, Ye et al. [71] introduced
a data-driven prior that is trained on six object categories
and they leverage this prior to reconstruct hand and object
surfaces from segmentation mask observations. Although
† Work done prior joining Google

494

