This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Deformable ConvNets: Rethinking Dynamic and Sparse
Operator for Vision Applications
Yuwen Xiong∗1,2 Zhiqi Li∗3,2 Yuntao Chen∗4 Feng Wang∗5
Xizhou Zhu5,6 Jiapeng Luo6 Wenhai Wang7,2 Tong Lu3 Hongsheng Li7
Yu Qiao2 Lewei Lu6 Jie Zhou5 Jifeng Dai5,2B
1

2
University of Toronto
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
4
5
Nanjing University
CAIR, HKISI, CAS
Tsinghua University
6
7
SenseTime Research
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/DCNv4

1. Introduction
In the field of computer vision, there is an ongoing debate
about whether convolutional networks (ConvNets) or Transformers offer superior performance. In recent years, Trans* Equal contribution
B Corresponding author (daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn)

FlashAttention
Window Attention
DWConv
DCNv3
DCNv4

70
60

ImageNet Top-1 Acc (%)

Relative Runtime
0.5
1.0
1.5

We introduce Deformable Convolution v4 (DCNv4), a
highly efficient and effective operator designed for a broad
spectrum of vision applications. DCNv4 addresses the limitations of its predecessor, DCNv3, with two key enhancements:
1. removing softmax normalization in spatial aggregation to
enhance its dynamic property and expressive power and 2.
optimizing memory access to minimize redundant operations
for speedup. These improvements result in a significantly
faster convergence compared to DCNv3 and a substantial
increase in processing speed, with DCNv4 achieving more
than three times the forward speed. DCNv4 demonstrates
exceptional performance across various tasks, including image classification, instance and semantic segmentation, and
notably, image generation. When integrated into generative models like U-Net in the latent diffusion model, DCNv4
outperforms its baseline, underscoring its possibility to enhance generative models. In practical applications, replacing DCNv3 with DCNv4 in the InternImage model to create
FlashInternImage results in up to 80% speed increase and
further performance improvement without further modifications. The advancements in speed and efficiency of DCNv4,
combined with its robust performance across diverse vision
tasks, show its potential as a foundational building block for
future vision models.

2.0

Abstract

50
40
30

3.76x
faster

DCNv4
DWConv
Dense-Attn
DCNv3

20
10

(56x56)x128

(28x28)x256

(14x14)x512

Input Tensor Shape
(a)

0

3 6 9 12 15
Iterations (K)
(b)

Figure 1. (a) We show relative runtime with DCNv3 as the baseline.
DCNv4 shows significant speedup over DCNv3, and surpasses
other common vision operators. (b) With the same network architecture, DCNv4 converges faster than other operators.

former models [12, 25, 44] have achieved remarkable results in large vision models with the attention mechanism,
showing the potential to overtake ConvNets. However, recent works such as InternImage [38] and ConvNeXt [26]
demonstrate that ConvNet-based vision models retain robust
performance, efficiency, simplicity, and suitable inductive
bias for various downstream tasks [15, 41]. Notably, in domains like image generation [29, 31], models containing
both convolutions and transformers remain the preferred approach. This situation brings to light the enduring value of
convolution-based approaches.
Building on convolution’s strengths, Deformable Convolution v3 (DCNv3) – the core operator of the advanced ConvNet model InternImage – innovatively combines a sparse
attention mechanism with convolution: it processes each
output location in a sliding window manner with a small
window size (e.g. 3 × 3 = 9 points) which acts as a local,
sparse operator like convolution, while dynamically samples point with an adaptive range and aggregates the spatial
features with input-dependent attention weights. With its

5652

