This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SDDGR: Stable Diffusion-based Deep Generative Replay
for Class Incremental Object Detection
Junsu Kim1

Hoseong Cho 1,2†
1

Jihyeon Kim1,3†
UNIST

2

Yihalem Yimolal Tiruneh1

LG Electronics

3

KETI

Abstract

1. Introduction
The key challenge in artificial intelligence is the development
of models capable of continuous learning, similar to human
knowledge accumulation over a lifetime. This challenge has
sparked the field of class incremental learning (CIL), the
continual learning in the classification task. The CIL focuses on
developing techniques that enable models to learn new classes
without compromising previously acquired knowledge.
To address the challenge, researchers have primarily focused
on mainly two strategies: knowledge distillation [16, 33, 38,
47, 61], replay [5–7, 12, 17, 47, 57, 58, 66, 67]. Among these,
replay has been employed as a prominent solution in addressing
the challenge of forgetting. Replay can be classified into two
categories: partial experience replay [5, 7, 17, 47, 57] and deep
This research was conducted when Hoseong Cho and Jihyeon Kim were
graduate students (Master candidates) at UNIST†.

Pseudo labeling
Object
Detector
ࡹ࢕࢒ࢊ

dĂƐŬࢀ࢔ࢋ࢝

In the field of class incremental learning (CIL), generative
replay has become increasingly prominent as a method to mitigate the catastrophic forgetting, alongside the continuous improvements in generative models. However, its application in
class incremental object detection (CIOD) has been significantly
limited, primarily due to the complexities of scenes involving
multiple labels. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
called stable diffusion deep generative replay (SDDGR) for
CIOD. Our method utilizes a diffusion-based generative model
with pre-trained text-to-image diffusion networks to generate
realistic and diverse synthetic images. SDDGR incorporates
an iterative refinement strategy to produce high-quality images
encompassing old classes. Additionally, we adopt an L2 knowledge distillation technique to improve the retention of prior
knowledge in synthetic images. Furthermore, our approach
includes pseudo-labeling for old objects within new task images,
preventing misclassification as background elements. Extensive
experiments on the COCO 2017 dataset demonstrate that SDDGR significantly outperforms existing algorithms, achieving a
new state-of-the-art in various CIOD scenarios.

Seungryul Baek1

ࢀ࢔ࢋ࢝ ZĞĂůĚĂƚĂƐĞƚ
Object
Detector
ࡹ࢔ࢋ࢝

Object
Detector
ࡹ࢕࢒ࢊ

ࢀ࢕࢒ࢊ ^ǇŶƚŚĞƚŝĐĚĂƚĂƐĞƚ

Training
L2 distillation
͗WƐĞƵĚŽĂŶŶŽƚĂƚŝŽŶƐ
͗EĞǁĂŶŶŽƚĂƚŝŽŶƐ
͗EĞǁŝŵĂŐĞƐ
͗KůĚƐǇŶƚŚĞƚŝĐŝŵĂŐĞƐ
͗&ƌŽǌĞŶŶĞƚǁŽƌŬƐ
͗dƌĂŝŶĂďůĞŶĞƚǁŽƌŬƐ

Figure 1. We utilize a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model [51]
to generate realistic images that include objects from the old task.
These images are then filtered out via iterative refinement and filtered
synthetic images are integrated into the training process of the new
task. During training, we employ L2 distillation to a synthetic dataset.
Additionally, when training an image for the new task, we employ
a pseudo-labeling that finds the old task objects from the new task
images. The series of methods enable us to effectively mitigate the
issue of catastrophic forgetting.

generative replay [6, 12, 58, 66, 67]. The partial experience
replay needs to store actual data samples from old tasks, acting
as a reservoir of previous knowledge for the model. On the
other hand, generative replay employs generative models to
mimic the distribution of old task’s data, enabling the current
model to re-experience the previous knowledge.
These methods have made significant progress in the field of
image classification when there is only a single object present
in an image. Yet, there has been a pressing need for techniques
that can handle more complex and realistic scenes including
multi-labels in a scene based on the object detection algorithms.
Consequently, class incremental object detection (CIOD) has
emerged, with the goal of improving models to detect multiple
labels in a scene while still preserving the ability to recognize
previously learned object classes.
Initial researches [1, 11, 35, 60] in class incremental object detection (CIOD) extended image classification methods

28772

