This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single-View Scene Point Cloud Human Grasp Generation
Yan-Kang Wang1 Chengyi Xing2 Yi-Lin Wei1 Xiao-Ming Wu1 Wei-Shi Zheng1,3 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Stanford University, Stanford, CA
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{wangyk65, weiylin5, wuxm65}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

②
④ ③

①

①

chengyix@stanford.edu wszheng@ieee.org

②

③

Dataset Scene

④

Red hands (second row): GraspCVAE

Yellow hands (third row): Ours

Figure 1. The scene of our dataset and comparison between our model and GraspCVAE [25]. The top-left image depicts the scene in our
dataset, comprising a table and an object. Below it are images from four random viewpoints out of 36. The three rows of images on the
right side represent, respectively, the single-view images, the generation results of GraspCVAE and our method. The green box indicates
the area where the hand-object penetration occurs due to the lack of global perception ability of GraspCVAE.

Abstract
In this work, we explore a novel task of generating human grasps based on single-view scene point clouds, which
more accurately mirrors the typical real-world situation of
observing objects from a single viewpoint. Due to the incompleteness of object point clouds and the presence of
numerous scene points, the generated hand is prone to
penetrating into the invisible parts of the object and the
model is easily affected by scene points. Thus, we introduce S2HGrasp, a framework composed of two key modules: the Global Perception module that globally perceives
partial object point clouds, and the DiffuGrasp module designed to generate high-quality human grasps based on
complex inputs that include scene points. Additionally, we
introduce S2HGD dataset, which comprises approximately
99,000 single-object single-view scene point clouds of 1,668
unique objects, each annotated with one human grasp. Our
extensive experiments demonstrate that S2HGrasp can not
only generate natural human grasps regardless of scene
points, but also effectively prevent penetration between the
* Corresponding author

hand and invisible parts of the object. Moreover, our model
showcases strong generalization capability when applied
to unseen objects. Our code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/iSEE-Laboratory/S2HGrasp.

1. Introduction
Learning and capturing hand-object interactions stands as
a foundation for understanding human behaviors and has
many practical applications. From augmented and virtual reality [24] to the domains of robotic grasps, humancomputer interaction [35, 41] and learning from human
demonstrations [13, 15, 37, 45], the comprehension and
replication of these interactions are of significance.
In this work, we focus on understanding the interactions
involved in generating 3D human grasps for objects. We
recognize most existing grasp generation methods depend
on full 3D object models [25, 26], yet in real-world scenarios, objects and scenes are commonly perceived from a
single viewpoint, leading to incomplete object point clouds
with potential scene noise. Consequently, existing methods
find it challenging to capture the complete geometric fea-

831

