This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Audio to Photoreal Embodiment: Synthesizing Humans in Conversations
Evonne Ng1, 2
Javier Romero1
Timur Bagautdinov1
Shaojie Bai1
Trevor Darrell2
Angjoo Kanazawa2
Alexander Richard1
1

2

Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, Pittsburgh

Input: conversational audio

University of California, Berkeley

Intermediate Output: 3D face, hand, and body motion

Final output: Photoreal conversational avatar

Figure 1. Synthesizing photoreal conversational avatars. Given the audio from a dyadic conversation, we generate realistic conversational motion for the face, body, and hands. The motion can then be rendered as a photorealistic video. Please see results video.

Abstract
We present a framework for generating full-bodied photorealistic avatars that gesture according to the conversational dynamics of a dyadic interaction. Given speech audio, we output multiple possibilities of gestural motion for
an individual, including face, body, and hands. The key behind our method is in combining the benefits of sample diversity from vector quantization with the high-frequency details obtained through diffusion to generate more dynamic,
expressive motion. We visualize the generated motion using
highly photorealistic avatars that can express crucial nuances in gestures (e.g. sneers and smirks). To facilitate this
line of research, we introduce a first-of-its-kind multi-view
conversational dataset that allows for photorealistic reconstruction. Experiments show our model generates appropriate and diverse gestures, outperforming both diffusion- and
VQ-only methods. Furthermore, our perceptual evaluation
highlights the importance of photorealism (vs. meshes) in
accurately assessing subtle motion details in conversational
gestures. Code and dataset available on project page.

1. Introduction
Consider talking to your friend in a telepresent world,
where they appear as the generic golden mannequin shown

in Figure 1 (middle). Despite the mannequin’s ability to
act out rhythmic strokes of arm motion that seemingly follow your friend’s voice, the interaction will inevitably feel
robotic and uncanny. This uncanniness stems from the limitations imposed by non-textured meshes which mask subtle
nuances like eye gaze or smirking. Photorealistic details can
effectively convey these nuances, allowing us to express diverse moods during conversation. For example, a sentence
spoken while avoiding eye contact differs significantly from
one expressed with sustained gaze. As humans, we are especially perceptive to these micro-expressions and movements, which we use to formulate a higher-order understanding of our conversational partner’s intentions, comfort,
or understanding [10]. Developing conversational avatars
with the level of photorealism that can capture these subtleties is therefore essential for virtual agents to meaningfully interact with humans.
Our ability to perceive these fine-grain motion patterns
breaks down as we represent the motion in more abstracted
forms. Chaminade et al. [8] demonstrates that humans have
a more difficult time distinguishing real vs. fake key-framed
motions (such as walking) in skeletons than in textured
meshes, and even more-so in point-based representations
than in skeletons. In faces, McDonnell et al. [26] shows
that large facial motion anomalies are considerably less discernible on Toon (i.e. plain colored, comic-like) characters,

1001

