This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CityDreamer: Compositional Generative Model of Unbounded 3D Cities
Haozhe Xie, Zhaoxi Chen, Fangzhou Hong, Ziwei Liu
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{haozhe.xie, zhaoxi001, fangzhou001, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
https://haozhexie.com/project/city-dreamer

Multi-view Consistent

Diverse City Layouts

Well-defined Geometry

Unbounded City Layout

Diverse Style and Viewpoints

Figure 1. The proposed CityDreamer generates a wide variety of unbounded city layouts and multi-view consistent appearances, featuring
well-defined geometries and diverse styles.

Abstract
3D city generation is a desirable yet challenging task,
since humans are more sensitive to structural distortions in
urban environments. Additionally, generating 3D cities is
more complex than 3D natural scenes since buildings, as
objects of the same class, exhibit a wider range of appearances compared to the relatively consistent appearance of
objects like trees in natural scenes. To address these challenges, we propose CityDreamer, a compositional generative model designed specifically for unbounded 3D cities.
Our key insight is that 3D city generation should be a composition of different types of neural fields: 1) various building instances, and 2) background stuff, such as roads and
green lands. Specifically, we adopt the bird’s eye view scene
representation and employ a volumetric render for both
instance-oriented and stuff-oriented neural fields. The
generative hash grid and periodic positional embedding
are tailored as scene parameterization to suit the distinct
characteristics of building instances and background stuff.
Furthermore, we contribute a suite of CityGen Datasets,
including OSM and GoogleEarth, which comprises a vast
amount of real-world city imagery to enhance the realism
of the generated 3D cities both in their layouts and appearances. CityDreamer achieves state-of-the-art performance
not only in generating realistic 3D cities but also in localized editing within the generated cities.

1. Introduction
In the wave of the metaverse, 3D asset generation has
drawn considerable interest. Significant advancements have
been achieved in generating 3D objects [45, 57, 58], 3D
avatars [24, 29, 60], and 3D scenes [7, 11, 34]. Cities, being
one of the most crucial 3D assets, have found widespread
use in various applications, including urban planning, environmental simulations, and game asset creation. Therefore, the quest to make 3D city development accessible to
a broader audience encompassing artists, researchers, and
players, becomes a significant and impactful challenge.
In recent years, notable advancements have been made
in the field of 3D scene generation. GANCraft [22] and
SceneDreamer [11] use volumetric neural rendering to produce images within the 3D scene, using 3D coordinates and
corresponding semantic labels. Both methods show promising results in generating 3D natural scenes by leveraging
pseudo-ground-truth images generated by SPADE [42]. A
very recent work, InfiniCity [34], follows a similar pipeline
for 3D city generation. However, creating 3D cities presents
greater complexity compared to 3D natural scenes. Buildings, as objects with the same semantic label, exhibit a wide
range of appearances, unlike the relatively consistent appearance of objects like trees in natural scenes. This fact
may decrease the quality of generated buildings when all

9666

