This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Asymmetric Masked Distillation for Pre-Training Small Foundation Models
Zhiyu Zhao1,2
1

Bingkun Huang1,2

Sen Xing2

Gangshan Wu1

Limin Wang1,2, B

Yu Qiao2

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University

2

Shanghai AI Lab

Abstract
Self-supervised foundation models have shown great
potential in computer vision thanks to the pre-training
paradigm of masked autoencoding. Scale is a primary factor influencing the performance of these foundation models.
However, these large foundation models often result in high
computational cost. This paper focuses on pre-training relatively small vision transformer models that could be efficiently adapted to downstream tasks. Specifically, taking inspiration from knowledge distillation in model compression,
we propose a new asymmetric masked distillation (AMD)
framework for pre-training relatively small models with autoencoding. The core of AMD is to devise an asymmetric masking strategy, where the teacher model is enabled
to see more context information with a lower masking ratio, while the student model is still equipped with a high
masking ratio. We design customized multi-layer feature
alignment between the teacher encoder and student encoder
to regularize the pre-training of student MAE. To demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of AMD, we apply it to
both ImageMAE and VideoMAE for pre-training relatively
small ViT models. AMD achieved 84.6% classification accuracy on IN1K using the ViT-B model. And AMD achieves
73.3% classification accuracy using the ViT-B model on
the Something-in-Something V2 dataset, a 3.7% improvement over the original ViT-B model from VideoMAE. We
also transfer AMD pre-trained models to downstream tasks
and obtain consistent performance improvement over the
original masked autoencoding. The code and models are
available at https://github.com/MCG-NJU/AMD.

1. Introduction
In recent years, self-supervised learning (SSL) [6, 10, 12,
24, 29, 62] has witnessed great success and outperformed
its supervised counterparts. With the success in masked language modeling (MLM) [15], masked image modeling has
become popular in computer vision for self-supervised representation learning. For example, BeiT [4], SimMIM [68],
B: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

Teacher
Encoder
masking

visible patches

input patches

distilling

Student
Encoder

(a) Symmetric masking strategy

visible patches

Teacher
Encoder
distilling

masking

input patches
visible patches

Student
Encoder

(b) Asymmetric masking strategy

Figure 1. Comparison of symmetric and asymmetric masking
strategy. The asymmetric masking strategy allows the teacher to
acquire more contextual information than the students.

and MAE [27] are proposed to image masked pre-training,
and MaskFeat [64], VideoMAE [51], MAE-ST [22], VideoMAEv2 [57], and MGMAE [33] are developed for video
masked representation learning. This simple pipeline of
masking and reconstruction has shown excellent performance on downstream tasks such as image classification,
object detection, semantic segmentation, and action recognition. However, some issues still remain for the masked
autoencoding framework. First, the encoder often operates
on a small portion of visible tokens with a high masking ratio
(e.g., 75% for image and 90% for video). This high masking
could increase the difficulty of the pre-training tasks and
might encourage the encoder to capture more useful highlevel information for reconstruction. We argue that this high
masking ratio might also lose some important and detailed
structure information, leading to the pre-trained model capturing incomplete and biased visual information. Second,
the masked autoencoding often requires the ViT backbones
of high capacities (e.g., ViT-Large and ViT-Huge) to unleash

18516

