This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Spatial-Frequency Information Integration from a Hierarchical
Perspective for Panchromatic and Multi-Spectral Image Fusion
Jiangtong Tan1 , Jie Huang1 , Naishan Zheng1 , Man Zhou1 , Keyu Yan1 , Danfeng Hong2 , Feng Zhao1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jttan, hj0117, nszheng, manman, keyu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hongdf@aircas.ac.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

9VGZOGROTLUXSGZOUTOTZKMXGZOUT

FT: Fourier transform
)

1. Introduction
In remote sensing imaging, due to the limitations of
satellites, it’s common to utilize sensors to acquire lowresolution multi-spectral (LRMS) image with high spectral
resolution and panchromatic (PAN) image with high spatial
resolution but low spectral resolution. Pan-sharpening technique aims to fuse the LRMS image with the PAN image to
obtain high-resolution multi-spectral (HRMS) image with
* Corresponding author.

:concatenate

6'4

6'4

)

/TZKMXGZOUT

Pan-sharpening is a super-resolution problem that essentially relies on spectra fusion of panchromatic (PAN)
images and low-resolution multi-spectral (LRMS) images.
The previous methods have validated the effectiveness of information fusion in the Fourier space of the whole image.
However, they haven’t fully explored the Fourier relationships at different hierarchies between PAN and LRMS images. To this end, we propose a Hierarchical Frequency
Integration Network (HFIN) to facilitate hierarchical
Fourier information integration for pan-sharpening. Specifically, our network consists of two designs: information
stratification and information integration. For information
stratification, we hierarchically decompose PAN and LRMS
information into spatial, global Fourier and local Fourier
information, and fuse them independently. For information integration, the above hierarchical fused information
is processed to further enhance their relationships and undergo comprehensive integration. Our method extend a new
space for exploring the relationships of PAN and LRMS
images, enhancing the integration of spatial-frequency information. Extensive experiments robustly validate the effectiveness of the proposed network, showcasing its superior performance compared to other state-of-the-art methods and generalization in real-world scenes and other fusion tasks as a general image fusion framework. Code is
available at https://github.com/JosephTiTan/HFIN.

-RUHGR,U[XOKXOTLUXSGZOUTOTZKMXGZOUT

-RUHGR
,:

)44
2839

2839

/T\KXYK
-RUHGR
,:

Spatial information
(a)

Global Fourier information

(b)

5[XVXUVUYKJRUIGR ,U[XOKXOTLUXSGZOUT OTZKMXGZOUTLXUSGNOKXGXINOIGRVKXYVKIZO\K
FT: Fourier transform
: Local region

6'4

2UIGR
,:
2839

…

/TZKMXGZOUT

Abstract

…
Local Fourier information

/T\KXYK
2UIGR
,:

Fused
representation

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of different information integration process.
(a): Spatial information integration; (b): Global Fourier information integration; (c): Our proposed local Fourier information integration. We explore the relationships of PAN and LRMS images
from a hierarchical perspective, combining relationships in (a), (b)
and (c) to achieve hierarchical information integration.

both high spectral and high spatial resolutions.
Over the past years, pan-sharpening technique has undergone rapid development and advancement. The traditional
approaches employ mathematical models to fuse spatial and
spectral information, typically assuming that the PAN image is a linear combination of different spectral bands of
the HRMS image. However, excessive reliance on prior
knowledge has constrained the applicability of these methods. With the rise of deep learning technology, convolutional neural networks have been employed in the field of
pan-sharpening [1, 10, 28]. Subsequently, model structures
have become increasingly complex, leading to impressive
results in the field of pan-sharpening [8].
Despite the promising results achieved by these methods, most of them focus on learning in the spatial domain, neglecting the information in the frequency domain.
Some studies have suggested that pan-sharpening is intri-

25922

