This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DMR: Decomposed Multi-Modality Representations for Frames and Events
Fusion in Visual Reinforcement Learning
Haoran Xu1,2 Peixi Peng2,3∗ Guang Tan1∗ Yuan Li4 Xinhai Xu4 Yonghong Tian2,3,5
1
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
4
Academy of Military Sciences 5 School of Computer Science, Peking University
Feed Forward

1. Introduction
Visual reinforcement learning (RL) is instrumental in training intelligent agents to make decisions by directly translating complex visual inputs into actions. It has found applications in various domains such as autonomous driving [47,
50], robot control [19, 52], and video games [31, 42]. While
most visual RL methods use frame-based RGB cameras as
their primary source of perception [19, 20, 45, 46], these
methods face limitations in certain situations due to the
camera’s low dynamic range (70 dB) [27]. For example, in
traffic scenarios with complex lighting conditions like night
* Corresponding authors.

Observation
noise

Policy
Policy

Left-turn

Policy

DMR
(ours)

Encoder

noise
person

Policy

Encoder

lane person
edge

Back Propagation

Representation

DMR

DVS Events

We explore visual reinforcement learning (RL) using two
complementary visual modalities: frame-based RGB camera and event-based Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS). Existing multi-modality visual RL methods often encounter
challenges in effectively extracting task-relevant information from multiple modalities while suppressing the increased noise, only using indirect reward signals instead
of pixel-level supervision. To tackle this, we propose a
Decomposed Multi-Modality Representation (DMR) framework for visual RL. It explicitly decomposes the inputs
into three distinct components: combined task-relevant features (co-features), RGB-specific noise, and DVS-specific
noise. The co-features represent the full information from
both modalities that is relevant to the RL task; the two
noise components, each constrained by a data reconstruction loss to avoid information leak, are contrasted with the
co-features to maximize their difference. Extensive experiments demonstrate that, by explicitly separating the different types of information, our approach achieves substantially improved policy performance compared to state-ofthe-art approaches.

RGB Frame

Abstract

Optimal action

Forward

TD
Loss

TD
Loss

TD
Loss

road edge

RGB
Frame
DVS
Events

Figure 1. Several typical visual examples of frames and events
based RL. (i) In the first row, insufficient ambient light causes
RGB underexposure, leading to the overlooking of the front pedestrian and resulting in a forward policy aligned with the lane direction that could cause collisions. (ii) In the second row, the lack
of texture in DVS causes the person and the background to blend,
leading to a left-turn policy to avoid the highlighted area on the
right. (iii) In contrast, our method (third row) can fully take advantage of RGB and DVS to extract task-relevant information and
eliminate task-irrelevant and noisy information through joint TD
and DMR learning, thereby obtaining an optimal evasion policy.

driving or tunnel traversal, the frame-based methods may
experience substantial performance degradation [51].
Recently, there has been a growing interest in using bioinspired event cameras to address these challenges [12, 37,
39]. Event-based cameras are well suited to adverse visual conditions due to their rapid adaptation to changes in
light intensity and a high dynamic range (120 dB) [27].
Their high sampling rate, typically in the order of KHz, al-

26508

