This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIA: Your Personalized Image Animator
via Plug-and-Play Modules in Text-to-Image Models
Yiming Zhang1,2,*
1

Zhening Xing1,*

Yanhong Zeng1,†

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

2

Youqing Fang1

Kai Chen1,†

Dalian University of Technology

https://github.com/open-mmlab/PIA

Figure 1. Given an elaborated image generated by a personalized text-to-image model, the proposed Personalized Image Animator (PIA)
animates it with realistic motions according to different text prompts while preserving the original distinct styles and high-fidelity details.
We recommend using Abode Arobat and clicking the images to play the animation clips. [Best viewed in color with zoom-in]

Abstract
Recent advancements in personalized text-to-image
(T2I) models have revolutionized content creation, empowering non-experts to generate stunning images with unique
styles. While promising, animating these personalized images with realistic motions poses significant challenges in
preserving distinct styles, high-fidelity details, and achieving motion controllability by text. In this paper, we present
PIA, a Personalized Image Animator that excels in aligning with condition images, achieving motion controllability by text, and the compatibility with various personalized
T2I models without specific tuning. To achieve these goals,
PIA builds upon a base T2I model with well-trained tempo-

ral alignment layers, allowing for the seamless transformation of any personalized T2I model into an image animation
model. A key component of PIA is the introduction of the
condition module, which takes as inputs the condition frame
and inter-frame affinity. This module leverages the affinity
hint to transfer appearance information from the condition
frame to individual frames in the latent space. This design
mitigates the challenges of appearance-related frame alignment within PIA and allows for a stronger focus on aligning with motion-related guidance. To address the lack of
a benchmark for this field, we introduce AnimateBench, a
comprehensive benchmark comprising diverse personalized
T2I models, curated images, and motion-related prompts.
We show extensive evaluations and applications on AnimateBench to verify the superiority of PIA.

∗ denotes equal contribution, † denotes corresponding author.

7747

