This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-dimensional Adapter to Rule Them All:
Concepts, Diffusion Models and Erasing Applications
Mengyao Lyu1,2 * Yuhong Yang1,2 * Haiwen Hong3† Hui Chen1,2 Xuan Jin3
Yuan He3 Hui Xue3 Jungong Han1,2 Guiguang Ding1,2 ‡
1
Tsinghua University 2 BNRist 3 Alibaba Group
mengyao.lyu@outlook.com, suisei.con@gmail.com, honghaiwen.hhw@alibaba-inc.com,
jichenhui2012@gmail.com, {jinxuan.jx, heyuan.hy, hui.xueh}@alibaba-inc.com,
jungonghan77@gmail.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

(Target)

(Non-Target)

Original Erased

Original

Generation Alternation

Original

Concept Erosion

Progressively Erase
0 → 20 Targets

Erase 1 Target:

Another
Model B

:

Training-free
Transfer
Generation Preservation
Generation of Model A + SPMs

Non-target: Preserved

SPM
(Ours)

Precise Erasure

Target: Erased

NonTransferable

Previous
Methods

SPM-Applied

Generation of Model B + SPMs

Figure 1. Previous methods often achieve target concept removal from diffusion models at the cost of degeneration on non-target concepts.
They suffer from unpredictable generation alterations, which escalate even into concept erosion when the number of targeted concepts
increases. In contrast, the proposed SPM achieves precise multi-concept erasing while preserving the generation capability of the pre-trained
DM. Moreover, concept-specific SPMs offer training-free transferability towards other models, making it a one-size-fits-all solution.

Abstract
The prevalent use of commercial and open-source diffusion models (DMs) for text-to-image generation prompts risk
mitigation to prevent undesired behaviors. Existing concept
erasing methods in academia are all based on full parameter or specification-based fine-tuning, from which we observe the following issues: 1) Generation alteration towards
erosion: Parameter drift during target elimination causes
alterations and potential deformations across all generations, even eroding other concepts at varying degrees, which
is more evident with multi-concept erased; 2) Transfer inability & deployment inefficiency: Previous model-specific
erasure impedes the flexible combination of concepts and
* Equal contribution.

† Project lead.

‡ Corresponding authors.

the training-free transfer towards other models, resulting in
linear cost growth as the deployment scenarios increase.
To achieve non-invasive, precise, customizable, and transferable elimination, we ground our erasing framework on
one-dimensional adapters to erase multiple concepts from
most DMs at once across versatile erasing applications. The
concept-SemiPermeable structure is injected as a Membrane
(SPM) into any DM to learn targeted erasing, and meantime the alteration and erosion phenomenon is effectively
mitigated via a novel Latent Anchoring fine-tuning strategy. Once obtained, SPMs can be flexibly combined and
plug-and-play for other DMs without specific re-tuning, enabling timely and efficient adaptation to diverse scenarios.
During generation, our Facilitated Transport mechanism
dynamically regulates the permeability of each SPM to respond to different input prompts, further minimizing the

7559

