This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hallucination Augmented Contrastive Learning for Multimodal Large Language
Model
Chaoya Jiang1
Haiyang Xu2∗ Mengfan Dong1
Jiaxing Chen1
Wei Ye1∗
2
2
2
2
Ming Yan
Qinghao Ye
Ji Zhang
Fei Huang
Shikun Zhang1
1
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
2
Alibaba Group
{jiangchaoya, wye}@pku.edu.cn, shuofeng.xhy@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) have been
shown to efficiently integrate natural language with visual
information to handle multi-modal tasks. However, MLLMs
still face a fundamental limitation of hallucinations, where
they tend to generate erroneous or fabricated information.
In this paper, we address hallucinations in MLLMs from a
novel perspective of representation learning. We first analyzed the representation distribution of textual and visual
tokens in MLLM, revealing two important findings: 1) there
is a significant gap between textual and visual representations, indicating unsatisfactory cross-modal representation
alignment; 2) representations of texts that contain and do not
contain hallucinations are entangled, making it challenging to distinguish them. These two observations inspire us
with a simple yet effective method to mitigate hallucinations.
Specifically, we introduce contrastive learning into MLLMs
and use text with hallucination as hard negative examples,
naturally bringing representations of non-hallucinative text
and visual samples closer while pushing way representations of non-hallucinating and hallucinative text. We evaluate our method quantitatively and qualitatively, showing its
effectiveness in reducing hallucination occurrences and improving performance across multiple benchmarks. On the
MMhal-Bench benchmark, our method obtains a 34.66%
/29.5% improvement over the baseline MiniGPT-4/LLaVA.
Our code is available on https:// github.com/ XPLUG/mPLUG-HalOwl/tree/main/hacl.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-3 [4], LLaMA
[45, 46], and GPT-4 [38] have received significant attention for their remarkable text understanding and generation
capabilities. Recently, GPT-4V1 [37] has demonstrated im∗ Corresponding author

1https://openai.com/research/gpt-4v-system-card

Modality
Gap

(a) Representation distribution of
LLaVA w/o HACL
MMhal-Bench
MME

(b) Representation distribution of
LLaVA with HACL

LLaVA with HACL
LLaVA w/o HACL
LLaVA with HACL
LLaVA w/o HACL

2.08
1.55
562.58
502.82

(c) The blue bar represents overall score on MMhal-Bench and the orange bar represents
the overall score on MME. Noted biger numbers mean better results.

Figure 1. Subfigure (a) and subfigure (b) show the distributions
of the last token’s representations yielded by LLM for visual or
textual token sequences. Blue icons represent images, green icons
represent ground truth captions, and red ones represent hallucinative captions generated by GPT-4. HACL refers to our proposed method, Hallucination Augmented Contrastive Learning. In
subfigure (a), textual and visual representations have cross-model
semantic gaps, while non-hallucinating and hallucinative text representations are mixed. This phenomenon is alleviated by HACL,
as shown in subfigure (b). Subfigure (c) shows the empirical results
of the hallucination evaluation benchmark MMhal-Bench [44] and
the model performance evaluation metric MME [12].

pressive multi-modal abilities in tasks such as image caption and visual question answering, shedding light on the
vision-language domain and attracting widespread research
interests.
Consequently, a new category of models, known as Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [2, 10, 26, 32, 49–
51, 55], has emerged, aiming to enhance LLMs with the
capacity to comprehend and handle visual information. To

27036

