This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mining Supervision for Dynamic Regions in Self-Supervised Monocular
Depth Estimation
Hoang Chuong Nguyen1
Tianyu Wang1
Jose M. Alvarez2
Miaomiao Liu1
1
2
Australian National University
NVIDIA

mono-consistent-depth.git

1. Introduction
Estimating a dense depth map from a monocular image
is crucial for various applications, such as 3D reconstruction [23], autonomous driving [24], and augmented reality
[30]. Self-/unsupervised depth estimation using monocular video sequences is an effective way to bypass the need
for expensive depth labels [3, 8, 10]. Current methods minimize the image reconstruction loss during training to jointly
estimate depth and camera pose [8, 10, 12, 13]. These meth1 Dynamic regions indicate regions covered by moving objects.

[17]

This paper focuses on self-supervised monocular depth
estimation in dynamic scenes trained on monocular videos.
Existing methods jointly estimate pixel-wise depth and motion, relying mainly on an image reconstruction loss. Dynamic regions1 remain a critical challenge for these methods due to the inherent ambiguity in depth and motion estimation, resulting in inaccurate depth estimation. This paper proposes a self-supervised training framework exploiting pseudo depth labels for dynamic regions from training
data. The key contribution of our framework is to decouple depth estimation for static and dynamic regions of images in the training data. We start with an unsupervised
depth estimation approach, which provides reliable depth
estimates for static regions and motion cues for dynamic regions and allows us to extract moving object information at
the instance level. In the next stage, we use an object network to estimate the depth of those moving objects assuming rigid motions. Then, we propose a new scale alignment
module to address the scale ambiguity between estimated
depths for static and dynamic regions. We can then use the
depth labels generated to train an end-to-end depth estimation network and improve its performance. Extensive experiments on the Cityscapes and KITTI datasets show that our
self-training strategy consistently outperforms existing self/unsupervised depth estimation methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/HoangChuongNguyen/

Ours

Abstract

josea@nvidia.com

Image

{hoangchuong.nguyen, tianyu.wang2, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au

Figure 1. Depth predictions for an image. Areas with more intense
red color in the error maps represent higher error. Our method
produces more accurate depths for moving objects in the image.

ods suffer accuracy degradation in the presence of moving
objects, e.g, cars, as the reconstruction process does not
take motion into consideration. To address this limitation,
a few works infer the camera and pixel-wise object motion
in 3D, and the depth to reduce the image reconstruction error [15, 19]. Other approaches incorporate binary masks
for moving objects to improve the pixel-wise motion estimation [3, 17]. Despite the accuracy improvement, as we
will show in Section 3, there are inherent ambiguities entangling motion and depth estimation in dynamic regions that
can not be fully resolved using regularization terms or joint
optimization, i.e., enforcing sparsity on pixel-wise motion.
In contrast, we propose to exploit scale-consistent pseudo
depth labels for moving objects which we can then use to
train a monocular depth estimation network.
In contrast to existing methods, we propose to decouple the depth estimation for static and dynamic regions in
images. We first leverage existing self-supervised depth
estimation frameworks to jointly estimate the depth, pixelwise object motion, and camera rigid motion [19]. We use
pixel-wise object motion to identify moving objects, e.g.,
the foreground, and their pixel-wise correspondences across
frames. For the rest of the image, the background, we directly use the inferred depth map as depth labels.
For the foreground, the goal is to obtain pseudo depth la-

10446

