This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PromptAD: Learning Prompts with only Normal Samples for
Few-Shot Anomaly Detection
Xiaofan Li1 , Zhizhong Zhang1 , Xin Tan1,2,†, Chengwei Chen2 , Yanyun Qu3 , Yuan Xie1,2 , Lizhuang Ma1
1
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, Chongqing, China
3
The Navy Military Medical University, Shanghai, China
4
Xiamen University, Fujian, China
{funzi}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {zzzhang, xtan, yxie, lzma}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
{timchen}91@aliyun.com, {yyqu}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
The vision-language model has brought great improvement to few-shot industrial anomaly detection, which usually needs to design of hundreds of prompts through prompt
engineering. For automated scenarios, we first use conventional prompt learning with many-class paradigm as the
baseline to automatically learn prompts but found that it
can not work well in one-class anomaly detection. To address the above problem, this paper proposes a one-class
prompt learning method for few-shot anomaly detection,
termed PromptAD. First, we propose semantic concatenation which can transpose normal prompts into anomaly
prompts by concatenating normal prompts with anomaly
suffixes, thus constructing a large number of negative samples used to guide prompt learning in one-class setting.
Furthermore, to mitigate the training challenge caused by
the absence of anomaly images, we introduce the concept of explicit anomaly margin, which is used to explicitly control the margin between normal prompt features
and anomaly prompt features through a hyper-parameter.
For image-level/pixel-level anomaly detection, PromptAD
achieves first place in 11/12 few-shot settings on MVTec
and VisA. Code is available at https://github.com/FuNz0/PromptAD.git

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) [4, 35, 48] is a critical task in computer vision [22, 25, 28, 29], with widespread applications
of defect detection in industry and medicine. This paper focuses on unsupervised industrial anomaly detection, which
poses a challenge known as a one-class classification (OCC)
† Corresponding author.

Sample (class1)

Sample (class2)

Sample (classn)

...

...

Prompt (classn)

Prompt (class1) Prompt (class )
2

a. Prompt learning in many-class setting
Sample (normal)
Prompt (anomalyn)

...
Prompt (normal)
Prompt (anomaly1)

b. Prompt learning in one-class setting

Figure 1. Left: Prompt learning under many-class and one-class
settings. Right: The prompt-guided results of WinCLIP using
different numbers of prompts, and the prompt-guided results of the
baseline and our PromptAD under one-shot for prompt learning.
All results are on the MVTec.

[37] setting. In this framework, only normal samples are
available during training, but in the testing phase, the model
is expected to identify anomalous samples. Since industrial
anomaly detection typically customizes a model for various
industrial production lines, the ability to rapidly train models with few samples holds significant promise for practical
applications.
Due to the strong zero-shot ability of the foundation
models [23, 32, 34], WinCLIP [19] was proposed as the first
work utilizing the vision-language foundation model (i.e.,
CLIP [33]) to enhance the model’s anomaly detection performance in few-shot settings. To better leverage prompt
guidance, WinCLIP introduces a prompt engineer strategy called “Prompt Ensemble” which combines a sufficient
number of manually-designed prompts. For example, some
manual prompts (e.g., a cropped photo of a [],
a blurry photo of the [], etc.) are combined together as the normal prompts. As shown in Figure 1 (right),
with the number of prompts increasing, WinCLIP’s perfor-

16838

