This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-aware Exploration-Verification-Exploitation
for Instance ImageGoal Navigation
Xiaohan Lei1
1

Min Wang2

Wengang Zhou1,2

Li Li1

Houqiang Li 1,2

MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, Univerisity of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
leixh@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wangmin@iai.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,lil1,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Embodied navigation is an emerging computer vision task,
where an agent utilizes visual sensing to actively interact
with its surroundings and execute navigation tasks [2, 4].
Over the past decade, substantial advancements have been
witnessed in the field of embodied visual navigation, driven
by the emergence of large-scale photorealistic 3D scene
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Contract 62102128 and 62021001, and in part
by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under contract WK3490000007. It was also supported by the GPU cluster built by
MCC Lab of Information Science and Technology Institution of USTC.
Corresponding authors: Min Wang and Wengang Zhou.

False Target

2

3

1

True Target

As a new embodied vision task, Instance ImageGoal
Navigation (IIN) aims to navigate to a specified object
depicted by a goal image in an unexplored environment.
The main challenge of this task lies in identifying the target object from different viewpoints while rejecting similar distractors. Existing ImageGoal Navigation methods
usually adopt the simple Exploration-Exploitation framework and ignore the identification of specific instance during navigation. In this work, we propose to imitate the human behaviour of “getting closer to confirm” when distinguishing objects from a distance. Specifically, we design a
new modular navigation framework named Instance-aware
Exploration-Verification-Exploitation (IEVE) for instancelevel image goal navigation. Our method allows for active switching among the exploration, verification, and exploitation actions, thereby facilitating the agent in making reasonable decisions under different situations. On
the challenging HabitatMatterport 3D semantic (HM3DSEM) dataset, our method surpasses previous state-of-theart work, with a classical segmentation model (0.684 vs.
0.561 success) or a robust model (0.702 vs. 0.561 success). Our code will be made publicly available at https:
//github.com/XiaohanLei/IEVE.

1

2

3

Observation at

Observation at

Observation at

Goal Image: Bed

Figure 1. Instance ImageGoal Navigation tasks an agent with
navigating to a particular object instance described by the goal
image. The agent is initially in an unexplored environment at t1 .
While exploring the environment, it encounters a “bed” similar to
the target at t2 and discerns their differences. Eventually, at t3 ,
agent finds the “bed” described in the goal image.

datasets [6, 41, 48, 53, 57], the implementation of advanced
simulators [24, 46, 49, 53], the development of deep learning algorithms [5, 19, 38, 47], and so on.
The ability for an agent to navigate its environment and
accomplish tasks without human intervention is essential
for the advancement of embodied visual navigation. One
common setting for tasking an agent is to give it natural
language instructions, such as “check if my laptop is on
the chair.” However, this setting becomes confusing when

16329

