This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SocialCircle: Learning the Angle-based Social Interaction Representation
for Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction

1

Conghao Wong1∗ Beihao Xia(B)1∗ Ziqian Zou1 Yulong Wang2 Xinge You1,3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Huazhong Agricultural University
3
Research Institute of Huazhong University of Science and Technology in Shenzhen

{conghaowong, xbh hust, ziqianzoulive}@icloud.com, ylwang@mail.hzau.edu.cn, youxg@mail.hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Analyzing and forecasting trajectories of agents like
pedestrians and cars in complex scenes has become more
and more significant in many intelligent systems and applications. The diversity and uncertainty in socially interactive behaviors among a rich variety of agents make this
task more challenging than other deterministic computer vision tasks. Researchers have made a lot of efforts to quantify the effects of these interactions on future trajectories
through different mathematical models and network structures, but this problem has not been well solved. Inspired
by marine animals that localize the positions of their companions underwater through echoes, we build a new anglebased trainable social interaction representation, named
SocialCircle, for continuously reflecting the context of social interactions at different angular orientations relative to
the target agent. We validate the effect of the proposed SocialCircle by training it along with several newly released
trajectory prediction models, and experiments show that the
SocialCircle not only quantitatively improves the prediction
performance, but also qualitatively helps better simulate social interactions when forecasting pedestrian trajectories in
a way that is consistent with human intuitions.

3-Echo
A little bit
dangerous?
Better not to go
through there?
Maybe safer?

Concatenate

Echo

2-Reflection
High Reflection
Low Reflection
No Reflection

1-Scan

Scan

Neighbor Agents
Target Agent’s
Past Trajectory

A Single Partition’s View

Figure 1. Motivation Illustration. Analogous to marine animals
like dolphins and whales localizing other companions underwater
through echolocation, we analyze agents’ reactions to the potential socially interactive behaviors by assuming (1) they first Scan
their interaction environment by sending signals from all angles,
(2) then all neighbors feedback their Reflection signals to tell their
directions, and (3) finally the target agent could make interactive
decisions by the received echoes at different angular orientations.

1. Introduction
Analyzing, understanding, and forecasting behaviors of
intelligent agents have been significantly required by more
and more intelligent systems and applications. Due to the
ease of access and analysis of trajectories, analyzing agents’
behaviors through trajectories has also become a common
approach. Trajectory prediction aims at forecasting agents’
all possible future trajectories during a specific period by
taking into account the positions of all agents that appeared
* equal contribution. Codes are available at https://github.
com/cocoon2wong/SocialCircle.

in the scene [1]. It also considers the potential interactive
behaviors [2, 8, 12, 33, 46] as well as the scene constraints
[3, 5, 17, 25, 27, 30, 41, 47] when making predictions.
The social interaction [1, 28] (also known as the agentto-agent interaction) considered in trajectory prediction
takes into account not only all kinds of interactive behaviors
among different agents but how they affect their trajectories.
Current social-interaction-modeling methods in the trajectory prediction task can be classified roughly into Modelbased and Model-free two classes[49]. Model-based methods may take some particular “rules” [49] as the primary
foundation for the prediction. For example, the Social-

19005

