This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ExMap: Leveraging Explainability Heatmaps for Unsupervised Group
Robustness to Spurious Correlations
Rwiddhi Chakraborty, Adrian Sletten, Michael C. Kampffmeyer
Department of Physics and Technology, UiT The Arctic University of Norway
firstname[.middle initial].lastname@uit.no

Abstract
Group robustness strategies aim to mitigate learned biases in deep learning models that arise from spurious correlations present in their training datasets. However, most
existing methods rely on the access to the label distribution
of the groups, which is time-consuming and expensive to
obtain. As a result, unsupervised group robustness strategies are sought. Based on the insight that a trained model’s
classification strategies can be inferred accurately based on
explainability heatmaps, we introduce ExMap, an unsupervised two stage mechanism designed to enhance group robustness in traditional classifiers. ExMap utilizes a clustering module to infer pseudo-labels based on a model’s explainability heatmaps, which are then used during training
in lieu of actual labels. Our empirical studies validate the
efficacy of ExMap - We demonstrate that it bridges the performance gap with its supervised counterparts and outperforms existing partially supervised and unsupervised methods. Additionally, ExMap can be seamlessly integrated with
existing group robustness learning strategies. Finally, we
demonstrate its potential in tackling the emerging issue of
multiple shortcut mitigation1 .

1. Introduction
Deep neural network classifiers trained for classification
tasks, have invited increased scrutiny from the research
community due to their overreliance on spurious correlations present in the training data [4, 5, 9, 31, 38]. This is
related to the broader aspect of Shortcut Learning [10], or
the Clever Hans effect [15], where a model picks the path
of least resistance to predict data, thus relying on shortcut
features that are not causally linked to the label. The consequence of this phenomenon is that, although such models
may demonstrate impressive mean accuracy on the test data,
they may still fail on challenging subsets of the data, i.e. the
groups [7, 8, 27]. As a result, group robustness is a natural
1 Code available at https://github.com/rwchakra/exmap

objective to be met to mitigate reliance on spurious correlations. Thus, instead of evaluating models based on mean
test accuracy, evaluating them on worst group accuracy has
been the recent paradigm [12, 21, 25, 40], resulting in the
emergence of group robustness techniques. By dividing a
dataset into pre-determined groups of spurious correlations,
classifiers are then trained to maximize the worst group accuracy - As a result, the spurious attribute that the model is
most susceptible to is considered the shortcut of interest.
In Figure 1, we illustrate the group robustness paradigm.
Given a dataset, a robustness strategy takes as input the
group labels and retrains a base classifier (such as Expected
Risk Minimization, i.e. ERM) to improve the worst group
accuracy (G3 in this case). GroupDRO [28] was one of the
early influential works that introduced the group robustness
paradigm. Further, it demonstrated a strategy that could indeed improve worst group accuracy. One limitation of this
approach was the reliance on group labels in the training
data, which was replaced with the reliance on group labels
in the validation data in successive works [13, 19]. However, while these efforts have made strides in enhancing the
accuracy of trained classifiers for underperforming groups,
many hinge on the assumption that the underlying groups
are known apriori and that the group labels are available,
which is often impractical in real-world contexts. An unsupervised approach, as illustrated in Figure 1, would ideally
estimate pseudo-labels that could be inputs to any robustness strategy, leading to improved worst group robustness.
An example of such a fully unsupervised worst group robustness approach is (GEORGE) [32]. GEORGE clusters
the penultimate layer features in a UMAP reduced space,
demonstrating impressive results on multiple datasets. In
this work, we instead show that clustering explainability
heatmaps instead, is more beneficial in improving worst
group robustness. Intuitively, this stems from the fact that a
pixel-attribution based explainability method in input space
focuses only on the relevant image features (pixel space) in
the task, discarding other entangled features irrelevant for
the final prediction.
In our work, we circumvent the need for a group labeled

12017

