This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffAM: Diffusion-based Adversarial Makeup Transfer for Facial Privacy
Protection
Yuhao Sun, Lingyun Yu*, Hongtao Xie, Jiaming Li, Yongdong Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China
{syh3327,ljmd}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{yuly,htxie,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

“red lipstick with
blue eyeshadow”

“face”

Misalignment

With the rapid development of face recognition (FR) systems, the privacy of face images on social media is facing
severe challenges due to the abuse of unauthorized FR systems. Some studies utilize adversarial attack techniques to
defend against malicious FR systems by generating adversarial examples. However, the generated adversarial examples, i.e., the protected face images, tend to suffer from subpar visual quality and low transferability. In this paper, we
propose a novel face protection approach, dubbed DiffAM,
which leverages the powerful generative ability of diffusion
models to generate high-quality protected face images with
adversarial makeup transferred from reference images. To
be specific, we first introduce a makeup removal module
to generate non-makeup images utilizing a fine-tuned diffusion model with guidance of textual prompts in CLIP space.
As the inverse process of makeup transfer, makeup removal
can make it easier to establish the deterministic relationship between makeup domain and non-makeup domain regardless of elaborate text prompts. Then, with this relationship, a CLIP-based makeup loss along with an ensemble attack strategy is introduced to jointly guide the direction of adversarial makeup domain, achieving the generation of protected face images with natural-looking makeup
and high black-box transferability. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that DiffAM achieves higher visual quality and
attack success rates with a gain of 12.98% under black-box
setting compared with the state of the arts. The code will be
available at https://github.com/HansSunY/DiffAM.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed major advances in face
recognition (FR) systems based on deep neural networks
(DNNs), which have been applied to various scenarios.
However, the expanding capabilities of FR systems have
raised concerns about the threats they pose to facial privacy.
* Corresponding author.

Generator

Adversarial information

Text-guided Adversarial Makeup Generation
Makeup Removal

Alignment

Generator

Adversarial information

Ours

Figure 1. Core idea comparison. Text-guided method generates
adversarial makeup simply with a pair of textual prompts. The
coarse-grained guidance of text results in unexpected makeup generation (as shown in red boxes). Our method introduces a makeup
removal module to transition this task from text-based guidance to
image-based guidance and controls the direction and distance of
refined adversarial makeup generation (as shown in green boxes).

Particularly, FR systems have the potential for unauthorized
surveillance and monitoring, which can analyze social media profiles without consent with the widespread availability
of face images on social media[2, 41]. Therefore, it is crucial to find an effective approach to protect facial privacy
against unauthorized FR systems.
Many studies leverage adversarial attacks[16] for facial
privacy protection, which generate noise-based[6, 39, 49] or
patch-based[27, 47] perturbations on face images. Nevertheless, to achieve ideal attack effects, most of the adversarial perturbations generated by these methods are noticeable
and cluttered. Consequently, the protected face images tend
to suffer from poor visual quality. To gain more naturallooking adversarial examples, makeup-based methods[21,
38, 50] are attracting considerable attention. These methods
organize perturbations as makeup, which can generate protected face images with adversarial makeup. However, such

24584

