This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViewDiff: 3D-Consistent Image Generation with Text-to-Image Models
Lukas Höllein1,2 Aljaž Božič2 Norman Müller2 David Novotny2 Hung-Yu Tseng2
Christian Richardt2 Michael Zollhöfer2 Matthias Nießner1
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Meta
https://lukashoel.github.io/ViewDiff/
a stuffed
bear sitting
on a
wooden box

Input

Multi-view generated images

Figure 1. Multi-view consistent image generation. Our method takes as input a text description, or any number of posed input images, and
generates high-quality, multi-view consistent images of a real-world 3D object in authentic surroundings from any desired camera poses.

Abstract
3D asset generation is getting massive amounts of attention,
inspired by the recent success of text-guided 2D content
creation. Existing text-to-3D methods use pretrained textto-image diffusion models in an optimization problem or
fine-tune them on synthetic data, which often results in nonphotorealistic 3D objects without backgrounds. In this paper,
we present a method that leverages pretrained text-to-image
models as a prior, and learn to generate multi-view images in
a single denoising process from real-world data. Concretely,
we propose to integrate 3D volume-rendering and crossframe-attention layers into each block of the existing U-Net
network of the text-to-image model. Moreover, we design an
autoregressive generation that renders more 3D-consistent
images at any viewpoint. We train our model on real-world
datasets of objects and showcase its capabilities to generate
instances with a variety of high-quality shapes and textures

in authentic surroundings. Compared to the existing methods,
the results generated by our method are consistent, and have
favorable visual quality (−30% FID, −37% KID).

1. Introduction
In recent years, text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [29, 33]
have emerged as cutting-edge technologies, revolutionizing
high-quality and imaginative 2D content creation guided by
text descriptions. These frameworks have found widespread
applications, including extensions such as ControlNet [53]
and DreamBooth [32], showcasing their versatility and potential. An intriguing direction in this domain is to use T2I models as powerful 2D priors for generating three-dimensional
(3D) assets. How can we effectively use these models to
create photo-realistic and diverse 3D assets?
Existing methods like DreamFusion [27], Fantasia3D [5],
and ProlificDreamer [47] have demonstrated exciting results
by optimizing a 3D representation through score distillation
sampling [27] from pretrained T2I diffusion models. The

5043

