This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PrPSeg: Universal Proposition Learning for Panoramic Renal Pathology
Segmentation
Ruining Deng1 , Quan Liu1 , Can Cui1 , Tianyuan Yao1 , Jialin Yue1 , Juming Xiong1 , Lining Yu1 , Yifei
Wu1 , Mengmeng Yin2 , Yu Wang2 , Shilin Zhao2 , Yucheng Tang3 , Haichun Yang2 , Yuankai Huo1,2 *
1. Vanderbilt University, 2. Vanderbilt Univeristy Medical Center, 3. NVIDIA Corp.
*contact author: yuankai.huo@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Understanding the anatomy of renal pathology is crucial for advancing disease diagnostics, treatment evaluation, and clinical research. The complex kidney system comprises various components across multiple levels, including regions (cortex, medulla), functional units (glomeruli,
tubules), and cells (podocytes, mesangial cells in glomerulus). Prior studies have predominantly overlooked the intricate spatial interrelations among objects from clinical
knowledge. In this research, we introduce a novel universal proposition learning approach, called panoramic renal pathology segmentation (PrPSeg), designed to segment
comprehensively panoramic structures within kidney by integrating extensive knowledge of kidney anatomy.
In this paper, we propose (1) the design of a comprehensive universal proposition matrix for renal pathology, facilitating the incorporation of classification and
spatial relationships into the segmentation process; (2) a
token-based dynamic head single network architecture, with
the improvement of the partial label image segmentation
and capability for future data enlargement; and (3) an
anatomy loss function, quantifying the inter-object relationships across the kidney.

1. Introduction
Digital pathology has revolutionized the field of pathology [1], not only facilitating the transition from local microscopes to remote monitoring for pathologists but also providing a significant opportunity for large-scale computerassisted quantification in pathology [5, 19, 41]. In the clinical anatomy of renal pathology, there are different levels of quantification necessary for disease diagnosis [42],
severity recognition [34], and treatment effectiveness evaluation [28], ranging from region-level objects (like medulla
and cortex) to functional units (glomerulus, tubules, vessels, etc.) and even to individual cells within these units.

These tasks, especially at the functional unit and cell levels, are prone to errors and variability in human examination and require labor-intensive efforts [26, 47, 53]. Therefore, achieving comprehensive quantification from regions
to cells is necessary in renal pathology, but it remains an
inevitably laborious task with manual human effort.
While many studies have developed pathological image
segmentation techniques for pixel-level tissue characterization, particularly using deep learning methods [4, 12, 35,
44, 51], they still encounter three major limitations: (1) Current multi-network and multi-head designs [11, 25, 27, 37,
48, 52] focus only on single tissue structures or structures at
similar scales, lacking a comprehensive approach to achieve
all-encompassing segmentation across different levels from
regions to cells. (2) These approaches require modifications
to their architectures when new classes are introduced, preventing the reuse of existing backbones without significant
alterations; (3) Comprehensive semantic (multi-label) segmentation and quantification on renal histopathological images remain challenging due to the intricate spatial relationships among different tissue structures. The spatial relationships between these different objects are illustrated in Figure 1. Understanding these interrelations in renal pathology is crucial for achieving effective all-encompassing segmentation, yet recent advancements in deep learning have
not fully incorporated this comprehensive modeling into the
training process, nor have they achieved panoramic segmentation for the complete anatomy of the kidney.
To address these challenges, we introduce a token-based
dynamic head network designed to achieve panoramic renal
pathology segmentation (PrPSeg) by modeling the spatial
relationships among all objects. This approach allows for
the reuse of the same architectural framework, even when
the dataset size expands. A universal proposition matrix is
established to translate anatomical relationships into computational modeling concepts. A anatomy loss is also proposed to integrate spatial relationships into the model train-

11736

