This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Representing Part-Whole Hierarchies in Foundation Models by Learning
Localizability, Composability, and Decomposability
from Anatomy via Self-Supervision
Mohammad Reza Hosseinzadeh Taher1 Michael B. Gotway2
1
Arizona State University 2 Mayo Clinic
{mhossei2,jianming.liang}@asu.edu

Jianming Liang1

Gotway.Michael@mayo.edu

(a) Human perception

Abstract

(b) Our framework

Lungs

Humans effortlessly interpret images by parsing them into
part-whole hierarchies; deep learning excels in learning
multi-level feature spaces, but they often lack explicit coding of part-whole relations, a prominent property of medical imaging. To overcome this limitation, we introduce
Adam–v2, a new self-supervised learning framework extending Adam [69] by explicitly incorporating part-whole
hierarchies into its learning objectives through three key
branches: (1) Localizability, acquiring discriminative representations to distinguish different anatomical patterns;
(2) Composability, learning each anatomical structure in
a parts-to-whole manner; and (3) Decomposability, comprehending each anatomical structure in a whole-to-parts
manner. Experimental results across 10 tasks, compared
to 11 baselines in zero-shot, few-shot transfer, and full finetuning settings, showcase Adam–v2’s superior performance
over large-scale medical models and existing SSL methods
across diverse downstream tasks. The higher generality and
robustness of Adam–v2’s representations originate from its
explicit construction of hierarchies for distinct anatomical
structures from unlabeled medical images. Adam–v2 preserves a semantic balance of anatomical diversity and harmony in its embedding, yielding representations that are
both generic and semantically meaningful, yet overlooked
in existing SSL methods. All code and pretrained models
are available at GitHub.com/JLiangLab/Eden.

1. Introduction
Human perception effortlessly parses visual scenes into
part-whole hierarchies [39–41]. For instance, when interpreting a chest radiograph, even untrained observers can
quickly form a hierarchy by dividing the lower respiratory
tract into the left and right lungs, whereas more experienced
observers can invoke further sub-hierarchies (see Sec. 1).
Deep learning has enabled breakthroughs in learning visual

Right Lung

Left Lung

Input images
Co-segmented parts

Superior
Lobe

Middle
Lobe

Inferior
Lobe

Superior
Lobe

Inferior
Lobe

Figure 1. Human perception effortlessly organizes objects into
hierarchies to understand their part-whole relationships in images.
Taking lungs as an example in (a), even a non-radiologist can form
a hierarchy of the right and left lungs, whereas a radiologist can
further “see” the lobes in sub-hierarchies. To emulate this ability,
we introduce a self-supervised learning framework that explicitly
learns to encode inherent part-whole hierarchies within medical
images into an embedding space, leading to the development of a
powerful model (Adam–v2) that is foundational to medical imaging. Adam-v2 can transform each pixel in medical images (e.g.,
chest radiographs in (b)) into semantically meaningful embeddings (Eve–v2), forming multiple “echo chambers” (produced via
co-segmentation [1, 97])—different anatomical structures are associated with distinct embeddings, and the same anatomical structures have (nearly) identical embeddings across patients.

representation at multiple levels. However, the multi-level
feature space learned by deep models does not explicitly
code part-whole hierarchies with necessary semantic information to indicate hierarchical relationships among wholes
and their constituent parts [39, 59].
To mimic the human ability to understand part-whole hierarchies in images, Hinton, in his idea paper [39], introduced an imaginary system (i.e., GLOM), aiming to signify the importance of explicitly presenting part-whole hierarchies in a neural network. Inspired by the conceptual
idea underlying GLOM, we devise a novel self-supervised
learning (SSL) framework, leading to a functioning system

11269

