This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fair-VPT: Fair Visual Prompt Tuning for Image Classification
Sungho Park*
Yonsei University
Republic of Korea

Hyeran Byun*
Yonsei University
Republic of Korea

qkrtjdgh18@yonsei.ac.kr

hrbyun@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of Vision Transformers
(ViT) across diverse fields in computer vision, they have a
clear drawback of expensive adaption cost for downstream
tasks due to the increased scale. To address this, Visual
Prompt Tuning (VPT) incorporates learnable parameters
in the input space of ViT. While freezing the ViT backbone
and tuning only the prompts, it exhibits superior performances to full fine-tuning. However, despite the outstanding advantage, we point out that VPT may lead to serious
unfairness in downstream classification. Initially, we investigate the causes of unfairness in VPT, identifying the biasedly pre-trained ViT as a principal factor. Motivated by this
observation, we propose a Fair Visual Prompt Tuning (FairVPT) which removes biased information in the pre-trained
ViT while adapting it to downstream classification tasks. To
this end, we categorize prompts into “cleaner prompts” and
“target prompts”. Based on this, we encode the class token
in two different ways by either masking or not masking the
target prompts in the self-attention process. These encoded
tokens are trained with distinct objective functions, resulting in the inclusion of different information in the target and
cleaner prompts. Moreover, we introduce a disentanglement
loss based on contrastive learning to further decorrelate
them. In experiments across diverse benchmarks, the proposed method demonstrates the most superior performance
in terms of balanced classification accuracy and fairness.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained language models [5, 6, 13, 44, 54] based on selfattention mechanisms have achieved immense success in
the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), attributed
to their remarkable efficiency and capability to handle largescale datasets. In light of the accomplishments in NLP,
many studies [14, 17, 36, 53, 57] have tried to alternative
conventional Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [23]
* Corresponding authors with equal contribution.

Method

TA

VPT [24]

A
NA

SA
M
F
52.7 93.1
89.1 65.2

VPT [24]-Head+NCM [39]

A
NA

68.1
99.4

ViT [14]+NCM [39]

A
NA

20.6
99.6

Acc. (↑)

EO (↓)

81.7

32.1

84.6
21.0

76.1

47.4

92.3
6.7

69.4

82.3

Table 1. Exploring primary factors of unfairness. This reports
classification accuracy (Acc.) and equalized odds (EO) [21] on
CelebA [35]. The target attribute (TA) corresponds to whether inputs are attractive (A) or not (NA) and the sensitive attribute (SA)
is set to Gender (abbreviated as M for male and F for female).
“Head” and “NCM” denote the classification head and Nearst
Class Mean classifier [39], respectively. The scores reported in the
third and fourth columns represent the classification accuracy of
the respective groups. The results indicate that the pre-trained ViT
is the key factor contributing to the unfairness in VPT.

to self-attention-based architectures (e.g., Transformer [54]
and BERT [13]) across diverse tasks of computer vision.
Notably, Vision Transformer (ViT) [14] has demonstrated
outstanding performance and versatility, leading to its adoption in various fields, including image classification [47],
semantic segmentation [33], and image captioning [10].
Nonetheless, a notable limitation of ViT is the expensive adaptation cost for downstream tasks. Due to the increased scale compared to conventional CNNs, full finetuning for each task becomes cost-prohibitive and occasionally inefficient [24]. To address this, Visual Prompt Tuning
(VPT) was proposed [24], which is an efficient approach for
adapting the pre-trained transformer models to downstream
computer vision tasks. It prepends a small portion of learnable parameters (i.e., prompt) to the input space for each
task, resulting in effective adaptation while keeping the ViT
backbones frozen. In many cases, it has demonstrated superior performance compared to full fine-tuning. However, we
point out that VPT may cause unfairness issues in classification tasks.
As deep learning models deployed in real-world applica-

12268

