This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompting Hard or Hardly Prompting:
Prompt Inversion for Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Shweta Mahajan1,2

Tanzila Rahman1,2
Kwang Moo Yi1
1
University of British Columbia
2
Vector Institute for AI

Leonid Sigal1,2

{s.mahajan, trahman8, kmyi, lsigal}@cs.ubc.ca

Target Image

Target Image

Prompt
Inversion

Prompt
Inversion

autumn blossoms colorful acrylic
impressionism paintings

In lapland stomp a cabin
beautiful

Generated Prompt

Generated Prompt

Abstract
The quality of the prompts provided to text-to-image diffusion models determines how faithful the generated content
is to the user’s intent, often requiring ‘prompt engineering’. To harness visual concepts from target images without prompt engineering, current approaches largely rely
on embedding inversion by optimizing and then mapping
them to pseudo-tokens. However, working with such highdimensional vector representations is challenging because
they lack semantics and interpretability, and only allow simple vector operations when using them. Instead, this work
focuses on inverting the diffusion model to obtain interpretable language prompts directly. The challenge of doing
this lies in the fact that the resulting optimization problem
is fundamentally discrete and the space of prompts is exponentially large; this makes using standard optimization
techniques, such as stochastic gradient descent, difficult.
To this end, we utilize a delayed projection scheme to optimize for prompts representative of the vocabulary space
in the model. Further, we leverage the findings that different timesteps of the diffusion process cater to different levels
of detail in an image. The later, noisy, timesteps of the forward diffusion process correspond to the semantic information, and therefore, prompt inversion in this range provides
tokens representative of the image semantics. We show that
our approach can identify semantically interpretable and
meaningful prompts for a target image which can be used
to synthesize diverse images with similar content. We further illustrate the application of the optimized prompts in
evolutionary image generation and concept removal.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image conditional diffusion models [31, 38, 41] are
trained on an enormous amount of image-text data and have
transformed the domain of generative learning in computer
vision. These models demonstrate exceptional generative

Figure 1. Illustration of Hard Prompt Inversion. Target images
(top) along with inverted prompts (bottom) obtained using proposed PH2P approach; note the exhibited prompt semantics.

capabilities and provide an opportunity for creative image
generation with customized concepts [22, 32, 34, 35, 43].
The quality and the regularity of the content produced by
diffusion models are, however, subject to the quality of the
input prompts; which in turn depends on the training data
[16, 57]. For pre-trained diffusion models, identifying and
formulating the prompts that produce the intended visual
content is challenging in the large-scale data regime.
For example, to generate the painting shown in Fig. 1,
one would require an understanding of art styles such as
acrylic or impressionism. These concepts, though encoded
in the diffusion model, might not be accessible without specialized domain knowledge or without access to the model’s
training vocabulary. Additionally, in many downstream applications of diffusion models such as image composition
[24, 27, 49] or segmentation [50] target concepts are available solely as images and require the discovery of the appropriate prompt as an intermediate step. This drives a relevant
research question: What is a likely prompt that would generate visual contents of the target image? Discovering, or

6808

