This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JeDi: Joint-Image Diffusion Models for Finetuning-Free Personalized
Text-to-Image Generation
Yu Zeng1 Vishal M. Patel1 Haochen Wang 2 Xun Huang3
Ting-Chun Wang3 Ming-Yu Liu3 Yogesh Balaji3
1

Johns Hopkins University

2

TTI-Chicago

on top of a dirt road

3

A monster
Text-to-image

NVIDIA Research

with Eiffel tower in the background

Input
Input

Ours
✅ Diverse results
✅ Preserve input subject

DreamBooth
❌ Overfit to input

reading a newspaper

Ours
✅ Diverse results
✅ Preserve input subject

BLIPDiffusion
❌ Different subject
in chef outfit

sleeping

by a frozen pond

DreamBooth
❌ Overfit to input
❌ Poor input preservation

BLIPDiffusion
❌ Poor input preservation

on a cobblestone street

under a starry night

floating in water

A cat boss

in front of a castle

A cat astronaut
in green cloak

in Sherlock Holmes movie

in leather jacket

a red cow sculpture

like a tile mosaic

on pink fabric

on wooden floor

in Grand Canyon

A mouse

A cow sculpture

Figure 1. We present Joint-Image Diffusion (JeDi), a finetuning-free image personalization model that can operate on any number of
reference images. JeDi is able to preserve the appearance of custom subjects while generating novel variations. As shown in the top row,
JeDi does not suffer from the issues of overfitting and lack of diversity exhibited by the prior models. The examples in the bottom two
rows demonstrate JeDi’s high-quality results on challenging personalization tasks.

Abstract
Personalized text-to-image generation models enable
users to create images that depict their individual possessions in diverse scenes, finding applications in various domains. To achieve the personalization capability, existing methods rely on finetuning a text-to-image foundation
model on a user’s custom dataset, which can be non-trivial
for general users, resource-intensive, and time-consuming.
Despite attempts to develope finetuning-free methods, their
generation quality is much lower compared to their finetuning counterparts. In this paper, we propose Joint-Image

Diffusion (JeDi), an effective technique for learning a
finetuning-free personalization model. Our key idea is to
learn the joint distribution of multiple related text-image
pairs that share a common subject. To facilitate learning,
we propose a scalable synthetic dataset generation technique. Once trained, our model enables fast and easy personalization at test time by simply using reference images
as input during the sampling process. Our approach does
not require any expensive optimization process or additional modules and can faithfully preserve the identity represented by any number of reference images. Experimental
results show that our model achieves state-of-the-art gen-

6786

