This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene Adaptive Sparse Transformer for Event-based Object Detection
Yansong Peng1,*

Hebei Li1,*
1

2

Yueyi Zhang1,†

Xiaoyan Sun1,2

Feng Wu1,2

University of Science and Technology of China

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

{pengyansong, lihebei}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, sunxiaoyan, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

50

50

48

Dense Transformers

1. Introduction
Event cameras asynchronously capture the illumination
changes of each pixel in a bionic way and possess several
advantages, such as high temporal resolution (>10K fps)
and a wide dynamic range (>120 dB) [12]. Unlike frame
cameras that capture the whole scene at a fixed rate, event
cameras exclusively record sparse event streams when ob-

48

48

46

46

44

44

42

42

AEC

RVT-T

GET

RVT-S
RVT-B

Original Events: Sparse Scene & Dense Scene

mAP (%)

While recent Transformer-based approaches have shown
impressive performances on event-based object
detection
46
tasks, their high computational costs still diminish the low
44
power consumption advantage of event cameras. Imagebased works attempt to reduce these costs by introduc42
ing sparse Transformers. However, they display inadequate sparsity and adaptability when applied to event-based
40
1
object detection, since these approaches cannot balance
the fine granularity of token-level sparsification and the
efficiency of window-based Transformers, leading to reduced performance and efficiency. Furthermore, they lack
scene-specific sparsity optimization, resulting in information loss and a lower recall rate. To overcome these limitations, we propose the Scene Adaptive Sparse Transformer
(SAST). SAST enables window-token co-sparsification, significantly enhancing fault tolerance and reducing computational overhead. Leveraging the innovative scoring and
selection modules, along with the Masked Sparse Window
Self-Attention, SAST showcases remarkable scene-aware
adaptability: It focuses only on important objects and dynamically optimizes sparsity level according to scene complexity, maintaining a remarkable balance between performance and computational cost. The evaluation results show
that SAST outperforms all other dense and sparse networks
in both performance and efficiency on two large-scale
event-based object detection datasets (1Mpx and Gen1).
Code: https://github.com/Peterande/SAST.

* Joint first author † Corresponding author

50

Ours

Dense Transformers: Dense Windows & Tokens
Sparse Transformers
AViT

SViT

SAST (Ours)

40

1
10
1

0

40

SAST-CB (Ours)
1

100
10

A- FLOPs (G)

2

100

100

SAST (Ours): Sparse Windows & Tokens

Figure 1. Detection performance vs. computational cost on
1Mpx, with marker size indicating model size. SAST exhibits superiority by employing window-token co-sparsification and scenespecific sparsity optimization, maintaining low computation while
delivering high performance across varying scenes.

jects are in motion, resulting in no events generated in static
scenes. This distinctive trait enables event cameras to operate with low power consumption (<10 mW) [12].
Building on these unique advantages of event cameras,
event-based object detection excels in challenging motion
and lighting conditions, and offers energy-efficient solutions in power-constrained environments [20, 28, 31, 41, 43,
63]. However, as the raw events are asynchronous, traditional Image-based networks can not be directly applied to
them. To overcome this problem, prior works often convert
events into Image-like representations, such as event voxel
[67], event histogram [39], and time surface [26, 51] first.
Features are extracted from these representations using different neural network architectures, including CNN-based
[10, 13, 14, 33], SNN-based [6, 9, 27, 34, 59], and GNNbased networks [30, 49]. Recently, many innovative works
have demonstrated that Vision Transformers can achieve superior performance on event-based object detection tasks
[15, 16, 42]. However, the quadratic computational complexity of self-attention in Transformers hinders model scalability [52], which challenges the balance between performance and efficiency for event-based object detection. The
high power consumption of such dense operation also di-

16794

