This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultiPhys: Multi-Person Physics-aware 3D Motion Estimation
Nicolas Ugrinovic*1,2 Boxiao Pan2 Georgios Pavlakos3 Despoina Paschalidou2
Bokui Shen2
Jordi Sanchez-Riera1 Francesc Moreno-Noguer1 Leonidas Guibas2
1
Institut de Robotica i Informatica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
2
Stanford University 3 UT Austin

Camera View

Novel View

Input Frames

Camera View

Novel View

Ours

SLAHMR

Input Frames

Figure 1. MultiPhys enables recovering multi-person 3D motion in a physically-aware manner.. State-of-the-art methods
(SLAHMR [39], top row) for multi-person motion recovery mostly rely on kinematic approaches, which typically ignore physical constraints, such as body penetration. Note that while individual poses are kinematically coherent, their spatial placement is suboptimal,
resulting in significant penetration errors. MultiPhys (bottom row) incorporates physics constraints into the reconstruction process, yielding more physically plausible results.

Abstract
We introduce MultiPhys, a method designed for recovering multi-person motion from monocular videos. Our focus
lies in capturing coherent spatial placement between pairs
of individuals across varying degrees of engagement. MultiPhys, being physically aware, exhibits robustness to jittering and occlusions, and effectively eliminates penetration
issues between the two individuals. We devise a pipeline in
which the motion estimated by a kinematic-based method is
fed into a physics simulator in an autoregressive manner.
We introduce distinct components that enable our model
to harness the simulator’s properties without compromising
the accuracy of the kinematic estimates. This results in final
motion estimates that are both kinematically coherent and
* Work done during internship at Stanford.

physically compliant. Extensive evaluations on three challenging datasets characterized by substantial inter-person
interaction show that our method significantly reduces errors associated with penetration and foot skating, while performing competitively with the state-of-the-art on motion
accuracy and smoothness. Results and code can be found
in our project page.

1. Introduction
In recent years, significant advancements have been made in
recovering human motion from monocular RGB videos [4,
18, 19, 39, 42, 44]. While most of these works focus on
videos of a single person, estimating motions for multiple people, especially those interacting, becomes significantly more challenging. This challenge primarily arises
due to severe occlusion during close interactions, leading

2331

