This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Codebook Transfer with Part-of-Speech for Vector-Quantized Image Modeling
Baoquan Zhang1 , Huaibin Wang1 , Chuyao Luo1 , Xutao Li1,3 , Guotao Liang1,3 , Yunming Ye∗1,3 , Xiaochen Qi2 , Yao He2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen; 2 ShenZhen SiFar Co., Ltd.; 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
baoquanzhang@hit.edu.cn, 22S051022@stu.hit.edu.cn, luochuyao.dalian@gmail.com,
lianggt@pcl.ac.cn, {lixutao, yeyunming}@hit.edu.cn, {joeqxc1974, heyao18818}@gmail.com

Abstract
Vector-Quantized Image Modeling (VQIM) is a fundamental research problem in image synthesis, which aims to
represent an image with a discrete token sequence. Existing studies effectively address this problem by learning a
discrete codebook from scratch and in a code-independent
manner to quantize continuous representations into discrete
tokens. However, learning a codebook from scratch and in a
code-independent manner is highly challenging, which may
be a key reason causing codebook collapse, i.e., some code
vectors can rarely be optimized without regard to the relationship between codes and good codebook priors such that
die off finally. In this paper, inspired by pretrained language
models, we find that these language models have actually
pretrained a superior codebook via a large number of text
corpus, but such information is rarely exploited in VQIM. To
this end, we propose a novel codebook transfer framework
with part-of-speech, called VQCT, which aims to transfer a
well-trained codebook from pretrained language models to
VQIM for robust codebook learning. Specifically, we first
introduce a pretrained codebook from language models and
part-of-speech knowledge as priors. Then, we construct
a vision-related codebook with these priors for achieving
codebook transfer. Finally, a novel codebook transfer network is designed to exploit abundant semantic relationships
between codes contained in pretrained codebooks for robust
VQIM codebook learning. Experimental results on four
datasets show that our VQCT method achieves superior
VQIM performance over previous state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the development of multi-modal learning on representation and generation, unifying all modality with transformer has attracted increasing interest on computer vision
and multi-modal domains [9, 37, 41]. It is well-known that
transformer [28] is proposed for modeling discrete token
∗ Corresponding author.

(a) Adjective Codebook Space.

(b) Noun Codebook Space.

Figure 1. Existing language models actually have provided a superior codebook, which contains abundant semantic relationships between codes and where some vision-related tokens (adjective and
noun) can be well transferred to VQIM. For example, the visionsimilar “orange” and “yellow” are indeed closer than dissimilar
“yellow” and “blue” in adjective space (a); In noun space (b), some
vision-similar parts like “breast” and “belly” are also closer than
dissimilar “breast” and “wheel”. Resorting to such relationships,
VQIM codebook collapse can be alleviated, e.g., although the ”orange” code is not selected to optimize, but its code vector can also
be well learned with its close relationship to the ”yellow” code.

sequence data like text, which is very difficult to directly
apply on continuous image data. To address this problem,
Vector-Quantized Image Modeling (VQIM) is proposed and
has received wide attention recently. VQIM, as a fundamental problem in machine learning, aims to encode an image
with a discrete token sequence similar to texts [20, 27].
Existing studies [5, 7, 27, 36, 38] effectively address
this VQIM problem by learning a discrete codebook from
scratch and in a code-independent manner to quantize continuous feature representation into a discrete token sequence. For example, in [27], Oord et al. propose an
encoder-decoder network (called VQ-VAE) to learn and
quantize a latent feature space by selecting its nearest neighbor in the codebook as the discrete vector (i.e., token) and
training the VQ-VAE model by a simple reconstruction loss.
Esser et al. [7] further enhance the VQ-VAE by additionally introducing an adversarial loss. Although these methods have shown superior performance on VQIM, they suffer from a codebook collapse issue [25], i.e., only a few
code vectors perform optimization during training, whereas
a majority of them are never updated (i.e., “die off”). This

7757

