This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Scale Video Anomaly Detection by Multi-Grained Spatio-Temporal
Representation Learning
Menghao Zhang, Jingyu Wang *, Qi Qi, Haifeng Sun, Zirui Zhuang, Pengfei Ren, Ruilong Ma, Jianxin Liao
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
zhangmenghao,wangjingyu,qiqi8266,hfsun,zhuangzirui,rpf,maruilong@bupt.edu.cn; jxlbupt@gmail.com

Abstract
濷

Recent progress in video anomaly detection suggests that
the features of appearance and motion play crucial roles in
distinguishing abnormal patterns from normal ones. However, we note that the effect of spatial scales of anomalies
is ignored. The fact that many abnormal events occur in
limited localized regions and severe background noise interferes with the learning of anomalous changes. Meanwhile, most existing methods are limited by coarse-grained
modeling approaches, which are inadequate for learning
highly discriminative features to discriminate subtle differences between small-scale anomalies and normal patterns.
To this end, this paper address multi-scale video anomaly
detection by multi-grained spatio-temporal representation
learning. We utilize video continuity to design three proxy
tasks to perform feature learning at both coarse-grained
and fine-grained levels, i.e., continuity judgment, discontinuity localization, and missing frame estimation. In particular, we formulate missing frame estimation as a contrastive learning task in feature space instead of a reconstruction task in RGB space to learn highly discriminative
features. Experiments show that our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on four datasets, especially in scenes with small-scale anomalies.

1. Introduction
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) is dedicated to detecting
anomalous events in videos with wide applications in public
safety and intelligent surveillance. The primary challenge
of VAD is the sparsity of abnormal samples, limiting the direct learning of abnormal patterns from the available data.
Therefore, most previous VAD studies can be divided into
the weakly supervised category [9, 29, 36, 40, 43, 50, 53]
that learns with video-level annotations, or the category
only learning from normal data [5, 23, 24, 39, 46]. Our work
* *Corresponding author

GT

濷

濷

Large-scale

Small-scale

PMem

Partial detection

RoadMap

Partial detection

Ours

Detect all anomalies
completely
Video Sequence

Anomaly

Score Curve

Anomaly-identified Section

Figure 1. Examples of small-scale anomalies and comparisons
of results from different methods. From top to bottom: video
sequence, ground truth (green regions are abnormal), result of
PMem [31] (reconstruction-based method), result of RoadMap
[41] (prediction-based method) and result of ours.

focuses on the latter, which typically models the spatiotemporal features of the normal pattern, while samples that
do not conform to the model are labeled as anomalies.
In the same scene, the appearance and motion of foreground objects are the main differences between normal
and abnormal patterns, and also the crucial features that the
model needs to learn. We note that the effect of the spatial
scale of the anomalies on feature learning is ignored. As illustrated in Fig. 1, many abnormal events occur in a limited
region with only subtle differences from the normal pattern
while background occupying a larger portion of the frame
is the same. Therefore, severe background noise interferes
with the feature learning of anomalous changes. Apart from
small-scale anomalies, there are also abnormal events that
span almost the entire frame, such as traffic accidents. Such
changes in the scale of anomalies require the model to remain robust to anomalies of various scales.
Unfortunately, most previous methods exhibit a lower
accuracy in detecting small-scale anomalies compared to
larger-scale anomalies, as shown in Fig. 1. Reconstruction-

17385

