This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatio-Temporal Turbulence Mitigation: A Translational Perspective
Xingguang Zhang1 Nicholas Chimitt1 Yiheng Chi1 Zhiyuan Mao2 Stanley H. Chan1
1
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University 2 Samsung Research America
{zhan3275, nchimitt, chi14, stanchan}@purdue.edu, m940421@gmail.com

Abstract
Recovering images distorted by atmospheric turbulence
is a challenging inverse problem due to the stochastic nature of turbulence. Although numerous turbulence mitigation (TM) algorithms have been proposed, their efficiency
and generalization to real-world dynamic scenarios remain
severely limited. Building upon the intuitions of classical TM algorithms, we present the Deep Atmospheric TUrbulence Mitigation network (DATUM). DATUM aims to
overcome major challenges when transitioning from classical to deep learning approaches. By carefully integrating the merits of classical multi-frame TM methods into
a deep network structure, we demonstrate that DATUM
can efficiently perform long-range temporal aggregation using a recurrent fashion, while deformable attention and
temporal-channel attention seamlessly facilitate pixel registration and lucky imaging. With additional supervision,
tilt and blur degradation can be jointly mitigated. These
inductive biases empower DATUM to significantly outperform existing methods while delivering a tenfold increase
in processing speed. A large-scale training dataset, ATSyn,
is presented as a co-invention to enable the generalization
to real turbulence. Our code and datasets are available at
https://xg416.github.io/DATUM

1. Introduction
Atmospheric turbulence is a dominant image degradation
for long-range imaging systems. Reconstructing images
distorted by atmospheric turbulence is an important task
for many civilian and military applications. The degradation process can be considered a combination of contentinvariant random pixel displacement (i.e., tilt) and random
blur. Until recently, reconstruction algorithms have often
been in the form of model-based solutions, often relying
on modalities such as pixel registration and deblurring. Although there have been many important insights into the
problem, e.g., lucky imaging, they are primarily limited to
static scenes with slow processing speed.
With the development of physics-grounded data synthe-

Figure 1. Benchmarking video restoration models for turbulence
mitigation on our ATSyn-dynamic dataset. The circles in orange
are other video-based TM networks, and the circles in blue are
representative video deblurring and general restoration networks.
The proposed Deep Atmospheric TUrbulence Mitigation network
(DATUM) is state-of-the-art while highly efficient.

sis methods [7, 17, 18, 33, 65, 77], data-driven algorithms
have been developed in the past two years. Most existing deep learning methods focus on single-frame problems
[24, 32, 34, 44, 45, 48, 49, 53, 71]. Since the degradation
is highly ill-posed, the performance of these algorithms is
naturally limited, especially when attempting to generalize
to real data. On the other hand, multi-frame turbulence mitigation networks [1, 26, 72] have shown greater potential
for generalization across a broader spectrum of real-world
test scenarios. However, these networks are adapted from
generic video restoration methods and do not reflect the
insights developed by traditional methods; few turbulencespecific properties are incorporated as inductive biases into
their methods.
For deep learning methods to work on real-world scenarios, two common factors hinder the application of current
turbulence mitigation methods: (1) the complexity of current data-driven methods is usually high, which impedes the

2889

