This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniGS: Unified Representation for Image Generation and Segmentation
Lu Qi1 ,* Lehan Yang2∗ , Weidong Guo3† , Yu Xu3 ,
Bo Du4 , Varun Jampani5 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1,6 ,
1

The University of California, Merced 2 The University of Sydney
3
QQ Brower Lab, Tencent, 4 Wuhan University
5
Stability AI 6 Google Research

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel unified representation of
diffusion models for image generation and segmentation.
Specifically, we use a colormap to represent entity-level
masks, addressing the challenge of varying entity numbers
while aligning the representation closely with the image
RGB domain. Two novel modules, including the locationaware color palette and progressive dichotomy module, are
proposed to support our mask representation. On the one
hand, a location-aware palette guarantees the colors’ consistency to entities’ locations. On the other hand, the progressive dichotomy module can efficiently decode the synthesized colormap to high-quality entity-level masks in a
depth-first binary search without knowing the cluster numbers. To tackle the issue of lacking large-scale segmentation training data, we employ an inpainting pipeline and
then improve the flexibility of diffusion models across various tasks, including inpainting, image synthesis, referring
segmentation, and entity segmentation. Comprehensive experiments validate the efficiency of our approach, demonstrating comparable segmentation mask quality to state-ofthe-art and adaptability to multiple tasks.

Inpainting

Synthesis

Referring Seg

Entity Seg

Input

UniGS Framework
Latent Decoder

Image

Colormap

Figure 1. Visualization results of a single UniGS model on image generation and segmentation. We present four tasks: multiclass multi-region inpainting, image synthesis, referring segmentation, and entity segmentation. We note that the generation of
colormaps shares a similar pipeline with images without needing
any explicit segmentation loss.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has propelled the performance of several
tasks to new heights, marking substantial progress within
the computer vision community. Image generation [17,
27, 29, 74] and segmentation [6, 18, 32, 43, 45, 75],
as two typical dense prediction tasks within this field,
are widely used in plethora of applications such as autonomous driving [40], video surveillance [49], medical
imaging [52], robotics [12], photography [56], and intelligent creation [61, 62].
The innovative usage of latent codes [46] in diffusion
models has recently demonstrated remarkable capabilities
* Equal contribution. † indicates the corresponding author.

in producing high-quality images, opening a new era of
AI-generated content (AIGC). Nevertheless, using a similar design for segmentation remains relatively unexplored
in diffusion-based works, despite evidence from specific
studies [3, 5, 33, 36, 54] that highlight the potential of attention blocks to group pixels. Realizing such a capability
with a unified representation for image and entity-level segmentation masks could potentially refine image generation,
achieving greater coherence between the synthesized entities and their masks. Moreover, this unified representation
offers significant potential for performing various dense
prediction tasks, including both generation and segmentation in a single representation, as shown in Figure 1.

6305

