This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Authentic Hand Avatar from a Phone Scan via Universal Hand Model
Gyeongsik Moon

Weipeng Xu

Rohan Joshi

Chenglei Wu

Takaaki Shiratori

Codec Avatars Lab, Meta
https://mks0601.github.io/UHM

(a) Universal hand model (UHM)

Adaptation
to a phone scan

(b) Animatable authentic hand avatar

Figure 1. We introduce (a) UHM, which can universally represent arbitrary IDs of hands at a high fidelity. Our adaptation pipeline fits
pre-trained UHM to a phone scan, which produces (b) an animatable authentic 3D hand avatar. Images of (b) are rendered using our
adapted hand avatar with the Phong reflection model and environment maps [7, 11].

Abstract

every identifiable information, including 3D hand shape and
texture, is necessary for immersive experiences in AR/VR.

The authentic 3D hand avatar with every identifiable
information, such as hand shapes and textures, is necessary for immersive experiences in AR/VR. In this paper, we
present a universal hand model (UHM), which 1) can universally represent high-fidelity 3D hand meshes of arbitrary
identities (IDs) and 2) can be adapted to each person with a
short phone scan for the authentic hand avatar. For effective
universal hand modeling, we perform tracking and modeling at the same time, while previous 3D hand models perform them separately. The conventional separate pipeline
suffers from the accumulated errors from the tracking stage,
which cannot be recovered in the modeling stage. On the
other hand, ours does not suffer from the accumulated errors while having a much more concise overall pipeline. We
additionally introduce a novel image matching loss function
to address a skin sliding during the tracking and modeling,
while existing works have not focused on it much. Finally,
using learned priors from our UHM, we effectively adapt
our UHM to each person’s short phone scan for the authentic hand avatar.

A 3D hand model is a function that produces a 3D hand
from a 3D pose and identity (ID) latent code. The pose represents 3D joint angles, and the ID latent code determines
identifiable hand shape (e.g., thickness and size) in the zero
pose or textures (e.g., skin color and fingernail polish). Such
two inputs (i.e., 3D pose and ID code) are used to drive pretrained 3D hand models, where the 3D poses can be obtained from 3D hand pose estimators [5, 8, 17, 18, 22, 25]
and ID latent code can be obtained in a personalization
stage [13]. Those two inputs are relatively affordable data
from single or stereo camera setup of in-the-wild environment than 3D reconstruction [9], which requires at least tens
of cameras. Hence, the 3D hand model is a core component
of the 3D hand avatar.

1. Introduction
We, humans, interact with the world through our hands. We
interact with other people with hand gestures, express our
feelings through hand motions, and interact with objects
with diverse hand poses. The authentic 3D hand avatar with

We present a universal hand model (UHM), which 1) can
universally represent high-fidelity 3D hand meshes of arbitrary IDs like Fig. 1 (a) and 2) can be adapted to each person with a short phone scan for the authentic hand avatar
like Fig. 1 (b). For the effective universal hand modeling,
we perform the tracking and modeling at the same time,
while existing 3D hand models [4, 6, 12, 16, 26, 28, 29] rely
on a separate tracking and modeling pipeline. Their tracking stage [1, 10] prepares target 3D meshes by non-rigidly
aligning a template mesh to targets, such as 3D joint coordinates, 3D scans, masks, and images. In this way, the tracking stage provides 3D meshes with a consistent topology
across all captures. Then, a modeling stage supervises 3D

2029

