This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OMG-Seg
Xiangtai Li1 †

: Is One Model Good Enough For All Segmentation?
Haobo Yuan1 Wei Li1 Henghui Ding1 Size Wu1
Yining Li2 Kai Chen2 Chen Change Loy1

Wenwei Zhang1

1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Project Page: https://lxtgh.github.io/project/omg_seg
†
: Project lead and corresonding author. E-mail: xiangtai94@gmail.com ccloy@ntu.edu.sg
Video Semantic Seg

Video Instance Seg

Video Panoptic Seg

Semantic

Interactive Seg

Panoptic

OV Video Seg

OV Interactive Seg

Video

OMG-Seg

Image
Close Set
Semantic Seg

Open Set

Instance Seg

Panoptic Seg

OV Seg

Figure 1. OMG-Seg can handle over ten different segmentation tasks in one framework, including image-level and video-level segmentation
tasks, interactive segmentation, and open-vocabulary segmentation. To our knowledge, this is the first model to unify these four directions.

Abstract
In this work, we address various segmentation tasks,
each traditionally tackled by distinct or partially unified
models. We propose OMG-Seg, One Model that is Good
enough to efficiently and effectively handle all the segmentation tasks, including image semantic, instance, and
panoptic segmentation, as well as their video counterparts, open vocabulary settings, prompt-driven, interactive segmentation like SAM, and video object segmentation. To our knowledge, this is the first model to handle
all these tasks in one model and achieve satisfactory performance. We show that OMG-Seg, a transformer-based
encoder-decoder architecture with task-specific queries and

outputs, can support over ten distinct segmentation tasks
and yet significantly reduce computational and parameter
overhead across various tasks and datasets. We rigorously
evaluate the inter-task influences and correlations during
co-training. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/lxtGH/OMG-Seg.

1. Introduction
Visual segmentation that aims to understand semantics at
the pixel level has been a longstanding problem [59, 71] in
the vision community, fueling advancements in diverse applications such as robotics, autonomous vehicles, and aug-

27948

