This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaGGIe: Masked Guided Gradual Human Instance Matting
Chuong Huynh1 * Seoung Wug Oh2 Abhinav Shrivastava1 Joon-Young Lee2
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Adobe Research
1

2

{chuonghm,abhinav}@cs.umd.edu

{seoh,jolee}@adobe.com

Abstract
Human matting is a foundation task in image and video
processing where human foreground pixels are extracted
from the input. Prior works either improve the accuracy by
additional guidance or improve the temporal consistency of
a single instance across frames. We propose a new framework MaGGIe, Masked Guided Gradual Human Instance
Matting, which predicts alpha mattes progressively for each
human instances while maintaining the computational cost,
precision, and consistency. Our method leverages modern
architectures, including transformer attention and sparse
convolution, to output all instance mattes simultaneously
without exploding memory and latency. Although keeping
constant inference costs in the multiple-instance scenario,
our framework achieves robust and versatile performance
on our proposed synthesized benchmarks. With the higher
quality image and video matting benchmarks, the novel
multi-instance synthesis approach from publicly available
sources is introduced to increase the generalization of models in real-world scenarios. Our code and datasets are
available at https://maggie-matt.github.io.

1. Introduction
In image matting, a trivial solution is to predict the pixel
transparency - alpha matte ↵ 2 [0, 1] for precise background removal. Considering a saliency image I with two
main components, foreground F and background B, the image I is expressed as I = ↵F + (1 ↵)B. Because of
the ambiguity in detecting the foreground region, for example, whether a person’s belongings are a part of the human
foreground or not, many methods [11, 16, 31, 37] leverage
additional guidance, typically trimaps, defining foreground,
background, and unknown or transition regions. However, creating trimaps, especially for videos, is resourceintensive. Alternative binary masks [39, 56] are simpler
to obtain by human drawings or off-the-shelf segmentation
models while offering greater flexibility without hardly con* This work was done during Chuong Huynh’s internship at Adobe

Guidance |
masks

{z
InstMatt [49]

} |

{z
MaGGIe (ours)

}

Figure 1. Our MaGGIe delivers precise and temporally consistent alpha mattes. It adeptly preserves intricate details and
demonstrates robustness against noise in instance guidance masks
by effectively utilizing information from adjacent frames. Red arrows highlight the areas of detailed zoom-in. (Optimally viewed
in color and digital zoom in).

straint output values of regions as trimaps. Our work focuses but is not limited to human matting because of the
higher number of available academic datasets and user demand in many applications [1, 2, 12, 15, 44] compared to
other objects.
When working with video input, the problem of creating trimap guidance is often resolved by guidance propagation [17, 45] where the main idea coming from video
object segmentation [8, 38]. However, the performance
of trimap propagation degrades when video length grows.
The failed trimap predictions, which miss some natures like
the alignment between foreground-unknown-background
regions, lead to incorrect alpha mattes. We observe that
using binary masks for each frame gives more robust results. However, the consistency between the frame’s output
is still important for any video matting approach. For example, holes appearing in a random frame because of wrong
guidance should be corrected by consecutive frames. Many

3870

