This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic-aware SAM for Point-Prompted Instance Segmentation
Zhaoyang Wei1 ,* Pengfei Chen1∗ , Xuehui Yu1∗ , Guorong Li1 ,
Jianbin Jiao1 , Zhenjun Han1†
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences(UCAS)

Abstract
Single-point annotation in visual tasks, with the goal of minimizing labelling costs, is becoming increasingly prominent
in research. Recently, visual foundation models, such as
Segment Anything (SAM), have gained widespread usage
due to their robust zero-shot capabilities and exceptional
annotation performance. However, SAM’s class-agnostic
output and high confidence in local segmentation introduce semantic ambiguity, posing a challenge for precise
category-specific segmentation. In this paper, we introduce
a cost-effective category-specific segmenter using SAM. To
tackle this challenge, we have devised a Semantic-Aware Instance Segmentation Network (SAPNet) that integrates Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) with matching capability and
SAM with point prompts. SAPNet strategically selects the
most representative mask proposals generated by SAM to
supervise segmentation, with a specific focus on object category information. Moreover, we introduce the Point Distance Guidance and Box Mining Strategy to mitigate inherent challenges: group and local issues in weakly supervised
segmentation. These strategies serve to further enhance the
overall segmentation performance. The experimental results on Pascal VOC and COCO demonstrate the promising performance of our proposed SAPNet, emphasizing its
semantic matching capabilities and its potential to advance
point-prompted instance segmentation. The code is available at https://github.com/zhaoyangwei123/SAPNet.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation seeks to discern pixel-level labels for
both instances of interest and their semantic content in images, a crucial function in domains like autonomous driving, image editing, and human-computer interaction. Despite impressive results demonstrated by various studies
[5, 11, 16, 40–42] , the majority of these high-performing
methods are trained in a fully supervised manner and heavily dependent on detailed pixel-level mask annotations,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors. (hanzhj@ucas.ac.cn)

Figure 1. Three Challenges Brought by SAM and single-MIL.
Orange dash box illustrates that semantic ambiguity in SAMgenerated masks, where it erroneously assigns higher scores to
non-object categories like clothes, despite the person being our desired target. Green dash box depicts a comparison between mask
proposals using single-MIL and SAPNet. It illustrates two primary
challenges: ‘group’, where segmentation encounters difficulties
in isolating individual targets among adjacent objects of the same
category, and ‘local’, where MIL favors foreground-dominant regions, resulting in overlooked local details.

thereby incurring significant labeling costs. To address this
challenge, researchers are increasingly focusing on weakly
supervised instance segmentation, leveraging cost-effective
supervision methods, such as bounding boxes [23, 27, 39],
points [14, 28], and image-level labels [21, 45].
Recently, visual foundation models, such as Segment
Anything (SAM)[22], have been widely employed by researchers for their exceptional generalization capabilities
and impressive annotation performance. Numerous studies based on SAM, such as [20, 44] have emerged, building
upon the foundations of SAM to further enhance its generalization capabilities and efficiency. However, these efforts
have predominantly focused on improving the annotation
performance of SAM. One limitation arises from SAM’s
lack of classification ability, resulting in class-agnostic segmentation results that fail to accurately segment specific categories as desired.
To tackle the inherent semantic ambiguity in SAM and
achieve specific-category segmentation, we propose integrating weak annotations with SAM, employing point annotations as prompts to imbue semantic information into

3585

