This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

YOLO-World: Real-Time Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Tianheng Cheng3,2,⋆ , Lin Song1,⋆,✉ , Yixiao Ge1,2,† , Wenyu Liu3 , Xinggang Wang3,✉ , Ying Shan1,2
⋆

equal contribution
1

†

project lead

✉

corresponding author

2

Tencent AI Lab ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
3
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology

Abstract
The You Only Look Once (YOLO) series of detectors
have established themselves as efficient and practical tools.
However, their reliance on predefined and trained object categories limits their applicability in open scenarios. Addressing this limitation, we introduce YOLO-World,
an innovative approach that enhances YOLO with openvocabulary detection capabilities through vision-language
modeling and pre-training on large-scale datasets. Specifically, we propose a new Re-parameterizable VisionLanguage Path Aggregation Network (RepVL-PAN) and
region-text contrastive loss to facilitate the interaction between visual and linguistic information. Our method excels in detecting a wide range of objects in a zero-shot
manner with high efficiency. On the challenging LVIS
dataset, YOLO-World achieves 35.4 AP with 52.0 FPS on
V100, which outperforms many state-of-the-art methods in
terms of both accuracy and speed. Furthermore, the finetuned YOLO-World achieves remarkable performance on
several downstream tasks, including object detection and
open-vocabulary instance segmentation. Code and models are available at: https://github.com/AILabCVC/YOLO-World.

1. Introduction
Object detection has been a long-standing and fundamental
challenge in computer vision with numerous applications in
image understanding, robotics, and autonomous vehicles.
Tremendous works [17, 27, 43, 45] have achieved significant breakthroughs in object detection as the development
of deep neural networks. Despite the success of these methods, they remain limited as they only detect objects with
a fixed vocabulary, e.g., 80 categories in the COCO [26]
dataset. Once object categories are defined and labeled,
trained detectors can only detect those specific categories,
thus limiting the ability and applicability of open scenarios.
Recent works [9, 14, 48, 53, 59] have explored the
prevalent vision-language models [19, 39] to address open-

20× Speedup

Figure 1. Speed-and-Accuracy Curve. We compare YOLOWorld with recent open-vocabulary methods pre-trained similar
datasets (i.e., Objects365 [46] and GoldG [21]) in terms of speed
and accuracy. All models are evaluated on the LVIS minival
(using Fixed AP [4]) and inference speeds are measured on one
NVIDIA V100 w/o TensorRT. The size of the circle represents the
model’s size.

vocabulary detection [59] by distilling vocabulary knowledge from language encoders, e.g., BERT [6]. However,
these distillation-based methods are much limited due to the
scarcity of training data with a limited diversity of vocabulary, e.g., OV-COCO [59] containing 48 base categories.
Several methods [24, 30, 56, 57, 60] reformulate object detection training as region-level vision-language pre-training
and train open-vocabulary object detectors at scale. However, those methods still struggle for detection in real-world
scenarios, which suffer from two aspects: (1) heavy computation burden and (2) complicated deployment for edge
devices. Previous works [24, 30, 56, 57, 60] have demonstrated the promising performance of pre-training large detectors while pre-training small detectors to endow them
with open recognition capabilities remains unexplored.
In this paper, we present YOLO-World, aiming for
high-efficiency open-vocabulary object detection, and ex-

16901

