This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayoutLLM: Layout Instruction Tuning with Large Language Models for
Document Understanding
Chuwei Luo1∗ , Yufan Shen12∗ , Zhaoqing Zhu1∗ , Qi Zheng1 , Zhi Yu2 , Cong Yao1
1
Alibaba Group, 2 Zhejiang University
{luochuwei,zzhaoqing.z,zhengqisjtu,yaocong2010}@gmail.com
{syficy,yuzhirenzhe}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Answer

Answer

Large Language Model

Recently, leveraging large language models (LLMs) or
multimodal large language models (MLLMs) for document
understanding has been proven very promising. However,
previous works that employ LLMs/MLLMs for document
understanding have not fully explored and utilized the document layout information, which is vital for precise document understanding. In this paper, we propose LayoutLLM,
an LLM/MLLM based method for document understanding.
The core of LayoutLLM is a layout instruction tuning strategy, which is specially designed to enhance the comprehension and utilization of document layouts. The proposed layout instruction tuning strategy consists of two components:
Layout-aware Pre-training and Layout-aware Supervised
Fine-tuning. To capture the characteristics of document
layout in Layout-aware Pre-training, three groups of pretraining tasks, corresponding to document-level, regionlevel and segment-level information, are introduced. Furthermore, a novel module called layout chain-of-thought
(LayoutCoT) is devised to enable LayoutLLM to focus on
regions relevant to the question and generate accurate answers. LayoutCoT is effective for boosting the performance
of document understanding. Meanwhile, it brings a certain degree of interpretability, which could facilitate manual inspection and correction. Experiments on standard
benchmarks show that the proposed LayoutLLM significantly outperforms existing methods that adopt open-source
7B LLMs/MLLMs for document understanding.

1. Introduction
Document AI [7], including its document understanding
tasks such as document VQA [33, 47] and document visual
information extraction [18, 19, 37], is currently a hot topic
in both academia and industry. In recent years, document
pre-trained models [2, 8, 12, 13, 16, 17, 23, 25, 26, 32, 38,
52, 54, 55, 59] have achieved excellent performance in doc* Equal contribution.

LayoutCoT +

Large Language Model
Visual Encoder
( eg: ViT… )

Plain Text / Layout Text

Question

Question

(Ⅰ) LLMs

Answer

Large Language Model
Doc Pre-trained Model
(eg: LayoutLM series)
Text
+
Layout

Question

(Ⅲ) LayoutLLM (Ours)

(Ⅱ) MLLMs

(a) Model architectures
MLLMs’ training paradigm for documents

Layout instruction tuning (Ours)
Layout-aware Pre-training

Pre-training

SFT

Document-level

Document VQA

Document-level

• Document Image Captioning.

Directly answering
the question.

Region-level

• Generating all text in the
document image.
•…

Q: …
A: …

• Dense Caption; Text and Layout Reconstruction
• Document layout analysis; Table Understanding

Segment-level
• MVLM & Mask Position & Geometric Layout Instructions

Layout-aware SFT
Document VQA + LayoutCoT
Q: …
LayoutCoT:
Step1: Question Analysis
Step2: Relevant Area Concentration
Step3: Answer formation
A: …

(b) Training paradigms

Figure 1. LLMs/MLLMs for document understanding. The LayoutLLM is an LLM/MLLM based method that integrates a document pre-trained model as encoder. It is trained by the newly proposed layout instruction tuning strategy which consists of Layoutaware Pre-training and Layout-aware Supervised Fine-tuning.

ument AI downstream tasks. However, due to the necessity
for fine-tuning on corresponding downstream task data, it
is challenging to directly adapt such pre-trained models for
zero-shot document understanding. In this paper, zero-shot
refers to not using training sets of downstream tasks.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT [35] and LLaMA [49, 50], or multimodal large language models (MLLMs) like GPT-4V [1, 36, 56], have
shown remarkable zero-shot capabilities across various applications. For Document AI, as shown in Fig. 1 (a),
(I) directly prompting LLMs with document text [15, 39]
and (II) training document-based MLLMs [3, 57, 60] have
also achieved promising results under the zero-shot setting [3, 39, 57, 60].
It is widely accepted that document layout information is
vital for document understanding [2, 8, 12, 13, 16, 17, 23,
25, 26, 32, 38, 41, 52, 54, 55, 59]. However, it is difficult
to convey document layout information by directly feeding
text to LLMs. As Fig. 1(a)(I) shows, representing documents as either flattened plain text or layout text such as text
with coordinates [15, 39, 44, 64] is often used for LLMs.

15630

