This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Segment Referred Objects from Narrated Egocentric Videos
Yuhan Shen1,2 * Huiyu Wang1 Xitong Yang1 Matt Feiszli1
Ehsan Elhamifar2 Lorenzo Torresani1 Effrosyni Mavroudi1
1
FAIR, Meta, 2 Northeastern University

Abstract
Egocentric videos provide a first-person perspective of
the wearer’s activities, involving simultaneous interactions
with multiple objects. In this work, we propose the task
of weakly-supervised Narration-based Video Object Segmentation (NVOS). Given an egocentric video clip and a
narration of the wearer’s activities, our aim is to segment object instances mentioned in the narration, without using any spatial annotations during training. Existing weakly-supervised video object grounding methods typically yield bounding boxes for referred objects. In contrast,
we propose ROSA, a weakly-supervised pixel-level grounding framework learning alignments between referred objects and segmentation mask proposals. Our model harnesses vision-language models pre-trained on image-text
pairs to embed region masks and object phrases. During
training, we combine (a) a video-narration contrastive loss
that implicitly supervises the alignment between regions
and phrases, and (b) a region-phrase contrastive loss based
on inferred latent alignments. To address the lack of annotated NVOS datasets in egocentric videos, we create a new
evaluation benchmark, VISOR-NVOS, leveraging existing
annotations of segmentation masks from VISOR alongside
14.6k newly-collected, object-based video clip narrations.
Our approach achieves state-of-the-art zero-shot pixel-level
grounding performance compared to strong baselines under
similar supervision. Additionally, we demonstrate generalization capabilities for zero-shot video object grounding on
YouCook2, a third-person instructional video dataset.

1. Introduction
Egocentric videos [6, 12, 42] capture human interactions
with the surrounding environment from a first-person perspective. Recent datasets, such as Ego4D [12], have paired
such interaction-rich visual signals with manually annotated textual narrations of the camera wearer’s activities,
catalyzing a surge in research at the intersection of vision
* Work done during an internship at FAIR, Meta.

“C uses a spoon to spread
the minced meat on the
cheese mixture in a
lasagna dish”

“C sprinkles the cheese
on the pizza bases”

(a) Narration-based Video Object Segmentation (Ours)
“C uses a spoon to spread the
minced meat on the cheese
mixture in a lasagna dish”

“the spoon used to spread
the minced meat”

spoon; minced meat;
cheese mixture; lasagna dish

(b) Video Object
Grounding

(c) Referring Expression
Segmentation

(d) Video Object
Segmentation

Figure 1. Overview of the Narration-based Video Object Segmentation (NVOS) task. Given a short video clip and a narration of the camera wearer’s activities, our goal is to predict segmentation masks for each object phrase. This task requires more
fine-grained video-language alignment (pixel-level and phraselevel) compared to popular grounding tasks, such as video object
grounding and referring expression segmentation. Frames taken
from the Epic-Kitchens [6] dataset.

and language. These efforts have primarily concentrated
on coarse-grained, holistic video-language understanding,
such as pairing a video clip with a narration of its content
(video-text retrieval) [24, 35, 60], egocentric video question
answering [2, 11, 18] and temporal localization of natural
language queries [3, 15, 26, 37, 61], often lacking the finegrained understanding at object level.
In this work, we explore a more fine-grained connection
between egocentric videos and language by introducing the
Narration-based Video Object Segmentation (NVOS) task,
linking noun phrases (objects) in narrations with segmentation masks in the video. For example, as shown in Figure 1,
given an egocentric video clip and its narration “C uses a
spoon to spread the minced meat on the cheese mixture in a
lasagna dish”, our goal is to predict a segmentation mask
at each frame for each one of the referred objects (noun
phrases): spoon, minced meat, cheese mixture, and lasagna
dish. Our task requires models to effectively disambiguate

14510

