This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-Aware Source-Free Adaptive Image Super-Resolution with
Wavelet Augmentation Transformer
Yuang Ai1,2 Xiaoqiang Zhou1,3 Huaibo Huang1,2 * Lei Zhang4,5 Ran He1,2,6
1
MAIS & CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Science and Technology of China 4 OPPO Research Institute
5
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 6 ShanghaiTech University
shallowdream555@gmail.com, xq525@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR), which is a fundamental task in low-level vision, aims to reconstruct a highresolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR) coun* Corresponding author. Project Page.

DADA (CVPR2022)

31.0
30.8
PSNR…(dB)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) can effectively
address domain gap issues in real-world image SuperResolution (SR) by accessing both the source and target
data. Considering privacy policies or transmission restrictions of source data in practical scenarios, we propose
a SOurce-free Domain Adaptation framework for image
SR (SODA-SR) to address this issue, i.e., adapt a sourcetrained model to a target domain with only unlabeled target
data. SODA-SR leverages the source-trained model to generate refined pseudo-labels for teacher-student learning. To
better utilize pseudo-labels, we propose a novel waveletbased augmentation method, named Wavelet Augmentation
Transformer (WAT), which can be flexibly incorporated with
existing networks, to implicitly produce useful augmented
data. WAT learns low-frequency information of varying levels across diverse samples, which is aggregated efficiently
via deformable attention. Furthermore, an uncertaintyaware self-training mechanism is proposed to improve the
accuracy of pseudo-labels, with inaccurate predictions being rectified by uncertainty estimation. To acquire better
SR results and avoid overfitting pseudo-labels, several regularization losses are proposed to constrain target LR and
SR images in the frequency domain. Experiments show
that without accessing source data, SODA-SR outperforms
state-of-the-art UDA methods in both synthetic→real and
real→real adaptation settings, and is not constrained by
specific network architectures.

SODA-SR (Ours)

31.2

30.6
30.4
30.2
30.0
29.8

DRN-Adapt (CVPR2020)
Method
CinCGAN [61]
DASR [57]
DRN-Adapt [16]
DADA [60]
ZSSR [2]
SODA-SR (Ours)

Source Data
✔
✔
✔
✔
✘
✘

PSNR
30.17
29.86
30.66
31.08
30.06
31.22

CinCGAN (CVPRW2018)

ZSSR (CVPR2018)
DASR (CVPR2021)
SFDA
SSL
UDA
0%
100%
(More Restrictions)
(Less Restrictions)
Usage of Source Data During Adaptation (%)

Figure 1. PSNR vs. the usage of source data on the DRealSR [56]
dataset. The less source data a method uses, the more restrictions
it faces. SFDA and SSL represent source-free domain adaption
and self-supervised learning methods respectively.

terpart. In recent years, owing to the thriving advancements
in deep learning, numerous deep learning-based approaches
have been applied to SISR, culminating in significant breakthroughs in this task. Predominantly, these methods employ
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [8, 31] or Vision
Transformers (ViTs) [9, 37] as their architectural foundation. However, the majority are trained on synthetic datasets
that generate LR images using simplistic and predetermined
degradation kernels (e.g., bicubic).
However, the domain gap between the predetermined
degradation and real-world degradation often leads to poor
generalization capability of the SR model in real-world scenarios. To address this issue, several unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) methods [16, 25, 26, 52, 57, 61] have
been proposed to adapt the model from the source domain
with synthetic image pairs to the target domain with unlabeled real images (i.e., synthetic→real adaptation). Alternatively, some real-world datasets have been collected to

8142

