This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards a Perceptual Evaluation Framework for Lighting Estimation
Justine Giroux1

Mohammad Reza Karimi Dastjerdi1 Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2
Javier Vazquez-Corral3,4 Jean-François Lalonde1
1
2
Université Laval, Adobe Research, 3 Computer Vision Center, 4 Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona

Figure 1. We pit image comparison metrics, used to quantify the performance of lighting estimation algorithms, against human perception.
When asked which render looks most plausible, our controlled psychophysical study reveals that humans preference contradicts image
metrics in the vast majority of cases. This paper questions the current practice of employing image quality metrics for evaluating lighting
estimation algorithms when used for the task of virtual object insertion: can we do better by considering human perception?

Abstract

Progress in lighting estimation is tracked by computing
existing image quality assessment (IQA) metrics on images
from standard datasets. While this may appear to be a reasonable approach, we demonstrate that doing so does not
correlate to human preference when the estimated lighting
is used to relight a virtual scene into a real photograph. To
study this, we design a controlled psychophysical experiment where human observers must choose their preference
amongst rendered scenes lit using a set of lighting estimation
algorithms selected from the recent literature, and use it to
analyse how these algorithms perform according to human
perception. Then, we demonstrate that none of the most
popular IQA metrics from the literature, taken individually,
correctly represent human perception. Finally, we show that
by learning a combination of existing IQA metrics, we can
more accurately represent human preference. This provides
a new perceptual framework to help evaluate future lighting estimation algorithms. To encourage future research,
all (anonymised) perceptual data and code are available at
https://lvsn.github.io/PerceptionMetric/.

1. Introduction
Light fashions the appearance of everything we see. From
the warm and glowing golden hour to the coldness of neon
tubes, lighting determines how scenes look and how we perceive them [35]. This wide variety in illumination conditions
creates a challenge for computer vision algorithms attempting to estimate lighting from images. How can it be robustly
estimated from images when conditions are so different?
Luckily, large lighting datasets [3, 13] and learning-based
approaches [7, 13, 18] have enabled significant progress over
the past decade. Nowadays, automatic lighting estimation
methods allow artists to plausibly relight virtual objects and
composite them into real images with ever-increasing ease.
As with many computer vision tasks, progress in lighting
estimation is tracked by computing existing image quality assessment (IQA) metrics on standard datasets. Since
lighting representations differ (e.g., environment maps [13],
parametric lights [14, 57], spherical harmonics [15], spherical Gaussians [26], etc.), it is common practice to render
a virtual object with the estimated lighting, and compare it
with a render of the same virtual object lit with the ground
truth. A variety of existing IQA metrics—ranging from
classical approaches (e.g., RMSE and SSIM [52]) to those
designed to mimic certain aspects of human perception (e.g.,
LPIPS [58])—have been used for this purpose.

4410

