This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SC-GS: Sparse-Controlled Gaussian Splatting for Editable Dynamic Scenes
Yi-Hua Huang1#* Yang-Tian Sun1#* Ziyi Yang3* Xiaoyang Lyu1 Yan-Pei Cao2† Xiaojuan Qi1†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 VAST 3 Zhejiang University

Fix

Control Points & 3D Gaussians across View & Time

(a) Input Images

Reconstructed Motion

(b) Dynamic View Synthesis

Drag

Control Panel

Edited Motion

(c) Motion Editing

Figure 1. Given (a) an image sequence from a monocular dynamic video, we propose to represent the motion with a set of sparse control
points, which can be used to drive 3D Gaussians for high-ﬁdelity rendering. Our approach enables both (b) dynamic view synthesis and
(c) motion editing due to the motion representation based on sparse control points.

Abstract
Novel view synthesis for dynamic scenes is still a challenging problem in computer vision and graphics. Recently,
Gaussian splatting has emerged as a robust technique to
represent static scenes and enable high-quality and realtime novel view synthesis. Building upon this technique,
we propose a new representation that explicitly decomposes
the motion and appearance of dynamic scenes into sparse
control points and dense Gaussians, respectively. Our key
idea is to use sparse control points, signiﬁcantly fewer in
number than the Gaussians, to learn compact 6 DoF transformation bases, which can be locally interpolated through
learned interpolation weights to yield the motion ﬁeld of
3D Gaussians. We employ a deformation MLP to predict time-varying 6 DoF transformations for each control
point, which reduces learning complexities, enhances learning abilities, and facilitates obtaining temporal and spatial
coherent motion patterns. Then, we jointly learn the 3D
Gaussians, the canonical space locations of control points,
and the deformation MLP to reconstruct the appearance,
geometry, and dynamics of 3D scenes. During learning,
the location and number of control points are adaptively
#This work is in collaboration with VAST.
*Equal Contribution †Corresponding Author

adjusted to accommodate varying motion complexities in
different regions, and an ARAP loss following the principle of as rigid as possible is developed to enforce spatial
continuity and local rigidity of learned motions. Finally,
thanks to the explicit sparse motion representation and its
decomposition from appearance, our method can enable
user-controlled motion editing while retaining high-ﬁdelity
appearances. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
approach outperforms existing approaches on novel view
synthesis with a high rendering speed and enables novel
appearance-preserved motion editing applications.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis from a monocular video is a crucial
problem with many applications in virtual reality, gaming,
and the movie industry. However, extracting scene geometry and appearance from limited observations [30, 31, 49]
is challenging. Concurrently, real-world scenes often contain dynamic objects, which pose additional challenges in
representing object movements accurately to reﬂect realworld dynamics [18, 19, 33, 34, 37]. Recent advancements
in this area are primarily driven by neural radiance ﬁelds
(NeRF) [19, 30, 37, 66], which utilizes an implicit function to simultaneously learn scene geometry [26, 29] and
14220

