This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation
Through Depth-Guided Feature Correlation and Sampling
Leon Sick
Ulm University

Dominik Engel
Ulm University

Abstract
Traditionally, training neural networks to perform semantic segmentation requires expensive human-made annotations. But more recently, advances in the field of unsupervised learning have made significant progress on this
issue and towards closing the gap to supervised algorithms.
To achieve this, semantic knowledge is distilled by learning
to correlate randomly sampled features from images across
an entire dataset. In this work, we build upon these advances by incorporating information about the structure of
the scene into the training process through the use of depth
information. We achieve this by (1) learning depth-feature
correlation by spatially correlating the feature maps with
the depth maps to induce knowledge about the structure of
the scene and (2) exploiting farthest-point sampling to more
effectively select relevant features by utilizing 3D sampling
techniques on depth information of the scene. Finally, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of our technical contributions
through extensive experimentation and present significant
improvements in performance across multiple benchmark
datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation plays a critical role in many of
today’s vision systems in a multitude of domains. These
include, among others, autonomous driving [15], medical
applications [33, 39], and many more [9, 27, 41, 45]. Until recently, the main body of research in this area was focused on supervised models that require a large amount
pixel-level annotations for training. Not only is sourcing
this image data often a labor intensive process, but also annotating the large datasets required for good performance
comes at a high price. Several benchmark datasets report their annotation times. For example, the MS COCO
dataset [28] required more than 28K hours of human annotation for around 164K images, and annotating a single image in the Cityscapes dataset [11] took 1.5 hours on average.

Pedro Hermosilla
TU Vienna

Timo Ropinski
Ulm University

These costs have triggered the advent of unsupervised semantic segmentation [10, 16, 20, 35], which aims to remove
the need for labeled training data in order to train segmentation models. Recently, work by Hamilton et al. [16] has
accelerated the progress towards removing the need for labels to achieve good results on semantic segmentation tasks.
Their model, STEGO, uses a DINO-pretrained [7] Vision
Transformer (ViT) [13] to extract features that are then distilled across the entire dataset to learn semantically relevant features, using a contrastive learning approach. The
to-be-distilled features are sampled randomly from feature
maps produced from the same image, k-NN matched images as well as other negative images. Seong et al. [35]
build on this process by trying to identify features that are
most relevant to the model by discovering hidden positives.
Their work exposes an inefficiency of random sampling in
STEGO as hidden positives sampling leads to significant
improvements. However, both approaches only operate on
the pixel space and therefore fail to take into account the
spatial layout of the scene. Not only do we humans perceive
the world in 3D, but also previous work [5, 8, 18, 37, 38, 44]
has shown that supervised semantic segmentation can benefit greatly from spatial information during training. Inspired
by these observations, we propose to incorporate spatial information in the form of depth maps into the STEGO training process. Depth is considered a product of vision and
does not provide a labeled training signal. To obtain depth
information for the benchmark image datasets in our evaluations, we make use of an off-the-shelf zero-shot monocular
depth estimator to obtain spatial information of the scene.
This allows us to incorporate the depth information without
the need for human annotations or sensor ground truth.
With our method, DepthG, we propose to (1) guide the
model to learn a rough spatial layout of the scene, since
we hypothesize this will aid the network in differentiating
objects much better. We achieve this by extending the contrastive process to the spatial dimension: We do not limit
the model to learning only Feature-Feature Correlations, but
also Depth-Feature Correlations. Through this process, the
model is guided towards pulling apart the features with high

3637

