This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Versatile Framework for Continual Test-Time Domain Adaptation: Balancing
Discriminability and Generalizability
Xu Yang∗ , Xuan Chen*, Moqi Li, Kun Wei, Cheng Deng†
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
{xuyang.xd, moqili14, weikunsk, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com,
x.chen@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Continual test-time domain adaptation (CTTA) aims to
adapt the source pre-trained model to a continually changing target domain without additional data acquisition or
labeling costs. This issue necessitates an initial performance enhancement within the present domain without labels while concurrently averting an excessive bias toward
the current domain. Such bias exacerbates catastrophic
forgetting and diminishes the generalization ability to future domains. To tackle the problem, this paper designs
a versatile framework to capture high-quality supervision
signals from three aspects: 1) The adaptive thresholds are
employed to determine the reliability of pseudo-labels; 2)
The knowledge from the source pre-trained model is utilized
to adjust the unreliable one, and 3) By evaluating past supervision signals, we calculate a diversity score to ensure
subsequent generalization. In this way, we form a complete
supervisory signal generation framework, which can capture the current domain discriminative and reserve generalization in future domains. Finally, to avoid catastrophic
forgetting, we design a weighted soft parameter alignment
method to explore the knowledge from the source model.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method
performs well on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in
visual tasks when training and testing data obey the same
distribution. Such networks, however, suffer from the generalization problem due to the ubiquitous domain shift [30].
For example, a classification network pre-trained in the
normal, natural images may not recognize the corrupted
images. Thus, domain adaptation is essential to transfer
knowledge from the source domain to the target one by re* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

ducing the shift. However, the target domain labels are usually unavailable, and the problem is primarily explored at
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [15, 31]. More
realistically, the source data is often inaccessible during test
time due to privacy or business problems, making the adaptation problem more challenging. Initial approaches attempt
to employ the source model, and unlabeled target data for
testing, called Source-free / Test-Time domain Adaptation
(TTA) [3, 19, 33].
Existing TTA methods usually solve the domain shift
problem by updating the adapted model parameters using the generated pseudo-labels or entropy regularization,
which are effective when the target distribution is fixed but
perform unstably when the distribution of the target domain is continually changing [22, 29, 36]. Such a problem
has brought a novel and fully underexplored area, called
Continual Test-Time Domain Adaptation (CTTA), where a
source pre-trained model must adapt to a stream of continually changing target domains without using source data.
Research has demonstrated that CTTA mainly faces the following problems. First, we should explore supervisory signals without labels to improve performance in the current
target domain, where widespread noisy pseudo labels are a
crucial factor affecting performance. Then, the adaptation
process means moving the initial source parameterization
to a parameterization that better models the current target
distribution, which carries the risk that predictions on the
source distribution become inaccurate, causing catastrophic
forgetting. Finally, an excessive affinity for the existing domain will cause generalization to be lost for future domains
when the current target distribution is narrow, especially under noisy pseudo labels.
Recently, some methods have been proposed to tackle
such an intractable problem. CoTTA [29] adopts a weightaverage teacher network to improve the quality of generated pseudo-labels and employs some source model parameters to cover the adapted model for alleviating catastrophic forgetting. Robust Mean Teacher [6] employs a
multi-viewed contrastive loss to pull test features towards

23731

