This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Source-Free Domain Adaptation with Frozen Multimodal Foundation Model

Multimodal foundation mo

1

SongPretrained
Tang1,2,3
, Wenxin Su1 , Mao Ye* 4 , and Xiatian Zhu*5
source
2 model
Target
University of Shanghai for model
Science and Technology
Universität Hamburg 3 ComOriginMat Inc.
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 5 University of Surrey
tangs@usst.edu.cn, Unlabeled
{suwenxin43,
target cvlab.uestc}@gmail.com , xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk
data
(a)

r

KD

Abstract

Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA) aims to adapt
a source model for a target domain, with only access to
unlabeled target training data and the source model pretrained on a supervised source domain. Relying on pseudo
labeling and/or auxiliary supervision, conventional methods are inevitably error-prone. To mitigate this limitation,
in this work we for the first time explore the potentials of
off-the-shelf vision-language (ViL) multimodal models (e.g.,
CLIP) with rich whilst heterogeneous knowledge. We find
that directly applying the ViL model to the target domain in a
zero-shot fashion is unsatisfactory, as it is not specialized for
this particular task but largely generic. To make it task specific, we propose a novel Distilling multImodal Foundation
mOdel (DIFO) approach. Specifically, DIFO alternates
Pretrained source
Target model
modelbetween two steps during
adaptation: (i) Customizing the
ViL model by maximizing the mutual information with the
Unlabeledtarget
target model in a prompt learning manner, (ii) Distilling
datathe knowledge of this customized(a)ViL model to the target
model. For more fine-grained and reliable distillation, we
further introduce two effective regularization terms, namely
most-likely category encouragement and predictive consisUnlabeled target
datatency. Extensive experiments show that DIFO significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art alternatives. Code is here.
Pretrained source
model

Target model

1. Introduction

(b)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) relies on both wellInitializing
Adapting
Alternating
annotated
source data and unannotated target data. However,
Customizing
Distilling
due to heightened safety and privacy concerns, accessing
source data freely has become difficult [18, 23]. In response,
Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA) has gained attention as a more practical solution, aiming to transfer a pretrained source model to the target domain using only unlabeled target data.
* Corresponding author

Multimodal
foundation model
Unlabeled
target data

Pretrained source model

Initializing
Adapting
Customizing

Target model

Alternating
Distilling

Figure 1. We expand beyond traditional SFDA methods that rely
solely on a pretrained source model and unlabeled target data.
Instead, we innovate by exploring off-the-shelf multimodal foundation models, such as CLIP, in an unsupervised manner (marked by
the box with blue background).

Due to the absence of source samples, traditional distribution matching approaches are no longer viable [7, 14]. The
predominant alternative is self-supervised learning, which
generates or mines auxiliary information to facilitate unsupervised adaptation. Two main approaches exist: constructing a pseudo source domain to leverage established
UDA methods such as adversarial learning [16, 41] or domain shift minimization based on distribution measurement [5, 15, 37] and mining extra supervision from the
source model [11, 18, 40] or target data [34, 42, 43]. In the
presence of domain distribution shift, applying the source
model to the target domain introduces inevitable errors in
pseudo-labeling or auxiliary supervision, thereby limiting
adaptation performance.
To address identified limitations, we pioneer the exploration of off-the-shelf multimodal foundation models, such
as the vision-language (ViL) model CLIP [24], transcending the constraints of both the source model and target
data knowledge. However, direct application of the ViL
model proves unsatisfactory, lacking specialization for specific tasks. To overcome this, we propose a novel taskspecific distillation approach named Distilling multImodal

23711

