This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

360Loc: A Dataset and Benchmark for Omnidirectional Visual Localization with
Cross-device Queries
Huajian Huang1∗ Changkun Liu1∗ Yipeng Zhu1 Hui Cheng2 Tristan Braud1 Sai-Kit Yeung1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Sun Yat-sen University
* equal contribution
{hhuangbg, cliudg, yzhudg}@connect.ust.hk, chengh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {braudt, saikit}@ust.hk

Abstract
Portable 360◦ cameras are becoming a cheap and efficient tool to establish large visual databases. By capturing
omnidirectional views of a scene, these cameras could expedite building environment models that are essential for
visual localization. However, such an advantage is often
overlooked due to the lack of valuable datasets. This paper
introduces a new benchmark dataset, 360Loc, composed
of 360◦ images with ground truth poses for visual localization. We present a practical implementation of 360◦
mapping combining 360◦ images with lidar data to generate the ground truth 6DoF poses. 360Loc is the first
dataset and benchmark that explores the challenge of crossdevice visual positioning, involving 360◦ reference frames,
and query frames from pinhole, ultra-wide FoV fisheye, and
360◦ cameras. We propose a virtual camera approach to
generate lower-FoV query frames from 360◦ images, which
ensures a fair comparison of performance among different query types in visual localization tasks. We also extend this virtual camera approach to feature matchingbased and pose regression-based methods to alleviate the
performance loss caused by the cross-device domain gap,
and evaluate its effectiveness against state-of-the-art baselines. We demonstrate that omnidirectional visual localization is more robust in challenging large-scale scenes with
symmetries and repetitive structures. These results provide new insights into 360-camera mapping and omnidirectional visual localization with cross-device queries. Project
Page and dataset: https://huajianup.github.
io/research/360Loc/.

1. Introduction
Visual localization refers to predicting the 6DoF absolute pose (translation and rotation) of query images in a
known scene. Accurate visual localization has wide applications in augmented reality (AR), navigation, and robotics.

Over the last decade, many visual localization methods
have been proposed, including feature matching-based approaches [17, 33, 42, 45, 54], scene coordinate regression [5–7] and absolute pose regressors (APRs) [23, 24, 49].
Much of this progress has been driven by the availability of
numerous datasets and benchmarks targeting different challenges, as shown in Table 1. However, existing methods and
datasets focus on localization and mapping using pinhole
images. Although the merits of 360◦ camera on visual perception have been recognized [22, 60, 62], the application of
360◦ cameras for visual localization is still under-explored.
Recently, SensLoc [61] started to apply 360◦ cameras to
facilitate data collection, but their pipeline cannot perform
omnidirectional localization directly from the 360◦ images.
This paper introduces 360Loc, a new challenging benchmark dataset to facilitate research on omnidirectional visual
localization. The dataset contains 360◦ images captured
in diverse campus-scale indoor and outdoor environments,
featuring highly symmetrical and repetitive features, as well
as interference of dynamic objects. To capture this dataset,
we present a practical pipeline using a portable 360-cameralidar platform to obtain reliable pose estimations of 360◦
cameras as ground truth. Although 360◦ cameras present
significant advantages for capturing reference data, real-life
applications applying visual localization often rely on traditional cameras. Examples include robots equipped with
fisheye cameras and phone-based AR applications using the
embedded pinhole camera. This raises the problem of crossdevice visual localization on image databases captured with
360◦ cameras. We thus supplement the reference database
composed of 360◦ images with query frames including pinhole, fisheye and 360◦ cameras.
We introduce the concept of virtual camera to generate
high-quality lower-FoV images with different camera parameters from 360◦ images. This enables a fair comparison of performance among queries from different devices in
cross-device visual localization. We adapt existing featurematching-based methods and APRs to support 360◦ image
queries and benchmark these methods for 360-based cross-

22314

