This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CRKD: Enhanced Camera-Radar Object Detection with Cross-modality
Knowledge Distillation
Lingjun Zhao* , Jingyu Song*† , Katherine A. Skinner
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI USA
{lingjunz,jingyuso,kskin}@umich.edu

Abstract
In the field of 3D object detection for autonomous driving, LiDAR-Camera (LC) fusion is the top-performing sensor configuration. Still, LiDAR is relatively high cost, which
hinders adoption of this technology for consumer automobiles. Alternatively, camera and radar are commonly deployed on vehicles already on the road today, but performance of Camera-Radar (CR) fusion falls behind LC fusion.
In this work, we propose Camera-Radar Knowledge Distillation (CRKD) to bridge the performance gap between LC
and CR detectors with a novel cross-modality KD framework. We use the Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) representation as
the shared feature space to enable effective knowledge distillation. To accommodate the unique cross-modality KD
path, we propose four distillation losses to help the student learn crucial features from the teacher model. We
present extensive evaluations on the nuScenes dataset to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed CRKD framework. The project page for CRKD is https://songjingyu.github.io/CRKD.

1. Introduction
Perception is an important module for achieving safe and
effective autonomous driving [3, 15, 55]. 3D object detection is an essential task in perception as it is of great
significance for subsequent tasks [44, 47, 50, 54]. Among
various perceptual sensors used by autonomous driving researchers, LiDAR, camera and radar are the most common
choices to enable autonomy on the road [50]. Sensor fusion techniques are usually used to improve the detector’s
performance and robustness. LiDAR-Camera (LC) fusion
has been widely demonstrated as the top-performing sensor
configuration for 3D object detection [1, 2, 7, 14, 38, 61].
However, the high cost of LiDAR constrains the wide appli* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

This work was supported by a grant from Ford Motor Company via
the Ford-UM Alliance under award N028603.

Distance Measurement
Lateral
Resolution

Teacher: LiDAR-Camera Detector

Velocity
LiDAR

Camera

CRKD: Cross-modality Knowledge Distillation

Student: Camera-Radar Detector
Darkness
Visibility

Object
Classification
Weather
Robustness

LiDAR-Camera
Camera-Radar

Radar

Camera

CRKD (Ours)

Figure 1. We propose CRKD to conduct a novel cross-modality
knowledge distillation path from a LiDAR-camera teacher to a
camera-radar student. We present a radar chart to illustrate the
complementary nature of these sensing configurations and the improvement that CRKD can enable.

cation of this configuration. Though Camera-Only (CO) detectors have demonstrated impressive performance in recent
Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) based frameworks [16, 17, 33, 34],
the camera’s vulnerability to lighting conditions and lack of
accurate depth measurements motivates researchers to turn
to other sensors such as radar. Radar is robust to varying
weather and lighting conditions and features automotivegrade design and low cost. Radars are already highly accessible on most cars equipped with driver assistance features. Compared with LiDAR, the radar measurements are
sparse and noisy, which makes designing a Camera-Radar
(CR) detector challenging. Recent CR detectors have leveraged the advancement brought by BEV-based Camera-Only
(CO) detectors [16, 17, 33, 34] to achieve further improvement in accuracy and robustness to weather and lighting
changes [28, 70].
Despite the advancement in architecture design, there is
still a distinct performance gap when comparing LiDAROnly (LO) and LC detectors against CO and CR detectors. Recent research has focused on applying the Knowledge Distillation (KD) technique to alleviate this gap [12,
13, 26, 52, 68]. Generally, KD features a teacher-student
framework that aims to propagate the informative knowl-

15470

