This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WinSyn: A High Resolution Testbed for Synthetic Data
Tom Kelly1
1

John Femiani2

KAUST, KSA

2

Peter Wonka1

Miami University, Ohio

Abstract
We present WinSyn, a unique dataset and testbed for creating high-quality synthetic data with procedural modeling techniques. The dataset contains high-resolution photographs of windows, selected from locations around the
world, with 89,318 individual window crops showcasing diverse geometric and material characteristics. We evaluate
a procedural model by training semantic segmentation networks on both synthetic and real images and then comparing their performances on a shared test set of real images.
Specifically, we measure the difference in mean Intersection
over Union (mIoU) and determine the effective number of
real images to match synthetic data’s training performance.
We design a baseline procedural model as a benchmark and
provide 21,290 synthetically generated images. By tuning
the procedural model, key factors are identified which significantly influence the model’s fidelity in replicating realworld scenarios. Importantly, we highlight the challenge of
procedural modeling using current techniques, especially in
their ability to replicate the spatial semantics of real-world
scenarios. This insight is critical because of the potential of
procedural models to bridge to hidden scene aspects such
as depth, reflectivity, material properties, and lighting conditions.

straightforward proxy task is initially required to ensure that
real-world imagery can be manually annotated and compared to synthetic imagery. We, therefore, propose segmentation as a proxy task. This proxy task helps pinpoint where
a procedural model fails to capture the diversity and nuances
of real-world scenes.
As our long-term goal is procedural urban modeling, we
initially considered street-view images and datasets, such
as CityScapes [12]. However, this has several drawbacks.
Modeling arbitrary urban scenes realistically requires overwhelming complexity; requiring modeling at least cars, humans, buildings, skies, and vegetation, and each of these
poses quite distinct and complex modeling challenges. For

c
a

b
d

1. Introduction
Larger and more sophisticated machine learning models demand an ever-increasing supply of data, particularly in tasks
where manual annotation is challenging, such as depth estimation, reflectance estimation, or full 3D reconstruction.
One solution is to use procedural models to generate synthetic training data. However, creating procedural models
that accurately reflect the domain of real images (i.e. closing the domain gap) remains an open problem. Despite the
visual realism of many synthetic scenes, their effectiveness
in machine-learning applications often falls short. In this
work we do not close the gap – but present an accessible pair
of real and synthetic datasets, with annotations, in which
this domain gap may be studied without massive resources.
While the final goal is to tackle complex problems, a

e

f

Figure 1. Photographers in 28 geographic regions captured realworld photos (a) of windows that are cropped (b) to single windows, which are then labeled (c). Synthetic windows are rendered
giving color (f) and labels(d), while other passes such as depth (e)
are also possible.

22456

