This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Fields as Distributions: Signal Processing Beyond Euclidean Space
Daniel Rebain1 , Soroosh Yazdani2 , Kwang Moo Yi1 , Andrea Tagliasacchi3, 4, 5
1

University of British Columbia, 2 Google Research, 3 Google DeepMind,
4

Simon Fraser University, 5 University of Toronto

fˆ

˚

k

«

fθ

Abstract
Neural fields have emerged as a powerful and broadly
applicable method for representing signals. However, in
contrast to classical discrete digital signal processing, the
portfolio of tools to process such representations is still
severely limited and restricted to Euclidean domains. In
this paper, we address this problem by showing how a probabilistic re-interpretation of neural fields can enable their
training and inference processes to become “filter-aware”.
The formulation we propose not only merges training and
filtering in an efficient way, but also generalizes beyond the
familiar Euclidean coordinate spaces to the more general
set of smooth manifolds and convolutions induced by the
actions of Lie groups. We demonstrate how this framework
can enable novel integrations of signal processing techniques for neural field applications on both Euclidean domains, such as images and audio, as well as non-Euclidean
domains, such as rotations and rays. A noteworthy benefit
of our method is its applicability. Our method can be summarized as primarily a modification of the loss function, and
in most cases does not require changes to the network architecture or the inference process.

1. Introduction
In the field of signal processing, there are few operations
more fundamental than applying a filter to a signal, and
the specific way we represent signals has a significant impact on what filtering methods are available. For example,
neural fields are growing in popularity as a way of representing complex signals [17, 27, 29], but few efficient
and general-purpose methods exist for applying filters to
them [14, 20, 35]. Our goal in this work is to address
this shortcoming, and provide a more general mathematical
treatment of neural fields which will unlock better filtering
methods for them.
The simplest approach to incorporating signal processing operations in neural field pipelines is to apply classical
discrete operations to the data at a stage when it is represented discretely. For example, some filtering operations

Figure 1. Our method enables a variety of neural field-based
methods to be reinterpreted within a common framework of nonEuclidean signal processing. For example, we show how the simulation of lens effects, such as depth of field (top), can be implemented without extra inference cost as a linear filter applied at
training time. This filtering operation is realized as a group convolution via the action of SEp3q between the light field of the
scene fˆ and distribution of rays k. Our training process results in
the observed light field being directly approximated by the learned
network fθ « fˆ ˚ k. In the case where a typical pinhole camera
model is desired, our method reduces to convolving with a Dirac
delta distribution over the ray manifold (bottom). See our project
page at https://ubc-vision.github.io/nfd for more
qualitative results.

may be applicable to discrete training data like images or
audio before the neural field is constructed. In other cases,
it may be possible to apply the desired filter to a discrete
sampling of the neural field’s outputs, e.g., rendered images.
While an effective strategy may exist in the cases where it is
applicable, there are many possible applications for which
this is not a good option due to the dimensionality and/or

4274

