This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaBM: On-the-Fly Adaptive Bit Mapping for Image Super-Resolution
Cheeun Hong1
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
1
Dept. of ECE & ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{cheeun914, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Although image super-resolution (SR) problem has experienced unprecedented restoration accuracy with deep
neural networks, it has yet limited versatile applications
due to the substantial computational costs. Since different input images for SR face different restoration difficulties, adapting computational costs based on the input image, referred to as adaptive inference, has emerged as a
promising solution to compress SR networks. Specifically,
adapting the quantization bit-widths has successfully reduced the inference and memory cost without sacrificing
the accuracy. However, despite the benefits of the resultant adaptive network, existing works rely on time-intensive
quantization-aware training with full access to the original training pairs to learn the appropriate bit allocation
policies, which limits its ubiquitous usage. To this end, we
introduce the first on-the-fly adaptive quantization framework that accelerates the processing time from hours to seconds. We formulate the bit allocation problem with only
two bit mapping modules: one to map the input image to
the image-wise bit adaptation factor and one to obtain the
layer-wise adaptation factors. These bit mappings are calibrated and fine-tuned using only a small number of calibration images. We achieve competitive performance with the
previous adaptive quantization methods, while the processing time is accelerated by ×2000. Codes are available at
https://github.com/Cheeun/AdaBM.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a classic computer vision
problem that aims to restore the high-resolution image (HR)
from the corresponding low-resolution input image (LR).
Since the emergence of deep neural networks, SR has been
able to produce high-resolution, high-fidelity outputs. However, achieving such a level of quality was conditional upon
utilizing computationally heavy SR models, necessitating
demanding computing power and storage costs. Moreover, as the industry’s demand is stepping towards superresolving larger inputs (e.g., 4K TVs), the computational

Method

Adaptive

Data

GT

BS

Iterations

Process Time

EDSR [29]

-

800

✓

16

150,000

30 hrs

PAMS [25]
DDTB [51]
PTQ4SR [39]

✗
✗
✗

800
800
100

✓
✓
✗

16
16
2

15,000
30,000
500

2 hrs
4 hrs
124 sec

CADyQ [14]
CABM [38]
AdaBM (Ours)

✓
✓
✓

800
800
100

✓
✓
✗

16
16
2

200,000
350,000
500

40 hrs
70 hrs
71 sec

Table 1. Existing methods for quantization on SR. Adaptive
denotes whether bit-widths are adaptively allocated, GT denotes
the requirement for ground-truth HR images, and BS denotes the
batch size. Metrics are reported for quantizing EDSR (×4).

burden has increased quadratically. Therefore, recent interest has shifted to reducing the computational costs of
SR networks with little or no sacrifice on restoration accuracy. Among the surge towards lightweight SR models,
quantization is one promising avenue to reduce the memory/inference cost of neural networks by replacing the 32bit floating-point (FP) weights and activations with lower
precision values.
Quantizing SR networks with minimal accuracy loss has
been a challenging problem, as SR network activations exhibit predominantly variant distributions during test time,
often leading to severe quantization errors. Few works address variant activations using a more fine-grained quantization function [15] or updating the quantization ranges to
better fit dynamic variant activations [25, 51]. However,
these methods neglect that the accuracy loss from quantization differs for different images and layers of the network.
Some images are easier to reconstruct than others; in other
words, they can still be accurately reconstructed with fewer
computations. Thus, assigning lower bit-widths to such images leads to a better computational cost and accuracy tradeoff. In this spirit, recent methods [14, 38] take into account
the different quantization sensitivity of the images and adapt
the bit-widths based on the input content.
To adaptively allocate bit-widths to images, existing
methods [14, 38] employ several quantization function candidates of different bit-widths for each activation. Then,
CADyQ [14] trains MLPs that predict the probability for
each quantization function, in which the function with the

2641

