This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Volumetric Environment Representation for Vision-Language Navigation
Rui Liu

Wenguan Wang

Yi Yang*

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/DefaultRui/VLN-VER

Abstract
Vision-language navigation (VLN) requires an agent to
navigate through an 3D environment based on visual observations and natural language instructions. It is clear
that the pivotal factor for successful navigation lies in the
comprehensive scene understanding. Previous VLN agents
employ monocular frameworks to extract 2D features of
perspective views directly. Though straightforward, they
struggle for capturing 3D geometry and semantics, leading to a partial and incomplete environment representation. To achieve a comprehensive 3D representation with
ﬁne-grained details, we introduce a Volumetric Environment Representation (VER), which voxelizes the physical
world into structured 3D cells. For each cell, VER aggregates multi-view 2D features into such a uniﬁed 3D space
via 2D-3D sampling. Through coarse-to-ﬁne feature extraction and multi-task learning for VER, our agent predicts
3D occupancy, 3D room layout, and 3D bounding boxes
jointly. Based on online collected VERs, our agent performs volume state estimation and builds episodic memory
for predicting the next step. Experimental results show our
environment representations from multi-task learning lead
to evident performance gains on VLN. Our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance across VLN benchmarks (R2R,
REVERIE, and R4R).

1. Introduction
Vision-language navigation (VLN) requires an agent to
navigate in a 3D environment following natural language
instructions [3, 64]. As a holistic understanding of the
environment plays a pivotal role in decision-making within
VLN, environment representation learning serves as a
foundation for formulating accurate navigation policies.
Early VLN approaches [3, 23] typically learn the navigation policy through the sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq)
framework [72], which directly maps instructions and
multi-view perspective observations to actions. They sim* Corresponding author: Yi Yang.

Figure 1. The agent observes its surroundings with corresponding perspective features of different candidate views ( ). Previous
methods construct the topological graph or semantic map based
on these 2D features. Our VER aggregates the multi-view features
into structured 3D cells via 2D-3D sampling. VER is a powerful
representation for both 3D perception tasks and VLN, providing a
volume state space for decision-making.

ply embed their immediate observation of local environment into the hidden states of recurrent units. As a result, they lack of explicit environment representations and
struggle to access their past states during long-time exploration [61, 82]. To address this issue, later VLN agents
are equipped with an external memory module [61], which
stores the environment representations distinctly from navigation states. In this way, they can explicitly model and
maintain the environment layouts and contents in a form of
topological graph [2, 11, 16, 19, 32, 62] or semantic map
[1, 4, 10, 12, 26, 34, 38, 55, 75, 94] (Fig. 1). Despite their
promising performance with advanced frameworks (e.g.,
graph neural network [44] and Transformer [79]), their environment representations are still built upon 2D perspective features extracted by monocular frameworks. While
straightforward, they compress depth information onto the
perspective plane, sacriﬁcing the integral scene structure in
the 3D space. Thus, they encounter challenges in capturing
3D geometry and semantics in complex scenes. Such an
incomplete environment representation easily leads to suboptimal navigation decisions.
16317

