This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniMotionGPT: Animal Motion Generation with Limited Data
Zhangsihao Yang1 ,* Mingyuan Zhou2 , Mengyi Shan3 , Bingbing Wen3 , Ziwei Xuan2
Mitch Hill2 , Junjie Bai2 , Guo-Jun Qi2,4 , Yalin Wang1
1
2
Arizona State University, USA
OPPO Seattle Research Center, USA
3
4
University of Washington, USA
Westlake University, China

Abstract
Our paper aims to generate diverse and realistic animal motion sequences from textual descriptions, without a
large-scale animal text-motion dataset. While the task of
text-driven human motion synthesis is already extensively
studied and benchmarked, it remains challenging to transfer
this success to other skeleton structures with limited data.
In this work, we design a model architecture that imitates
Generative Pretraining Transformer (GPT), utilizing prior
knowledge learned from human data to the animal domain.
We jointly train motion autoencoders for both animal and
human motions and at the same time optimize through the
similarity scores among human motion encoding, animal
motion encoding, and text CLIP embedding. Presenting the
first solution to this problem, we are able to generate animal
motions with high diversity and fidelity, quantitatively and
qualitatively outperforming the results of training human motion generation baselines on animal data. Additionally, we
introduce AnimalML3D, the first text-animal motion dataset
with 1240 animation sequences spanning 36 different animal identities. We hope this dataset would mediate the data
scarcity problem in text-driven animal motion generation,
providing a new playground for the research community.

1. Introduction
Computational modeling of 3D motions is an important topic
with a wide range of applications, including robotics, virtual/mixed/augmented reality, gaming, and visual media.
Traditional methods for obtaining computational models of
motions rely on human artists who use their observations of
the real world to animate 3D assets [27], or extensive motion capture process [35]. This process requires great effort
and skill from artists or an expensive and time-consuming
capture procedure. Recent advances in generative modeling
have led to breakthrough success for synthesizing realistic
human motions using natural language textual descriptions
* Work done while interning at OPPO

Figure 1. Visualization of in-domain and out-of-domain motion
generation from textual descriptions. Our model generates animal motion ranging from conventional movements to complex,
out-of-domain behaviors. The in-domain motion semantic latent
space, highlighted by the yellow region, encapsulates common animal movements described in textual data. The out-of-domain latent
space, delineated by the blue region, includes complex motions that
are less frequently associated with animal behaviors, such as performing a handstand. The blue and green arrows denote our motion
generation process from out-of-domain and in-domain prompts.

[14, 15, 21, 37, 45, 46]. Text-driven motion generation has
the potential to greatly increase the efficiency and accessibility of motion animation. Despite the success of motion
generation in the domain of human motions, significant obstacles remain which prevent similar techniques from being
used to generate other kinds of motions.
In this work, we showcase a method to tackle the difficult
problem of animal motion generation from text descriptions.
Text-driven animal motion generation is much less studied
than human motion generation mainly due to dataset availability issues. Animal motion data in the research commu-

1249

