This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fooling Polarization-based Vision using Locally Controllable Polarizing
Projection

1

Zhuoxiao Li1 Zhihang Zhong2 Shohei Nobuhara3 Ko Nishino3
The University of Tokyo 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Yinqiang Zheng1 *
3
Kyoto University

Abstract
Polarization is a fundamental property of light that encodes abundant information regarding surface shape, material, illumination and viewing geometry. The computer
vision community has witnessed a blossom of polarizationbased vision applications, such as reflection removal,
shape-from-polarization (SfP), transparent object segmentation and color constancy, partially due to the emergence
of single-chip mono/color polarization sensors that make
polarization data acquisition easier than ever. However,
is polarization-based vision vulnerable to adversarial attacks? If so, is that possible to realize these adversarial attacks in the physical world, without being perceived by human eyes? In this paper, we warn the community of the vulnerability of polarization-based vision, which can be more
serious than RGB-based vision. By adapting a commercial
LCD projector, we achieve locally controllable polarizing
projection, which is successfully utilized to fool state-of-theart polarization-based vision algorithms for glass segmentation and SfP. Compared with existing physical attacks on
RGB-based vision, which always suffer from the trade-off
between attack efficacy and eye conceivability, the adversarial attackers based on polarizing projection are contactfree and visually imperceptible, since naked human eyes
can rarely perceive the difference of viciously manipulated
polarizing light and ordinary illumination. This poses unprecedented risks on polarization-based vision, for which
due attentions should be paid and counter measures be considered.

1. Introduction
Even if the frequency of light lies in the visible range, its
polarization status can hardly be perceived by human eyes.
Fortunately, a variety of imaging devices have been developed, which allow to utilize rich scene information encoded in polarization, regarding geometry, material, illumination and light transportation. The emergence of single* Corresponding author

Figure 1. (a) Single-chip color polarization sensor can capture
trichromatic image, angle of linear polarization (AoLP), and degree of linear polarization (DoLP) within one shot. (b) Our proposed physical attackers are based on polarizing projection, which
is naturally conceivable to human eyes, thus can bypass the tradeoff between attack efficacy and eye conceivability in fooling RGBbased vision.

chip mono/color polarization sensors has made polarization
data acquisition easier, leading to a blossom of polarizationbased vision applications, such as reflection removal [22],
shape-from-polarization (SfP) [10, 13, 23], surface defects
detection [24], color constancy [28], transparent object detection and segmentation [26]. Figure 1 (a) shows the capabilities of a single-chip color polarization sensor in capturing trichromatic image I, angle of linear polarization
(AoLP) ϕ, and degree of linear polarization (DoLP) ρ, with
one shot. Given the prevalence of polarization-based vision, it is astonishing that its vulnerability has never been
formally explored in the CV and AI communities.
The vulnerability of RGB-based deep vision models is
firstly reported in [30], with various extensions in minimizing perturbation magnitude, maximizing success rate
of attack, retrieving universal adversarial attackers, and so
on [1, 2]. Stepping beyond the digital space, more recent researches focus on studying the vulnerability of RGBbased vision models in the physically feasible space, while
minimizing the level of offensiveness to human eyes (blue

24706

