This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Versatile Medical Image Segmentation Learned from Multi-Source
Datasets via Model Self-Disambiguation
Xiaoyang Chen

Hao Zheng

Yuemeng Li
Yuncong Ma
Yong Fan
University of Pennsylvania

Liang Ma

Hongming Li

{xiaoyang.chen,yong.fan}@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Abstract
A versatile medical image segmentation model applicable to images acquired with diverse equipment and protocols can facilitate model deployment and maintenance.
However, building such a model typically demands a large,
diverse, and fully annotated dataset, which is challenging
to obtain due to the labor-intensive nature of data curation.
To address this challenge, we propose a cost-effective alternative that harnesses multi-source data with only partial
or sparse segmentation labels for training, substantially reducing the cost of developing a versatile model. We devise
strategies for model self-disambiguation, prior knowledge
incorporation, and imbalance mitigation to tackle challenges associated with inconsistently labeled multi-source
data, including label ambiguity and modality, dataset, and
class imbalances. Experimental results on a multi-modal
dataset compiled from eight different sources for abdominal structure segmentation have demonstrated the effectiveness and superior performance of our method compared to
state-of-the-art alternative approaches. We anticipate that
its cost-saving features, which optimize the utilization of existing annotated data and reduce annotation efforts for new
data, will have a significant impact in the field.

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation plays a pivotal role in disease diagnosis [1, 8, 25, 42], treatment planning [36], and
biomedical research [5, 6, 12, 23]. Models, tailored for specific applications, imaging modalities, and distinct anatomical regions, are ubiquitous and attract considerable attention [37]. Nonetheless, they often exhibit limited robustness and generalizability, largely due to insufficient training
data. Additionally, the necessity to develop separate segmentation models for different organs and modalities poses
scalability challenges, causing inefficient resource utilization and escalating development and maintenance costs.

Versatile image segmentation models show potential in
overcoming the limitations of their specialized counterparts.
However, their training typically requires a large, diverse,
and fully annotated dataset, incurring high costs in data curation and annotation. As a result, only small-scale datasets
are usually available, with annotations covering only a portion of anatomical structures or image slices, resulting in
partial or sparse segmentation labels [38]. These datasets
are typically curated by annotators focusing on labeling
specific structures of interest while treating others as background. However, such selective annotation introduces ambiguity when interpreting unannotated regions, impeding
the efficacy of image segmentation methods that rely on
complete annotations. Specialized strategies are thus essential to effectively utilize datasets with ambiguous labels.
Multi-head segmentation models obviate the issue of labeling ambiguity by designing a distinct decoder for different datasets [4, 18]. However, their inefficient memory usage hampers scalability. Dynamic models, such as
the class-conditioned model [9], DoDNet [41], and CLIPdriven [24], adeptly address partial labeling through conditional segmentation, enabling adjustments in their outputs
for specific tasks. Nevertheless, dynamic models face their
own challenges, such as training complexities, inefficiencies in inference due to multiple forward passes, and limitations in fully exploiting the benefits of fine-grained annotations, as class-specific parameters are optimized separately.
Semi-supervised segmentation methods generate pseudolabels for unannotated anatomical structures to facilitate
conventional loss computation [15, 43]. However, these
methods require fully annotated data for initial fully supervised training, and the incorporation of inaccurate pseudolabels in later training stage may degrade the model performance. Background modeling methods [11, 35] dynamically compute losses for unannotated voxels to mitigate semantic drifts in partial annotations. Nevertheless, their requirement for fully annotated data limits their applicability
in challenging scenarios. Notably, all these existing methods are unable to utilize sparsely labeled data (cf. Fig. 1(c)).

11747

