This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskClustering: View Consensus based Mask Graph Clustering
for Open-Vocabulary 3D Instance Segmentation
†

Zoom-in View

Building

First floor

Open-vocabulary queries

Instance segmentation Input point cloud

Mi Yan1,2 Jiazhao Zhang1,2 Yan Zhu1 He Wang1,2,3,
1
CFCS, School of CS, Peking University 2 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 3 Galbot

Second floor

”Green plant on the marble table” “White clothes on the sofa chair”

Figure 1. Our method tackles the challenges of open-vocabulary instance segmentation. It achieves detailed segmentation across objects
of varying scales and can query these objects using open-vocabulary text.

Abstract

Open-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation is cuttingedge for its ability to segment 3D instances without predefined categories. However, progress in 3D lags behind its
2D counterpart due to limited annotated 3D data. To address this, recent works first generate 2D open-vocabulary
masks through 2D models and then merge them into 3D
instances based on metrics calculated between two neighboring frames. In contrast to these local metrics, we propose a novel metric, view consensus rate, to enhance the
utilization of multi-view observations. The key insight is
that two 2D masks should be deemed part of the same 3D
instance if a significant number of other 2D masks from
different views contain both these two masks. Using this
metric as edge weight, we construct a global mask graph
where each mask is a node. Through iterative clustering
of masks showing high view consensus, we generate a series of clusters, each representing a distinct 3D instance.
Notably, our model is training-free. Through extensive experiments on publicly available datasets, including ScanNet++, ScanNet200 and MatterPort3D, we demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in
open-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation. Our project
† : He Wang is the corresponding author.

page is at https://pku-epic.github.io/MaskClustering.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation tackles the
problem of predicting 3D object instance masks and their
corresponding categories from reconstructed 3D scenes,
without relying on a predefined list of categories. This is
an essential task for 3D scene understanding [4, 12, 35],
robotics [8, 15, 50] and VR/AR applications [22, 45]. However, this task is more challenging than its established
2D counterpart, open-vocabulary 2D instance segmentation
[11, 20, 39, 43, 44], primarily due to the lack of large-scale
open-world 3D data. Consequently, most current methods [18, 28, 37] in this field divide this task into two stages:
zero-shot 3D instance mask prediction, followed by openvocabulary semantic queries. In this work, we primarily
focuses on obtaining high-quality, zero-shot 3D instance
masks.
Existing approaches for zero-shot 3D instance mask prediction primarily follow two paths. 3D-to-2D projectionbased methods [18, 19] leverage existing 3D instance segmentation algorithms to generate 3D masks. However, this
approach is fundamentally constrained by the quality of
3D reconstructions and the relatively modest capabilities
of current 3D instance segmentation tools. As a result,
these methods often struggle to accurately segment small

28274

