This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Video Transformers via Universal Concept Discovery
Matthew Kowal1,3,4 * Achal Dave3 Rares Ambrus3
Adrien Gaidon3 Konstantinos G. Derpanis1,2,4 Pavel Tokmakov3
1

York University, 2 Samsung AI Centre Toronto, 3 Toyota Research Institute, 4 Vector Institute

Project page: yorkucvil.github.io/VTCD
Abstract

1. Introduction
Understanding the hidden representations within neural networks is essential for addressing regulatory concerns [14,
34], preventing harms in deployment [8, 33], and can aid innovative model designs [16]. This problem has been studied
extensively for images, both for convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [5, 25, 29, 37] and, more recently, vision
transformers (ViTs) [55, 68], resulting in multiple key insights. For example, image classification models extract
low-level positional and texture cues at early layers and
gradually combine them into higher-level, semantic concepts at later layers [5, 27, 49].
* Work completed during an internship at Toyota Research Institute

frames
1 7 14 20

11-0

Early Layers

Container

9-7

Middle Layers

Collisions

6-7

Deep Layers

Spatial
Positions

2-4

Occlusion
Tracking

This paper studies the problem of concept-based interpretability of transformer representations for videos. Concretely, we seek to explain the decision-making process
of video transformers based on high-level, spatiotemporal
concepts that are automatically discovered. Prior research
on concept-based interpretability has concentrated solely
on image-level tasks. Comparatively, video models deal
with the added temporal dimension, increasing complexity and posing challenges in identifying dynamic concepts
over time. In this work, we systematically address these
challenges by introducing the first Video Transformer Concept Discovery (VTCD) algorithm. To this end, we propose an efficient approach for unsupervised identification of
units of video transformer representations - concepts, and
ranking their importance to the output of a model. The resulting concepts are highly interpretable, revealing spatiotemporal reasoning mechanisms and object-centric representations in unstructured video models. Performing this
analysis jointly over a diverse set of supervised and selfsupervised representations, we discover that some of these
mechanism are universal in video transformers. Finally, we
show that VTCD can be used for fine-grained action recognition and video object segmentation.

What concepts are important for object permanence?

Figure 1. Heatmap predictions of the TCOW model [66] for tracking through occlusions (top), together with concepts discovered
by our VTCD (bottom). We can see that the model encodes positional information in early layers, identifies containers and collision events in mid-layers and tracks through occlusions in late
layers. Only one video is shown, but the discovered concepts are
shared between many dataset samples.

However, while video transformers do share their overall architecture with image-level ViTs, the insights obtained
in existing works do very little to explain their inner mechanisms. Consider, for example, the recent approach for tracking occluded objects [66] shown in Figure 1 (top). To accurately reason about the trajectory of the invisible object
inside the pot, texture or semantic cues alone would not suffice. What, then, are the spatiotemporal mechanisms used
by this approach? Are any of these mechanisms universal
across video models trained for different tasks?
To answer these questions, in this work we present the
Video Transformer Concept Discovery algorithm (VTCD)
- the first concept discovery methodology for interpreting
the representations of deep video transformers. We focus
on concept-based interpretability [24, 25, 29, 74] due to its

10946

