This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ASH: Animatable Gaussian Splats for Efficient and Photoreal Human Rendering
Haokai Pang1,2 †

Heming Zhu1 † Adam Kortylewski1,3 Christian Theobalt1,4 Marc Habermann1,4 B
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
2
ETH Zürich 3 Universität Freiburg
4
Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and AI
{hpang, hezhu, akortyle, theobalt, mhaberma}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Figure 1. ASH takes an arbitrary 3D skeletal pose and virtual camera view, which can be controlled by the user, as input, and generates a
photorealistic rendering of the human in real time. To achieve this, we propose an efficient and animatable Gaussian representation, which
is parameterized on the surface of a deformable template mesh.

Abstract
Real-time rendering of photorealistic and controllable
human avatars stands as a cornerstone in Computer Vision
and Graphics. While recent advances in neural implicit rendering have unlocked unprecedented photorealism for digital avatars, real-time performance has mostly been demonstrated for static scenes only. To address this, we propose
ASH, an animatable Gaussian splatting approach for photorealistic rendering of dynamic humans in real time. We
parameterize the clothed human as animatable 3D Gaussians, which can be efficiently splatted into image space
to generate the final rendering. However, naively learning
the Gaussian parameters in 3D space poses a severe challenge in terms of compute. Instead, we attach the Gaussians
onto a deformable character model, and learn their parameters in 2D texture space, which allows leveraging efficient
2D convolutional architectures that easily scale with the required number of Gaussians. We benchmark ASH with competing methods on pose-controllable avatars, demonstrating that our method outperforms existing real-time methods
by a large margin and shows comparable or even better results than offline methods.

† Joint first authors.
B Corresponding author.
Project page: vcai.mpi-inf.mpg.de/projects/ash

1. Introduction
Generating high-fidelity human renderings is a longstanding problem in the field of Computer Graphics and Vision, with a multitude of real-world applications, such as
gaming, film production, and AR/VR. Typically, this process is a laborious task, requiring complicated hardware setups and tremendous efforts from skilled artists. To ease
the extensive manual efforts, recent advances, including this
work, focus on generating photorealistic and controllable
human avatars solely from multi-view videos.
Recent works on photorealistic human rendering can
be categorized into explicit-based and hybrid methods.
Explicit methods represent the human avatar as a deformable template mesh with learned dynamic textures [13,
53]. Although these methods are runtime-efficient and
can be seamlessly integrated with the well-established
rasterization-based rendering pipeline, the generated rendering often falls short in terms of photorealism and level of
detail. Hybrid approaches usually attach a neural radiance
field (NeRF) [38] onto a (deformable) human model [15, 32,
45]. Typically, they evaluate the NeRF in an unposed space
to model the detailed appearance of clothed humans, and
generate color and density values by querying a coordinatebased MLP per ray sample. Although hybrid methods can
deliver superior rendering quality through NeRF’s capability to capture delicate appearance details, they are unsuitable for real-time applications due to the intensive sampling

1165

