This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniPAD: A Universal Pre-training Paradigm for Autonomous Driving
Honghui Yang1,2∗ , Sha Zhang2,6 , Di Huang2,7 , Xiaoyang Wu2,5 , Haoyi Zhu2,6 , Tong He2†
Shixiang Tang2 , Hengshuang Zhao5 , Qibo Qiu8 , Binbin Lin3,4† , Xiaofei He1 , Wanli Ouyang2
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University 4 Fullong Inc. 5 HongKong University
6
University of Science and Technology of China 7 The University of Sydney 8 Zhejiang Lab

Abstract
In the context of autonomous driving, the significance of
effective feature learning is widely acknowledged. While
conventional 3D self-supervised pre-training methods have
shown widespread success, most methods follow the ideas
originally designed for 2D images. In this paper, we present
UniPAD, a novel self-supervised learning paradigm applying 3D volumetric differentiable rendering. UniPAD implicitly encodes 3D space, facilitating the reconstruction of
continuous 3D shape structures and the intricate appearance characteristics of their 2D projections. The flexibility of our method enables seamless integration into both
2D and 3D frameworks, enabling a more holistic comprehension of the scenes. We manifest the feasibility and effectiveness of UniPAD by conducting extensive experiments
on various 3D perception tasks. Our method significantly
improves lidar-, camera-, and lidar-camera-based baseline
by 9.1, 7.7, and 6.9 NDS, respectively. Notably, our pretraining pipeline achieves 73.2 NDS for 3D object detection and 79.4 mIoU for 3D semantic segmentation on the
nuScenes validation set, achieving state-of-the-art results
in comparison with previous methods.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning for 3D point cloud data is of great
significance as it is able to use vast amounts of unlabeled
data efficiently, enhancing their utility for various downstream tasks like 3D object detection [20, 51, 63, 64, 89,
92] and semantic segmentation [16, 47, 48, 52, 76, 104].
Although significant advances have been made in selfsupervised learning for 2D images [9, 10, 26, 27], extending
these approaches to 3D point clouds have presented considerably more significant challenges. This is partly caused
∗ This work was done during his internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Effect of our pre-training for 3D detection and segmentation on the nuScenes [5] dataset, where C, L, and M denote camera, LiDAR, and fusion modality, respectively.

by the inherent sparsity of the data, and the variability in
point distribution due to sensor placement and occlusions
by other scene elements. Previous pre-training paradigms
for 3D scene understanding adapted the idea from the 2D
image domain and can be roughly categorized into two
groups: contrastive-based and MAE-based.
Contrastive-based methods [12, 102] explore pulling
similar 3D points closer together while pushing dissimilar points apart in feature space through a contrastive loss
function. For example, PointContrast [80] directly operates on each point and has demonstrated its effectiveness
on various downstream tasks. Nonetheless, the sensitivity
to positive/negative sample selection and the associated increased latency often impose constraints on the practical
applications of these approaches. Masked AutoEncoding
(MAE) [27], which encourages the model to learn a holistic
understanding of the input beyond low-level statistics, has
been widely applied in the autonomous driving field. Yet,
such a pretext task has its challenges in 3D point clouds due
to the inherent irregularity and sparsity of the data. VoxelMAE [28] proposed to divide irregular points into discrete
voxels and predict the masked 3D structure using voxelwise supervision. The coarse supervision may lead to insufficient representation capability.
In this paper, we come up with a novel pre-training
paradigm tailored for effective 3D representation learn-

15238

