This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning for Transductive Threshold Calibration in Open-World Recognition
Qin Zhang1 , Dongsheng An1 , Tianjun Xiao2 , Tong He2 , Qingming Tang3 , Ying Nian Wu1 ,
Joseph Tighe1 , Yifan Xing1
1
2
3
AWS AI Labs
Amazon Web Services
Alexa AI
{qzaamz,andongsh,tianjux,htong,qmtang,wunyin,yifax}@amazon.com, jtighe@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
In deep metric learning for visual recognition, the calibration of distance thresholds is crucial for achieving desired model performance in the true positive rates (TPR) or
true negative rates (TNR). However, calibrating this threshold presents challenges in open-world scenarios, where the
test classes can be entirely disjoint from those encountered
during training. We define the problem of finding distance
thresholds for a trained embedding model to achieve target
performance metrics over unseen open-world test classes as
open-world threshold calibration. Existing posthoc threshold calibration methods, reliant on inductive inference and
requiring a calibration dataset with a similar distance distribution as the test data, often prove ineffective in openworld scenarios. To address this, we introduce OpenGCN,
a Graph Neural Network-based transductive threshold calibration method with enhanced adaptability and robustness.
OpenGCN learns to predict pairwise connectivity for the
unlabeled test instances embedded in a graph to determine
its TPR and TNR at various distance thresholds, allowing
for transductive inference of the distance thresholds which
also incorporates test-time information. Extensive experiments across open-world visual recognition benchmarks
validate OpenGCN’s superiority over existing posthoc calibration methods for open-world threshold calibration.

1. Introduction
In deep metric learning (DML) for visual recognition, distance calibration plays a critical role in determining the
user-perceived model performance. Unlike confidence calibration in closed-set classification settings which focuses
on aligning confidence probabilities with true likelihood of
correctness in a fixed label space [27, 33], distance calibration in DML aims to pinpoint an optimal distance threshold to achieve a target true positive rate (TPR) or true negative rate (TNR) for diverse test-time distributions [26].
This calibration is vital because, even with a highly effec-

Figure 1. This figure illustrates the open-world threshold calibration problem. In open-world recognition, the embedding model
is trained on closed-set classes but tested on distinct open-world
classes. When applying the model to open-world classes, it often
produces less compact embeddings than those encountered during
training, necessitating the calibration of the distance threshold for
achieving the desired TPR and TNR trade-off. However, the absence of prior knowledge about open-world test classes and distributions makes it challenging to find the optimal distance threshold,
denoted as dopt . Best viewed in color.

tive embedding model, an inappropriate distance threshold
can significantly degrade user experience. The issue becomes more pronounced in open-world recognition, where
the embedding model, trained on a closed set of classes
(e.g., dog, cat, bird), is tested on an open collection of unseen classes (e.g., wolf, sheep, mouse, ...). These openworld classes may have very different intra-class and interclass representation structures, typically being less compact, compared to the training classes. In such open-world
scenarios, where prior knowledge about test-time classes
and distributions are absent, calibrating the distance threshold becomes a challenging task, as illustrated in Fig. 1. We
term this task of distance calibration in an open-world scenario as open-world threshold calibration.

17097

