This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attentive Illumination Decomposition Model
for Multi-Illuminant White Balancing
Dongyoung Kim1
Jinwoo Kim1
Junsang Yu2
Seon Joo Kim1
1
2
Yonsei University
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
: Illumination map

Abstract

1. Introduction
Color constancy, a unique human capability, allows us to
perceive the color of objects uniformly under any lighting
conditions. Similarly, a computational color constancy or
white balancing (WB) module is integrated into the image
processing unit, designed to compensate for the effects of
illumination to recover the original color of the objects.
Many WB studies have been conducted with the goal of
predicting the single chromaticity vector of the light source
for a given image, assuming uniform illumination. Traditional statistics-based methodologies [16, 19, 20, 43], including gray world [10] and white patch [30] algorithms,
Author E-mail : dongyoung.kim@yonsei.ac.kr

Model

[Conventional Model]

[GT]

Slot 1

Chromaticity Weight map

AID
Slot 2

White balance (WB) algorithms in many commercial
cameras assume single and uniform illumination, leading
to undesirable results when multiple lighting sources with
different chromaticities exist in the scene. Prior research on
multi-illuminant WB typically predicts illumination at the
pixel level without fully grasping the scene’s actual lighting conditions, including the number and color of light
sources. This often results in unnatural outcomes lacking
in overall consistency. To handle this problem, we present
a deep white balancing model that leverages the slot attention, where each slot is in charge of representing individual illuminants. This design enables the model to generate
chromaticities and weight maps for individual illuminants,
which are then fused to compose the final illumination map.
Furthermore, we propose the centroid-matching loss, which
regulates the activation of each slot based on the color
range, thereby enhancing the model to separate illumination more effectively. Our method achieves the state-of-theart performance on both single- and multi-illuminant WB
benchmarks, and also offers additional information such as
the number of illuminants in the scene and their chromaticity. This capability allows for illumination editing, an application not feasible with prior methods.

[Attentive Illumination Decomposition]

Figure 1. Comparison of the AID framework (bottom) with existing approaches (top). Previous methodologies did not individually
consider illuminant profiles within the scene, resulting in unnatural
results. The AID framework outperforms previous works in illumination estimation by estimating the chromaticity and pixel-wise
weight map of each individual illuminant and combining them.

used various statistics that could be obtained from images.
Data-driven methods [4, 24] worked by optimizing through
the white balance dataset. However, these algorithms produce distorted results when multiple illuminants affect the
scene simultaneously. For example, when a blue skylight is
coming in from the window into a room with warm-colored
lighting, applying a single white balance matrix to the entire
image may fail in recovering the scene color.
Accordingly, spatially varying white balance algorithms
have been proposed to deal with multi-illuminant scenes.
Early works estimate mixed illumination map by utilizing
auxiliary flash photography [25] or prior knowledge about
the chromaticity of illuminants [5, 23]. Recently, many
DNN-based methods have been introduced with the advancements in neural networks. Algorithms using patches
[8], GANs [42], U-Net [27] with transformer blocks [31]
have been proposed.
All previous multi-illuminant WB works directly generate patch- or pixel-level predictions of illumination maps

25512

