This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometrically-driven Aggregation for Zero-shot 3D Point Cloud Understanding
Guofeng Mei Luigi Riz Yiming Wang Fabio Poiesi
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive, 18, 38123 Trento, Italy
{gmei,luriz, ywang, poiesi}@fbk.eu

Abstract
Zero-shot 3D point cloud understanding can be achieved
via 2D Vision-Language Models (VLMs). Existing strategies directly map VLM representations from 2D pixels of
rendered or captured views to 3D points, overlooking the
inherent and expressible point cloud geometric structure.
Geometrically similar or close regions can be exploited
for bolstering point cloud understanding as they are likely
to share semantic information. To this end, we introduce
the first training-free aggregation technique that leverages
the point cloud’s 3D geometric structure to improve the
quality of the transferred VLM representations. Our approach operates iteratively, performing local-to-global aggregation based on geometric and semantic point-level reasoning. We benchmark our approach on three downstream
tasks, including classification, part segmentation, and semantic segmentation, with a variety of datasets representing both synthetic/real-world, and indoor/outdoor scenarios. Our approach achieves new state-of-the-art results in
all benchmarks. Code and dataset are available at https:
//luigiriz.github.io/geoze-website/.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot point cloud understanding aims to develop deep
learning models capable of performing recognition tasks,
such as shape classification or segmentation, on data unobserved at training time [8, 18, 35]. Especially, visionlanguage models (VLMs), such as CLIP [22], trained on
internet-scale image-text pairs, can be effectively employed
for zero-shot visual recognition tasks [11]. However, training a 3D deep model using CLIP’s dataset size and procedure is currently infeasible since point cloud-text pair data
of the same scale as that used for CLIP is not yet available.
Transferring VLM representations from images to point
clouds has proven to be the most effective strategy so far for
achieving zero-shot point cloud understanding [8, 30, 33,
35]. For example, PointCLIP [33] pioneers a training-free
approach to directly transfer and combine per-pixel VLM
representations of multiple rendered views of a point cloud

geometric
feature
extraction

geometrically
driven
aggregation

image
encoder

semantic feature extraction
prompt

text
encoder

classification

part segmentation semantic segmentation
downstream tasks

Figure 1. Given a set of dense per-pixel VLM representations
(e.g. CLIP [22]) extracted from different viewpoint images of a
point cloud, our approach is the first geometrically-driven aggregation technique to effectively transfer these image representations
to 3D points. We use geometric features (e.g. FPFH [23], normals)
extracted from the point cloud to denoise the VLM representations
through an iterative process. This process begins by aggregating
information locally and then extends to operate globally, thereby
facilitating improvements across a variety of downstream tasks.

for zero-shot classification and part segmentation. Its successor PointCLIPv2 [35] enhances 3D understanding by refining view rendering quality. ConceptFusion [8] fuses perobject VLM representations into per-pixel representations,
transferring them to 3D points without requiring training.
Both PointCLIPv2 and ConceptFusion have been tested in
downstream tasks involving 3D scene understanding. However, 3D points remain isolated when transferring features
from 2D domain to 3D domain, lacking any bridge for intrainformation flow. Additionally, current fusion operations
often disregard the global context and spatial geometric
structures. We argue that the geometric structure of a point
cloud contains valuable information that could be used to
enhance the quality of the transferred VLM representations.
In practical terms, we can rely on the key assumption: VLM
representations should exhibit local smoothness and global
consistency when their geometric structures are similar. To

27896

