This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Bird’s Eye View Semantic Segmentation by Task Decomposition
Tianhao Zhao1 * Yongcan Chen1 * Yu Wu1 Tianyang Liu1 Bo Du1†
Peilun Xiao2 Shi Qiu2 Hongda Yang2 Guozhen Li2 Yi Yang2 Yutian Lin1†
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science,
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Didi Chuxing, China
{happytianhao, chenyongcan, wuyucs, bodu, yutian.lin}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic segmentation in bird’s eye view (BEV) plays
a crucial role in autonomous driving. Previous methods
usually follow an end-to-end pipeline, directly predicting
the BEV segmentation map from monocular RGB inputs.
However, the challenge arises when the RGB inputs and
BEV targets from distinct perspectives, making the direct
point-to-point predicting hard to optimize. In this paper,
we decompose the original BEV segmentation task into two
stages, namely BEV map reconstruction and RGB-BEV feature alignment. In the first stage, we train a BEV autoencoder to reconstruct the BEV segmentation maps given corrupted noisy latent representation, which urges the decoder
to learn fundamental knowledge of typical BEV patterns.
The second stage involves mapping RGB input images into
the BEV latent space of the first stage, directly optimizing the correlations between the two views at the feature
level. Our approach simplifies the complexity of combining perception and generation into distinct steps, equipping
the model to handle intricate and challenging scenes effectively. Besides, we propose to transform the BEV segmentation map from the Cartesian to the polar coordinate system to establish the column-wise correspondence between
RGB images and BEV maps. Moreover, our method requires
neither multi-scale features nor camera intrinsic parameters for depth estimation and saves computational overhead. Extensive experiments on nuScenes and Argoverse
show the effectiveness and efficiency of our method. Code
is available at https://github.com/happytianhao/TaDe.

1. Introduction
In the field of autonomous driving, bird’s eye view
(BEV) perception tasks can obtain adequate semantic in* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Perspective View RGB Image

(b) End-to-end

(c) TaDe (Ours)

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison between traditional end-to-end
method and our method. (a) shows the perspective view RGB image, (b) and (c) show the BEV segmentation maps predicted without and with the method of task decomposition, respectively.

formation such as road layout, object categories, positions,
and scales around vehicles. This kind of information is
called BEV representation and can be directly applied to
downstream tasks such as layout mapping, action prediction, route planning, and collision avoidance. In this work,
we focus on the monocular BEV segmentation task, which
is a fundamental task that aims to predict road segments
from camera inputs.
Previous BEV segmentation methods [6,16,18,23,25,28,
31, 34, 40, 41] usually follow an end-to-end pipeline, which
adopts a transformer-based architecture to directly predict
BEV segmentation maps from the input RGB images. However, different from the general segmentation task, the input
images and targets in BEV are of distinct views (perspective view versus bird’s eye view), thus it is hard to train the
model by direct point-to-point optimization. And it is even
harder when attempting to achieve both source information
perception and target view generation in a single step. As
shown in Figure 1 (b), the generated BEV segmentation
map of the end-to-end baseline looks distorted and does not
conform to the expected regular patterns found in real-world
traffic scenes.
To achieve the complex cross-view BEV segmentation,
we propose a Task Decomposition (TaDe) method that decompose the traditional end-to-end pipeline into two distinct but goal-oriented stages. In the first stage, we train an

15512

