This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Video Individual Counting
Xinyan Liu1 Guorong Li1,3 * Yuankai Qi2 Ziheng Yan1
Zhenjun Han1 Anton van den Hengel5 Ming-Hsuan Yang6 Qingming Huang1,3,4
1
University of Chinese Academy of Science; 2 Macquarie University;
3
Key Lab of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, UCAS, China;
4
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS;
5
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide;
6
University of California at Merced.

Abstract
Video Individual Counting (VIC) aims to predict the
number of unique individuals in a single video. Existing
methods learn representations based on trajectory labels
for individuals, which are annotation-expensive. To provide
a more realistic reflection of the underlying practical challenge, we introduce a weakly supervised VIC task, wherein
trajectory labels are not provided. Instead, two types of labels are provided to indicate traffic entering the field of view
(inflow) and leaving the field view (outflow). We also propose the first solution as a baseline that formulates the task
as a weakly supervised contrastive learning problem under
group-level matching. In doing so, we devise an end-to-end
trainable soft contrastive loss to drive the network to distinguish inflow, outflow, and the remaining. To facilitate future
study in this direction, we generate annotations from the existing VIC datasets SenseCrowd and CroHD and also build
a new dataset, UAVVIC. Extensive results show that our
baseline weakly supervised method outperforms supervised
methods, and thus, little information is lost in the transition
to the more practically relevant weakly supervised task. The
code and trained model can be found at CGNet.

1. Introduction
Video Crowd Counting (VCC) has garnered much interest
due to its broad range of practical applications, particularly
in crowd safety management. This task requires a model
* Corresponding author.

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 62272438, 62236008, U21B2038,
and 61931008, in part by the Key Deployment Program of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences under Grant KGFZD145-23-18, and in part by
the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities (E2ET1104).
Yuankai Qi, Anton van den Hengel, and Ming-Hsuan Yang are not supported by the aforementioned fundings.

(a) Annotation of VIC method

(b) Annotation of our method

Figure 1. Existing VIC method requires a unique label indicating the position of each human in each frame, and these labels
are consistent across frames. Weakly supervised VIC only requires labels indicating each human position and whether they
are an inflow/outflow pedestrian (purple/yellow in (b)) in the current frame. The transition from individual-level labels to identityagnostic group-level labels represents a significant reduction in the
labeling effort.

to count the number of people in each frame of a video. A
limitation of VCC [12, 51, 53] is that it gives an imprecise
estimate of the number of unique individuals appearing in
a video sequence, as people are counted multiple times if
they appear in several frames. To overcome this drawback,
Video Individual Counting (VIC) was introduced, wherein
a method must count the total number of people with unique
identities appearing in a video sequence.
The apparent approach to crowd counting is to count
the people who appear in the first frame and add the number of people who come into the camera’s field of view in
later frames (the inflow). Following this principle, Han et
al. [14] devised DRNet, the only existing published method
for VIC, identifying repeated observations of individuals
across consecutive frames based on their appearance, simultaneously predicting inflow and outflow. Although the number of outflows does not contribute to the final count, DRNet finds it helps determine individual associations. Han et
al. [14] also explored using conventional multi-object track-

19228

