This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Overload: Latency Attacks on Object Detection for Edge Devices
Erh-Chung Chen 1 *

Pin-Yu Chen 2

I-Hsin Chung 2

Che-Rung Lee 1

National Tsing Hua University 1

IBM Research 2

s107062802@m107.nthu.edu.tw

pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

cherung@cs.nthu.edu.tw

ihchung@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Nowadays, the deployment of deep learning-based applications is an essential task owing to the increasing demands
on intelligent services. In this paper, we investigate latency
attacks on deep learning applications. Unlike common adversarial attacks for misclassification, the goal of latency
attacks is to increase the inference time, which may stop
applications from responding to the requests within a reasonable time. This kind of attack is ubiquitous for various
applications, and we use object detection to demonstrate
how such kind of attacks work. We also design a framework
named Overload to generate latency attacks at scale. Our
method is based on a newly formulated optimization problem and a novel technique, called spatial attention. This
attack serves to escalate the required computing costs during the inference time, consequently leading to an extended
inference time for object detection. It presents a significant threat, especially to systems with limited computing resources. We conducted experiments using YOLOv5 models
on Nvidia NX. Compared to existing methods, our method is
simpler and more effective. The experimental results show
that with latency attacks, the inference time of a single image can be increased ten times longer in reference to the
normal setting. Moreover, our findings pose a potential new
threat to all object detection tasks requiring non-maximum
suppression (NMS), as our attack is NMS-agnostic.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNN) have accomplished many
achievements in various fields [1, 2, 12, 17, 34]. However,
those models are usually large and demand a huge amount
of computing resources, even for model inference. One solution is to utilize the computing power in cloud platforms,
but the communication cost between the data center and the
edge nodes can be high and the latency may not be accept* The primary research and contribution for this work were conducted
during a visit to IBM Research.

able for many real-time applications [10, 24].
In this paper, we investigate a new type of attacks, called
latency attacks, whose purpose is to increase the execution time of the victim application. This kind of attacks
poses critical threats to real-time applications, such as purchase behavior recognition system for unmanned store or
autonomous cars systems, which are required to detect target objects and determine proper actions within stringent
time constraints [23, 32]. Any mistake or delayed response
due to elongated latency could cause severe failures. Moreover, the latency attacks not only increase the execution
time but also cause improper predictions made by the model
indirectly.
The task we focus on is object detection, which has been
widely used in numerous applications [11, 36, 38]. Its
purpose is to identify all objects in an image and to label
them with corresponding classes and locations. Many deep
learning-based models, such as SSD [13] and YOLO series [22], often use Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) as
a post-processing operation to eliminate duplicated objects
predicted by the detectors. The execution time of NMS depends on the number of objects fed into NMS. This property implies that object detection tasks may suffer from severe latency if numerous objects are predicted by the target
model.
In this paper, we analyze the time complexity of NMS
and find that the execution time is dominated by the total
number of objects. The influence of the number of survival
bounding boxes can be ignored. Based on the observation,
we propose a Latency Attack on Object Detection (we name
this attack framework “Overload”), whose objective is to
craft adversarial images with abundant objects from the victim model. To further improve the effectiveness of the adversarial image, we introduce a technique, called spatial attention, which can be used to manipulate the fake object
generation in particular regions. This attack serves to escalate the required computing costs during the inference time,
consequently leading to an extended inference time for object detection. It presents a significant threat, especially to
systems with limited computing resources.

24716

