This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Parametric Gaussians for Monocular Non-Rigid Object Reconstruction
Devikalyan Das1

Christopher Wewer2

Raza Yunus1,2

Eddy Ilg1

Jan Eric Lenssen2

1

2

Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{ddas, jlenssen}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

a) Novel View Synthesis on the D-NeRF Dataset

b) Comparison on an Unbiased4D Sequence.

Figure 1. We present Neural Parametric Gaussians (NPGs), a method for monocular non-rigid reconstruction of objects. a) Our method
enables to produce high quality reconstructions in easy settings like the object-level D-NeRF scenes while b) also being able to handle
challenging monocular settings much better than previous work through strong parametric low-rank regularization.

Abstract
Reconstructing dynamic objects from monocular videos
is a severely underconstrained and challenging problem,
and recent work has approached it in various directions.
However, owing to the ill-posed nature of this problem,
there has been no solution that can provide consistent, highquality novel views from camera positions that are significantly different from the training views. In this work, we
introduce Neural Parametric Gaussians (NPGs) to take on
this challenge by imposing a two-stage approach: first, we
fit a low-rank neural deformation model, which then is used
as regularization for non-rigid reconstruction in the second
stage. The first stage learns the object’s deformations such
that it preserves consistency in novel views. The second
stage obtains high reconstruction quality by optimizing 3D
Gaussians that are driven by the coarse model. To this end,
we introduce a local 3D Gaussian representation, where
temporally shared Gaussians are anchored in and deformed
by local oriented volumes. The resulting combined model
can be rendered as radiance fields, resulting in high-quality
photo-realistic reconstructions of the non-rigidly deforming
objects. We demonstrate that NPGs achieve superior results
compared to previous works, especially in challenging scenarios with few multi-view cues.1

1 Project Page: https://geometric-rl.mpi-inf.mpg.de/npg/

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D objects from 2D observations is a core
problem in computer vision with numerous applications in
several industries, such as the movie and game industry,
AR/VR, and robotics. Tremendous progress has been seen
in static scene reconstruction during the last few years. The
real world is, however, dynamic, and most recorded scenes
are captured in a casual setting, with sparse coverage from
a single camera. Thus, addressing these two aspects during
reconstruction is of fundamental importance.
The success of neural approaches on static scenes has encouraged their use for dynamic scene reconstruction from
monocular videos, both in its classical [24, 40, 45] and
hybrid [4, 10, 28] forms. These methods either learn a
per-frame scene representation with limited time consistency [10, 24] or utilize a time-invariant canonical space,
which is used to track the observations at each timestep [41,
45]. However, as pointed out in Gao et al. [12], they are
evaluated on datasets that contain multi-view signals, such
as camera teleportation—i.e., alternating samples from different cameras to construct a temporal sequence—and limited object motion, and their performance suffers drastically
when evaluated on more realistic monocular sequences.
Such sequences usually contain faster object motion compared to camera motion. Strong regularization is required in
order to propagate information between different timesteps
with the correct data association. As we will demonstrate

10715

