This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Devil is in the Details: StyleFeatureEditor for Detail-Rich StyleGAN
Inversion and High Quality Image Editing
Denis Bobkov1
1

Vadim Titov2

HSE University

2

AIRI

Aibek Alanov1,2
3

Dmitry Vetrov3

Constructor University, Bremen

dnbobkov@edu.hse.ru, titov@2a2i.org, aalanov@hse.ru, dvetrov@constructor.university

Figure 1. Editing examples and graphical comparison for StyleFeatureEditor. Our approach takes a real image, inverts it to the
StyleGAN latent space, edits the found latents, and synthesises the edited image. On the left, we present examples of our approach, while
on the right, we display a comparison with previous approaches. To evaluate inversion quality, we used LPIPS↓. Additionally, to compare
the editing capabilities, we compute FID↓ for 3 editing directions (see 4.3) and average them with coefficients equal to the average
FID per editing direction. The size of markers indicates the inference time of the method, with larger markers indicating a higher time.
StyleFeatureEditor capable of reconstructing even finer image details and preserving them during editing.

Abstract
The task of manipulating real image attributes through
StyleGAN inversion has been extensively researched. This
process involves searching latent variables from a welltrained StyleGAN generator that can synthesize a real image, modifying these latent variables, and then synthesizing an image with the desired edits. A balance must be
struck between the quality of the reconstruction and the
ability to edit. Earlier studies utilized the low-dimensional
W-space for latent search, which facilitated effective editing
but struggled with reconstructing intricate details. More
recent research has turned to the high-dimensional feature space F, which successfully inverses the input image
but loses much of the detail during editing. In this paper,
we introduce StyleFeatureEditor – a novel method that enables editing in both w-latents and F-latents. This technique not only allows for the reconstruction of finer image details but also ensures their preservation during editing. We also present a new training pipeline specifically
designed to train our model to accurately edit F-latents.
Our method is compared with state-of-the-art encoding approaches, demonstrating that our model excels in terms of
reconstruction quality and is capable of editing even challenging out-of-domain examples.

1. Introduction
In recent years, GANs [15] have achieved impressive results in image generation, which has led to their use in a
wide variety of computer vision tasks. One of the most successful models is StyleGAN [21–24], which not only has
a high quality of generation, but also a rich semantic latent space. In this space, we can control different semantic
attributes of the generated images by changing their latent
code [2]. However, to apply this editing technique to real
images, we must be able to find their internal representation
in the StyleGAN latent space. This problem is called GAN
inversion [47], and although it is well studied and many approaches have been proposed [2, 5, 12, 28, 32, 38, 44, 46],
it is still an open problem to develop a method that simultaneously satisfies three requirements: high-quality reconstruction, good editability, and fast inference. Our work is
dedicated to the development of such a method.
Existing GAN inversion approaches can be divided
into two groups: optimization-based and encoder-based.
Optimization-based methods [1, 2] learn a latent representation for each input image that best reconstructs that image. This results in good inversion quality, but such overfitted latent codes may deviate from the original distribution
of the latent space, resulting in poor editing. While there
are approaches that improve the quality of editing by finetuning the generator itself for a given image [33], this does

9337

