This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LangSplat: 3D Language Gaussian Splatting
Minghan Qin1,∗ ,

Wanhua Li2,∗, , Jiawei Zhou1,∗ , Haoqian Wang1, ,
1
Tsinghua University 2 Harvard University

Hanspeter Pfister2

qmh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wanhua@seas.harvard.edu, zhoujw22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn, pfister@seas.harvard.edu

3D Scene: Figurines

3D Scene: Waldo Kitchen

Ours

LERF

RGB

3D Scene: Teatime

Figure 1. Visualization of learned 3D language features of the previous SOTA method LERF and our LangSplat. While LERF generates
imprecise and vague 3D features, our LangSplat accurately captures object boundaries and provides precise 3D language fields. While
being effective, our LangSplat is also 199 × faster than LERF at the resolution of 1440 × 1080.

Abstract
Humans live in a 3D world and commonly use natural
language to interact with a 3D scene. Modeling a 3D language field to support open-ended language queries in 3D
has gained increasing attention recently. This paper introduces LangSplat, which constructs a 3D language field
that enables precise and efficient open-vocabulary querying within 3D spaces. Unlike existing methods that ground
CLIP language embeddings in a NeRF model, LangSplat
advances the field by utilizing a collection of 3D Gaussians, each encoding language features distilled from CLIP,
to represent the language field. By employing a tile-based
splatting technique for rendering language features, we circumvent the costly rendering process inherent in NeRF.
Instead of directly learning CLIP embeddings, LangSplat
first trains a scene-wise language autoencoder and then
learns language features on the scene-specific latent space,
∗ Equal contribution.

Corresponding authors.

thereby alleviating substantial memory demands imposed
by explicit modeling. Existing methods struggle with imprecise and vague 3D language fields, which fail to discern clear boundaries between objects. We delve into this
issue and propose to learn hierarchical semantics using
SAM, thereby eliminating the need for extensively querying the language field across various scales and the regularization of DINO features. Extensive experimental results
show that LangSplat significantly outperforms the previous
state-of-the-art method LERF by a large margin. Notably,
LangSplat is extremely efficient, achieving a 199 × speedup
compared to LERF at the resolution of 1440 × 1080. We
strongly recommend readers to check out our video results
at https://langsplat.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Language is the primary means of communication for human beings [3]. Modeling a 3D language field allows users

20051

