This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CSTA: CNN-based Spatiotemporal Attention for Video Summarization
Jaewon Son, Jaehun Park, Kwangsu Kim*
Sungkyunkwan University
{31z522x4,pk9403,kim.kwangsu}@skku.edu

Abstract
Video summarization aims to generate a concise representation of a video, capturing its essential content and key
moments while reducing its overall length. Although several
methods employ attention mechanisms to handle long-term
dependencies, they often fail to capture the visual significance inherent in frames. To address this limitation, we
propose a CNN-based SpatioTemporal Attention (CSTA)
method that stacks each feature of frames from a single
video to form image-like frame representations and applies
2D CNN to these frame features. Our methodology relies
on CNN to comprehend the inter and intra-frame relations
and to find crucial attributes in videos by exploiting its ability to learn absolute positions within images. In contrast to
previous work compromising efficiency by designing additional modules to focus on spatial importance, CSTA requires minimal computational overhead as it uses CNN as
a sliding window. Extensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets (SumMe and TVSum) demonstrate that our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance with
fewer MACs compared to previous methods. Codes are
available at https://github.com/thswodnjs3/
CSTA.

1. Introduction
The rise of social media platforms has resulted in a
tremendous surge in daily video data production. Due to the
high volume, diversity, or redundancy, it is time-consuming
and equally difficult to retrieve the desired content or edit
multiple videos. Video summarization is a powerful timesaving technique to condense long videos by retaining the
most relevant information, making it easier for users to
quickly grasp the main points of the video without having
to watch the entire footage.
One of the challenges that occur during video summarization is the long-term dependency problem, where the
initial information is often lost due to large data intervals
* Corresponding author

(a) Temporal
attention

(b) Spatial
attention

(c) CNN
attention

Figure 1. Approaches for calculating attention. Each row is the
feature vector of a frame. T is the number of frames, and D is the
dimension of the feature.

[18, 26, 43, 44]. The decay of initial data prevents deep
learning models from capturing the relation between frames
essential for determining key moments in videos. Attention
[38], in which entire frames are reflected through pairwise
operations, has gained popularity as a widely adopted technique for solving this problem [1, 7, 15, 17, 46]. Attentionbased models distinguish important parts from unimportant
ones by determining the mutual reliance between frames.
However, attention cannot consider spatial contexts within
images [15, 27, 39, 43, 48]. For instance, current attention calculates temporal attention based on correlations of
visual attributes from other frames (See Figure 1a), but the
importance of visual elements within the frame remains unequal to the temporal significance. Including spatial dependency leads to different weighted values of features, causing changes in temporal importance. Therefore, attention
can be calculated more precisely by including visual associations, as shown in Figure 1b.
Prior studies mixed spatial importance and performed
better than solely relying on sequential connections [15,
27, 39, 43, 48]. Nevertheless, acquiring spatial and temporal importance requires the design of additional modules
and, thus, incurs excessive costs. Some studies used additional structures to embrace visual relativities in individual
frames, such as self-attention [15, 39], multi-head attention
[43], and graph convolutional neural networks [48]. Processing too many frames of lengthy videos to capture the
temporal and visual importance can be expensive. Thus,

18847

