This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GSVA: Generalized Segmentation via Multimodal Large Language Models
Zhuofan Xia* Dongchen Han* Yizeng Han

Xuran Pan

Shiji Song

Gao Huang†

Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Generalized Referring Expression Segmentation (GRES)
extends the scope of classic RES to refer to multiple objects in one expression or identify the empty targets absent
in the image. GRES poses challenges in modeling the complex spatial relationships of the instances in the image and
identifying non-existing referents. Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have recently shown tremendous
progress in these complicated vision-language tasks. Connecting Large Language Models (LLMs) and vision models,
MLLMs are proficient in understanding contexts with visual
inputs. Among them, LISA, as a representative, adopts a
special [SEG] token to prompt a segmentation mask decoder, e.g., SAM, to enable MLLMs in the RES task. However, existing solutions to GRES remain unsatisfactory since
current segmentation MLLMs cannot correctly handle the
cases where users might reference multiple subjects in a
singular prompt or provide descriptions incongruent with
any image target. In this paper, we propose Generalized
Segmentation Vision Assistant (GSVA) to address this gap.
Specifically, GSVA reuses the [SEG] token to prompt the
segmentation model towards supporting multiple mask references simultaneously and innovatively learns to generate a [REJ] token to reject the null targets explicitly. Experiments validate GSVA’s efficacy in resolving the GRES
issue, marking a notable enhancement and setting a new
record on the GRES benchmark gRefCOCO dataset. GSVA
also proves effective across various classic referring segmentation and comprehension tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/GSVA.

1. Introduction
Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) [5, 25] is an
emerging vision-language (VL) task predicting the masks of
the interested objects referred to in the language expression.
RES has great potential in many areas, especially embodied
AI [17, 28, 54, 58, 66], including VL navigation, humanrobot interaction, etc. Nevertheless, the simplification in
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Multiple Targets

(b) Empty Target

LISA

Wrong Mask

GSVA

Reject Empty Target

Targets

Leftman, Guy second from right

Banana

Figure 1. Comparison of the segmentation masks by LISA [32]
and GSVA, facing the challenges in Generalized Referring Expression Segmentation (GRES) [38]. (a) LISA fails to segment
the correct targets when multiple targets are requested due to the
single [SEG] token restriction. GSVA successfully generates all
target masks via learning multiple [SEG] tokens. (b) When the
referent does not exist in the image, i.e., the empty target is requested, LISA reluctantly produces the wrong mask because of the
compulsive [SEG] token output. In contrast, GSVA can reject the
empty targets by predicting [REJ] tokens in the output sequence.

RES formulation that one referring expression must match
an individual object in the image [30] has left a gap between current RES algorithms and real-world applications,
neglecting multiple-target and empty-target cases.
To bridge this gap, Generalized Referring Expression
Segmentation (GRES) [38] has recently been proposed to
support multiple-target and empty-target cases. Practically,
users refer to multiple subjects within a single instruction
or provide descriptions that do not correspond to any targets in the image. As an example shown in Figure 1 (a),
the left man and the second man from the right are targeted
simultaneously, while a banana is referred to in a scene of
apples in Figure 1 (b). RES takes no account of these cases,
which GRES handles. In addition to the multimodal correspondences between images and text prompts in classic
RES, GRES poses new challenges in handling more complicated multiple-target and empty-target cases. Therefore,
the models must handle complex spatial relationships of the
instances in the image [38] to segment the targets at various

3858

