This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SkillDiffuser: Interpretable Hierarchical Planning via Skill Abstractions in
Diffusion-Based Task Execution
Zhixuan Liang1,3 Yao Mu1,3 Hengbo Ma2
Masayoshi Tomizuka2 Mingyu Ding2† Ping Luo1,3†
1

The University of Hong Kong

2

University of California, Berkeley

{zxliang, ymu, pluo}@cs.hku.hk

3

Shanghai AI Laboratory

{hengbo ma, tomizuka, myding}@berkeley.edu

https://skilldiffuser.github.io/

Abstract

Non-transferable

Transferable and Interpretable
widely generalizable

Diffusion models have demonstrated strong potential for
robotic trajectory planning. However, generating coherent trajectories from high-level instructions remains challenging, especially for long-range composition tasks requiring multiple sequential skills. We propose SkillDiffuser, an
end-to-end hierarchical planning framework integrating interpretable skill learning with conditional diffusion planning to address this problem. At the higher level, the skill
abstraction module learns discrete, human-understandable
skill representations from visual observations and language
instructions. These learned skill embeddings are then used
to condition the diffusion model to generate customized latent trajectories aligned with the skills. This allows generating diverse state trajectories that adhere to the learnable
skills. By integrating skill learning with conditional trajectory generation, SkillDiffuser produces coherent behavior
following abstract instructions across diverse tasks. Experiments on multi-task robotic manipulation benchmarks
like Meta-World and LOReL demonstrate state-of-the-art
performance and human-interpretable skill representations
from SkillDiffuser. More visualization results and information could be found on our website.

1. Introduction
Recent research [6, 7, 18, 19] has demonstrated diffusion
models’ superior generative capabilities compared to previous models that help enhance reinforcement learning across
various dimensions, including the generation of action trajectories [2, 19], policy representation [5, 50], and data synthesis [14, 23]. However, their ability to generate coherent
trajectories for intricate tasks still poses challenges in terms
of performance and generalizability, as these tasks often re† Corresponding authors.

easily adaptable

pick obj
!!

Denoise U-Net

Learnable
Skill Set
High Level
Abstraction

!"

“pick the apple and place
it in the bowl”
Instruction Input

(a) Language-conditioned
Diffuser

place obj

!!

move top

…

Denoise U-Net

push obj

!"

“pick the apple and place
it in the bowl”
Visual Input

Instruction Input

(b) Our SkillDiffuser

Figure 1. Comparison of SkillDiffuser and previous language
conditioned diffusers. SkillDiffuser utilizes high-level abstraction to translate visual observations and language instructions into
human understandable skills with language grounding. It then enables the low-level diffusion model condition on these skills, not
only improving the execution performance of multi-step composition tasks but greatly enhancing the generalization and adaptability
of the framework.

quire the fulfillment of abstract instructions that consist of
numerous coordination-intensive sequential steps.
Previous approaches [2, 14], such as Decision Diffuser,
aim to tackle this challenge by decomposing complex tasks
into simpler sub-skills, organized within a predefined skill
library. These methods rely on conditioning the diffusion
model with one-hot skill representations to generate trajectories for each of these sub-skills. Nevertheless, these techniques encounter difficulties in attempting to autonomously
learn end-to-end from a wide range of datasets, which hinders their scalability and ability to achieve end-to-end learning [1]. In addition, without explicitly learning reusable
skills, models cannot capture intricate inter-step dependen-

16467

