This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GS-SLAM: Dense Visual SLAM with 3D Gaussian Splatting
Chi Yan1,3 *
Delin Qu1,2 *
Dan Xu3
Bin Zhao1,4
Zhigang Wang1
Dong Wang1†
Xuelong Li1,5
1
2
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Fudan University
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
5
Northwestern Polytechnical University
TeleAI, China Telecom Corp Ltd
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce GS-SLAM that first utilizes
3D Gaussian representation in the Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) system. It facilitates a better balance between efficiency and accuracy. Compared to recent
SLAM methods employing neural implicit representations,
our method utilizes a real-time differentiable splatting rendering pipeline that offers significant speedup to map optimization and RGB-D rendering. Specifically, we propose
an adaptive expansion strategy that adds new or deletes
noisy 3D Gaussians in order to efficiently reconstruct new
observed scene geometry and improve the mapping of previously observed areas. This strategy is essential to extend 3D Gaussian representation to reconstruct the whole
scene rather than synthesize a static object in existing methods. Moreover, in the pose tracking process, an effective
coarse-to-fine technique is designed to select reliable 3D
Gaussian representations to optimize camera pose, resulting in runtime reduction and robust estimation. Our method
achieves competitive performance compared with existing
state-of-the-art real-time methods on the Replica, TUMRGBD datasets. Project page: https://gs-slam.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) has
emerged as a pivotal technology in fields such as
robotics [6], virtual reality [10], and augmented reality [25,
39]. The goal of SLAM is to construct a dense/sparse map
of an unknown environment while simultaneously tracking the camera pose. Traditional SLAM methods employ point/surfel clouds [20, 32, 42, 46], mesh representations [26], voxel hashing [12, 18, 23] or voxel grids [21]
as scene representations to construct dense mapping, and
have made considerable progress on localization accuracy.
However, these methods face serious challenges in obtaining fine-grained dense maps.
* Equal contribution: yanchi@pjlab.org.cn.
† Corresponding author: dongwang.dw93@gmail.com.

3D Gaussian Scene
Representation

Real-Time Tracking
and Mapping

a) Illustration of GS-SLAM
ESLAM. 3 FPS

Point-SLAM. 3 FPS

Ours. 386 FPS

GroundTruth

b) The Rendering Performance of GS-SLAM

Figure 1. The illustration of the proposed GS-SLAM. It first utilizes the 3D Gaussian representation and differentiable splatting
rasterization pipeline in SLAM, achieving real-time tracking and
mapping performance on GPU. Besides, benefiting from the splatting rasterization pipeline, GS-SLAM achieves a 100⇥ faster rendering FPS and more high-quality full image results than the other
SOTA methods.

Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [19] have
been explored to enhance SLAM methodologies and exhibit strengths in generating high-quality, dense maps with
low memory consumption [35]. In particular, iMAP [35]
uses a single multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to represent
the entire scene, which is updated globally with the loss
between volume-rendered RGB-D image and ground-truth
observations. NICE-SLAM [55] utilizes a hierarchical neural implicit grid as scene map representation to allow local updates for reconstructing large scenes. Moreover, ESLAM [11], CoSLAM [41] and EN-SLAM [24] utilize axisaligned feature planes and joint coordinate-parametric encoding to improve the capability of scene representation,
achieving efficient and high-quality surface map reconstruction. In practical mapping and tracking steps, these methods only render a small set of pixels to reduce optimization
time, which leads to the reconstructed dense maps lacking

19595

