This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantics-aware Motion Retargeting with Vision-Language Models
Haodong Zhang1∗ Zhike Chen1∗ Haocheng Xu1 Lei Hao2 Xiaofei Wu2
Songcen Xu2 Zhensong Zhang2 Yue Wang1 Rong Xiong1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D animation characters have extensive application in animation production, virtual reality, and various other domains. These characters are animated using motion data, resulting in lifelike and immersive animations. Nevertheless,
acquiring motion data for each character can be a costly endeavor. Therefore, the ability to retarget existing motion
data for new characters holds immense importance. The
goal of motion retargeting is to transfer existing motion data
to new characters following motion feature extraction and
integration processes, which ensure the preservation of the
original motion’s characteristics.
Semantics encompasses the meaningful and contextually
relevant information conveyed in motion and plays a critical role in ensuring the realism and vividness of the anima* These authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author: rxiong@zju.edu.cn

Source

0.75

𝒅𝒅∗𝟏𝟏
𝒅𝒅∗𝟐𝟐
𝒅𝒅∗𝟑𝟑
Target

0.7

Source

R2ET

0.65

Mesh Self-Contacts

Joint Distance Matrix

Source

Target

Ours
Semantics (ITM score)

Capturing and preserving motion semantics is essential
to motion retargeting between animation characters. However, most of the previous works neglect the semantic information or rely on human-designed joint-level representations. Here, we present a novel Semantics-aware Motion
reTargeting (SMT) method with the advantage of visionlanguage models to extract and maintain meaningful motion semantics. We utilize a differentiable module to render 3D motions. Then the high-level motion semantics are
incorporated into the motion retargeting process by feeding the vision-language model with the rendered images
and aligning the extracted semantic embeddings. To ensure the preservation of fine-grained motion details and
high-level semantics, we adopt a two-stage pipeline consisting of skeleton-aware pre-training and fine-tuning with
semantics and geometry constraints. Experimental results
show the effectiveness of the proposed method in producing high-quality motion retargeting results while accurately
preserving motion semantics. Project page can be found at
https://sites.google.com/view/smtnet.

𝒅𝒅𝟏𝟏
𝒅𝒅𝟐𝟐
𝒅𝒅𝟑𝟑

(a) Previous Works

0.6

Vision-Language
Model

0.55

The character is
praying and holding
his hands up
in front of him.

0.5

(b) Ours

Target

NKN

0.2

0.3

SAN

0.4

0.5

0.6

Quality (MSE)

(c) Motion Quality & Semantics Comparison

Figure 1. Comparison with previous motion retargeting methods.
(a) Previous works rely on human-designed joint distance matrix
[25] or self-contacts between mesh vertices [23] to ensure semantics preservation. (b) Ours work enforces human-level motion
semantics consistency with the extensive knowledge of visionlanguage models. (c) Comparison of motion quality and semantics
preservation on the Mixamo dataset [1]. Our method achieves the
best motion quality and semantics consistency.

tion characters. Preservation of motion semantics can enhance the efficiency of motion retargeting by reducing the
need for time-consuming manual adjustments and refinements. However, previous methods [2, 15, 22] are mainly
based on retargeting of joint positions and make less use
of the extraction of semantic information. They focus on
trajectory-level motion retargeting with few attention to motion semantics. Consequently, this leads to a significant loss
of motion semantics and necessitates the labor-intensive intervention of animation artists for manual trajectory adjustments. Recent advancements have introduced self-contacts
[23] and joint distance matrices [25] as the representation of
motion semantics. Nevertheless, self-contacts are not applicable to non-contact semantics and require intricate vertex
correspondence. The human-designed joint distance matrices primarily focus on joint relative relationships and still
lack consideration of high-level semantic information.
To address the intricate task of capturing and preserving motion semantics, we introduce a new perspective: the
most general and comprehensive form of motion semantics
is human-level natural language, reflecting the user’s intu-

2155

