This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Adversarial Transferability by Block Shuffle and Rotation
Kunyu Wang1 , Xuanran He2 , Wenxuan Wang1 , Xiaosen Wang3 *
1
Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Nanyang Technological University,
3
Huawei Singularity Security Lab

Abstract
Adversarial examples mislead deep neural networks with
imperceptible perturbations and have brought significant
threats to deep learning. An important aspect is their transferability, which refers to their ability to deceive other models, thus enabling attacks in the black-box setting. Though
various methods have been proposed to boost transferability, the performance still falls short compared with
white-box attacks. In this work, we observe that existing input transformation based attacks, one of the mainstream transfer-based attacks, result in different attention
heatmaps on various models, which might limit the transferability. We also find that breaking the intrinsic relation
of the image can disrupt the attention heatmap of the original image. Based on this finding, we propose a novel input
transformation based attack called block shuffle and rotation (BSR). Specifically, BSR splits the input image into several blocks, then randomly shuffles and rotates these blocks
to construct a set of new images for gradient calculation.
Empirical evaluations on the ImageNet dataset demonstrate
that BSR could achieve significantly better transferability
than the existing input transformation based methods under
single-model and ensemble-model settings. Combining BSR
with the current input transformation method can further
improve the transferability, which significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Trustworthy-AI-Group/BSR.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have established superior
performance in many tasks, such as image classification [12, 13], segmentation [21], object detection [26, 27],
face recognition [39], among others. Despite their achievements, DNNs have been observed to exhibit significant vulnerability to adversarial examples [8, 34, 41], which closely
resemble legitimate examples, yet can deliberately misguide deep learning models to produce unreasonable pre* Corresponding author. Email: xiaosen@hust.edu.cn

Raw Image

Shuffled Image

Reshuffled Image

Figure 1. The attention heatmaps of the raw images, shuffled images, and reshuffled heatmaps on the shuffled image generated on
Inception-v3 model using Grad-CAM.

dictions. The existence of such vulnerabilities gives rise to
serious concerns, particularly in security-sensitive applications, such as autonomous driving [5], face verification [30].
Adversarial attacks can generally be categorized into two
types: white-box attacks and black-box attacks. White-box
attacks involve having complete access to the target model’s
architecture and parameters. In contrast, black-box attacks
only have limited information about the target model, which
makes them more applicable for real-world applications.
In the white-box setting, some studies employ the gradient with respect to the input sample to generate adversarial
examples [8]. Those crafted adversarial examples exhibit
transferability across neural models [25], which is the ability of adversarial examples generated on one model to deceive not only the victim model but also other models, making them suitable for black-box attacks. However, existing
attack methods [14, 22] demonstrate outstanding white-box
attack performance but relatively poorer transferability, limiting their efficacy in attacking real-world applications.
Recently, several approaches have emerged to enhance
adversarial transferability, including incorporating momentum into gradient-based attacks [3, 18], attacking multiple
models simultaneously [19], transforming the image before
gradient calculation [46, 51], leveraging victim model features [47], and modifying the forward or backward process [45, 48]. Among these, input transformation based
methods, which modify the input image for gradient calculation, have demonstrated significant effectiveness in im-

24336

