This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unraveling Instance Associations: A Closer Look for Audio-Visual Segmentation
Yuanhong Chen 1 * Yuyuan Liu 1 * Hu Wang 1
Fengbei Liu 1
Chong Wang 1
Helen Frazer2
Gustavo Carneiro3
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
2
St Vincent’s Hospital Melbourne
3
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
Abstract

1. Introduction
The human nervous system exhibits multi-modal perception [44], combining input signals from different modalities to improve the detection and classification of multiple
stimuli [44]. Such functionality has been emulated by recent papers [1–3, 5, 18, 32, 33] that aim to associate visual
objects with their corresponding audio sequences, in a task
known as audio-visual correspondence (AVC) [2, 3].
* First two authors contributed equally to this work.
1 This work was supported by Australian Research Council through

grant FT190100525.

Bird

Noise

TPAVI

Image

Male

Ours

Audio-visual segmentation (AVS) is a challenging task
that involves accurately segmenting sounding objects based
on audio-visual cues. The effectiveness of audio-visual
learning critically depends on achieving accurate crossmodal alignment between sound and visual objects. Successful audio-visual learning requires two essential components: 1) a challenging dataset with high-quality pixel-level
multi-class annotated images associated with audio files,
and 2) a model that can establish strong links between audio information and its corresponding visual object. However, these requirements are only partially addressed by current methods, with training sets containing biased audiovisual data, and models that generalise poorly beyond this
biased training set. In this work, we propose a new costeffective strategy to build challenging and relatively unbiased high-quality audio-visual segmentation benchmarks.
We also propose a new informative sample mining method
for audio-visual supervised contrastive learning to leverage
discriminative contrastive samples to enforce cross-modal
understanding. We show empirical results that demonstrate
the effectiveness of our benchmark. Furthermore, experiments conducted on existing AVS datasets and on our new
benchmark show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
(SOTA) segmentation accuracy1 .

Helic.

Figure 1. Current AVS datasets [54] tend to assume specific objects as consistent sound sources. Such a bias influences AVS
methods, like TPAVI [54] (2nd row), to favour segmenting the presumed sound source, even when replacing the original audio with
different sound types such as a person speaking (2nd column), bird
chirping (3rd column), or background noise (4th row). Our paper
proposes a new cost-effective strategy to build a relatively unbiased audio-visual segmentation benchmark and a supervised contrastive learning method that mines informative samples to better
constrain the learning of audio-visual embeddings (last row).

A particularly interesting AVC task is the audio-visual
segmentation (AVS) [54, 55] that aims to segment all pixels of the sounding visual objects using a fully supervised
model. A major challenge in AVS is achieving cross-modal
alignment between sound and visual objects [43]. Current
datasets poorly establish and evaluate this alignment, leading to undesired system behaviour and less effective evaluation. For instance, the dataset in [54] shows a “commonsense” bias because it assumes that certain objects are
always the sound source in some scenarios. Fig. 1 shows
an example of a scene from [54] with a bias toward the
segmentation of the helicopter, even though other sound
sources (e.g., person’s speech or bird’s singing) are plau-

26497

