This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Histogram Threshold Segmentation –
Auto-terminating High-detail Oversegmentation
Thomas V. Chang, Simon Seibt, Bartosz von Rymon Lipinski
Game Tech Lab, Faculty of Computer Science, Nuremberg Institute of Technology, Germany
thomas.chang@th-nuernberg.de

Abstract
Superpixels play a crucial role in image processing by
partitioning an image into clusters of pixels with similar visual attributes. This facilitates subsequent image processing tasks, offering computational advantages over the manipulation of individual pixels. While numerous oversegmentation techniques have emerged in recent years, many
rely on predefined initialization and termination criteria. In
this paper, a novel top-down superpixel segmentation algorithm called Hierarchical Histogram Threshold Segmentation (HHTS) is introduced. It eliminates the need for initialization and implements auto-termination, outperforming state-of-the-art methods w.r.t. boundary recall. This
is achieved by iteratively partitioning individual pixel segments into foreground and background and applying intensity thresholding across multiple color channels. The underlying iterative process constructs a superpixel hierarchy
that adapts to local detail distributions until color information exhaustion. Experimental results demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed approach in terms of boundary adherence, while maintaining competitive runtime performance on the BSDS500 and NYUV2 datasets. Furthermore, an application of HHTS in refining machine learningbased semantic segmentation masks produced by the Segment Anything Foundation Model (SAM) is presented.

1. Introduction
Superpixel segmentation is an important preprocessing step
in computer vision. It groups pixels with similar properties to reduce the number of primitives and enhance object representation. Various image processing tasks benefit
from high-quality superpixels, such as semantic segmentation [12, 33, 42, 52], object tracking [47], object categorization [11], simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
[6, 20], image segmentation [10, 34, 50], video segmentation [39, 40], and stereo matching [37, 44]. There exists a wide range of approaches for image oversegmention

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Visual comparison of 500 superpixels resulting from
(a, c) ETPS [previous], (b, d) HHTS [proposed] segmentation.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. Visual comparison of semantic segment masks (a) original image, (b) semantic segment (SAM ViT-H) [previous] and
(c) refined semantic segment (SAM + HHTS) [proposed]

[1, 5, 7–9, 18, 21, 28, 30, 46, 49, 51], often involving tradeoffs between boundary adherence, regular segment sizes,
and computational efficiency. However, there are also various applications e.g. in computer graphics or medical imaging [37, 50] requiring the maximization of boundary recall.
In this work, a novel hierarchical oversegmentation approach based on auto-terminating local histogram thresholding is introduced, resulting in superpixels with significantly higher boundary adherence. The corresponding results can be utilized e.g. for fine-tuning semantic segmentation masks, as will be shown for the Segment Anything
Model (SAM) [15]. Most established superpixel algorithms
depend on a priori knowledge of image content and structure: Examples are seed-based methods requiring infor-

3195

