This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wired Perspectives: Multi-View Wire Art Embraces Generative AI
Zhiyu Qu1 Lan Yang2 Honggang Zhang2 Tao Xiang1 Kaiyue Pang1 Yi-Zhe Song1
1

SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey

2

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

{z.qu, t.xiang, k.pang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk {ylan, zhhg}@bupt.edu.cn

https://dreamwireart.github.io

Figure 1. Multi-view art done generatively. We present DreamWire as the first system that takes user prompt for each view as input – either
via the expressive vehicle of text or image – and produces 3D line sculptures showing distinct interpretations when viewed at different angles,
i.e., multi-view wire art (MVWA). Compared to previous rule-based work, we significantly improve the quality of MVWA by utilising the
flexible drawing capabilities of a universal generative prior (diffusion models or ControlNet). Notably, the “GBE” here pays tribute to the
book “Gödel, Escher, Bach: an Eternal Golden Braid” [12], which discusses how systems can acquire meaningful context despite being
made of “meaningless” elements, just like what MVWA does.

Abstract
Creating multi-view wire art (MVWA), a static 3D sculpture with diverse interpretations from different viewpoints, is
a complex task even for skilled artists. In response, we
present DreamWire, an AI system enabling everyone to
craft MVWA easily. Users express their vision through text
prompts or scribbles, freeing them from intricate 3D wire
organisation. Our approach synergises 3D Bézier curves,
Prim’s algorithm, and knowledge distillation from diffusion
models or their variants (e.g., ControlNet). This blend en-

ables the system to represent 3D wire art, ensuring spatial
continuity and overcoming data scarcity. Extensive evaluation and analysis are conducted to shed insight on the inner
workings of the proposed system, including the trade-off
between connectivity and visual aesthetics.

1. Introduction
A great thought begins by seeing something differently, with
a shift of the mind’s eye.
Albert Einstein

6149

