This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Semi-supervised Nighttime Dehazing Baseline with Spatial-Frequency Aware
and Realistic Brightness Constraint

1

Xiaofeng Cong1 Jie Gui1 * Jing Zhang2 Junming Hou1 Hao Shen3
Southeast University 2 University of Sydney 3 Hefei University of Technology

cxf svip@163.com, {guijie,junming hou}@seu.edu.cn, {jingzhang.cv,haoshenhs}@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing research based on deep learning has extensively
explored the problem of daytime image dehazing. However,
few studies have considered the characteristics of nighttime
hazy scenes. There are two distinctions between nighttime
and daytime haze. First, there may be multiple active colored light sources with lower illumination intensity in nighttime scenes, which may cause haze, glow and noise with
localized, coupled and frequency inconsistent characteristics. Second, due to the domain discrepancy between simulated and real-world data, unrealistic brightness may occur
when applying a dehazing model trained on simulated data
to real-world data. To address the above two issues, we
propose a semi-supervised model for real-world nighttime
dehazing. First, the spatial attention and frequency spectrum filtering are implemented as a spatial-frequency domain information interaction module to handle the first issue. Second, a pseudo-label-based retraining strategy and
a local window-based brightness loss for semi-supervised
training process is designed to suppress haze and glow
while achieving realistic brightness. Experiments on public benchmarks validate the effectiveness of the proposed
method and its superiority over state-of-the-art methods.
The source code and Supplementary Materials are placed
in the https://github.com/Xiaofeng-life/SFSNiD.

1. Introduction
Nighttime and daytime images may contain hazy effects,
which may cause their quality to be degraded [7, 15, 39,
50]. Therefore, two valuable research fields are proposed,
which are daytime single image dehazing (DaSID) [2, 38,
54] and nighttime single image dehazing (NiSID) [14, 19,
31], respectively. Compared with the daytime hazy image,
the imaging of the nighttime hazy image is more complex
[28, 49]. Currently, NiSID is still a challenging problem.
Existing research on DaSID [20, 25, 27, 34, 43, 48, 52,
* Corresponding author

(a) Hazy

(b) IM-YellowHaze [26]

(d) IM-NHR [51]

(e) GE-UNREAL-NH [31]

(c) IM-NightHaze [26]

(f) Ours

Figure 1. Visualization of real-world dehazed images, where the
“IM-” and “GE-” denote the dehazed results obtained by training
on imaging model (IM) and game engine (GE) simulated datasets,
respectively. The curve figure represents the pixel histogram,
where the x and y coordinates represent the pixel values and corresponding numbers, respectively. The x and y coordinates of the
bar figure represent the color channel and the corresponding average pixel value, respectively.

53] have achieved impressive performance. Various effective DaSID algorithms have been proposed and verified on
benchmark daytime datasets [21]. However, these DaSID
algorithms are designed for the properties of daytime hazy
and haze-free images, without taking into account the characteristics of nighttime hazy and haze-free images.
Currently, NiSID research is divided into two types,
namely non-deep learning-based NiSID and deep learningbased NiSID. On the one hand, the prior hypotheses and
statistical laws are explored [50, 51]. The maximum reflectance prior to estimate the varying ambient illumination is proposed by [50]. The illumination estimation, color

2631

