This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Automatic Power Battery Detection:
New Challenge, Benchmark Dataset and Baseline
Xiaoqi Zhao1,2† , Youwei Pang1,2† , Zhenyu Chen1 , Qian Yu1 ,
Lihe Zhang1∗ , Hanqi Liu2 , Jiaming Zuo2∗ , Huchuan Lu1
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 X3000 Inspection Co., Ltd
{zxq, lartpang, dlutczy, ms.yuqian}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {jerry, klaus}@3000gy.com
{zhanglihe, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
We conduct a comprehensive study on a new task named
power battery detection (PBD), which aims to localize
the dense cathode and anode plates endpoints from X-ray
images to evaluate the quality of power batteries. Existing
manufacturers usually rely on human eye observation to
complete PBD, which makes it difficult to balance the
accuracy and efficiency of detection. To address this issue
and drive more attention into this meaningful task, we first
elaborately collect a dataset, called X-ray PBD, which has
1, 500 diverse X-ray images selected from thousands of
power batteries of 5 manufacturers, with 7 different visual
interference. Then, we propose a novel segmentation-based
solution for PBD, termed multi-dimensional collaborative
network (MDCNet). With the help of line and counting
predictors, the representation of the point segmentation
branch can be improved at both semantic and detail
aspects. Besides, we design an effective distance-adaptive
mask generation strategy, which can alleviate the visual
challenge caused by the inconsistent distribution density of
plates to provide MDCNet with stable supervision. Without
any bells and whistles, our segmentation-based MDCNet
consistently outperforms various other corner detection,
crowd counting and general/tiny object detection-based solutions, making it a strong baseline that can help facilitate
future research in PBD. Finally, we share some potential
difficulties and works for future researches. The source
code and datasets will be publicly available at X-ray PBD.

1. Introduction
With the development of power battery technology, new energy vehicles are receiving more and more attention. The
power battery is the only source of driving energy for bat† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

Point-wise Perception

Power Battey Plates
Human Expert

Visual
Detector

Anode

Cathode

AI Model

Quality
Evaluation

Anode Number

Anoder Location

Cathode Number

Cathode Location

Overhang

Figure 1. Illustration of the power battery detection task.

tery electric vehicle (BEV), which directly affects the power
performance, endurance and safety of BEV [49]. To ensure
the safety of power battery, the functional evaluation has to
be done through power battery detection (PBD). As shown
in Fig. 1, the PBD can provide accurate coordinate information for all anode and cathode endpoints. With the help
of digital radiography (DR) device, the internal shape of the
battery cell can be obtained from the X-ray image, thereby
providing humans with the number and overhang 1 information to judge whether the current battery cell is OK or
NG. Most factories evaluate the quality of power batteries
through human eyes. However, visual fatigue will be aggravated with long-term work. Although some top battery
factories have a large number of re-inspection technicians,
this PBD manner is high-cost and low-efficiency. T
We believe that it is imminent to explore an intelligent
PBD model. To this end, we build a X-ray PBD dataset
via the high-quality industry DR device under thousands of
1 Number and overhang are two criteria for power battery manufacturers

to evaluate battery quality. Number: The number of both anode and cathode plates. Overhang: The average value of the vertical distance between
a single anode plate and two adjacent cathode plates.

22020

