This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLOAF: CoLlisiOn-Aware Human Flow
Andrey Davydov* Martin Engilberge Mathieu Salzmann
CVLab, EPFL

Pascal Fua

{name}.{surname}@epfl.ch

Abstract

39.2%

HMR2.0
Methods

Even the best current algorithms for estimating body
3D shape and pose yield results that include body selfintersections. In this paper, we present CLOAF, which
exploits the diffeomorphic nature of Ordinary Differential
Equations to eliminate such self-intersections while still imposing body shape constraints. We show that, unlike earlier
approaches to addressing this issue, ours completely eliminates the self-intersections without compromising the accuracy of the reconstructions. Being differentiable, CLOAF
can be used to fine-tune pose and shape estimation baselines to improve their overall performance and eliminate
self-intersections in their predictions. Furthermore, we
demonstrate how our CLOAF strategy can be applied to
practically any motion field induced by the user. CLOAF
also makes it possible to edit motion to interact with the
environment without worrying about potential collision or
loss of body-shape prior.

Optim

9.2%

CLOAF 0.0%
Collision Rate (%)

1. Introduction
Feed-forward approaches to estimating human body 3D
shape and pose from a single image have become remarkably effective [6, 25, 35]. The very recent transformer-based
architecture of [10] embodies the current state-of-the-art.
It is pre-trained on 300 million images and fine-tuned on
most SMPL data sets in existence. However, as good as
these methods have become, they can still produce unrealistic poses with substantial self-intersections of body parts,
as illustrated by Fig. 1. This is a serious issue if video-based
motion capture is to be used in fields, such as robotics or realistic animation, where preventing self-intersections is of
utmost importance.
Most current approaches to addressing this issue [4, 13,
24, 28] are iterative. They penalize self-intersections explicitly by minimizing an interpenetration loss. This requires
explicitly detecting self-intersections and then performing
* This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation

Figure 1. Self-intersections in SOTA methods. Top rows.
HMR2.0 [10] (first row) and PARE [19] (second row), two of the
best current methods, produce bodies shown in blue with selfintersections. CLOAF removes them and generates the results
shown in gold. Bottom row. HMR 2.0 [10] recovers bodies with
self-intersections in 39.2% of frames of the 3DPW-test set. A
recent post-processing method such as [28] brings this down to
9.2%. CLOAF drops this number all the way to zero.

a separate optimization step, which makes the whole process non-differentiable and precludes its use during training. Another approach is to eliminate self-intersections in
the training databases [26]. While all these methods help,
they do not guarantee the absence of self-collisions at inference time.
In this paper, we propose a different approach. It prevents self-intersections in a differentiable manner and without an explicit detection step. To this end, we rely on the
fact that if the scene flow from one body to another is the

1176

