This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Dual-Augmentor Framework for Domain Generalization in 3D Human Pose
Estimation
Qucheng Peng, Ce Zheng, Chen Chen
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
{qucheng.peng,ce.zheng}@ucf.edu, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Target Domain 1
Domain
Current Single-augmentor
Generalization
Frameworks

Abstract
3D human pose data collected in controlled laboratory
settings present challenges for pose estimators that generalize across diverse scenarios. To address this, domain
generalization is employed. Current methodologies in domain generalization for 3D human pose estimation typically
utilize adversarial training to generate synthetic poses for
training. Nonetheless, these approaches exhibit several limitations. First, the lack of prior information about the target
domain complicates the application of suitable augmentation through a single pose augmentor, affecting generalization on target domains. Moreover, adversarial training’s
discriminator tends to enforce similarity between source
and synthesized poses, impeding the exploration of out-ofsource distributions. Furthermore, the pose estimator’s optimization is not exposed to domain shifts, limiting its overall generalization ability.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel framework featuring two pose augmentors: the weak and the
strong augmentors. Our framework employs differential
strategies for generation and discrimination processes, facilitating the preservation of knowledge related to source
poses and the exploration of out-of-source distributions
without prior information about target poses. Besides, we
leverage meta-optimization to simulate domain shifts in the
optimization process of the pose estimator, thereby improving its generalization ability. Our proposed approach significantly outperforms existing methods, as demonstrated
through comprehensive experiments on various benchmark
datasets. Our code will be released at https : / /
github.com/davidpengucf/DAF-DG.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) is the process of predicting the 3D coordinates of human joints from images or
videos. It serves as the foundation for various applications
including person re-identification [29], action recognition

Target 1

Similar
Source

Target 2

Target Domain 2

Dissimilar

Our Dual-augmentor
Framework with Weak- (WA)
and Strong-augmentor (SA)
Target Domain 3

Very Dissimilar

Target 3

Target 1

via WA

Target 2

via SA

Target 3

via SA

Figure 1. Comparisons between existing single-augmentor frameworks and our proposed dual-augmentor framework on a toy example. Current single-augmentor methods excel at simulating Target Domain 2 but exhibit limitations in simulating Target Domain
1, closely resembling the source, and Target Domain 3, deviating
significantly from the source. In our framework, the weak augmentor excels in simulating Target Domain 1, while the strong
augmentor effectively imitates both Target Domain 2 and 3.

[10, 20, 34], human mesh recovery [44, 45], virtual reality
[9, 35]. However, the annotated 3D data are often collected
in controlled laboratory environments for convenience, featuring indoor settings and limited actions performed by few
individuals. As a result, pose estimators trained on these
labeled datasets face challenges in generalizing to varied
in-the-wild scenarios. Hence, the notion of domain generalization (DG) is pivotal in incorporating knowledge from
labeled (source) data into a pose estimator that could generalize well on unseen (target) data. Unlike domain adaptation (DA) which involves the training with target data, DG
relies solely on the source data as a reference, without any
prior information about the target data.
Existing DG approaches for 3D HPE [7, 11, 37] conduct
substantial augmentations on the source poses to obtain synthesized poses via adversarial training, and incorporate the
synthesized poses as complementary to the source poses for
HPE model training. However, these methods have several
limitations. First, in the context of DG for 3D HPE, there

2240

