This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Views, Near Light:
A Practical Paradigm for Uncalibrated Point-light Photometric Stereo
*

Mohammed Brahimi1,2 Bjoern Haefner1,2,4 Zhenzhang Ye1,2 Bastian Goldluecke3 Daniel Cremers1,2
1
TU Munich, 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning, 3 University of Konstanz, 4 NVIDIA
{mohammed.brahimi, bjoern.haefner, yez, cremers}@tum.de
bastian.goldluecke@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract
Neural approaches have shown a significant progress
on camera-based reconstruction. But they require either a
fairly dense sampling of the viewing sphere, or pre-training
on an existing dataset, thereby limiting their generalizability. In contrast, photometric stereo (PS) approaches
have shown great potential for achieving high-quality reconstruction under sparse viewpoints. Yet, they are impractical because they typically require tedious laboratory conditions, are restricted to dark rooms, and often multi-staged,
making them subject to accumulated errors. To address
these shortcomings, we propose an end-to-end uncalibrated
multi-view PS framework for reconstructing high-resolution
shapes acquired from sparse viewpoints in a real-world environment. We relax the dark room assumption, and allow
a combination of static ambient lighting and dynamic near
LED lighting, thereby enabling easy data capture outside
the lab. Experimental validation confirms that it outperforms existing baseline approaches in the regime of sparse
viewpoints by a large margin. This allows to bring highaccuracy 3D reconstruction from the dark room to the real
world, while maintaining a reasonable data capture complexity.

1. Introduction
The challenge of 3D reconstruction stands as a cornerstone in both computer vision and computer graphics. Despite notable progress in recovering an object’s shape from
dense image viewpoints, predicting consistent geometry
from sparse viewpoints remains a difficult task. Contemporary approaches employing neural data structures depend
heavily on extensive training data to achieve generalization
in the context of sparse views. Additionally, the presence of
a wide baseline or textureless objects form significant obstacles. In contrast, photometric methodologies like photometric stereo (PS) excel in reconstructing geometry, even in
textureless regions. This capability is attributed to the abun* The contribution was done while at TUM.

MultiMultiillumination
illumination
PS-NeRF [60]
Ours
data at
data at
viewpoint 1
viewpoint 2
Figure 1. We introduce the first framework for multi-view uncalibrated point-light photometric stereo. Given a set of PS images captured from different viewpoints (left), our method recovers high-fidelity 3D reconstruction (right). The acquisition of uncalibrated point-light PS imagery captured under ambient lighting
in a sparse multi-view setup does not only allow for easy data capture, but also leads to 3D reconstructions of unprecedented detail.
Here, with as few as two views we are able to reconstruct the squirrel’s 3D geometry at higher precision than the state-of-the-art.

dance of shading information derived from images acquired
under diverse illumination. Yet, such approaches typically
require a controlled laboratory setup to fulfill the necessary
dark room and directional light assumptions. As a consequence, PS approaches become impractical beyond the confines of a laboratory.
To address these shortcomings we combine state-of-theart volume rendering formulations with a sparse multi-view
photometric stereo model. In particular, we advocate a
physically realistic lighting model that combines ambient
light and uncalibrated point-light illumination. Our approach facilitates simplified data acquisition, and we introduce a novel pipeline capable of reconstructing an object’s
geometry from a sparse set of viewpoints, even if the object
is completely textureless. Furthermore, since we assume a
point-light model instead of distant directional lighting, we
can infer absolute depth from a single viewpoint, allowing
us to address the challenge of wide camera baselines.

11862

