This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bring Event into RGB and LiDAR:
Hierarchical Visual-Motion Fusion for Scene Flow
Hanyu Zhou1 , Yi Chang1 *, Zhiwei Shi1
National Key Lab of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
1

{hyzhou, yichang, shizhiwei}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

RGB feature

Visual feature

RGB

Motion feature

Scene flow aims to model the correspondence between
adjacent visual RGB or LiDAR features to estimate 3D motion features, which has been applied in various vision tasks,
e.g., 3D object detection [1] and motion segmentation [2].
The key to scene flow estimation is the highly discriminative
* Corresponding author.

H

Visual space
Event

Heterogeneous Gap

Fuse

H
H

1. Introduction

H Motion homogeneous feature

H

Bridge

Visual homogeneous feature

Event feature

H

Fuse

Motion space
Bridge

Fuse

H
H

LiDAR

Single RGB or LiDAR is the mainstream sensor for the
challenging scene flow, which relies heavily on visual features to match motion features. Compared with single modality, existing methods adopt a fusion strategy to directly fuse
the cross-modal complementary knowledge in motion space.
However, these direct fusion methods may suffer the modality
gap due to the visual intrinsic heterogeneous nature between
RGB and LiDAR, thus deteriorating motion features. We discover that event has the homogeneous nature with RGB and
LiDAR in both visual and motion spaces. In this work, we
bring the event as a bridge between RGB and LiDAR, and
propose a novel hierarchical visual-motion fusion framework for scene flow, which explores a homogeneous space to
fuse the cross-modal complementary knowledge for physical
interpretation. In visual fusion, we discover that event has a
complementarity (relative v.s. absolute) in luminance space
with RGB for high dynamic imaging, and has a complementarity (local boundary v.s. global shape) in scene structure
space with LiDAR for structure integrity. In motion fusion,
we figure out that RGB, event and LiDAR are complementary
(spatial-dense, temporal-dense v.s. spatiotemporal-sparse)
to each other in correlation space, which motivates us to
fuse their motion correlations for motion continuity. The proposed hierarchical fusion can explicitly fuse the multimodal
knowledge to progressively improve scene flow from visual
space to motion space. Extensive experiments have been
performed to verify the superiority of the proposed method.

H

Scene flow

Visual space
LiDAR feature

Figure 1. Illustration of the main idea. There exists a large modality
gap due to the visual intrinsic heterogeneous nature between RGB
and LiDAR, thus deteriorating the motion features. We discover
that the event has the homogeneous nature with RGB and LiDAR in
both visual and motion spaces. In this work, we bring the event as a
bridge between RGB and LiDAR, and propose a novel hierarchical
visual-motion fusion framework for scene flow, which explores
a homogeneous feature space to explicitly fuse the cross-modal
complementary knowledge for physical interpretation.

visual feature for the valid motion feature matching.
Existing scene flow methods can be divided into two
categories: unimodal direct learning methods [3–7] and multimodal motion fusion methods [8, 9]. Unimodal direct
learning methods mainly resort to the ideal visual feature to
directly learn the motion feature from single RGB or LiDAR
modality. Multimodal motion fusion methods further exploit
the complementary knowledge between RGB and LiDAR to
fuse their features in the motion space. For example, Liu et
al. [9] fused dense RGB motion features and sparse LiDAR
motion features for scene flow. However, these methods
neglect the visual intrinsic heterogeneous nature, e.g., degraded visual RGB features with weakened texture under low
light due to low dynamic range and limited visual LiDAR
features with incomplete contour due to non-uniform laser
beam. These can enlarge the modality gap and deteriorate the
motion features. Therefore, we suggest that introducing an
auxiliary modality as the bridge to assistantly enhance the

26477

