This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Large-scale 3D Representation Learning
with Multi-dataset Point Prompt Training
Xiaoyang Wu1 Zhuotao Tian2 Xin Wen1 Bohao Peng2 Xihui Liu1 Kaicheng Yu3,4 Hengshuang Zhao1*
1

The Univeristy of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese Univeristy of Hong Kong
3
Westlake University 4 Alibaba Group
https://github.com/Pointcept/Pointcept

(a) Multi-dataset Point Prompt (Pre-)Training

input
Point Cloud

ra i
nt t

)
urs PTv2

n (o

joi
PPT
w/
SparseUNet
PointNeXt

t

72.2

illa
× join

…
Source

shared weight

PTv1

ST
shared weight

Dataset C

w/ PPT ft (ours)

ScanNet

van

Dataset B

(Pre-)Training Objective

Prompt Adapter

Domain Prompt

Categorical Alignment

Dataset A

query

(b) Results Comparison
mIoU
76.4
75.7

KPConv

68.9

S3DIS

Backbone

63.3

65.4

72.2 72.7 mIoU

Figure 1. Multi-dataset synergistic training with Point Prompt Training (PPT). (a) Our PPT Framework is comprised of two key
components: 1. The domain prompt adapter adapts the backbone to various dataset-specific contexts with a set of domain-specific prompts;
2. The categorical alignment process empowers the model to effectively undergo training within multiple category spaces concurrently in
the supervised setting. (b) The Result Comparison plot reveals that PPT delivers state-of-the-art performance across both datasets only
with one single shared-weight backbone, and fine-tuning on any single specific dataset can further enhance the results.

Abstract
The rapid advancement of deep learning models is often attributed to their ability to leverage massive training
data. In contrast, such privilege has not yet fully benefited 3D deep learning, mainly due to the limited availability of large-scale 3D datasets. Merging multiple available data sources and letting them collaboratively train
a single model is a potential solution. However, due to
the large domain gap between 3D point cloud datasets,
such mixed supervision could adversely affect the model’s
performance and lead to degenerated performance (i.e.,
negative transfer) compared to single-dataset training. In
view of this challenge, we introduce Point Prompt Training (PPT), a novel framework for multi-dataset synergistic learning in the context of 3D representation learning
that supports multiple pre-training paradigms. Based on
this framework, we propose Prompt-driven Normalization,
which adapts the model to different datasets with domainspecific prompts and Language-guided Categorical Alignment that decently unifies the multiple-dataset label spaces
by leveraging the relationship between label text. Extensive experiments verify that PPT can overcome the negative
transfer associated with synergistic learning and produce
* Corresponding author.

generalizable representations. Notably, it achieves state-ofthe-art performance on each dataset using a single weightshared model with supervised multi-dataset training. Moreover, when served as a pre-training framework, it outperforms other pre-training approaches regarding representation quality and attains remarkable state-of-the-art performance across over ten diverse downstream tasks spanning
both indoor and outdoor 3D scenarios.

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of deep learning models in various domains, e.g., 2D vision [27, 48, 92, 102] and natural language processing [1, 46, 66, 93], are often attributed
to the availability of massive training data, which enable
them to learn rich and discriminative representations and
generalize well to a wide spectrum of downstream applications. Such privilege, in contrast, has not yet fully benefited 3D vision, primarily due to two challenges: previous representation learning frameworks exhibit constraints
in processing larger-scale point cloud data efficiently (i.e.,
they build on raw frames rather than the scene-level point
cloud [35, 110]), and current 3D datasets are often limited
in scale (e.g., the commonly used ScanNet [21] only contains 1.6K scans, while image datasets are often at million

19551

