This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention-Propagation Network for Egocentric Heatmap to 3D Pose Lifting
Taeho Kang
Seoul National University, South Korea

Youngki Lee
Seoul National University, South Korea

taeho.kang@hcs.snu.ac.kr

youngkilee@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present EgoTAP, a heatmap-to-3D pose lifting
method for highly accurate stereo egocentric 3D pose estimation. Severe self-occlusion and out-of-view limbs in egocentric camera views make accurate pose estimation a challenging problem. To address the challenge, prior methods
employ joint heatmaps-probabilistic 2D representations of
the body pose, but heatmap-to-3D pose conversion still remains an inaccurate process. We propose a novel heatmapto-3D lifting method composed of the Grid ViT Encoder and
the Propagation Network. The Grid ViT Encoder summarizes joint heatmaps into effective feature embedding using
self-attention. Then, the Propagation Network estimates the
3D pose by utilizing skeletal information to better estimate
the position of obscure joints. Our method significantly
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art qualitatively and
quantitatively demonstrated by a 23.9% reduction of error in an MPJPE metric. Our source code is available on
GitHub 1 .

Figure 1. The stereo egocentric input and the comparison of the
estimated pose of the state-of-the-art method [7] and ours. Blue
color for the ground truth and red color for the respective method’s
estimation

(b) MLP

Heatmaps

(a) CNN

1. Introduction
The increasing use of Virtual Reality(VR) and Augmented
Reality(AR) applications has prompted efforts to perform various vision tasks with minimal wearable sensors.
Specifically, head-mounted cameras in the egocentric setup
(Fig. 1) received increasing attention thanks to their accessibility. Here, accurate 3D pose estimation is noted as a task
critical for seamlessly integrating virtual selves into the real
world. However, existing egocentric pose estimation methods still suffer from accuracy challenges [7].
Conventional 3D pose estimation methods typically derive 3D pose directly from 2D pose information [10, 15, 28].
However, this approach faces challenges in egocentric setups due to inaccuracies in 2D pose estimation resulting
from limited camera views and self-occlusion. To address this, egocentric pose estimation methods use joint
heatmaps—probabilistic 2D representations of joints [17].
1 https://github.com/tho-kn/EgoTAP

Feature
Vector

Full Body 3D Pose

Figure 2. The architecture of the common baseline heatmap-to3D approach. This architecture is adopted by monocular xREgoPose [16] and stereo UnrealEgo [1] for 3D pose inference.

These heatmaps employ probability distributions of likely
joint positions rather than exact locations. Following this
approach, methods generate heatmaps for key joints from
egocentric camera input, consolidate them into a unified
feature embedding vector, and perform full-body 3D pose
estimation (Fig. 2). However, two critical problems in the
heatmap-to-3D lifting process significantly impact position
estimation accuracy.
Inefficiency in feature embedding. Obtaining an effective feature embedding from the heatmap poses a significant
challenge. A robust embedding vector is crucial for accurately reconstructing the 3D pose, given the indirect mapping between the probabilistic, high-dimensional heatmaps
and the 3D pose. However, the standard design, utilizing
a CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) encoder, proves
inadequate for feature summarization. The CNN encoder

842

