This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffuse, Attend, and Segment: Unsupervised Zero-Shot Segmentation using
Stable Diffusion
Junjiao Tian1
jtian73@gatech.edu

Lavisha Aggarwal2
lavishaggarwal@google.com

Zsolt Kira1
zk15@gatech.edu

Mar Gonzalez-Franco2
margon@google.com

Abstract
Producing quality segmentation masks for images is a
fundamental problem in computer vision. Recent research
has explored large-scale supervised training to enable zeroshot transfer segmentation on virtually any image style and
unsupervised training to enable segmentation without dense
annotations. However, constructing a model capable of segmenting anything in a zero-shot manner without any annotations is still challenging. In this paper, we propose to utilize the self-attention layers in stable diffusion models to
achieve this goal because the pre-trained stable diffusion
model has learned inherent concepts of objects within its
attention layers. Specifically, we introduce a simple yet effective iterative merging process based on measuring KL
divergence among attention maps to merge them into valid
segmentation masks. The proposed method does not require any training or language dependency to extract quality segmentation for any images. On COCO-Stuff-27, our
method surpasses the prior unsupervised zero-shot transfer SOTA method by an absolute 26% in pixel accuracy
and 17% in mean IoU. The project page is at https:
//sites.google.com/view/diffseg/home. 1

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation divides an image into regions of entities sharing the same semantics. It is an important foundational application for many downstream tasks such as image editing [26], medical imaging [27], and autonomous
driving [14] etc. While supervised semantic segmentation,
where a target dataset is available and the categories are
known, has been widely studied [10, 38, 40], zero-shot
1 Georgia Institute of Technology1

Google2

Andrea Colaco2
andreacolaco@google.com

Stable
Diffusion
Model
Attention Aggregation
Iterative Attention
Merging × #

$×$
Sampling Grid

Non-Maximum
Suppression

Figure 1. Overview of DiffSeg. DiffSeg is an unsupervised and
zero-shot segmentation algorithm using a pre-trained stable diffusion model. Starting from M ⇥ M anchor points, DiffSeg iteratively merges self-attention maps from the diffusion model for N
iterations to segment any image without any prior knowledge and
external information.

transfer segmentation2 for any images with unknown categories is much more challenging. A recent popular work
SAM [20], trains a neural network on 1.1B segmentation
annotations and achieves impressive zero-shot transfer to
any images. This is an important step towards making segmentation a more flexible foundation task for many other
tasks, not just limited to a given dataset with limited categories. However, the cost of collecting per-pixel labels is
high. Therefore, it is of high research and production interest to investigate unsupervised and zero-shot transfer segmentation methods under the least restrictive settings, i.e.,
2 Zero-shot transfer segmentation means that the underlying model is
not trained for segmentation, similar to CLIP which is not trained for classification but can be used for zero-shot classification [32].

3554

