This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human Motion Prediction under Unexpected Perturbation
Jiangbei Yue1
1
3

Baiyi Li1

Julien Pettré2
2

University of Leeds, UK

Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany

Abstract
We investigate a new task in human motion prediction,
which is predicting motions under unexpected physical perturbation potentially involving multiple people. Compared
with existing research, this task involves predicting less controlled, unpremeditated and pure reactive motions in response to external impact and how such motions can propagate through people. It brings new challenges such as data
scarcity and predicting complex interactions. To this end,
we propose a new method capitalizing differentiable physics
and deep neural networks, leading to an explicit Latent Differentiable Physics (LDP) model. Through experiments, we
demonstrate that LDP has high data efficiency, outstanding prediction accuracy, strong generalizability and good
explainability. Since there is no similar research, a comprehensive comparison with 11 adapted baselines from several relevant domains is conducted, showing LDP outperforming existing research both quantitatively and qualitatively, improving prediction accuracy by as much as 70%,
and demonstrating significantly stronger generalization.

1. Introduction
Human motion prediction aims to predict the future
movements given the past motions, which has been heavily
studied in computer vision [17, 67–69]. Deviating from existing research, we are interested in a new task setting: predicting human motions, on both individual and group levels,
under unexpected physical perturbation. On the individual
level, physical perturbation causes reactive motions as opposed to active motions. On the group level, such perturbations can propagate through people while possibly being intensified, e.g. a push at the back of a line of people could be
transferred all the way to the front. These motions have not
been investigated. Incorporating physical perturbation potentially extends motion prediction to new application domains e.g. balance recovery in biomechanics [4, 18], reac∗ Corresponding author, he_wang@ucl.ac.uk.

Armin Seyfried3

He Wang4 ∗

INRIA Rennes, France
4

University College London, UK

tive motions for character animation [3, 14], crowd crush
induced by pushing [6, 53], humanoid robots [24, 26], etc.
Incorporating physical perturbation in prediction imposes new challenges. First, the motions are purely reactive
and less controlled such that they are less smooth and less
coordinated among body parts. Furthermore, this perturbation can propagate through people when they are packed
and the space to recover balance is restricted, such that an
attempt to recover balance relies on pushing others. Last but
not least, unlike existing research, the data for motion prediction under perturbation is extremely scarce. Not only is it
rare to capture full-body motions under such circumstances,
but it is also difficult to record the interactions between people, e.g. forces of pushes.
Before deep learning, many areas have formulated this
problem, which can be broadly divided into two categories.
The first is physics-based where human bodies are simplified into connected rigid bodies [37, 53]. The reaction to
push is solved via optimization to compute what forces are
needed to recover balance [40, 42], or through carefully tuning feed-forward controllers [37, 38]. These methods, despite aiming to mimic the balance recovery of humans, do
not learn from human data and therefore cannot predict human motions. Alternatively, reactions to perturbation can
be learned from data via regression [60], optimization [66],
or reinforcement learning [63]. Comparatively, this type
of method tends to generate more human-like motions, but
they are not designed for prediction.
Recently, deep learning [44, 56, 67, 68] have dominated
human motion prediction, but they cannot be adapted for
our problem. First, most datasets only contain single-body
motions without external perturbation. Even when multiple people are captured, it is not under unexpected perturbation. To predict push propagation, one would still need
to measure information e.g. contact forces between people, ground friction, muscle forces, etc., which are all absent. This data scarcity essentially rules out most deeplearning methods. Furthermore, there is also little work in
modelling the physical/bio-mechanical interactions that can
potentially propagate through people. Current research includes motion forecasting, generation and synthesis. Most

1501

