This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single Domain Generalization for Crowd Counting
Zhuoxuan Peng, S.-H. Gary Chan
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{zpengac, gchan}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Due to its promising results, density map regression has
been widely employed for image-based crowd counting. The
approach, however, often suffers from severe performance
degradation when tested on data from unseen scenarios, the
so-called “domain shift” problem. To address the problem,
we investigate in this work single domain generalization
(SDG) for crowd counting. The existing SDG approaches
are mainly for image classification and segmentation, and
can hardly be extended to our case due to its regression nature and label ambiguity (i.e., ambiguous pixel-level ground
truths). We propose MPCount, a novel effective SDG approach even for narrow source distribution. MPCount
stores diverse density values for density map regression and
reconstructs domain-invariant features by means of only
one memory bank, a content error mask and attention consistency loss. By partitioning the image into grids, it employs patch-wise classification as an auxiliary task to mitigate label ambiguity. Through extensive experiments on different datasets, MPCount is shown to significantly improve
counting accuracy compared to the state of the art under
diverse scenarios unobserved in the training data characterized by narrow source distribution. Code is available
at https://github.com/Shimmer93/MPCount.

1. Introduction
Image-based crowd counting is to estimate the number of
people (or objects) in an image. The recent mainstream
counting approach is density map regression, where a density map with continuous pixel value is predicted from the
input image, and the total crowd count is obtained by summing all these pixel values. During training, the groundtruth density map is generated by smoothing point annotations given by the locations of human heads. Density map
regression has been demonstrated to achieve encouraging
results in crowd counting.
Existing training models predominantly assume that the
testing data share the same source distribution, i.e., fully supervised learning. Such assumption, however, often breaks

(a) Source domain

(c) Ground-truth

(d) DCCUS

(b) Target image

(e) MPCount (Ours)

Figure 1. Single domain generalization for crowd counting. (a)
Sample images from a single source domain S with narrow distribution. (b) A challenging target image from an unseen scenario.
(c) The ground-truth density map. (d) The predicted density map
from the previous work DCCUS [6] trained on S. (e) The predicted density map from our MPCount trained on S. MPCount
achieves much lower counting error than DCCUS and makes better predictions in the cropped area against the domain shift.

in practice due to changes in camera position, weather condition, etc. Such deviation from the training data (i.e. source
domain) to unseen testing data (i.e. target domain) is known
as domain shift, which severely degrades the performance
of deep learning models in real-world deployment.
To mitigate the domain shift problem, domain adaptation
(DA) approaches have been proposed to transfer knowledge
from the source domain to the target one, typically by finetuning pre-trained models with target domain data [2, 10,
39, 44]. Despite promising results, the fine-tuning process
of DA is usually laborious. Furthermore, target domain data
may not be easily available in reality.
In contrast to DA, domain generalization (DG) aims to
generalize models to any unobserved target domain without the need for target data. As data and model fine-tuning
are not necessary at the target domain, DG is more convenient to be deployed in unseen or unpredictable domain.
We consider in this work the challenging case of single domain generalization (SDG) for image-based crowd counting, where only one source domain, likely of narrow distribution (Fig. 1a), is used for training.
A common general SDG technique is to construct

28025

