This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-Time Neural BRDF with Spherically Distributed Primitives
Yishun Dou2 * Zhong Zheng2 * Qiaoqiao Jin1 Bingbing Ni1,2† Yugang Chen2 Junxiang Ke2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China 2 Huawei
yishun.dou@gmail.com

nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a neural reflectance model (NeuBRDF) that
offers highly versatile material representation, yet with
light memory and neural computation consumption towards achieving real-time rendering. The results depicted
in Fig. 1, rendered at full HD resolution on a contemporary desktop machine, demonstrate that our system achieves
real-time performance with a wide variety of appearances,
which is approached by the following two designs. Firstly,
recognizing that the bidirectional reflectance is distributed
in a sparse high-dimensional space, we propose to project
the BRDF into two low-dimensional components, i.e. two
hemisphere feature-grids for incoming and outgoing directions, respectively. Secondly, we distribute learnable neural reflectance primitives on our highly-tailored spherical
surface grid. These primitives offer informative features
for each hemisphere component and reduce the complexity
of the feature learning network, leading to fast evaluation.
These primitives are centrally stored in a codebook and can
be shared across multiple grids and even across materials,
based on low-cost indices stored in material-specific spherical surface grids. Our NeuBRDF, agnostic to the material,
provides a unified framework for representing a variety of
materials consistently. Comprehensive experimental results
on measured BRDF compression, Monte Carlo simulated
BRDF acceleration, and extension to spatially varying effects demonstrate the superior quality and generalizability
achieved by the proposed scheme.

1. Introduction
Reflectance model is one of the most critical factors that
affects the rendering photorealism. A common choice for
real-time rendering is hand-crafted analytical BRDF models [3, 39], while they often face challenges in accurately
reproducing realistic appearances. In terms of methods that
offer high realism, measured BRDF models tend to incur
prohibitive storage and transmission overhead, particularly
for anisotropic and spatially varying materials. On the other
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

1 SPP

Path Tracer + NeuBRDF: 89FPS

1024 SPP

NeuBRDF.evaluation
Addressing & Interpolation
0.2ms
0.4ms

ang2pix

3.8ms

neural network

Figure 1. NeuBRDF achieves real-time framerates (i9 12900k and
RTX 3090) and can cover a wide range of appearances. We show
the time breakdown of evaluating this reflectance model in a 5maxdepth path tracer at full resolution (1 SPP, 1920 × 1080).

hand, Monte Carlo simulation models rely on tracing a large
number of light paths with multiple bounces, which limits
their applicability in real-time applications.
One appealing approach is to approximate the reflectance using an implicit neural function [27], which offers compact storage and holds promise for acceleration
through the recently emerged feature-grid encoding [26,
35]. However, the 4D input of the BRDF poses challenges
in constructing such an acceleration structure. We propose
to address this challenge through a factorization that decomposes the BRDF into two 3D hemisphere feature-grids,
which are decoded by a tiny MLP. Our system is designed
according to the following principles:
• Efficiency. BRDF evaluation at shading point would occur millions of times at full HD resolution. Therefore,
operations on spherical feature-grid need to be straightforward, and the neural network must remain lightweight.
• Mild memory cost. The feature-grid is material-specific
and often trades memory for fast evaluation. Hence, we
should maximize the memory-quality tradeoff.
• Generalization. We aim to establish a unified framework
capable of accommodating a broad spectrum of materials. We strive for a solution that is agnostic to the materials, whether they are isotropic or anisotropic, measured
or simulated, spatially varying or not, and whether the
sampling is dense or sparse.

4337

