This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Universal Segmentation at Arbitrary Granularity with Language Instruction
Yong Liu1 , Cairong Zhang2 , Yitong Wang2 , Jiahao Wang3 , Yujiu Yang1 Yansong Tang1 *
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
ByteDance Inc. 3 The University of Hong Kong
liuyong23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Seg.
Mask

Lang.

“head”

“all faces”

“the most
salient object”

“man looking
this way”

“mom and kid”

“wall”

“bed, light,
shelf, et al.”

Sem.
Level

part

part

instance

instance

group

class

scene

Bottom

Semantic Understanding Level

Top

Figure 1. Illustration of our UniLSeg that is able to segment images at any granularity or semantic level with language as instructions. “Seg.
Mask”, “Lang.”, and “Sem. Level” denote the segmentation masks, corresponding language descriptions, and semantic levels, respectively.
The segmentation masks are shown in red or other colors. UniLSeg can take arbitrary text as input, whether it is a detailed long description
of an object or a short category name. With flexible expressions indicating segmentation target, UniLSeg achieves excellent performance
on various semantic level, e.g., object part, single or multiple instances, and the whole scene.

Abstract
This paper aims to achieve universal segmentation of arbitrary semantic level. Despite significant progress in recent years, specialist segmentation approaches are limited
to specific tasks and data distribution. Retraining a new
model for adaptation to new scenarios or settings takes expensive computation and time cost, which raises the demand for versatile and universal segmentation model that
can cater to various granularity. Although some attempts
have been made for unifying different segmentation tasks or
generalization to various scenarios, limitations in the definition of paradigms and input-output spaces make it difficult for them to achieve accurate understanding of content
at arbitrary granularity. To this end, we present UniLSeg,
a universal segmentation model that can perform segmentation at any semantic level with the guidance of language
instructions. For training UniLSeg, we reorganize a group
of tasks from original diverse distributions into a unified
data format, where images with texts describing segmenta1 Corresponding author

tion targets as input and corresponding masks are output.
Combined with a automatic annotation engine for utilizing numerous unlabeled data, UniLSeg achieves excellent
performance on various tasks and settings, surpassing both
specialist and unified segmentation models. Code is available here.

1. Introduction
Segmentation is one of the most important problem in computer vision, which aims to group meaningful regions and
perform pixel-level understanding. Recent years have witnessed great progress in the development of various segmentation tasks such as semantic segmentation [7, 16, 46,
48], interactive segmentation [30, 44, 45, 74], salient object
segmentation [26, 85], and referring segmentation [51, 78].
Although many excellent works have emerged, they tend
to be specialist approaches for specific segmentation tasks,
making it difficult for them to address complex and diverse
segmentation scenarios. When adapting to novel settings
or semantics, new models need to be designed and trained

3459

