This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Differentiable Information Bottleneck for Deterministic Multi-view Clustering
Xiaoqiang Yan, Zhixiang Jin∗ , Fengshou Han, Yangdong Ye∗
School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University
{iexqyan, ieydye}@zzu.edu.cn, {zxjin, iefshan}@gs.zzu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent several years, the information bottleneck (IB)
principle provides an information-theoretic framework for
deep multi-view clustering (MVC) by compressing multiview observations while preserving the relevant information
of multiple views. Although existing IB-based deep MVC
methods have achieved huge success, they rely on variational approximation and distribution assumption to estimate the lower bound of mutual information, which is a notoriously hard and impractical problem in high-dimensional
multi-view spaces. In this work, we propose a new differentiable information bottleneck (DIB) method, which provides
a deterministic and analytical MVC solution by fitting the
mutual information without the necessity of variational approximation. Specifically, we first propose to directly fit the
mutual information of high-dimensional spaces by leveraging normalized kernel Gram matrix, which does not require
any auxiliary neural estimator to estimate the lower bound
of mutual information. Then, based on the new mutual information measurement, a deterministic multi-view neural
network with analytical gradients is explicitly trained to parameterize IB principle, which derives a deterministic compression of input variables from different views. Finally, a
triplet consistency discovery mechanism is devised, which
is capable of mining the feature consistency, cluster consistency and joint consistency based on the deterministic
and compact representations. Extensive experimental results show the superiority of our DIB method on 6 benchmarks compared with 13 state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) [8, 48] aims to discover hidden patterns or potential structures by leveraging the complementary information in multi-view data. In the literature, MVC involving traditional machine learning techniques can be classified into graph-based [14], subspacebased [18] and matrix factorization-based methods [22].
∗ Corresponding author.

However, these traditional MVC based on shallow learning
models often exhibits poor representation ability on largescale high-dimensional and non-linear multi-view data. Recently, deep learning models have seen widespread adoption
in MVC owing to their powerful representation capability,
resulting in deep MVC [6, 15, 20, 21, 38, 43–45]. Although
achieving promising performance, most existing deep MVC
emphasizes the relevant correlations across multiple views
and ignores the limitations of the irrelevant information in
each view, such as noises, corruptions or even view-private
attributes.
In addressing these challenges, several recent approaches have resorted to the notable information bottleneck (IB) principle to multi-view clustering [26, 41, 46].
By formulating mutual information (MI), IB provides an
information-theoretic framework to learn a compact representation and remove irrelevant information for a given
task [35]. Despite the successful applications, the estimation of mutual information is a notoriously hard problem in
high-dimensional multi-view space since the complicated
joint distribution of two variables is often criticized to be
hard or impossible. To overcome this constraint, variational
approximation offers a natural solution to construct and estimate a lower bound of the mutual information of highdimensional variables [1, 40]. Inspired by this, IB and its
variational versions have achieved promising performance
by exploring the training dynamics in deep multi-view clustering and representation models as well as a learning objective [27, 28, 47]. However, the variational approximation
in existing IB-based deep MVC results in the uncertainty
in multi-view representation learning. Specifically, existing
IB-based deep MVC leverages variational approximation to
estimate the marginal and posterior probability distribution
of the potential feature representations (as shown in Fig.1).
In the process of variational approximation, IB-based deep
MVC methods introduce an auxiliary neural network to estimate the mean and variance of the posterior distribution
so as to fit the posterior distribution. Then, they impose
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence constraint between the
posterior distribution and variational approximation to align
them [1]. Thus, the approximation error introduced by vari-

27435

