This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flatten Long-Range Loss Landscapes for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Yixiong Zou, Yicong Liu, Yiman Hu, Yuhua Li, Ruixuan Li*
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{yixiongz, smnight, m202273659, idcliyuhua, rxli}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-domain few-shot learning (CDFSL) aims to acquire knowledge from limited training data in the target
domain by leveraging prior knowledge transferred from
source domains with abundant training samples. CDFSL
faces challenges in transferring knowledge across dissimilar domains and fine-tuning models with limited training
data. To address these challenges, we initially extend the
analysis of loss landscapes from the parameter space to
the representation space, which allows us to simultaneously interpret the transferring and fine-tuning difficulties
of CDFSL models. We observe that sharp minima in the
loss landscapes of the representation space result in representations that are hard to transfer and fine-tune. Moreover, existing flatness-based methods have limited generalization ability due to their short-range flatness. To enhance
the transferability and facilitate fine-tuning, we introduce
a simple yet effective approach to achieve long-range flattening of the minima in the loss landscape. This approach
considers representations that are differently normalized as
minima in the loss landscape and flattens the high-loss region in the middle by randomly sampling interpolated representations. We implement this method as a new normalization layer that replaces the original one in both CNNs
and ViTs. This layer is simple and lightweight, introducing
only a minimal number of additional parameters. Experimental results on 8 datasets demonstrate that our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of average
accuracy. Moreover, our method achieves performance improvements of up to 9% compared to the current best approaches on individual datasets. Our code will be released.

1. Introduction
Cross-domain few-shot learning (CDFSL) is introduced as
a solution to mitigate the need for extensive training data
on the target domain. It leverages knowledge transferred
from non-overlapping source domain datasets that have sufficient training data [2, 11]. It poses two primary chal* Corresponding author. Code is at https://github.com/Zoilsen/FLoR.

Figure 1. (a) Representation-space loss landscape (RSLL): Given
an input sample, the model maps it into a representation space,
where effective representations correspond to low classification
losses, i.e., minima in the landscape. Since domain shifts can be
reflected by the landscape shift and representation shift, a sharp
minimum in the landscape corresponds to a representation vulnerable to domain shifts, making the training and finetuning difficult.
(b) We can easily find different minima in the RSLL, which covers
a longer range than current flatness-based methods. This inspires
us to flatten a long-range loss landscape by randomly interpolating
these minima. (c) Given a flattened minimum, the representation
and the model are more transferable against domain shifts and easier to be finetuned on the target domain.

lenges due to domain shifts between the source and target
domains. (1) Transferring: overcoming domain shifts to
transfer knowledge from source to target datasets. (2) Finetuning: leveraging the transferred knowledge to learn from
limited training data in the target domain. Numerous approaches [20, 36] have been proposed to address these challenges. However, these challenges still remain unsolved.
Currently, several works [8, 18, 34] have attempted to
address the challenge posed by domain shifts by investigating the flatness of the loss landscape. However, these works
primarily concentrate on the parameter space, which can not
reflect the presence of domain shifts directly. To tackle the
CDFSL problem, we extend this concept from the parameter space to the representation space, which provides a more

23575

