This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-based Max-margin for Practical Few-shot Recognition
Minghao Fu Ke Zhu∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
fumh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zhuk@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In order to mimic the human few-shot learning (FSL)
ability better and to make FSL closer to real-world applications, this paper proposes a practical FSL (pFSL) setting.
pFSL is based on unsupervised pre-trained models (analogous to human prior knowledge) and recognizes many novel
classes simultaneously. Compared to traditional FSL, pFSL
is simpler in its formulation, easier to evaluate, more challenging and more practical. To cope with the rarity of training examples, this paper proposes IbM2, an instance-based
max-margin method not only for the new pFSL setting, but
also works well in traditional FSL scenarios. Based on the
Gaussian Annulus Theorem, IbM2 converts random noise
applied to the instances into a mechanism to achieve maximum margin in the many-way pFSL (or traditional FSL)
recognition task. Experiments with various self-supervised
pre-training methods and diverse many- or few-way FSL
tasks show that IbM2 almost always leads to improvements
compared to its respective baseline methods, and in most
cases the improvements are significant. With both the new
pFSL setting and novel IbM2 method, this paper shows that
practical few-shot learning is both viable and promising.

1. Introduction
We human have the ability to learn new concepts based on
a few exemplars, thanks to both our ability to learn and
the previously accumulated knowledge. As a stark contrast,
learning machines (especially deep learning models) mostly
require plentiful training examples to learn just few (e.g., 5)
concepts. Both the vision and learning community are fully
aware of this shortcoming, and few-shot learning (FSL) is
our community’s effort to counter this weakness, which has
been studied for a long time [39].
FSL relies on prior knowledge, too. Currently, the setting is to set aside a collection of object categories (known
as the base set), with many training examples in every base
∗ K. Zhu is the corresponding author.

Class One
Class Two

Decision Boundary

Figure 1. Instance-based max-margin. We create a hypersphere
(large dashed circles) centered at every example (solid shapes),
sample many virtual examples (hollow shapes) around the hypersphere, and require the decision boundary to classify all virtual
samples correctly. Then we in effect achieve instance-based maxmargin. Best viewed in color.

set category. A model is first pre-trained on the base set,
which naturally encodes prior knowledge. Then, few novel
object categories (most commonly 5) are to be recognized
based on the pre-trained model given few training examples
from these new concepts (e.g., 1 or 5 per category). Note
that the base and novel training sets are semantically closely
related (e.g., both contain different kinds of birds).
There is a clear mismatch between the human ability
and this FSL setting. We human can learn many instead
of few novel concepts; and, the human prior knowledge
include those accumulated as both common-sense and domain knowledge from many diverse domains rather than a
limited set of concepts closely related to a specific task.
Although this FSL setting has served our community
well and has pushed the technical frontier for years, with
the immense advances in deep learning and emerging practical needs for real-world FSL applications, it is time that
we need a better, simpler, and more practical FSL setting.
Hence we advocate a practical few-shot learning (or
pFSL) setting: based on an unsupervised model pre-trained
from a large number of concepts (e.g., ImageNet [30]), simultaneously learn many new concepts (e.g., 200) with few

28674

