This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NoiseCLR: A Contrastive Learning Approach for Unsupervised Discovery of
Interpretable Directions in Diffusion Models
Yusuf Dalva
Pinar Yanardag
Virginia Tech
{ydalva, pinary}@vt.edu
Project webpage: https://noiseclr.github.io

Face + Cat

Interpretable Directions Learned by NoiseCLR

Input

b) Cat (Eye Color), Face (Mustache)

c) Cat (Breed), Face (Race #2)

Cat

Face

a) Face (Race #1, Glasses)

Glasses

Race #1

Mustache

Race #2

Input

Lion

Eye color

Breed

Fox

Art

Input

Input

Style #1

Style #2

Style #3

Style #4

Style #5

Style #6

Style #7

Style #8

Figure 1. NoiseCLR. We propose an unsupervised approach to identify interpretable directions in text-to-image diffusion models, such as
Stable Diffusion [30]. Our method finds semantically meaningful directions across various domains like faces, cats, and art. NoiseCLR
can apply multiple directions either within a single domain (a) or across different domains in the same image (b, c) in a disentangled
manner. Since the directions learned by our model are highly disentangled, there is no need for semantic masks or user-provided guidance
to prevent edits in different domains from influencing each other. Additionally, our method does not require fine-tuning or retraining of the
diffusion model, nor does it need any labeled data to learn directions. Note that our method does not require any text prompts, the direction
names above are provided by us for easy understanding.

Abstract
Generative models have been very popular in the recent
years for their image generation capabilities. GAN-based
models are highly regarded for their disentangled latent
space, which is a key feature contributing to their success
in controlled image editing. On the other hand, diffusion
models have emerged as powerful tools for generating highquality images. However, the latent space of diffusion mod-

els is not as thoroughly explored or understood. Existing
methods that aim to explore the latent space of diffusion
models usually relies on text prompts to pinpoint specific
semantics. However, this approach may be restrictive in areas such as art, fashion, or specialized fields like medicine,
where suitable text prompts might not be available or easy
to conceive thus limiting the scope of existing work. In this
paper, we propose an unsupervised method to discover latent semantics in text-to-image diffusion models without re-

24209

