This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Model-

Model-based tracking

FoundationPose: Unified 6D Pose Estimation and Tracking of Novel Objects
Model-free tracking

Bowen Wen

Wei Yang

Jan Kautz

Stan Birchfield

NVIDIA

Abstract
We present FoundationPose, a unified foundation model
for 6D object pose estimation and tracking, supporting both
model-based and model-free setups. Our approach can be
instantly applied at test-time to a novel object without finetuning, as long as its CAD model is given, or a small number of reference images are captured. Thanks to the unified framework, the downstream pose estimation modules
are the same in both setups, with a neural implicit representation used for efficient novel view synthesis when no
CAD model is available. Strong generalizability is achieved
via large-scale synthetic training, aided by a large language model (LLM), a novel transformer-based architecture, and contrastive learning formulation. Extensive evaluation on multiple public datasets involving challenging scenarios and objects indicate our unified approach outperforms existing methods specialized for each task by a large
margin. In addition, it even achieves comparable results
to instance-level methods despite the reduced assumptions.
Project page: https:// nvlabs.github.io/ FoundationPose/

1. Introduction
Computing the rigid 6D transformation from the object to
the camera, also known as object pose estimation, is crucial for a variety of applications, such as robotic manipulation [29, 63, 64] and mixed reality [40]. Classic methods [19, 20, 30, 47, 62] are known as instance-level because
they only work on the specific object instance determined at
training time. Such methods usually require a textured CAD
model for generating training data, and they cannot be applied to an unseen novel object at test time. While categorylevel methods [5, 32, 54, 58, 69] remove these assumptions
(instance-wise training and CAD models), they are limited
to objects within the predefined category on which they are
trained. Moreover, obtaining category-level training data is
notoriously difficult, in part due to additional pose canonicalization and examination steps [58] that must be applied.
To address these limitations, more recent efforts have focused on the problem of instant pose estimation of arbitrary
novel objects [18, 31, 38, 50, 53]. Two different setups are

Figure 1. Our unified framework enables both 6D pose estimation and
tracking for novel objects, supporting the model-based and model-free setups. On each of these four tasks, it outperforms prior work specially designed for the task (• indicates RGB-only; × indicates RGBD, like ours).
The metric for each task is explained in detail in the experimental results.

considered, depending upon what information is available at
test time: model-based, where a textured 3D CAD model of
the object is provided, and model-free, where a set of reference images of the object is provided. While much progress
has been made on both setups individually, there remains a
need for a single method to address both setups in a unified
way, since different real-world applications provide different types of information.
Orthogonal to single-frame object pose estimation, pose
tracking methods [8, 28, 34, 37, 51, 57, 61, 66] leverage
temporal cues to enable more efficient, smooth and accurate pose estimation on a video sequence. These methods
share the similar aforementioned issues to their counterparts
in pose estimation, depending on their assumptions on the
object knowledge.
In this paper we propose a unified framework called
FoundationPose that performs both pose estimation and
tracking for novel objects in both the model-based and
model-free setups, using RGBD images. As seen in Fig. 1,
our method outperforms existing state-of-art methods specialized for each of these four tasks. Our strong gen-

17868

