This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing Motion at Nighttime with an Event Camera
Haoyue Liu1 , Shihan Peng1 , Lin Zhu2 , Yi Chang1 ,* Hanyu Zhou1 , Luxin Yan1
1
National Key Lab of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
{liuhy, pengshihan, yichang, hyzhou, yanluxin}@hust.edu.cn, linzhu@bit.edu.cn

6.7 lux, short exposure

6.7 lux, long exposure

(a) Conventional camera

(b) Event camera

(c) Reconstruction from E2VID+ [1]

(d) Reconstruction from NER-Net (ours)

Figure 1. Comparison between frame-based imaging and event-based imaging. (a) The extended exposure time of conventional cameras
leads to motion blur in low-light conditions (6.7 lux). (b) Event cameras can capture high-speed and high-dynamic-range scene information.
(c) and (d) are reconstruction results of E2VID+ [1] and the proposed method.

Abstract
We focus on a very challenging task: imaging at nighttime dynamic scenes. Most previous methods rely on the
low-light enhancement of a conventional RGB camera. However, they would inevitably face a dilemma between the
long exposure time of nighttime and the motion blur of dynamic scenes. Event cameras react to dynamic changes
with higher temporal resolution (microsecond) and higher
dynamic range (120dB), offering an alternative solution. In
this work, we present a novel nighttime dynamic imaging
method with an event camera. Specifically, we discover
that the event at nighttime exhibits temporal trailing characteristics and spatial non-stationary distribution. Consequently, we propose a nighttime event reconstruction network (NER-Net) which mainly includes a learnable event
timestamps calibration module (LETC) to align the temporal trailing events and a non-uniform illumination aware
module (NIAM) to stabilize the spatiotemporal distribution
of events. Moreover, we construct a paired real low-light
event dataset (RLED) through a co-axial imaging system, including 64,200 spatially and temporally aligned image GTs
and low-light events. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of visual quality and generalization ability on

real-world nighttime datasets. The project are available at:
https://github.com/Liu-haoyue/NER-Net.

1. Introduction
Imaging in nighttime dynamic scenes is crucial for various applications, including autonomous driving and video
surveillance. Conventional cameras often require longer
exposure times to capture information in low-light environments, but this inevitably leads to motion blur, which is a
significant contradiction for conventional cameras, as shown
in Fig. 1(a). While existing low-light image/video enhancement techniques can enhance contrast [2–14], the loss of
essential scene structural information leads to suboptimal
imaging results. Thus, achieving high-quality imaging in
nighttime dynamic scenarios remains an intricate challenge.
Event cameras [15–20] overcome the challenge of the
trade-off between seeing faster and seeing clearer, especially
in nighttime scenarios. This sensor activates each pixel independently in response to changes in brightness and possesses
several notable advantages, including high temporal resolution (1µs) and high dynamic range (120dB), as shown
in Fig. 1(b). Therefore, reconstructing images from events
offers an attractive approach for nighttime imaging.
Early event-based reconstruction methods rely on hand-

25648

