This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiVAS: Video and Audio Synchronization with Dynamic Frame Rates
Clara Fernandez-Labrador1 Mertcan Akçay1,2 Eitan Abecassis3 Joan Massich1 Christopher Schroers1
1
DisneyResearch|Studios 2 ETH Zürich 3 Disney Entertainment and ESPN Technology
{clara.fernandez, mertcan.akcay, joan.massich, christopher.schroers}@disneyresearch.com
eitan.abecassis@disneystreaming.com

Abstract
Synchronization issues between audio and video are one
of the most disturbing quality defects in film production
and live broadcasting. Even a discrepancy as short as 45
milliseconds can degrade the viewer’s experience enough
to warrant manual quality checks over entire movies. In
this paper, we study the automatic discovery of such issues.
Specifically, we focus on the alignment of lip movements
with spoken words, targeting realistic production scenarios
which can include background noise and music, intricate
head poses, excessive makeup, or scenes with multiple individuals where the speaker is unknown. Our model’s robustness also extends to various media specifications, including
different video frame rates and audio sample rates. To address these challenges, we present a model fully based on
Transformers that encodes face crops or full video frames
and raw audio using timestamp information, identifies the
speaker and provides highly accurate synchronization predictions much faster than previous methods.

1. Introduction
Audio-Video (AV) synchronization is a basic expectation to
anyone that is consuming video, whether through streaming, social media, cable television, theaters or any other
form of media. From the lens of the camera to the eye of
the consumer, there are many instances where errors can
be introduced, such as during content mastering, third party
modifications, content encoding, or client playback. Studies
show that the viewer experience can be negatively affected
by a mere 45 millisecond (ms) discrepancy [7]; this is equivalent to a delay of a single frame in a 90 minute film at 25
frames per second (fps). While commercial solutions [1]
exist, their scale and capabilities are insufficient for production. Thereby, detecting and identifying the origin of synchronization issues remains a significant burden for quality
control teams, as it is largely a manual process. Thus, there
is a pressing need for an automated detection system that
can accurately identify and resolve AV synchronization is-

sues before they reach the viewer.
A first requirement for such an automated system is to
identify relevant cues to reliably detect synchronization issues - scenes with clear relationships between visual and
auditory stimuli [19]. However, many sound sources do not
map to a clear visual signal, such as ambient sounds (traffic, rain, crowds), stationary sounds (car engine), and acousmatic sounds (narrator, background music). Similarly, some
visual cues may not have a clear audio cue to detect synchronization issues (landscapes, still elements). The definitive cue for synchronization, and the most studied one in
literature, is known as lip sync, where speakers’ lip movements match the sound of spoken words. However, identifying such dialogue scenes is intricate and time-consuming,
involving a combination of scene, speech, and face detectors, face tracking, and active speaker detection in most
cases.
Another fundamental requirement for a synchronization
model is to consume the content in its original form, since
a simple operation like a frame rate conversion can introduce synchronization artifacts [4]. In video production,
frame rates are used to invoke a certain feel to the content. For example, a feature film might have a lower frame
rate to achieve a cinematic look, while a sports broadcast
might have a higher frame rate to capture fast-moving action. Standard frame rates can range from 24 fps to 120
fps, thus challenging models to be robust enough to make
reliable predictions on the original content. Previous lip
sync methods [6, 8–10, 14, 15] have typically thrived on
simpler datasets derived from BBC interviews [2] or TED
talks [3], often containing a single speaker providing clean,
continuous speech while facing the camera. These [2, 3]
are the most common datasets used to benchmark AV synchronization models. Notably, both offer videos converted
to 25 fps and cropped to the face region. Existing lip sync
approaches [6, 8–10, 14, 15] leverage Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) achieving outstanding results on these
simpler datasets, but their performance does not extend to
more complex videos, as they exclusively operate on singleface clips and require an intermediate encoding of the in-

26846

