This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PELA: Learning Parameter-Efficient Models with Low-Rank Approximation
Yangyang Guo, Guangzhi Wang, Mohan Kankanhalli
National University of Singapore

Research Intuition

Transformer Layers

Abstract

1. Introduction
Pre-training a large model and fine-tuning it at hand has
become a de facto paradigm in diverse research fields [9,
10, 60]. While significant performance has been achieved,
building such models often compromises increased memory
usage and longer training time. Despite these challenges,
recent advances in the appreciation of the scaling law [28]
and emergent abilities [62] of language pre-training have
further fueled practitioners’ interest in developing and utilizing large models.
As it is usually prohibitive to deploy these models for
downstream tasks, recent studies have resorted to bypassing the fine-tuning of the entire model. Typical approaches

× 𝑁𝑁

…

Applying a pre-trained large model to downstream tasks
is prohibitive under resource-constrained conditions. Recent dominant approaches for addressing efficiency issues
involve adding a few learnable parameters to the fixed
backbone model. This strategy, however, leads to more
challenges in loading large models for downstream finetuning with limited resources. In this paper, we propose a
novel method for increasing the parameter efficiency of pretrained models by introducing an intermediate pre-training
stage. To this end, we first employ low-rank approximation
to compress the original large model and then devise a feature distillation module and a weight perturbation regularization module. These modules are specifically designed to
enhance the low-rank model. In particular, we update only
the low-rank model while freezing the backbone parameters
during pre-training. This allows for direct and efficient utilization of the low-rank model for downstream fine-tuning
tasks. The proposed method achieves both efficiencies in
terms of required parameters and computation time while
maintaining comparable results with minimal modifications
to the backbone architecture. Specifically, when applied
to three vision-only and one vision-language Transformer
models, our approach often demonstrates a merely ∼0.6
point decrease in performance while reducing the original
parameter size by 1/3 to 2/3. We release our code at link.

PELA
Compression

× 𝑁𝑁

Figure 1. Overview and performance of our proposed PELA
method. Left: Using PELA, we compress the trainable weights
of a typical ViT model while preserving its overall architecture.
Right: Comparison of the Original and our PELA w.r.t relative
model size and accuracy metric on three pre-trained Transformers.

often introduce a few more learnable parameters to the
backbone model while freezing the rest, e.g., adapter [52]
and prompt tuning [25] add tunable parameters to the middle and peripheral token positions of Transformers, respectively. However, this approach inevitably leads to the following two disadvantages. First, the potential of pre-trained
large models is not fully exploited as the majority of parameters are not tuned with downstream task objectives.
Second, loading the pre-trained model becomes even more
burdensome for researchers with limited resources. In contrast, conventional methods such as knowledge distillation
(KD) [20, 21, 51] and quantization [7, 23] can partially alleviate this issue. Yet, there is currently no established approach for constructing a high-performing student model of
KD and non-differentiable operators of quantization usually
make it less feasible to perform back-propagation.
This paper targets developing a highly parameterefficient approach to help downstream task fine-tuning,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. By parameter-efficiency, we refer to a compressed model with reduced-size (e.g., 2×
smaller), easy-to-implement, computationally-efficient, and
minimal-architectural-change merits. Our method offers a
pre-trained compressed model that downstream tasks can
directly perform fine-tuning on, in contrast to previous ap-

15699

