This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanRef: Single Image to 3D Human Generation via Reference-Guided
Diffusion
Jingbo Zhang
City University of Hong Kong

Xiaoyu Li ∗
Tencent AI Lab

Qi Zhang
Tencent AI Lab

jbzhang6-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

xliea@connect.ust.hk

nwpuqzhang@gmail.com

Yanpei Cao
Tencent AI Lab

Ying Shan
Tencent AI Lab

Jing Liao *
City University of Hong Kong

caoyanpei@gmail.com

yingsshan@tencent.com

jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

Figure 1. We propose HumanRef, a reference-guided 3D human generation framework. Our HumanRef is capable of generating 3D clothed
human with realistic, view-consistent texture and geometry from a single image input.

Abstract
Generating a 3D human model from a single reference image is challenging because it requires inferring textures and geometries in invisible views while maintaining
consistency with the reference image. Previous methods
utilizing 3D generative models are limited by the availability of 3D training data. Optimization-based methods that lift text-to-image diffusion models to 3D generation often fail to preserve the texture details of the reference image, resulting in inconsistent appearances in different views. In this paper, we propose HumanRef, a
3D human generation framework from a single-view input. To ensure the generated 3D model is photorealistic and consistent with the input image, HumanRef introduces a novel method called reference-guided score distillation sampling (Ref-SDS), which effectively incorporates
image guidance into the generation process. Furthermore,
we introduce region-aware attention to Ref-SDS, ensuring
accurate correspondence between different body regions.
Experimental results demonstrate that HumanRef outper* Corresponding authors

forms state-of-the-art methods in generating 3D clothed humans with fine geometry, photorealistic textures, and viewconsistent appearances. Code and model are available at
https://eckertzhang.github.io/HumanRef.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Clothed human reconstruction from single or multi-view
images has received significant attention in the fields of
computer vision and graphics due to its potential applications in virtual reality, movie industry, and immersive
games [22, 71]. Unlike reconstruction using videos [1–3]
or multi-view images [5, 6, 9, 54, 59], which allows for inferring 3D information from multi-view inputs, reconstructing a 3D human from a single view input is considerably
more challenging. This task not only requires the reconstructed 3D clothed human to exhibit consistency in geometry and texture with the input view but also involves generating plausible geometry and texture that are not directly
visible in the input. Therefore, compared to reconstruction,
this task faces even greater challenges in human generation.
One approach to generating 3D human models from sin-

1844

