This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing the Power of OOD Detection via Sample-Aware Model Selection
Feng Xue*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Zi He*
Hunan University

Yuan Zhang*
Beijing Normal University

sjtu2988237@sjtu.edu.cn

hezi0107@hnu.edu.cn

1256033547@qq.com

Chuanlong Xie
Beijing Normal University

Zhenguo Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Falong Tan†
Hunan University

clxie@bnu.edu.cn

li.zhenguo@huawei.com

falongtan@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel perspective on detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples and propose an algorithm for sample-aware model selection to enhance the
effectiveness of OOD detection. Our algorithm determines,
for each test input, which pre-trained models in the model
zoo are capable of identifying the test input as an OOD
sample. If no such models exist in the model zoo, the test
input is classified as an in-distribution (ID) sample. We theoretically demonstrate that our method maintains the true
positive rate of ID samples and accurately identifies OOD
samples with high probability when there are a sufficient
number of diverse pre-trained models in the model zoo. Extensive experiments were conducted to validate our method,
demonstrating that it leverages the complementarity among
single-model detectors to consistently improve the effectiveness of OOD sample identification. Compared to baseline methods, our approach improved the relative performance by 65.40% and 37.25% on the CIFAR10 and ImageNet benchmarks, respectively.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown remarkable success in
a variety of applications, but their ability to generalize robustly remains a challenging issue in deep learning. While
highly trained and complex deep neural networks can perform exceptionally well on test data that is identically distributed (ID) with the training data, their effectiveness in
accurately predicting inputs that fall outside of the training
distribution is limited. This poses a significant hurdle to the
generalization capability of deep neural network models. In
safety-critical applications, it is preferable to detect out-ofdistribution (OOD) inputs beforehand rather than relying on
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

the model to make potentially unreliable predictions.
Utilizing pre-trained network models, post hoc OOD detection has shown significant potential in addressing largescale problems. The post hoc detection method typically involves two crucial steps: (i) selecting a pre-trained
model that captures the distinction between OOD samples
and the in-distribution (ID) samples, and (ii) generating a
test score that measures the similarity of a given test input to the ID samples used for training. Various score
functions have been developed to differentiate OOD samples by utilizing different outputs of pre-trained models
[11, 18], energies [19, 32], and features [8, 16, 17, 24, 26–
29, 36].Considerable research effort has been dedicated to
this field.
Despite significant advancements in deep neural network
architecture, the selection of an appropriate pre-trained
model remains a challenging initial step. This is because
the effectiveness of post hoc detection heavily relies on the
choice of pre-trained models [7]. In Section 5, Table 2
presents the performance of various single models using the
KNN detector [28] for OOD detection on ID samples from
CIFAR10. Notably, when the OOD samples are sourced
from SVHN [22], there is a significant difference of approximately 32.54% in the false positive rate (FPR) between
the best-performing and worst-performing models. Furthermore, during the training process, both OOD samples and
OOD distributions are unknown.1 Consequently, hyperparameter tuning and model selection solely rely on the ID or
training data. Once deployed in an open-world setting, the
OOD detector may encounter a diverse range of test inputs
originating from various OOD distributions. Therefore, it
is possible that a single pre-trained model may not be capable of handling potential distribution shifts (See Figure 1 in
Section 5). Hence, adaptive model selection is crucial and
should be performed on a per-test-sample basis.
1 In this work, we consider OOD detection without exposure to auxiliary data or OOD samples.

17148

