This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Link-Context Learning for Multimodal LLMs
Yan Tai3, * Weichen Fan2, *,† Zhao Zhang2 Ziwei Liu1,
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University.
2
SenseTime Research.
3
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China.
yan.tai@sjtu.edu.cn, weichen.fan@u.nus.edu, zzhang@mail.nankai.edu.cn
ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Here are two images: The first one
is a RockFlock, and the second
one is a Sheep. Could you tell me
what animal is in these two
pictures?

The first image is a RockFlock,
while the second one is a Sheep.

The first image is a sheep wearing
sunglasses, while the second one
is a sheep.
Figure 1. The demo dialogue of our proposed link-context learning. After presenting the model with a pair of unseen images and novel
concepts, our improved model gains the ability to learn and retain the acquired knowledge throughout the conversation while the vanilla
MLLMs fail to provide accurate answers.

Abstract
The ability to learn from context with novel concepts,
and deliver appropriate responses are essential in human
conversations. Despite current Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) and Large Language Models (LLMs) being
trained on mega-scale datasets, recognizing unseen images
or understanding novel concepts in a training-free manner
remains a challenge. In-Context Learning (ICL) explores
training-free few-shot learning, where models are encouraged to “learn to learn” from limited tasks and generalize to
unseen tasks. In this work, we propose link-context learning
(LCL), which emphasizes “reasoning from cause and effect”
to augment the learning capabilities of MLLMs. LCL goes
beyond traditional ICL by explicitly strengthening the causal
relationship between the support set and the query set. By
∗ Equal contribution. † Project Lead.

Corresponding author.

providing demonstrations with causal links, LCL guides the
model to discern not only the analogy but also the underlying
causal associations between data points, which empowers
MLLMs to recognize unseen images and understand novel
concepts more effectively. To facilitate the evaluation of this
novel approach, we introduce the ISEKAI dataset, comprising exclusively of unseen generated image-label pairs designed for link-context learning. Extensive experiments show
that our LCL-MLLM exhibits strong link-context learning
capabilities to novel concepts over vanilla MLLMs. Code,
demo, and dataset have been released.

1. Introduction
(In the near future, mankind finally be able to travel
interstellar and come to the centaur constellation.)
Human and MLLM walk off the spaceship.
Human:“We made it! Look! The locals are here.”

27176

