This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Emergent Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation from Off-the-shelf
Vision-Language Models
Jiayun Luo♭ , Siddhesh Khandelwal♯ , Leonid Sigal♯ , and Boyang Li♭
♭
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
♯
University of British Columbia, Vector Institute for AI, Canada
{luoj0028, boyang.li}@ntu.edu.sg, {skhandel, lsigal}@cs.ubc.ca

Figure 1. Qualitative Results of PnP-OVSS + BLIP. Images are from Pascal Context and COCO stuff. The right columns and bottom
rows show the ground-truth (GT); the rest are our results. Note accurate results even on complex (trees) and small objects (last column).

Abstract
From image-text pairs, large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) learn to implicitly associate image regions
with words, which prove effective for tasks like visual
question answering. However, leveraging the learned association for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation remains a challenge. In this paper, we propose a simple,
yet extremely effective, training-free technique, Plug-andPlay Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation (PnP-OVSS)
for this task. PnP-OVSS leverages a VLM with direct
text-to-image cross-attention and an image-text matching
loss. To balance between over-segmentation and undersegmentation, we introduce Salience Dropout; by iteratively
dropping patches that the model is most attentive to, we
are able to better resolve the entire extent of the segmentation mask. PnP-OVSS does not require any neural network training and performs hyperparameter tuning without
the need for any segmentation annotations, even for a validation set. PnP-OVSS demonstrates substantial improvements over comparable baselines (+29.4% mIoU on Pascal
VOC, +13.2% mIoU on Pascal Context, +14.0% mIoU on
MS COCO, +2.4% mIoU on COCO Stuff) and even outperforms most baselines that conduct additional network training on top of pretrained VLMs. Our codebase is at https:
//github.com/letitiabanana/PnP-OVSS.

1. Introduction
The classic task of semantic segmentation [20, 22] aims to
classify pixels to their object types. Traditional supervised
methods require dense pixel-level annotations and are restricted to recognizing a predefined set of objects. To relax
these constraints, open-vocabulary semantic segmentation
[8, 17, 21, 41, 44, 46, 48, 74, 76, 77, 80, 84] aspires to identify arbitrary object categories, whereas weakly supervised
techniques [9, 11, 15, 25, 31, 36, 53, 55, 65, 75, 90] can
acquire pixel-level localization capabilities from coarse supervision, e.g., image labels or boxes.
Large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) pretrained
on image-text pairs [1, 37, 38, 40, 60, 78, 85] achieve unprecedented performance on multimodal tasks, such as describing arbitrary images and answering free-form, openended questions about them (either with [37, 38, 60] or
without finetuning [1, 19, 62, 70]). These tasks apparently
involve some ability to localize objects. For example, to
answer the question “what objects appear on the table?”,
the model would have to first localize the table in the image and identify the objects on it. Hence, it is reasonable to
conjecture that the VLM network learns to perform openvocabulary localization from image-text pretraining. However, distilling the localization capability from the VLMs
remains an open challenge.
Most existing methods for open-vocabulary semantic

4029

