This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-Free Quantization via Pseudo-label Filtering
Chunxiao Fan1,2 , Ziqi Wang1 , Dan Guo1,2 *, Meng Wang1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, 230009, Anhui, China
2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, 230088, Anhui, China

fanchunxiao@hfut.edu.cn, zackiewang29@gmail.com, guodan@hfut.edu.cn, eric.mengwang@gmail.com

density

Abstract
Quantization for model compression can efficiently reduce the network complexity and storage requirement, but
the original training data is necessary to remedy the performance loss caused by quantization. The Data-Free Quantization (DFQ) methods have been proposed to handle the
absence of original training data with synthetic data. However, there are differences between the synthetic and original training data, which affects the performance of the
quantized network, but none of the existing methods considers the differences. In this paper, we propose an efficient
data-free quantization via pseudo-label filtering, which is
the first to evaluate the synthetic data before quantization.
We design a new metric for evaluating synthetic data using self-entropy, which indicates the reliability of synthetic
data. The synthetic data can be categorized with the metric into high- and low-reliable datasets for the following
training process. Besides, the multiple pseudo-labels are
designed to label the synthetic data with different reliability, which can provide valuable supervision information and
avoid misleading training by low-reliable samples. Extensive experiments are implemented on several datasets, including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet with various
models. The experimental results show that our method can
perform excellently and outperform existing methods in accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [26] have shown tremendous potential in a number of fields, but their high computing costs and storage requirements make the implementation complex, especially on embedded systems and edge
devices [9, 36]. In recent years, many model compression
methods [7] have been proposed to decrease the computational and memory requirements while keeping the performance. The existing methods can be divided into network
* Corresponding author.

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

original
synthetic

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

𝓗𝐬𝐞𝐥𝐟

Figure 1. The self-entropy of the prediction results on the original and synthetic data using pre-trained network. The prediction
results on the synthetic dataset always have a higher self-entropy
than that on the original dataset, owing to different reliability.

pruning [41, 45], model quantization [2, 21], knowledge
distillation [18, 31], and neural architecture search (NAS)
[33, 39]. Among these techniques, quantization uses finite
approximations to represent the full-precision values in the
pre-trained network, which needs to be quantized. It can
efficiently reduce the network complexity for acceleration
and storage, but the approximate operation inevitably affects the network performance, resulting in accuracy drops
after quantization.
To reduce the performance loss caused by quantization, many methods propose to optimize the quantizer
[1, 2, 10, 11, 35] or retrain the pre-trained network with
quantization constraint [4, 15, 27]. In these methods, the
original training data is very helpful for maintaining model
performance, but it may not be feasible due to data privacy
concerns in specific scenarios. The Data-Free Quantization
(DFQ) methods [3, 5, 28, 30, 42, 47, 48] have been proposed to deal with the absence of original training data. In
principle, the batch normalization (BN) [20] layers in the
pre-trained model contain the statistical information of the
original training data, i.e. mean and variance, which can
be regarded as prior information for data synthesis [46].
Thus, the synthetic data can be generated from random initial data by guiding its distribution closer to the original data
with the full-precision pre-trained model. Generally, exsiting DFQ methods can be divided into Generator-Based Approach (GBA) [5, 22, 37, 42] and Distill-Based Approach
(DBA) [3, 28, 30, 47].
The GBA trains a specific generative network (e.g., GAN
[12] or VAE [24]) to generate the synthetic data, which re-

5589

