This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Average: Individualized Visual Scanpath Prediction
Xianyu Chen
Ming Jiang
Qi Zhao
University of Minnesota, United States
{chen6582, mjiang}@umn.edu, qzhao@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
Understanding how attention varies across individuals has
significant scientific and societal impacts. However, existing visual scanpath models treat attention uniformly, neglecting individual differences. To bridge this gap, this paper focuses on individualized scanpath prediction (ISP), a
new attention modeling task that aims to accurately predict
how different individuals shift their attention in diverse visual tasks. It proposes an ISP method featuring three novel
technical components: (1) an observer encoder to characterize and integrate an observer’s unique attention traits,
(2) an observer-centric feature integration approach that
holistically combines visual features, task guidance, and
observer-specific characteristics, and (3) an adaptive fixation prioritization mechanism that refines scanpath predictions by dynamically prioritizing semantic feature maps
based on individual observers’ attention traits. These novel
components allow scanpath models to effectively address
the attention variations across different observers. Our
method is generally applicable to different datasets, model
architectures, and visual tasks, offering a comprehensive
tool for transforming general scanpath models into individualized ones. Comprehensive evaluations using valuebased and ranking-based metrics verify the method’s effectiveness and generalizability.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Understanding and predicting the distinct eye movements of each observer is the key objective of individualized scanpath prediction. These examples reveal the variations in the scanpaths of different observers, showing their distinct attention preferences in (a) faces, (b) objects, and (c) background. Each dot
represents a fixation, with the number and radius indicating its order and duration, respectively. The blue and red dots indicate the
beginning and the end of the scanpath, respectively.

nosing neurodevelopmental conditions [11, 22, 39].

1. Introduction
Saccadic eye movements, such as fixations and saccades,
enable individuals to shift their attention quickly and redirect their focus to different points in the visual field. Studying various factors driving people’s eye movements is important for understanding human attention and developing human-like attention systems. Computational models
predicting eye movements have broad impacts across various domains, such as assessing image and video quality [8, 27, 47], developing intuitive human-computer interaction systems [33, 40, 55, 64, 67], creating immersive virtual reality experiences [1, 57, 58], enhancing the safety and
efficiency of autonomous vehicles [28, 77, 78], and diag-

While existing models of saccadic eye movements predominantly focus on modeling generic gaze patterns manifested as observer-agnostic scanpaths (i.e., a spatiotemporal sequence of fixations), this work seeks to model
the individual variations in eye movements. As shown in
Figure 1, there exists significant inter-observer variations
in visual scanpaths. Such variations can be attributed to
a multitude of individual characteristics, such as gender,
age, and neurodevelopmental conditions [56, 61]. For instance, females show more explorative gaze patterns than
males [53, 62, 63], older adults prefer faces [54] and objects with high color visibility [74], individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD), may show a preference for repetitive patterns

25420

