This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency Decoupling for Motion Magnification via
Multi-Level Isomorphic Architecture
Fei Wang1 , Dan Guo1,2 *, Kun Li1 , Zhun Zhong1,3 , Meng Wang1,2 *
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, China
3
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, NG8 1BB Nottingham, UK

Abstract
Texture

Video Motion Magnification (VMM) aims to reveal subtle and imperceptible motion information of objects in the
macroscopic world. Prior methods directly model the motion field from the Eulerian perspective by Representation
Learning that separates shape and texture or Multi-domain
Learning from phase fluctuations. Inspired by the frequency
spectrum, we observe that the low-frequency components
with stable energy always possess spatial structure and less
noise, making them suitable for modeling the subtle motion
field. To this end, we present FD4MM, a new paradigm
of Frequency Decoupling for Motion Magnification with a
Multi-level Isomorphic Architecture to capture multi-level
high-frequency details and a stable low-frequency structure
(motion field) in video space. Since high-frequency details
and subtle motions are susceptible to information degradation due to their inherent subtlety and unavoidable external interference from noise, we carefully design Sparse
High/Low-pass Filters to enhance the integrity of details
and motion structures, and a Sparse Frequency Mixer to
promote seamless recoupling. Besides, we innovatively design a contrastive regularization for this task to strengthen
the model’s ability to discriminate irrelevant features, reducing undesired motion magnification. Extensive experiments on both Real-world and Synthetic Datasets show
that our FD4MM outperforms SOTA methods. Meanwhile,
FD4MM reduces FLOPs by 1.63× and boosts inference
speed by 1.68× than the latest method. Our code is available at https://github.com/Jiafei127/FD4MM .

1. Introduction
Human eyes have a limited resolution range to perceive the
subtle motion in the macroscopic world [22, 37]. Video
Motion Magnification (VMM), as a ªmotion microscopeº,
* Corresponding authors.

Representation
Learning

Shape

(a) Representation Learning
Spatial
Multi-domain
Learning

Phase &
Amplitude

(b) Multi-domain Learning

Frequency
Decoupling

High-frequency

(c) Frequency Decoupling

Low-frequency

Figure 1. Learning-based methods for motion magnification.
(a) Representation Learning methods [12, 34, 43], (b) Multidomain Learning method [44] and (c) our Frequency Decoupling
method. Inspired by the theory of frequency spectrum [41, 64], we
utilise it to separate high- and low-frequency features and leverage
their discriminative characteristics for motion magnification.

vividly reveals subtle variations in the macroscopic world
and uncovers important invisible information [29, 52, 61].
It plays a crucial role in various downstream applications, such as micro-expression recognition [32, 62], robotic
sonography [1, 18] and material property estimation [9, 10,
13, 66], etc. VMM is a complex task that involves generating pixel-level motion in videos. Especially when the
motion occurs subtle, it is susceptible to confusion with inevitable photography noise [3, 34, 61, 71], which comprises
photon noise due to the quantum properties and uncertainty
of light as well as thermal noise inherent in charge-coupled
devices (CCDs) of the acquisition device, resulting in amplified noise, undesired motion and distortion.
Early research drew inspiration in fluid mechanics [61],
utilizing spatial decomposition [51, 61] and hand-crafted

18984

