This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionRegPose: Enhancing Multi-Person Pose Estimation using a
Diffusion-Based End-to-End Regression Approach
Lu Xiong1
Dayi Tan1
Hansheng Chen2
Wei Tian1 *
1
2
Tongji University, China
Stanford University, USA
{dytan, tian wei, xiong lu}@tongji.edu.cn, hanshengchen@stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper presents the DiffusionRegPose, a novel approach to multi-person pose estimation that converts a onestage, end-to-end keypoint regression model into a diffusionbased sampling process. Existing one-stage deterministic regression methods, though efficient, are often prone to missed
or false detections in crowded or occluded scenes, due to
their inability to reason pose ambiguity. To address these
challenges, we handle ambiguous poses in a generative fashion, i.e., sampling from the image-conditioned pose distributions characterized by a diffusion probabilistic model.
Specifically, with initial pose tokens extracted from the image, noisy pose candidates are progressively refined by interacting with the initial tokens via attention layers. Extensive
evaluations on the COCO and CrowdPose datasets show
that DiffusionRegPose clearly improves the pose accuracy
in crowded scenarios, as evidenced by a notable 4.0 AP increase in the APH metric on the CrowdPose dataset. This
demonstrates the model’s potential for robust and precise
human pose estimation in real-world applications. Code will
be available at https://github.com/cici203/DiffusionRegPose.

1. Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation is a well-explored area in computer vision, which involves locating the keypoints that correspond to body parts of each person within an image. It has
been adopted in various applications, including human action
recognition [39, 40], human body reconstruction [35, 47],
and human image generation [15, 21]. The multi-person pose
estimation can be broadly classified into three categories:
top-down [26, 34, 36, 42, 44], bottom-up [5, 8, 22, 38], and
one-stage methods [20, 29, 37, 41]. The top-down method
typically relies on an off-the-shelf object detector, which
* Corresponding author: Wei Tian
Project is supported by the Shanghai Science and Technology Commission [No. 21ZR1467400], the Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing
[No. 2023NSCQ-MSX4511], and the National Key R&D Program of China
[No. 2021YFB2501104].

Figure 1. Comparison of one-stage end-to-end human pose estimation frameworks. The naı̈ve method is represented in (a), while our
proposed diffusion-based approach is illustrated in (b).

is firstly applied to identify persons within an image and
then followed by the single-person pose estimation. In contrast, the bottom-up approach initially detects keypoints in
an instance-agnostic manner and subsequently groups them
to form individual human instances. Compared to those twostage approaches above, the one-stage method is capable
of directly outputting a sequence of potential human poses,
yielding improved computing efficiency and thus drawing
increased research attention.
A typical strategy for one-stage approaches is the keypoint regression with an end-to-end framework to learn the
mapping from the input image to the coordinates of human
joints (Fig. 1 (a)). This approach offers advantages for realtime pose estimation tasks, given its reduced computational
and memory cost, as well as the capability to achieve subpixel precision. Furthermore, when encountering truncations,
regression-based methods excel in extrapolating joint posi-

2230

