This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CosmicMan: A Text-to-Image Foundation Model for Humans
Shikai Li∗ ,

Jianglin Fu∗ ,

Kaiyuan Liu∗ , Wentao Wang∗ ,
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Kwan-Yee Lin† ,

Wayne Wu†

{lishikai, fujianglin, wangwentao}@pjlab.org.cn
1154864382@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Text Descriptions:
A close up portrait shot, an
adult Indian female, fit, a beige
wall, above chest brown bun
hair, short sleeve saree

linjunyi9335@gmail.com

Text Descriptions:
A portrait shot, an adult Caucasian female, fit,
a wooden fence and a building, mesh belt,
sleeveless mesh solid color wedding dress,
blonde bun above chin hair

wuwenyan0503@gmail.com

Text Descriptions:
A close up portrait shot, a
adult Caucasian male, fit,
natural landscape, short sleeve
normal cotton blue t-shirt,
wavy blonde above eyes hair,
woven hat

Text Descriptions:
A headshot, a Caucasian child
male, fit, a white wall, normal
long sleeve cotton black graphic
solid color sweatshirt, blonde
above eyes straight hair

Figure 1. CosmicMan. High-fidelity images generated by our proposed human-specialized text-to-image foundation model CosmicMan.
The results are with meticulous appearance, reasonable structure, and precise text-image alignment with detailed dense descriptions.

Abstract
We present CosmicMan, a text-to-image foundation
model specialized for generating high-fidelity human images. Unlike current general-purpose foundation models that are stuck in the dilemma of inferior quality and
text-image misalignment for humans, CosmicMan enables
generating photo-realistic human images with meticulous
appearance, reasonable structure, and precise text-image
alignment with detailed dense descriptions.
At the heart of CosmicMan’s success are the new reflections and perspectives on data and models: (1) We found
that data quality and a scalable data production flow are essential for the final results from trained models. Hence, we
propose a new data production paradigm, Annotate Anyone, which serves as a perpetual data flywheel to produce
high-quality data with accurate yet cost-effective annota-

tions over time. Based on this, we constructed a large-scale
dataset, CosmicMan-HQ 1.0, with 6 Million high-quality
real-world human images in a mean resolution of 1488 ×
1255, and attached with precise text annotations deriving
from 115 Million attributes in diverse granularities. (2) We
argue that a text-to-image foundation model specialized for
humans must be pragmatic – easy to integrate into downstreaming tasks while effective in producing high-quality
human images. Hence, we propose to model the relationship between dense text descriptions and image pixels in
a decomposed manner, and present Decomposed-AttentionRefocusing (Daring) training framework. It seamlessly decomposes the cross-attention features in existing text-toimage diffusion model, and enforces attention refocusing
without adding extra modules. Through Daring, we show
that explicitly discretizing continuous text space into several
basic groups that align with human body structure is the key
to tackling the misalignment problem in a breeze. Project
page:https://cosmicman-cvpr2024.github.io/.

* Joint first authors.
† Equal advising.

6955

