This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-Quality Facial Geometry and Appearance Capture at Home
Yuxuan Han

Junfeng Lyu

Feng Xu

School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University

Data Capture

Recon. Geometry and Reflectance

normal

Relighting

diffuse albedo

specular albedo

a single co-located sequence

mesh

roughness

high-quality renderings with plausible eyes’ specularities

Figure 1. We propose a novel method for high-quality face capture, featuring a low-cost and easy-to-use capture setup and the capability
to model the complete face with skin, mouth interior, hair, and eyes. Our method takes a single co-located smartphone flashlight sequence
captured in a dim room (e.g. rooms with curtains or at night) as input. It reconstructs relightable 3D face assets from the recorded data.
These can be used by common graphics software like Blender to create photo-realistic renderings in new environments.

Abstract
Facial geometry and appearance capture have demonstrated tremendous success in 3D scanning real humans in
studios. Recent works propose to democratize this technique while keeping the results high quality. However, they
are still inconvenient for daily usage. In addition, they focus
on an easier problem of only capturing facial skin. This paper proposes a novel method for high-quality face capture,
featuring an easy-to-use system and the capability to model
the complete face with skin, mouth interior, hair, and eyes.
We reconstruct facial geometry and appearance from a single co-located smartphone flashlight sequence captured in
a dim room where the flashlight is the dominant light source
(e.g. rooms with curtains or at night). To model the complete face, we propose a novel hybrid representation to effectively model both eyes and other facial regions, along
with novel techniques to learn it from images. We apply a
combined lighting model to compactly represent real illuminations and exploit a morphable face albedo model as a
reflectance prior to disentangle diffuse and specular. Experiments show that our method can capture high-quality
3D relightable scans. Our code will be released.

1. Introduction
High-quality facial geometry and appearance capture are
the core steps for cloning our human beings to get into the
digital world. To achieve this, existing works [14, 18, 31,
40, 49] develop specialized and expensive apparatus in studios to 3D scan real humans. Although impressive results
are demonstrated [1, 2], these techniques are currently only
viable for a small number of professional users as on-site
data capture is inconvenient and costly. Thus, low-cost but
high-quality face capture is strongly in demand to connect
broad daily users to the digital world.
A few recent works [3, 46] focus on democratizing the
face capture process while keeping the results as close as
possible to the studio-based techniques. The rationale of
these methods is to exploit the high-frequency light sources
in daily life, which is the key to recovering high-quality reflectance [39]. SunStage [46] exploits the sunlight where
they reconstruct facial geometry and reflectance from a single selfie video of the subject rotating under the sun. PolFace [3] exploits the smartphone flashlight, i.e. they capture
two co-located smartphone flashlight sequences with different polarization orientations in a darkroom to estimate facial
geometry and reflectance. Although both methods ease the
face capture process to a large extent compared to the stu-

697

