This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

XCube: Large-Scale 3D Generative Modeling using Sparse Voxel Hierarchies
Xuanchi Ren1,2,3 Jiahui Huang1 Xiaohui Zeng1,2,3
Sanja Fidler1,2,3 Francis Williams1
1

NVIDIA

2

University of Toronto

3

Ken Museth1

Vector Institute
Semantics

Normal

Sparse Voxel

Resolution = 10243

Figure 1. XCube (X 3 ). Our model generates high-resolution (up to 10243 ) sparse 3D voxel hierarchies of objects and driving scenes in
under 30 seconds. The voxels are enriched with arbitrary attributes such as semantics, normals, and TSDF from which mesh could be readily
extracted. Here we show randomly sampled geometries using our model trained on ShapeNet, Objaverse, Karton City, and Waymo.

Abstract
We present XCube (abbreviated as X 3 ), a novel generative model for high-resolution sparse 3D voxel grids with
arbitrary attributes. Our model can generate millions of
voxels with a finest effective resolution of up to 10243 in a
feed-forward fashion without time-consuming test-time optimization. To achieve this, we employ a hierarchical voxel
latent diffusion model which generates progressively higher
resolution grids in a coarse-to-fine manner using a custom
framework built on the highly efficient VDB data structure.
Apart from generating high-resolution objects, we demonstrate the effectiveness of XCube on large outdoor scenes at
scales of 100 m×100 m with a voxel size as small as 10 cm.
We observe clear qualitative and quantitative improvements
over past approaches. In addition to unconditional generation, we show that our model can be used to solve a variety
of tasks such as user-guided editing, scene completion from
a single scan, and text-to-3D. More results and details can
be found on our project webpage.

1. Introduction
Equipping machines with the ability to create and understand
three-dimensional scenes and objects has long been a tantalizing pursuit, promising a bridge between the digital and
physical worlds. The problem of 3D content generation lies
at the heart of this endeavor. By modeling the distribution of

objects and scenes, generative models can propose plausible
shapes and their attributes from scratch, from user input, or
from partial observations.
There has been a surge of new and exciting works on
generative models for 3D shapes in recent years. Initial work
in this area, train on datasets of 3D shapes and leverage 3D
priors to perform generation [17, 21]. While these works
produce impressive results, their diversity and shape quality
is fundamentally bounded by the size of 3D datasets (e.g.
[5, 12]), as well as their underlying 3D representation. To
address the diversity problem, one line of work [43, 65] proposed an elegant solution that leverages powerful 2D generative models to produce 3D structures using inverse rendering
and a diffusion score distillation formulation. While they
benefit from the massive corpora of 2D image data and can
generate highly diverse and high-quality shapes, the generated shapes usually suffer from the Janus face problem, and
the generation process requires test-time optimization that is
lengthy and computationally expensive. More recent works
such as [30, 32] achieve state-of-the-art 3D generation by
smartly combining a mix of 2D and 3D priors. They gain
diversity from 2D data and spatial consistency from 3D data
and speed up the generation process by operating directly
in 3D. These works motivate a deeper investigation into the
fundamentals of 3D priors for generation. In particular, current 3D priors are limited to low resolutions [26], and do
not scale well to large outdoor scenes such as those in au-

4209

