This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Backpack Full of Skills:
Egocentric Video Understanding with Diverse Task Perspectives
Simone Alberto Peirone1 Francesca Pistilli1 Antonio Alliegro1,2 Giuseppe Averta1
1
Politecnico di Torino, 2 Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
firstname.lastname@polito.it

Abstract
Human comprehension of a video stream is naturally
broad: in a few instants, we are able to understand what
is happening, the relevance and relationship of objects, and
forecast what will follow in the near future, everything all
at once. We believe that - to effectively transfer such an
holistic perception to intelligent machines - an important
role is played by learning to correlate concepts and to abstract knowledge coming from different tasks, to synergistically exploit them when learning novel skills. To accomplish
this, we look for a unified approach to video understanding which combines shared temporal modelling of human
actions with minimal overhead, to support multiple downstream tasks and enable cooperation when learning novel
skills. We then propose EgoPack, a solution that creates a
collection of task perspectives that can be carried across
downstream tasks and used as a potential source of additional insights, as a backpack of skills that a robot can
carry around and use when needed. We demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach on four Ego4D
benchmarks, outperforming current state-of-the-art methods. Project webpage: sapeirone.github.io/EgoPack.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Given a video stream, a robot is asked to learn a novel
task, e.g. Object State Change Classification (OSCC). To learn the
new skill, the robot can access previously gained knowledge regarding different tasks, such as Point of No Return (PNR), Long
Term Anticipation (LTA) and Action Recognition (AR), and use
it during the learning process to enhance downstream task performance. This knowledge is stored as graphs inside the robot’s
backpack, always ready to boost a new skill.

Our daily living activities are extremely complex and diverse, nonetheless humans have the extraordinary ability to
reason on the behaviour itself in just a few instants from
a visual input. We are able to spot what another person
is doing, predict their next actions based on current observations, and understand the implications of an activity, for
instance whether its effects are reversible. Observing someone in the kitchen by the worktable, where there is a pack of
flour and a jug of water, we can identify that they are a chef
kneading flour (reasoning about current activity). We can
also forecast that the next step will involve mixing the flour
with water (reasoning about the future), and finally obtaining dough (reasoning about implications of these actions).
This type of holistic reasoning, which is natural for humans,

is still a distant goal for artificial intelligence systems. The
challenge arises not only from the requirement of executing multiple tasks with a single architecture, but also from
the necessity of being able to abstract and repurpose such
knowledge across-tasks, for example to foster and enhance
the learning of novel skills. Current research trends in human activity understanding predominantly focus on creating several, hyper-specialised, models. This approach splits
the understanding of human activities into distinct skills,
with each model being independently trained to rely only on
“task-specific” clues for prediction [69, 73, 76]. However,
this approach disregards the valuable insights that could be
gleaned from different task perspectives. A first step in this
direction relies on Multi-Task Learning (MTL) to exploit

18275

