This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViLa-MIL: Dual-scale Vision-Language Multiple Instance Learning for
Whole Slide Image Classification
Jiangbo Shi1 , Chen Li1∗ , Tieliang Gong1 , Yefeng Zheng2 , Huazhu Fu3 *
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
1

shijiangbo@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, cli@xjtu.edu.cn, hzfu@ieee.org

Abstract
Multiple instance learning (MIL)-based framework has
become the mainstream for processing the whole slide image (WSI) with giga-pixel size and hierarchical image context in digital pathology. However, these methods heavily
depend on a substantial number of bag-level labels and
solely learn from the original slides, which are easily affected by variations in data distribution. Recently, vision
language model (VLM)-based methods introduced the language prior by pre-training on large-scale pathological
image-text pairs. However, the previous text prompt lacks
the consideration of pathological prior knowledge, therefore does not substantially boost the model’s performance.
Moreover, the collection of such pairs and the pre-training
process are very time-consuming and source-intensive. To
solve the above problems, we propose a dual-scale visionlanguage multiple instance learning (ViLa-MIL) framework
for whole slide image classification. Specifically, we propose a dual-scale visual descriptive text prompt based on
the frozen large language model (LLM) to boost the performance of VLM effectively. To transfer the VLM to process WSI efficiently, for the image branch, we propose a
prototype-guided patch decoder to aggregate the patch features progressively by grouping similar patches into the
same prototype; for the text branch, we introduce a contextguided text decoder to enhance the text features by incorporating the multi-granular image contexts. Extensive studies
on three multi-cancer and multi-center subtyping datasets
demonstrate the superiority of ViLa-MIL.

1. Introduction
Pathological examination serves as the gold standard for
cancer diagnosis [4]. With the fast development of digital scanning devices, traditional glass slides can be rapidly
* Co-corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Comparison of our ViLa-MIL with existing MIL- and
VLM-based methods. (a) MIL-based methods design various aggregation functions to generate the slide-level features; (b) VLMbased methods calculate the similarity between patches and candidate text prompts, then utilize operator like top-K to obtain
the slide-level prediction; (c) Our ViLa-MIL aligns the dual-scale
slide-level features and the visual descriptive text prompt to obtain
the slide prediction efficiently. Note that, for simplicity, only the
single-scale data stream of ViLa-MIL is visualized.

digitized into the whole slide image (WSI) [27]. WSI exhibits a hierarchical structure and huge size, which typically
has about one billion pixels at its highest resolution (0.25
µm/pixel) [36]. Therefore, obtaining a substantial dataset
with accurate pixel-level annotations can often be challenging and unattainable. To alleviate this problem, various weakly supervised learning methods [16, 20, 26, 32, 37]
have been proposed. Among them, multiple instance learning (MIL) [9, 13, 15, 24] has gained significant popularity
for tackling WSI classification tasks.
MIL utilizes small patches (i.e., instances) to gener-

11248

