This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tumor Micro-environment Interactions Guided Graph Learning for Survival
Analysis of Human Cancers from Whole-slide Pathological Images
Wei Shao

YangYang Shi

Daoqiang Zhang * JunJie Zhou

Peng Wan

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, China.

Abstract
The recent advance of deep learning technology brings
the possibility of assisting the pathologist to predict the
patients’ survival from whole-slide pathological images
(WSIs). However, most of the prevalent methods only
worked on the sampled patches in specifically or randomly
selected tumor areas of WSIs, which has very limited capability to capture the complex interactions between tumor
and its surrounding micro-environment components. As a
matter of fact, tumor is supported and nurtured in the heterogeneous tumor micro-environment(TME), and the detailed analysis of TME and their correlation with tumors
are important to in-depth analyze the mechanism of cancer
development. In this paper, we considered the spatial interactions among tumor and its two major TME components
(i.e., lymphocytes and stromal fibrosis) and presented a Tumor Micro-environment Interactions Guided Graph Learning (TMEGL) algorithm for the prognosis prediction of human cancers. Specifically, we firstly selected different types
of patches as nodes to build graph for each WSI. Then, a
novel TME neighborhood organization guided graph embedding algorithm was proposed to learn node representations that can preserve their topological structure information. Finally, a Gated Graph Attention Network is applied to
capture the survival-associated intersections among tumor
and different TME components for clinical outcome prediction. We tested TMEGL on three cancer cohorts derived
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and the experimental results indicated that TMEGL not only outperforms
the existing WSI-based survival analysis models, but also
has good explainable ability for survival prediction.

1. Introduction
Cancer is an aggressive disease seriously affecting the
health and living quality of human beings[16][35]. It is re-

ported that the number of cancer patients will dramatically
increased and is expected to achieve 28.4 million cases in
2040 [12]. Hence, it is very important to accurately predict
the patients’ clinical outcome including the survival time,
which in turn can help doctors design individual therapeutic plan at the early stage [3][15].
In the past decade, image-based technologies have
shown their great potential in healthcare researches. Among
a wide variety of imaging bio-markers including CT
images[21], Ultrasound images [28] and MRI images [34]
collected from the patients, the whole-slide pathological images (WSIs) are generally considered as the golden standard
for the diagnosis and prognosis of human cancers since they
can reveal the morphology and arrangement of cells reflecting the progression of human cancers[1][39]. Because of
the heterogeneous patterns shown in WSIs [26] that will
lead to the large inter-observation variation among different pathologists, it is necessary to design machine learning
models to help pathologists assess the survival risks of human cancers.
Recently, with the rapid development of the deep learning technology [23], training WSI-based deep learning
models for cancer survival analysis have drawn much attentions [37][33]. In comparison with the traditional survival
analysis models requiring the heavy burden of feature engineering, the deep learning models can automatically learn
survival-associated representations from WSIs to improve
the prognosis results. However, one major challenge for analyzing WSIs is that a WSI is usually with huge size (e.g.,
100,000-by-100,000 pixels), and it is impossible to directly
feed them into the deep neural network for model training .
To address the above challenges, the existing studies can
be categorized into two folds, i.e., patch-level and WSIlevel annotation methods. The patch-level annotation methods [6] [42][13] need the experts to annotate the key patches
such as the tumor patches from the WSIs at first, and then
used those patches for deep model training. However, such

* Corresponding Author

11694

