This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Split to Merge: Unifying Separated Modalities for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Xinyao Li1 Yuke Li2 * Zhekai Du1 Fengling Li3 Ke Lu1 Jingjing Li1 *
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Boston College 3 University of Technology Sydney
xinyao326@outlook.com, lidwh@bc.edu, zhekaid@std.uestc.edu.cn
fenglingli2023@gmail.com, kel@uestc.edu.cn, lijin117@yeah.net

Abstract
Large vision-language models (VLMs) like CLIP have
demonstrated good zero-shot learning performance in the
unsupervised domain adaptation task. Yet, most transfer
approaches for VLMs focus on either the language or visual
branches, overlooking the nuanced interplay between both
modalities. In this work, we introduce a Unified Modality Separation (UniMoS) framework for unsupervised domain adaptation. Leveraging insights from modality gap
studies, we craft a nimble modality separation network
that distinctly disentangles CLIP’s features into languageassociated and vision-associated components. Our proposed Modality-Ensemble Training (MET) method fosters
the exchange of modality-agnostic information while maintaining modality-specific nuances. We align features across
domains using a modality discriminator. Comprehensive
evaluations on three benchmarks reveal our approach sets
a new state-of-the-art with minimal computational costs.
Code: https://github.com/TL-UESTC/UniMoS.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [2, 7, 29, 30] aims
to apply knowledge trained on a source domain to an unlabeled target domain, a process invaluable in data-scarce
scenarios. Conventional methods often struggle with bridging the gap between source and target domains, finding it
challenging to develop consistent features across domains
[19, 39]. In image classification, aligning vision features
while neglecting semantic content can lead to difficulties in
differentiating complex samples [10, 41]. Vision-language
models (VLMs) such as CLIP [36] and ALIGN [13] circumvent these issues through joint multimodal pretraining on
images and texts. This extensive pretraining endows publicly available VLMs with robust zero-shot transfer abil* Corresponding author.

Modality / Prob.

couch

chair (√)

Modality / Prob.

shelf

file cabinet (√)

image modality

0.002

0.998

image modality

0.899

0.101

text modality

0.832

0.130

text modality

0.062

0.928

Figure 1. Examples of modality-specific information from task
Art→RealWorld in Office-Home dataset. The digits are top-2
highest classification probabilities given by both modalities.

ities and a broad base of conceptual knowledge, making
them highly suitable for comprehensive UDA. They facilitate alignment across both visual and textual modalities,
enhancing adaptability and applicability in diverse contexts.
Previous studies have shown promising results by adapting VLMs like CLIP for unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA). For instance, DAPrompt [10] introduces learning both domain-agnostic and domain-specific text embeddings, while PADCLIP [17] focuses on fine-tuning the vision branch of CLIP for adaptive visual feature extraction.
However, recent research [14, 24] highlights a modality gap
in VLMs, revealing that, despite training efforts, vision and
text features often remain distinctly distributed. We argue that adapting a single modality is less than ideal due
to the existence of unique, modality-specific cues in misaligned textual and visual components. We suggest that
certain samples are best classified using specific modalities, a hypothesis supported by empirical observations in
Fig. 1. This figure shows differing classification patterns
when each modality is adapted independently to the unlabeled target data. Text modality results derive from CLIP’s
zero-shot capabilities, while image results come from linear probing with target pseudo-labels. For instance, visually
straightforward items like a cushioned chair are accurately
classified by the vision linear classifier after tuning on target dataset. However, pretrained CLIP can erroneously cat-

23364

