This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

No More Ambiguity in 360◦ Room Layout via Bi-Layout Estimation
Yu-Ju Tsai1,3 *
Jin-Cheng Jhang2 *
Jingjing Zheng3
Wei Wang3
Albert Y. C. Chen3
Min Sun2,3
Cheng-Hao Kuo3
Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1
2
3
UC Merced
National Tsing Hua University
Amazon
{ytsai17, myang37}@ucmerced.edu

{frank890725}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

{zhejingj, wweiwan, aycchen, minnsun, chkuo}@amazon.com

Abstract
Inherent ambiguity in layout annotations poses significant challenges to developing accurate 360◦ room layout
estimation models. To address this issue, we propose a novel
Bi-Layout model capable of predicting two distinct layout
types. One stops at ambiguous regions, while the other extends to encompass all visible areas. Our model employs
two global context embeddings, where each embedding is
designed to capture specific contextual information for each
layout type. With our novel feature guidance module, the
image feature retrieves relevant context from these embeddings, generating layout-aware features for precise bi-layout
predictions. A unique property of our Bi-Layout model is its
ability to inherently detect ambiguous regions by comparing the two predictions. To circumvent the need for manual
correction of ambiguous annotations during testing, we also
introduce a new metric for disambiguating ground truth
layouts. Our method demonstrates superior performance
on benchmark datasets, notably outperforming leading approaches. Specifically, on the MatterportLayout dataset, it
improves 3DIoU from 81.70% to 82.57% across the full
test set and notably from 54.80% to 59.97% in subsets with
significant ambiguity.

1. Introduction
Room layout estimation from a single 360◦ image has received significant attention due to the availability of cheap
360◦ cameras and the demonstration of visually pleasing
room pop-ups. It also plays a vital role in indoor 3D scene
understanding [3, 15, 32, 38] as the room layout constrains
the space where objects are placed and interact. Its performance has improved significantly over the years, where the
gain comes from better algorithms design [17, 29, 31, 34],
and more challenging data collected [7, 45]. Despite the
progress, the task formulation of predicting a single layout
* Equal contribution

2D IoU = 0.13

(a) Enclosed Type Annotation
2D IoU = 0.49

(b) Extended Type Annotation

Figure 1. Inherent ambiguity in the MatterportLayout [45]. Blue
and Green represent ground truth annotations and predictions from
the SoTA models, respectively. The layout boundaries are shown on
the left, and their bird’s-eye view projections are on the right. We
define two types of layout annotation: (a) enclosed type encloses
the room. (b) extended type extends to all visible areas. The dashed
lines underscore the ambiguity in the dataset labels.

given a single 360◦ image has never been changed.
Annotating a single layout for each 360◦ image is, in fact,
an ambiguous task. For instance, consider the two images
with openings in Fig. 1, where the ground truth (GT) annotation stops at openings and encloses the nearest room in
Fig. 1(a) while extending to all visible areas inside the opening in Fig. 1(b). Notably, even within the same dataset, there
are variations in how opening regions are annotated. We
observe that this ambiguity issue in annotation is prevalent
across most datasets, and there is a lack of a clear definition
of how to annotate ambiguous regions. Furthermore, state-ofthe-art (SoTA) methods often overlook this ambiguity issue,
leading to inherent inaccuracy during training. As a result,
existing methods may predict in a manner opposite to the GT,
as shown in Fig. 1. In this paper, we define two main types
of layout annotations: enclosed and extended. The former

28056

