This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DToonify: Creating Your High-Fidelity 3D Stylized Avatar Easily from 2D
Portrait Images
Yifang Men1 *, Hanxi Liu2 *, Yuan Yao1 , Miaomiao Cui1 , Xuansong Xie1 , Zhouhui Lian2†
1
Institute for Intelligent Computing, Alibaba Group
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China

Figure 1. Given a set of RGB portrait images captured by a monocular camera, our method can learn a photorealistic representation in
neural implicit fields, and transfer it to artistic ones with underlying 3D structures changed. Multiple stylized results can be rendered from
arbitrary novel viewpoints with consistent geometry and texture.

Abstract
Visual content creation has aroused a surge of interest
given its applications in mobile photography and AR/VR.
Portrait style transfer and 3D recovery from monocular images as two representative tasks have so far evolved independently. In this paper, we make a connection between
the two, and tackle the challenging task of 3D portrait stylization – modeling high-fidelity 3D stylized avatars from
captured 2D portrait images. However, naively combining the techniques from the two isolated areas may suffer from either inadequate stylization or absence of 3D assets. To this end, we propose 3DToonify, a new framework
that introduces a progressive training scheme to achieve
3D style adaption on spatial neural representation (SNR).
SNR is constructed with implicit fields and they are dy* Denotes equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn.

This work was partially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.: 62372015).

namically optimized by the progressive training scheme,
which consists of three stages: guided prior learning, deformable geometry adaption and explicit texture adaption.
In this way, stylized geometry and texture are learned in
SNR in an explicit and structured way with only a single
stylized exemplar needed. Moreover, our method obtains
style-adaptive underlying structures (i.e., deformable geometry and exaggerated texture) and view-consistent stylized avatar rendering from arbitrary novel viewpoints. Both
qualitative and quantitative experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of
our method for automatically generating exemplar-guided
3D stylized avatars.

1. Introduction
Portrait style transfer [30, 53] aims to transform real face
images into artistic 2D portraits in desired visual styles
while maintaining personal identity. However, given a sequence of portrait images captured from different viewpoints, existing portrait style transfer methods are typically

10127

