This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ESR-NeRF: Emissive Source Reconstruction Using LDR Multi-view Images
Jinseo Jeong1 Junseo Koo1 Qimeng Zhang2 Gunhee Kim1
1
Seoul National University 2 Korea University
jinseo@vision.snu.ac.kr, junseo.koo@vision.snu.ac.kr, zoe1024@korea.ac.kr, gunhee@snu.ac.kr
https://jinseo.kr/ESR-NeRF

Edit emission

log!" .

Abstract

4
3

Existing NeRF-based inverse rendering methods suppose that scenes are exclusively illuminated by distant
light sources, neglecting the potential influence of emissive
sources within a scene. In this work, we confront this limitation using LDR multi-view images captured with emissive sources turned on and off. Two key issues must be
addressed: 1) ambiguity arising from the limited dynamic
range along with unknown lighting details, and 2) the expensive computational cost in volume rendering to backtrace the paths leading to final object colors. We present
a novel approach, ESR-NeRF, leveraging neural networks
as learnable functions to represent ray-traced fields. By
training networks to satisfy light transport segments, we
regulate outgoing radiances, progressively identifying emissive sources while being aware of reflection areas. The results on scenes encompassing emissive sources with various properties demonstrate the superiority of ESR-NeRF
in qualitative and quantitative ways. Our approach also
extends its applicability to the scenes devoid of emissive
sources, achieving lower CD metrics on the DTU dataset.

1. Introduction
Extensive research has focused on reconstructing 3D object
structures [16, 43, 47, 86], material properties [18, 29, 65],
and lighting [15, 33, 34, 74, 79] from 2D images, applicable across domains including 3D graphics and augmented
reality [62, 63, 69, 72]. This endeavor not only facilitates the creation of life-like virtual objects but also streamlines the process of scene manipulation [27, 58, 61, 73].
Recent advancements [24, 30, 36, 71] have built on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [40] successes in novel view
synthesis [3, 4, 45, 81, 91]. Significant progress in relighting [37, 38, 50] has facilitated scene editing via manipulating the reconstructed light sources. However, existing methods predominantly deal with the scenes lit by
distant sources, like environment maps or collocated flashlights. Notably, NeRF-based inverse rendering has yet to

2
1

Unspecified light
source properties

0

255 pixel values Information loss

Desired
Limited to 255

Emission? Reflection?
Threshold 0.65

Threshold 0.75

Unrealistic

Figure 1. Challenges posed by emissive sources in LDR images.
Green, red, and blue in thresholded images respectively show true
positives, false negatives, and false positives of source identification. Thresholding values are scaled down divided by 255. The
contrast between light on and off pixel values is more pronounced
in surroundings than emissive sources. Inaccurate reconstruction
of emissive sources disrupts scene editing, causing reflection areas
to stay static while only the source colors change.

consider scenes with multiple emissive sources, a common
real-world illumination condition.
Emissive sources in a scene introduce critical challenges:
(i) ambiguity in decomposing scene components and (ii)
high computational costs for analyzing the causes of pixel
colors. This ambiguity stems from difficulties in identifying
emissive source regions, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Contrary to
prior setups [6–8, 66, 85, 93], we allow the possibility of numerous emissive sources throughout the scene. In standard
photographs with pixel values from 0 to 255, the distinction between emissive sources and nearby reflection areas
is challenging. As shown in Fig. 1, relying solely on pixel
value thresholding is insufficient for differentiating between
emissive sources and their reflections. Naive inverse path
tracing is impractical, due to the computational costs rising
exponentially with the number of ray bounces in volume
rendering. This can cause inaccuracy in emissive source reconstruction, yielding unrealistic illumination in reflective
areas as users manipulate emissive sources.
To address these challenges, we introduce ESR-NeRF

4598

