This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-grained Prototypical Voting with Heterogeneous Mixup for
Semi-supervised 2D-3D Cross-modal Retrieval

1

Fan Zhang1 , Xian-Sheng Hua2 , Chong Chen2 , Xiao Luo3†
Georgia Tech Shenzhen Institute, Tianjin University (GTSI),
2
Terminus Group, 3 University of California, Los Angeles

fanzhang@gatech.edu, huaxiansheng@gmail.com, chenchong.cz@gmail.com, xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of semi-supervised 2D3D retrieval, which aims to align both labeled and unlabeled 2D and 3D data into the same embedding space. The
problem is challenging due to the complicated heterogeneous relationships between 2D and 3D data. Moreover,
label scarcity in real-world applications hinders from generating discriminative representations. In this paper, we
propose a semi-supervised approach named Fine-grained
Prototypcical Voting with Heterogeneous Mixup (FIVE),
which maps both 2D and 3D data into a common embedding space for cross-modal retrieval. Specifically, we generate fine-grained prototypes to model intra-class variation
for both 2D and 3D data. Then, considering each unlabeled
sample as a query, we retrieve relevant prototypes to vote
for reliable and robust pseudo-labels, which serve as guidance for discriminative learning under label scarcity. Furthermore, to bridge the semantic gap between two modalities, we mix cross-modal pairs with similar semantics in the
embedding space and then perform similarity learning for
cross-modal discrepancy reduction in a soft manner. The
whole FIVE is optimized with the consideration of sharpness to mitigate the impact of potential label noise. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets validate the superiority of FIVE compared with a range of baselines in different settings. On average, FIVE outperforms the second-best
approach by 4.74% on 3D MNIST, 12.94% on ModelNet10,
and 22.10% on ModelNet40.

1. Introduction
3D visual understanding has received growing interest in
computer vision and graphics. Among various 3D visual
problems, 3D retrieval [12, 52] aims to return similar 3D
shapes given a query. Early approaches usually concentrate
on single-modal 3D retrieval, which transfers 3D data into
† Corresponding author.

Embedding of Class A

Prototype of Class A

Embedding of Class B

Prototype of Class B

Embedding of Class C

Prototype of Class C

(a) Single Centroid

(b) Prototypical Voting

Figure 1. Compared with a single centroid for each class (a),
our prototypical voting (b) can provide more reliable and robust
pseudo-labels at the distribution boundaries.

an embedding space while maintaining the similarity structure [63]. Recently, due to the massive 2D and 3D data from
artificial intelligence generated content, a more challenging
problem of 2D-3D cross-modal retrieval has gained popularity, which aims to return data from one modality given a
query from the other modality [35, 44].
In literature, researchers have proposed a variety of 2D3D cross-modal retrieval approaches, which generally map
both 2D and 3D samples into a single low-dimensional
space with heterogeneous gaps reduced [12, 25, 36, 46,
60, 62]. A portion of these approaches generate groundtruth similarity structures which are then used to match the
similarity relationships of deep representations using pairwise or triplet objectives [46, 62]. Another line of the research is to generate anchors for different classes, which
can directly guide the optimization process using a pointwise objective [12, 25]. These approaches have also been
expanded to address more circumstances including 3D object retrieval [17, 37] and CAD model retrieval [2, 15].
Despite their great success, current cross-modal retrieval
approaches [12, 25, 34] usually require large amounts of labeled 2D and 3D data for end-to-end training. However,
in practice, annotating a huge number of samples is prohibitively costly or even impossible. For instance, we can-

17016

