This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagicAnimate: Temporally Consistent Human Image Animation
using Diffusion Model
Jianfeng Zhang2 Jun Hao Liew2 Hanshu Yan2 Jia-Wei Liu1
Chenxu Zhang2 Jiashi Feng2 Mike Zheng Shou1 *
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 ByteDance
reference

Zhongcong Xu1

1. Introduction
Given a sequence of motion signals such as video, depth,
or pose, the image animation task aims to bring static images to life. The animation of humans, animals, cartoons,
or other general objects, has attracted much attention in research [27, 28, 52]. Among these, human image animation [15, 35, 48] has been the most extensively explored,
given its potential applications across various domains, including social media, movie industry, and entertainment,
* Corresponding author

DisCo

t

t

Ours

This paper studies the human image animation task,
which aims to generate a video of a certain reference identity following a particular motion sequence. Existing animation works typically employ the frame-warping technique to animate the reference image towards the target
motion. Despite achieving reasonable results, these approaches face challenges in maintaining temporal consistency throughout the animation due to the lack of temporal
modeling and poor preservation of reference identity. In
this work, we introduce MagicAnimate, a diffusion-based
framework that aims at enhancing temporal consistency,
preserving reference image faithfully, and improving animation fidelity. To achieve this, we first develop a video
diffusion model to encode temporal information. Second, to
maintain the appearance coherence across frames, we introduce a novel appearance encoder to retain the intricate
details of the reference image. Leveraging these two innovations, we further employ a simple video fusion technique
to encourage smooth transitions for long video animation.
Empirical results demonstrate the superiority of our method
over baseline approaches on two benchmarks. Notably, our
approach outperforms the strongest baseline by over 38%
in terms of video fidelity on the challenging TikTok dancing dataset. Code and model will be made available at
https://showlab.github.io/magicanimate.

MRAA*

Abstract

t

Figure 1. Given a sequence of motion signals, MagicAnimate produces temporally consistent animation for reference identity images, whereas state-of-the-art methods fail to generalize or preserve the reference appearance, as highlighted in red boxes. The
motion sequence is overlaid at the corner. ∗ Note that the official
MRAA implementation directly uses video frames as the driving
signal. The video results can be found on our Project Page.

etc. In contrast to traditional graphic approaches [9, 41],
the abundance of data enables the development of low-cost
data-driven animation frameworks [6, 7, 12, 36, 43, 47].
Existing data-driven methods for human image animation can be categorized into two primary groups based on
the generative backbone models used, namely GAN-based
and diffusion-based frameworks. The former [27, 36] typically employs a warping function to deform the reference
image into the target pose and utilize GAN models to extrapolate the missing or occluded body parts. In contrast,
the latter [15, 35] harness appearance [21] and pose conditions [50] to generate the target image based on pretrained

1481

