This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discriminative Probing and Tuning for Text-to-Image Generation
Leigang Qu1 , Wenjie Wang1 ,* Yongqi Li2 , Hanwang Zhang3,4 , Liqiang Nie5 , Tat-Seng Chua1
1

National University of Singapore, 2 Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 3 Nanyang Technological University,
4
Skywork AI, 5 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
leigangqu@gmail.com, wenjiewang96@gmail.com, liyongqi0@gmail.com
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg, nieliqiang@gmail.com, dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Despite advancements in text-to-image generation (T2I),
prior methods often face text-image misalignment problems
such as relation confusion in generated images. Existing solutions involve cross-attention manipulation for better
compositional understanding or integrating large language
models for improved layout planning. However, the inherent
alignment capabilities of T2I models are still inadequate.
By reviewing the link between generative and discriminative
modeling, we posit that T2I models’ discriminative abilities
may reflect their text-image alignment proficiency during
generation. In this light, we advocate bolstering the discriminative abilities of T2I models to achieve more precise
text-to-image alignment for generation. We present a discriminative adapter built on T2I models to probe their discriminative abilities on two representative tasks and leverage discriminative fine-tuning to improve their text-image
alignment. As a bonus of the discriminative adapter, a selfcorrection mechanism can leverage discriminative gradients to better align generated images to text prompts during
inference. Comprehensive evaluations across three benchmark datasets, including both in-distribution and out-ofdistribution scenarios, demonstrate our method’s superior
generation performance. Meanwhile, it achieves state-ofthe-art discriminative performance on the two discriminative tasks compared to other generative models. The code is
available at https://dpt-t2i.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image generation (T2I) aims to synthesize highquality and semantically-relevant images to a given freeform text prompt. In recent years, the rapid development
of diffusion models [22, 47] has ignited the research enthusiasm for content generation, leading to a significant leap
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by NExT++ Research
Center and National Research Foundation and Singapore under its AI Singapore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-RP-2021-022).

“A blue bird and
a brown bowl. ”

“Five pandas are
eating bamboo. ”

“A white horse looking
through the window of a
tall brick building. ”

Attribute Binding

Counting Error

Relation Confusion

(a) Text-Image Misalignment Problems

x

“The boy sitting in the middle.”

y'

“Three children and their mother
sitting behind are flying kites.” y

Discrimination
Generation

x̂

Which matches y
better, x or x̂ ?

Where is the object
described by y' ?

(b) Improving Generation with Discrimination

Figure 1. Illustration of the (a) text-image misalignment problem
and (b) our motivation by enhancing discriminative abilities of T2I
models to promote generative abilities. We list three wrong generation results generated by SD-v2.1 [43] with regard to attribute
binding, counting error, and relation confusion in (a).

in T2I [40, 43, 45]. However, due to the weak compositional reasoning capabilities, current T2I models still suffer
from the Text-Image Misalignment problem [28], such as
attribute binding [15], counting error [37], and relation confusion [37] (see Fig. 1), especially in complicated multiobject generation scenes.
Two lines of work have made remarkable progress in
improving text-image alignment for T2I models. The first
line proposes to intervene in cross-modal attention activations guided by linguistic structures [15] or test time optimization [4]. However, they heavily rely on the induc-

7434

