This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LucidDreamer: Towards High-Fidelity Text-to-3D Generation
via Interval Score Matching
Yixun Liang*1 Xin Yang*1,2 Jiantao Lin1 Haodong Li1 Xiaogang Xu3,4 Yingcong Chen∗∗1,2
1
HKUST (GZ) 2 HKUST 3 CUHK 4 Zhejiang University
yliang982@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

xin.yang@connect.ust.hk

jlin695@hkust-gz.edu.cn

hli736@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

xiaogangxu00@gmail.com

yingcongchen@ust.hk

“A portrait of Hatsune Miku, robot”

“A beautiful cyborg with brown hair”

“An armored green-skin orc warrior riding a vicious hog”

“A warrior with red cape riding a horse”

“A forbidden castle high up in the mountains”

“A highly-detailed sandcastle”

“Gandalf smiling, white hair, head, HDR,
photorealistic,8K.”

“A portrait of IRONMAN, white
hair , head, HDR, photorealistic,8K.”

“'Zombie JOKER, head, HDR,
photorealistic,8K.”

“Saber from Fate stay Night, 3D,
girl, anime”

“A DSLR photo of a
football helmet.”

“ Viking axe, fantasy, weapon,
blender, 8k, HD. ”

“ A DSLR photo of a LV handbag”

“A pyramid shaped burrito
with a slice cut out of it.”

“A DSLR photo of a bagel filled
with cream cheese and lox.”

“ A delicious hamburger.”

“ A blue motorcycle.”

“A Supercar made out of toy bricks.”

Figure 1. Examples of text-to-3D content creations with our framework. We present a text-to-3D generation framework, named the
LucidDreamer, to distill high-fidelity textures and shapes from pretrained 2D diffusion models (detailed shows on Sec. 4) with a novel
Interval Score Matching objective and an Advanced 3D distillation pipeline. Together, we achieve superior 3D generation results with
photorealistic quality in a short training time. Please zoom in for details.

* Conceptualization: Yixun Liang: 60%, Xin Yang: 40%,
* Methodology:
Xin Yang: 60%, Yixun Liang: 40%.

** Corresponding author.
*The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

6517

