This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Naturally Supervised 3D Visual Grounding with
Language-Regularized Concept Learners
Chun Feng*
Stanford University

Joy Hsu*
Stanford University

Abstract
3D visual grounding is a challenging task that often requires direct and dense supervision, notably the semantic
label for each object in the scene. In this paper, we instead study the naturally supervised setting that learns from
only 3D scene and QA pairs, where prior works underperform. We propose the Language-Regularized Concept
Learner (LARC), which uses constraints from language as
regularization to significantly improve the accuracy of neurosymbolic concept learners in the naturally supervised setting.
Our approach is based on two core insights: the first is that
language constraints (e.g., a word’s relation to another)
can serve as effective regularization for structured representations in neuro-symbolic models; the second is that we
can query large language models to distill such constraints
from language properties. We show that LARC improves
performance of prior works in naturally supervised 3D visual grounding, and demonstrates a wide range of 3D visual reasoning capabilities—from zero-shot composition, to
data efficiency and transferability. Our method represents
a promising step towards regularizing structured visual reasoning frameworks with language-based priors, for learning
in settings without dense supervision.

1. Introduction
3D visual reasoning models often require direct supervision
during training to achieve faithful 3D visual grounding, for
example, in the form of classification labels for each ground
truth object bounding box in the scene. However, dense
visual annotation for 3D scenes is difficult and expensive to
acquire. In this paper, we study the more practical setting
of naturally supervised 3D visual grounding, where models
learn by looking at only scene and question-answer pairs, and
do not use object-level classification supervision. Prior stateof-the-art works for 3D referring expression comprehension
[5, 23, 26, 29, 31, 43] do not show strong visual reasoning
* Equal contribution.

Weiyu Liu
Stanford University

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Prior concept learners with direct supervision
Ground truth
3D object
bounding boxes

“Select the printer
next to the copier”

Object-level
classification labels

Neuro-symbolic
concept learner

Language-Regularized Concept Learners (LARC) with indirect supervision
LLM

“Select the printer
next to the copier”

Constraints

Neuro-symbolic
concept learner

Figure 1. Compared to prior works, LARC conducts 3D visual
grounding in the naturally supervised setting, by training neurosymbolic concept learners with language regularization.

capabilities, such as generalization and data efficiency, in
this indirectly supervised setup (See Figure 1).
To this end, we propose a neuro-symbolic concept learner
that leverages constraints from language (e.g., a word’s relation to another), as regularization in low guidance settings.
Compared to visual annotations, language-based priors are
cheap to annotate, and free when distilled from large language models (LLMs). We show that especially in settings
with indirect supervision, models benefit from such regularization as it reduces overfitting on noisy signals. Notably,
we leverage the structured and interpretable representations
from neuro-symbolic methods to effectively inject constraintbased regularization.
Neuro-symbolic concept learners decompose visual reasoning queries into modular functions, and execute them
with neural networks. Each network outputs representations
that can be indexed by its concept name (e.g., chair) and
arity (e.g., that the concept describes a binary relation) [36].
Due to this modularity, prior neuro-symbolic works have
shown strong generalization, data efficiency, and transferability in the 3D domain [26]. However, they require direct

13269

