This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D-DRESS: A 4D Dataset of
Real-World Human Clothing With Semantic Annotations
Wenbo Wang∗1

Hsuan-I Ho∗1
Jie Song1

Chen Guo1
Juan Jose Zarate†1

Boxiang Rong1

Artur Grigorev1,2

Otmar Hilliges1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
https://ait.ethz.ch/4d-dress

Figure 1. Overview of 4D-DRESS. We propose the first real-world 4D dataset of human clothing, capturing 64 human outfits in more than
520 motion sequences. These sequences include a) high-quality 4D textured scans; for each scan, we annotate b) vertex-level semantic
labels, thereby obtaining c) the corresponding garment meshes and fitted SMPL(-X) body meshes.

Abstract
The studies of human clothing for digital avatars have predominantly relied on synthetic datasets. While easy to collect, synthetic data often fall short in realism and fail to
capture authentic clothing dynamics. Addressing this gap,
we introduce 4D-DRESS, the first real-world 4D dataset
advancing human clothing research with its high-quality
4D textured scans and garment meshes. 4D-DRESS captures 64 outfits in 520 human motion sequences, amounting to 78k textured scans. Creating a real-world clothing
dataset is challenging, particularly in annotating and segmenting the extensive and complex 4D human scans. To
address this, we develop a semi-automatic 4D human parsing pipeline. We efficiently combine a human-in-the-loop
process with automation to accurately label 4D scans in di*

Equal contributors

†

Corresponding author

verse garments and body movements. Leveraging precise
annotations and high-quality garment meshes, we establish several benchmarks for clothing simulation and reconstruction. 4D-DRESS offers realistic and challenging data
that complements synthetic sources, paving the way for advancements in research of lifelike human clothing.

1. Introduction
Human clothing is crucial in various applications such as
3D games, animations, and virtual try-on. Researchers are
actively investigating algorithms for clothing reconstruction [12, 24, 34] and simulation [4, 5, 15], to achieve realistic clothing behavior, enhance user engagement, and enable cross-industry applications. These algorithms are frequently developed and assessed using synthetic datasets [3,
7, 53], since they comprise a) meshes covering various
garment types and outfits and b) parametric body mod-

550

