This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Triangular Distribution in Visual World
Ping Chen†1 , Xingpeng Zhang†4 , Chengtao Zhou1 , Dichao Fan1 , Peng Tu3 , Le Zhang1 , Yanlin Qian1,2 *
1
MicroBT Inc. 2 Waseda University, IPS. 3 RuqiMobility Inc.
4
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu, China

Abstract
Convolution neural network is successful in pervasive vision tasks, including label distribution learning, which usually takes the form of learning an injection from the nonlinear visual features to the well-defined labels. However,
how the discrepancy between features is mapped to the label
discrepancy is ambient, and its correctness is not guaranteed.To address these problems, we study the mathematical
connection between feature and its label, presenting a general and simple framework for label distribution learning.
We propose a so-called Triangular Distribution Transform
(TDT) to build an injective function between feature and
label, guaranteeing that any symmetric feature discrepancy
linearly reflects the difference between labels. The proposed
TDT can be used as a plug-in in mainstream backbone networks to address different label distribution learning tasks.
Experiments on Facial Age Recognition, Illumination Chromaticity Estimation, and Aesthetics assessment show that
TDT achieves on-par or better results than the prior arts.
Code is available at https://github.com/redcping/TDT.

1. Introduction
Label distribution learning (LDL) utilizes the advantages
of distribution to solve the task of quasi-continuous label or inner-correlation between labels [22, 58]. LDL assigns a distribution over label value to an instance, which
can be obtained by fitting a Gaussian or Triangle distribution whose peak indicates the label and represents the relative importance of each label describing an instance [58].
Hence, LDL has an impact on many real-world applications, such as facial age estimation [22], head-pose estimation [20, 23], crowd counting [76], zero-shot learning
[35], facial beauty prediction [51], hierarchical classification [68], partial multi-label learning [69] and so on.
When LDL was first proposed, it mainly used maximum
entropy and Kullback-Leibler divergence to learn label distribution [22]. Then, a more efficient optimization method
BFGS is proposed to replace the IIS method [19]. The

LDL is also widely combined with other algorithms, such as
random forest [57], deep convolution neural network [71],
hashing method [77], Bayesian [79], metric learning [80]
and so on. Although LDL has wide applications, it encounters some challenges, i.e. the feature space and label (solution) space are inhomogeneous [57]. To be more specific,
the feature space generated by the model is nonlinear, while
the label information is gradually changing. In addition, the
existing label distribution is mainly based on label information to construct the distribution, placing the label information for one instance over the whole label distribution.
Therefore, this article proposes a Triangular Distribution
Transform (TDT) method, aiming to linearly map the transformed feature information to its corresponding label information concisely and efficiently. Inspired by label distribution learning [57], we propose using symmetric triangular
distributions to represent this symmetric linear transformation. Specifically, the high-dimensional features obtained
by feature extraction networks will reflect the relationship
between labels through symmetric triangular distributions.
To better achieve this goal, we draw inspiration from the
paradigm of comparative learning and supply two sets of
images to the feature extraction network each time. One set
is the prior knowledge that needs to be compared, and the
other set is the training sample. Our method is more suitable for visual tasks with linearly continuous changing label
information, such as age, aesthetics, lighting intensity, etc.
Our TDT can be used as a plug-in in mainstream backbone
networks. Therefore, our method has achieved excellent results on multiple visual tasks, such as facial age estimation,
image aesthetics estimation, and illumination estimation.
The contribution of this article is summarized as follows:
• We analyze to lay the theoretical foundation for the
Triangular Distribution Transform, enabling feature
discrepancy to explain label difference.
• We show with the proposed symmetry-related loss
and commutativity-related loss, TDT can be learnt by
mainstream backbone networks.
• TDT outperforms other methods on age estimation,
aesthetics estimation, and illumination estimation.

* Corresponding author. †These authors contributed equally.

11019

