This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AiOS: All-in-One-Stage Expressive Human Pose and Shape Estimation
Qingping Sun*,1,2 , Yanjun Wang∗,1 , Ailing Zeng3 , Wanqi Yin1 , Chen Wei1 ,
Wenjia Wang5 , Haiyi Mei 1 , Chi-Sing Leung2 , Ziwei Liu4 , Lei Yang1,5 , Zhongang Cai†,1,4,5
1
SenseTime Research 2 City University of Hong Kong
3
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
4
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory
∗

Equal Contributions, † Corresponding Author

https://ttxskk.github.io/AiOS/

ℳ!"#$

Encoder

ℳ

Merge

Decoder

ℳ)"*'

ℳ%&'(

(a) Top-Down, Multi-Stage

(b) Top-Down, One-Stage

(c) Our All-in-One-Stage Method

Figure 1. A comparison of existing methods in EHPS. (a) Top-down, multi-stage methods typically use detectors to detect humans, then use
different networks to regress body parts on cropped images. (b) Top-down, one-stage methods use only one network for regression but still
require detectors and rely on the cropped image. (c) Our all-in-one-stage pipeline, end-to-end human detection, and regression on full frame.

Abstract
Expressive human pose and shape estimation (a.k.a. 3D
whole-body mesh recovery) involves the human body, hand,
and expression estimation. Most existing methods have tackled this task in a two-stage manner, first detecting the human
body part with an off-the-shelf detection model and then inferring the different human body parts individually. Despite
the impressive results achieved, these methods suffer from
1) loss of valuable contextual information via cropping, 2)
introducing distractions, and 3) lacking inter-association
among different persons and body parts, inevitably causing
performance degradation, especially for crowded scenes. To
address these issues, we introduce a novel all-in-one-stage
framework, AiOS, for multiple expressive human pose and
shape recovery without an additional human detection step.
Specifically, our method is built upon DETR, which treats
multi-person whole-body mesh recovery task as a progressive set prediction problem with various sequential detection.
We devise the decoder tokens and extend them to our task.
Specifically, we first employ a human token to probe a human location in the image and encode global features for
each instance, which provides a coarse location for the later
transformer block. Then, we introduce a joint-related token

to probe the human joint in the image and encoder a finegrained local feature, which collaborates with the global
feature to regress the whole-body mesh. This straightforward but effective model outperforms previous state-of-theart methods by a 9% reduction in NMVE on AGORA, a
30% reduction in PVE on EHF, a 10% reduction in PVE on
ARCTIC, and a 3% reduction in PVE on EgoBody.

1. Introduction
Expressive human pose and shape estimation (EHPS) 1 is a
rapidly developing area. It plays an important role in human
understanding and has broad applications in the animation,
gaming, and streaming industries. Unlike human pose and
shape estimation (HPS), which focuses solely on the human
body, EHPS is designed to jointly estimate human body
poses, hand gestures, and facial expressions from the image.
In mainstream studies, the common approaches involve
utilizing parametric human models, such as SMPL-X [30],
to represent the articulated mesh model of a human and to
regress the parameters for each body part. Drawing from
research experience in single-part estimation, such as body
1 EHPS is used interchangeably with 3D whole-body human mesh recovery in this work

1834

