This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Modal Proxy Learning Towards Personalized Visual Multiple Clustering
Jiawei Yao1 Qi Qian2 Juhua Hu1 *
1
School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington, Tacoma, WA 98402, USA
2
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{jwyao, juhuah}@uw.edu, qi.qian@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Multiple clustering has gained significant attention in
recent years due to its potential to reveal multiple hidden
structures of data from different perspectives. The advent of
deep multiple clustering techniques has notably advanced
the performance by uncovering complex patterns and relationships within large datasets. However, a major challenge
arises as users often do not need all the clusterings that algorithms generate, and figuring out the one needed requires
a substantial understanding of each clustering result. Traditionally, aligning a user’s brief keyword of interest with
the corresponding vision components was challenging, but
the emergence of multi-modal and large language models
(LLMs) has begun to bridge this gap. In response, given unlabeled target visual data, we propose Multi-MaP, a novel
method employing a multi-modal proxy learning process. It
leverages CLIP encoders to extract coherent text and image embeddings, with GPT-4 integrating users’ interests to
formulate effective textual contexts. Moreover, reference
word constraint and concept-level constraint are designed
to learn the optimal text proxy according to the user’s interest. Multi-MaP not only adeptly captures a user’s interest via a keyword but also facilitates identifying relevant
clusterings. Our extensive experiments show that MultiMaP consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
all benchmark multi-clustering vision tasks. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Alexander-Yao/Multi-MaP.

1. Introduction
Clustering, which groups data points based on their similarities, has been extensively researched, since huge amount of
unlabeled data are becoming more and more available. Traditional methods [2, 16, 19] exploit general-purpose handcrafted features that are not always ideal for specific tasks.
Recently, deep clustering algorithms [9, 23, 33] leverage
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) significantly improve performance. However, most algorithms yield a single data
* Corresponding author

User

GPT-4

Multi-Map

I am eager to see the color-based and species-based
clustering results.

Common colors include red,
yellow, green……

Common species include
apples, bananas……

GPT-4

Multi-Map

Figure 1. The flow chart of Multi-MaP. Multi-MaP obtains multiple clustering results based on the high-level concepts from users
and the reference words from GPT-4.

partition, while data can exhibit multiple aspects (e.g., color
and species as shown in Fig. 1). Traditional multiple clustering algorithms [1, 12] have been developed to generate
different partitions for varying applications, demonstrating
the ability to identify multiple distinct clusterings from a
dataset. Contemporary advancements in the field reveal
a growing inclination among researchers to integrate deep
learning methodologies for facilitating multiple clustering
outcomes. Predominantly, such techniques capitalize on
auto-encoders and data augmentation processes to capture
a broad spectrum of feature dimensions, thereby enhancing
the performance of multiple clustering [18, 27, 35].
However, a common issue arises as users often do not
require all the clusterings generated by the algorithm, and
identifying the relevant ones necessitates a substantial understanding of each clustering result. Therefore, in this
work, we initiate an exploration into a method that is adept
at accurately capturing and reflecting a user’s interest. Users
typically express their interests through concise keywords
(e.g., color or species), and aligning these with different visual components precisely is challenging. Fortunately, the
advent of multi-modal models like CLIP [25] that aligns images to their corresponding text descriptions, can be helpful
to fill this gap. However, unlike methods that employ labeled data to fine-tune pre-trained models [6, 30], multiple

14066

