This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ODIN: A Single Model for 2D and 3D Segmentation
Ayush Jain1 , Pushkal Katara1 , Nikolaos Gkanatsios1 , Adam W. Harley2 , Gabriel Sarch1 ,
Kriti Aggarwal3 , Vishrav Chaudhary3 , Katerina Fragkiadaki1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Stanford University, 3 Microsoft
{ayushj2, pkatara ngkanats,gsarch,kfragki2}@andrew.cmu.edu
aharley@cs.stanford.edu, {kragga,vchaudhary}@microsoft.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art models on contemporary 3D segmentation benchmarks like ScanNet consume and label datasetprovided 3D point clouds, obtained through post processing of sensed multiview RGB-D images. They are typically trained in-domain, forego large-scale 2D pre-training
and outperform alternatives that featurize the posed RGBD multiview images instead. The gap in performance between methods that consume posed images versus postprocessed 3D point clouds has fueled the belief that 2D
and 3D perception require distinct model architectures.
In this paper, we challenge this view and propose ODIN
(Omni-Dimensional INstance segmentation), a model that
can segment and label both 2D RGB images and 3D point
clouds, using a transformer architecture that alternates between 2D within-view and 3D cross-view information fusion. Our model differentiates 2D and 3D feature operations through the positional encodings of the tokens involved, which capture pixel coordinates for 2D patch tokens
and 3D coordinates for 3D feature tokens. ODIN achieves
state-of-the-art performance on ScanNet200, Matterport3D
and AI2THOR 3D instance segmentation benchmarks, and
competitive performance on ScanNet, S3DIS and COCO. It
outperforms all previous works by a wide margin when the
sensed 3D point cloud is used in place of the point cloud
sampled from 3D mesh. When used as the 3D perception engine in an instructable embodied agent architecture, it sets
a new state-of-the-art on the TEACh action-from-dialogue
benchmark. Our code and checkpoints can be found at the
project website https://odin-seg.github.io.

1. Introduction
There has been a surge of interest in porting 2D foundational image features to 3D scene understanding [8, 14, 20,
22, 36, 39, 44–46]. Some methods lift pre-trained 2D image
features using sensed depth to 3D feature clouds [8, 36, 39,
45]. Others distill 2D backbones to differentiable paramet-

ric 3D models, e.g., NeRFs, by training them per scene to
render 2D feature maps of pre-trained backbones [22, 44].
Despite this effort, and despite the ever-growing power of
2D backbones [4, 51], the state-of-the-art on established 3D
segmentation benchmarks such as ScanNet [6] and ScanNet200 [40] still consists of models that operate directly in
3D, without any 2D pre-training stage [27, 42]. Given the
obvious power of 2D pre-training, why is it so difficult to
yield improvements in these 3D tasks?
We observe that part of the issue lies in a key implementation detail underlying these 3D benchmark evaluations.
Benchmarks like ScanNet do not actually ask methods to
use RGB-D images as input, even though this is the sensor data. Instead, these benchmarks first register all RGBD frames into a single colored point cloud and reconstruct
the scene as cleanly as possible, relying on manually tuned
stages for bundle adjustment, outlier rejection and meshing,
and ask models to label the output reconstruction. While
it is certainly viable to scan and reconstruct a room before labelling any of the objects inside, this pipeline is perhaps inconsistent with the goals of embodied vision (and
typical 2D vision), which involves dealing with actual sensor data and accounting for missing or partial observations.
We therefore hypothesize that method rankings will change,
and the impact of 2D pre-training will become evident, if
we force the 3D models to take posed RGB-D frames as input rather than pre-computed mesh reconstructions. Our revised evaluation setting also opens the door to new methods,
which can train and perform inference in either single-view
or multi-view settings, with either RGB or RGB-D sensors.
We propose Omni-Dimensional INstance segmentation
(ODIN)† , a model for 2D and 3D object segmentation and
labelling that can parse single-view RGB images and/or
multiview posed RGB-D images. As shown in Fig. 1, ODIN
alternates between 2D and 3D stages in its architecture,
† The Norse god Odin sacrificed one of his eyes for wisdom, trading

one mode of perception for a more important one. Our approach sacrifices
perception on post-processed meshes for perception on posed RGB-D images.

3564

