This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual In-Context Prompting
Feng Li , Qing Jiang] , Hao Zhang , Tianhe Ren† , Shilong Liu¶ , Xueyan Zou§ , Huaizhe Xu ,
Hongyang Li] , Jianwei Yang‡1 , Chunyuan Li‡ , Lei Zhang†2 , Jianfeng Gao‡2
 HKUST

‡ Microsoft Research, Redmond

† IDEA

] SCUT

¶ Tsinghua

§ UW-Madison

1. Project Lead 2. Equal Advisory Contribution

Figure 1. Our model DINOv supports generic and referring segmentation to associate multiple or single objects with the user input visual
prompts. A user can input one or more in-context visual prompts (scribbles, masks, boxes, etc.) to improve the segmentation performance.

Abstract
In-context prompting in large language models (LLMs)
has become a prevalent approach to improve zero-shot capabilities, but this idea is less explored in the vision domain. Existing visual prompting methods focus on referring segmentation to segment the most relevant object,
falling short of addressing many generic vision tasks like
open-set segmentation and detection. In this paper, we
introduce a universal visual in-context prompting framework for both tasks, as shown in Fig. 1. In particular, we
build on top of an encoder-decoder architecture, and develop a versatile prompt encoder to support a variety of
prompts like strokes, boxes, and points. We further enhance it to take an arbitrary number of reference image

segments as the context. Our extensive explorations show
that the proposed visual in-context prompting elicits extraordinary referring and generic segmentation capabilities to refer and detect, yielding competitive performance to
close-set in-domain datasets and showing promising results
on many open-set segmentation datasets. By joint training on COCO and SA-1B, DINOv achieves 57.7 PQ on
COCO and 23.2 PQ on ADE20K. Code will be available
at https://github.com/UX-Decoder/DINOv

1. Introduction
The recent progress in large language models (LLMs)
like GPT [1, 27] has shown promising results towards arti-

12861

