This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeNM-VAE: Semi-Supervised Noise Modeling with Hierarchical Variational
Autoencoder
Xiaowen Zhang2
Chenglong Bao1,3,4†
Yihang Zou1 *
Dihan Zheng1 *
Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 2 Hisilicon, Shanghai
3
Yanqi Lake Beijing Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Applications, Beijing
4
State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing
1

*

Equal contribution

†

Corresponding author

{zhengdh19,zou-yh21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The data bottleneck has emerged as a fundamental challenge in learning based image restoration methods. Researchers have attempted to generate synthesized training
data using paired or unpaired samples to address this challenge. This study proposes SeNM-VAE, a semi-supervised
noise modeling method that leverages both paired and unpaired datasets to generate realistic degraded data. Our
approach is based on modeling the conditional distribution of degraded and clean images with a specially designed graphical model. Under the variational inference
framework, we develop an objective function for handling
both paired and unpaired data. We employ our method to
generate paired training samples for real-world image denoising and super-resolution tasks. Our approach excels
in the quality of synthetic degraded images compared to
other unpaired and paired noise modeling methods. Furthermore, our approach demonstrates remarkable performance in downstream image restoration tasks, even with
limited paired data. With more paired data, our method
achieves the best performance on the SIDD dataset.

1. Introduction
Image restoration is a fundamental and essential problem
in image processing and computer vision, aiming to restore the underlying signal from its corrupted observation. Traditional methods employ the Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) framework, transforming the image restoration problem into an optimization problem. In these approaches, the objective function comprises a data fidelity
term and a regularization term corresponding to the degradation and prior models, respectively. Over the years, the
prior model has been extensively studied. Before the advent
of deep learning, researchers utilized hand-crafted priors,

clbao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

such as sparsity [45, 48], non-local similarity [6, 12], and
low-rankness [15, 19]. Recently, harnessing the power of
deep neural networks has enabled achieving more accurate
prior models through pre-trained generative models derived
from a plethora of unlabeled clean signals [28, 51].
Deep learning based methods have achieved remarkable
success in image restoration tasks, such as image denoising [20, 65, 66] and super-resolution (SR) [13, 14, 40, 54].
These methods aim to learn an end-to-end mapping for
restoration using paired training data. Owing to the powerful representational capabilities of deep neural networks,
these methods typically outperform traditional approaches.
However, their effectiveness is contingent upon the availability of high-quality paired training data.
Collecting training data poses its challenges. First, realworld degradation is highly complex due to the intricate
camera image signal processing (ISP) pipeline [2, 18, 21],
rendering the simulation process challenging. Another approach entails manual collection, where clean and degraded
pairs are obtained through long and short exposure [5] or
using statistical methods [1, 46]. Nevertheless, these approaches inevitably suffer from the misalignment problem
between clean and degraded images [57], making the process expensive and time-consuming.
We conclude that a key problem in real-world image
restoration is obtaining an accurate degradation model.
With the degradation model, one can tackle the restoration
problem either via a classical optimization based method
with a pre-defined prior model [9, 70] or a supervised learning based method with synthesized training data [61, 71].
Accordingly, we investigate a scenario where a limited
amount of paired data and a large amount of unpaired data
are available, referred to as a semi-supervised dataset. Our
approach involves learning the unknown degradation model
from this semi-supervised training dataset and synthesizing
more paired data using this degradation model. We then use

25889

