This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VMINer: Versatile Multi-view Inverse Rendering
with Near- and Far-field Light Sources
Fan Fei1,2,4
1

Jiajun Tang1,2,4

Ping Tan3,4

Boxin Shi1,2#

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Light Illusions

Abstract
This paper introduces a versatile multi-view inverse rendering framework with near- and far-field light sources.
Tackling the fundamental challenge of inherent ambiguity
in inverse rendering, our framework adopts a lightweight
yet inclusive lighting model for different near- and far-field
lights, thus is able to make use of input images under varied
lighting conditions available during capture. It leverages
observations under each lighting to disentangle the intrinsic geometry and material from the external lighting, using
both neural radiance field rendering and physically-based
surface rendering on the 3D implicit fields. After training,
the reconstructed scene is extracted to a textured triangle
mesh for seamless integration into industrial rendering software for various applications. Quantitatively and qualitatively tested on synthetic and real-world scenes, our method
shows superiority to state-of-the-art multi-view inverse rendering methods in both speed and quality.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of 3D scenes from multi-view RGB imagery has experienced significant advancements following
the development of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [19],
and both the speed and quality of the reconstruction have
reached an unprecedented level [18, 20]. Despite these improvements, a common limitation is to represent only the
radiance field, which is a complex product of the external
lighting interacting with the intrinsic geometry and material
of the scene [11]. The entangled nature of this representation generally hampers the ability to accurately render the
scene under unseen lighting conditions, because the influence of the original lighting is embedded within the newly
rendered scene. Recent approaches [24, 41, 46] have incorporated inverse rendering [22] to separate material properties and lighting effects, extending the application of the
reconstruction beyond novel view synthesis to novel scenarios involving relighting and material editing [2]. Some
# Corresponding author. E-mail: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn.

Input Multi-view Images under
Varied Lighting Conditions

Geometry and Material
Reconstruction

…

Light 1
Flash off

Light 2

Light 1
Flash on

Mesh Extraction

Triangle Mesh

Surface
Normal

Diffuse
Albedo

Specular
Roughness

Applications

Texture

Figure 1. Given multi-view images under possibly varied lighting, our method leverages all present lighting conditions to reconstruct scene geometry and material disentangled with lighting. The
trained fields are extracted to textured meshes for seamless integration into industrial renderers for various applications.

methods [2, 6, 9, 21, 32] have advanced to the extraction of
detailed triangle meshes with material UV textures, which
can serve as economical and lifelike 3D models for gaming
and cinematography industries [9, 21], thereby marking a
transformative step in digital asset creation.
Inverse rendering presents several fundamental challenges, one of them being its severe inherent ambiguity [41]. To combat this, multi-view inverse rendering
methodologies usually reduce the ambiguity by imposing
various constraints on each scene component. These methods can be categorized based on the assumption on the
amount and types of lighting conditions present in the input
images (Tab. 1). The majority of methods [9, 21, 24, 35, 36,
39, 41, 42] assumes the imagery to be captured under one
fixed lighting condition (rows 1, 2). However, in such scenarios, only one case of scene appearances among all possible cases under different lighting is observed, causing severe lighting-material ambiguity, posing considerable difficulties to material estimation. In a bid to alleviate this ambiguity, recent techniques [2, 6, 10, 12, 23, 32] utilize input

11800

