This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HoloVIC: Large-scale Dataset and Benchmark for Multi-Sensor Holographic
Intersection and Vehicle-Infrastructure Cooperative
Cong Ma1 , Lei Qiao1 , Chengkai Zhu1 , Kai Liu1 , Zelong Kong1 ,
Qing Li1 , Xueqi Zhou1 , Yuheng Kan1 , Wei Wu1,2 *
1
2
SenseAuto Research
Tsinghua University
https://holovic.net
Abstract
Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) is a popular topic in the
field of Autonomous Driving in recent years. Vehicleinfrastructure cooperation (VIC) becomes one of the important research area. Due to the complexity of traffic conditions such as blind spots and occlusion, it greatly limits the
perception capabilities of single-view roadside sensing systems. To further enhance the accuracy of roadside perception and provide better information to the vehicle side, in
this paper, we constructed holographic intersections with
various layouts to build a large-scale multi-sensor holographic vehicle-infrastructure cooperation dataset, called
HoloVIC. Our dataset includes 3 different types of sensors (Camera, Lidar, Fisheye) and employs 4 sensor-layouts
based on the different intersections. Each intersection is
equipped with 6-18 sensors to capture synchronous data.
While autonomous vehicles pass through these intersections for collecting VIC data. HoloVIC contains in total on 100k+ synchronous frames from different sensors.
Additionally, we annotated 3D bounding boxes based on
Camera, Fisheye, and Lidar. We also associate the IDs of
the same objects across different devices and consecutive
frames in sequence. Based on HoloVIC, we formulated four
tasks to facilitate the development of related research. We
also provide benchmarks for these tasks.

1. Introduction
Autonomous Driving has experienced notable progression in recent years. In order to further enhance the
safety and overall perception, V2X (Vehicle-to-everything)
has emerged as a new generation research focus in autonomous driving, which hopefully maximizes the potential of autonomous driving by interaction between Vehicleto-Vehicle (V2V) and Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I). Currently, Vehicle-Infrastructure Cooperation (VIC) has become a significant research area within V2X. Due to sen* Corresponding Author

Camera1

Camera4
Camera4

Lidar1
Camera1

Lidar2

Camera3

Camera2

Lidar1

Lidar2
BEV

Camera2

Camera3

Figure 1. An example from HoloVIC dataset: The data and annotated 3D boxes on Camera, Lidar, and BEV, the same targets from
different devices are labeled with the same Global ID.

sors from roadside at a higher viewpoint, the sensors cover
wider field compared to the perspective of the vehicle, thus
the captured data can provide infomation for the blind spots
and farther areas that are beyond the sight of single-vehicle.
V2X has been gradually attracting more attention recently, and some pioneering datasets related to V2X have
been released [15, 24, 33, 34]. V2X-sim [15] and DeepAccident [24] are generated through simulations using
CARLA [7] and SUMO [12]. On the other hand, DAIRV2X [33] and V2X-seq [34] are collected from real-world
scenarios, but the dataset rely on a single viewpoint by a pair
of Camera and Lidar to capture data from different intersections. However, due to the complexity of traffic conditions,
the targets captured from Camera are frequently occluded.
Therefore, collecting data from a single-viewpoint sensor
greatly limits the roadside perception capability.
To further accelerate research in the field of vehicleinfrastructure cooperation, in this paper, we constructed

22129

