This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CodedEvents: Optimal Point-Spread-Function Engineering for
3D-Tracking with Event Cameras
Sachin Shah
Matthew A. Chan
Haoming Cai
Jingxi Chen
Sakshum Kulshrestha
Chahat Deep Singh
Yiannis Aloimonos
Christopher A. Metzler
University of Maryland, College Park
shah2022@umd.edu

Figure 1. CodedEvent Tracking. Left: example recovered trajectory using designed optics for an event camera. Right: top row, optimal
phase mask design and PSFs for a CMOS sensor, bottom row, our optimal phase mask design and PSFs for an event sensor.

Abstract
Point-spread-function (PSF) engineering is a wellestablished computational imaging technique that uses
phase masks and other optical elements to embed extra information (e.g., depth) into the images captured by conventional CMOS image sensors. To date, however, PSFengineering has not been applied to neuromorphic event
cameras; a powerful new image sensing technology that responds to changes in the log-intensity of light.
This paper establishes theoretical limits (Cramér Rao
bounds) on 3D point localization and tracking with PSFengineered event cameras. Using these bounds, we first
demonstrate that existing Fisher phase masks are already
near-optimal for localizing static flashing point sources
(e.g., blinking fluorescent molecules). We then demonstrate
that existing designs are sub-optimal for tracking moving
point sources and proceed to use our theory to design optimal phase masks and binary amplitude masks for this task.
To overcome the non-convexity of the design problem, we
leverage novel implicit neural representation based parameterizations of the phase and amplitude masks. We demonstrate the efficacy of our designs through extensive simulations. We also validate our method with a simple prototype.

1. Introduction
Single-molecule localization microscopy (SMLM) is a vital
tool for resolving nano-scale structures with applications in
analysis of protein clusters [39], cell dynamics [62], and
electromagnetic effects [30]. Traditional SMLM experiments are limited by the slow capturing process of framebased CMOS sensors, preventing use in capturing highspeed, dynamic interactions. Recently, [9] showed event
cameras are key to enabling high-speed 2D SMLM.
In contrast to traditional CMOS cameras, event cameras
are an emerging class of bio-inspired neuromorphic sensors
that operate with a high temporal resolution on the order
of µs. These sensors are comprised of an asynchronous
pixel array, where each pixel records an event when the
log intensity change exceeds a set threshold. In addition
to having kilohertz time resolution, these sensors are lowpower, resistant to constant background noise, and can operate over a high dynamic range [14]. Already, these sensors have proven useful in a range of applications including object tracking [4, 60], gesture recognition [3, 32], and
robotics [24, 48].
Just as PSF-engineering allows one to extract additional
information using conventional CMOS sensors [52], we believe that event-camera-specific PSF engineering will be the
key to enabling high-speed 3D SMLM with event cameras.

25265

