This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instantaneous Perception of Moving Objects in 3D
Di Liu1 Bingbing Zhuang3 Dimitris N. Metaxas1 Manmohan Chandraker2,3
1
Rutgers University 2 University of California, San Diego 3 NEC Labs America
(a) A Fast-Moving Vehicle

(b) A Parking Vehicle Starts to Move

(c) A Forward Moving Vehicle Stops and Reverses

Figure 1. Illustration of Instantaneous Motion Perception. We visualize motion of three objects from Waymo dataset [46], each with
three consecutive frames. Objects in fast and subtle motions are marked as red and blue, respectively, with arrow length indicating motion
magnitude. While standard motion detection handles general large motions such as (a), we focus on instantaneous perception of subtle
motions that may indicate changes in driving behavior, for example (b) parking car starts to move, and (c) forward moving car stops and
reverses. The visualized subtle motions (b)(c) are output from our framework. We also provide the video visualization in supplementary.

Abstract
The perception of 3D motion of surrounding traffic participants is crucial for driving safety. While existing works
primarily focus on general large motions, we contend that
the instantaneous detection and quantification of subtle motions is equally important as they indicate the nuances in
driving behavior that may be safety critical, such as behaviors near a stop sign of parking positions. We delve into
this under-explored task, examining its unique challenges
and developing our solution, accompanied by a carefully
designed benchmark. Specifically, due to the lack of correspondences between consecutive frames of sparse Lidar
point clouds, static objects might appear to be moving – the

so-called swimming effect. This intertwines with the true
object motion, thereby posing ambiguity in accurate estimation, especially for subtle motions. To address this, we
propose to leverage local occupancy completion of object
point clouds to densify the shape cue, and mitigate the impact of swimming artifacts. The occupancy completion is
learned in an end-to-end fashion together with the detection of moving objects and the estimation of their motion,
instantaneously as soon as objects start to move. Extensive
experiments demonstrate superior performance compared
to standard 3D motion estimation approaches, particularly
highlighting our method’s specialized treatment of subtle
motions.

19573

