This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NIFTY: Neural Object Interaction Fields for Guided Human Motion Synthesis
Nilesh Kulkarni1 Davis Rempe2 Kyle Genova3 Abhijit Kundu3
Justin Johnson1 David Fouhey4 Leonidas Guibas3,5
University of Michigan1 NVIDIA2 Google3 New York University4 Stanford University5

Abstract
We address the problem of generating realistic 3D motions of humans interacting with objects in a scene. Our
key idea is to create a neural interaction field attached to
a specific object, which outputs the distance to the valid
interaction manifold given a human pose as input. This interaction field guides the sampling of an object-conditioned
human motion diffusion model, so as to encourage plausible contacts and affordance semantics. To support interactions with scarcely available data, we propose an automated synthetic data pipeline. For this, we seed a pretrained motion model, which has priors for the basics of
human movement, with interaction-specific anchor poses
extracted from limited motion capture data. Using our
guided diffusion model trained on generated synthetic data,
we synthesize realistic motions for sitting and lifting with
several objects, outperforming alternative approaches in
terms of motion quality and successful action completion.
We call our framework NIFTY: Neural Interaction Fields
for Trajectory sYnthesis. NIFTY results are available on
https://nileshkulkarni.github.io/nifty

1. Introduction
Predicting human-object interaction motions is a key component of systems for vision, robotics, and animation. For example, consider generating the motion of a person sitting on
a chair or table as in Fig. 1. Achieving this in general requires
progress on several important independent sub-problems: (i)
navigating in the scene while avoiding obstacles, (ii) approaching the object and initiating an interaction through
contact, and (iii) potentially moving the object and transitioning to subsequent actions. In this work, we address the
second problem of approaching and initiating contact, which
is the core of the interaction. We term this problem the “last
mile" of interaction. Unlike navigation in stage (i), which is
primarily collision avoidance, solving the last mile requires
accounting for object affordances and changes in contacts
that influence human motion. Afterwards, kinematic [8] or
learning-based methods [56] can be used in stage (iii) to

Motion Model

Training Data Synthesis

Diffusion
Motion
Generator
Initial Pose
& Shape

Guidance

Anchor
Poses

Motion Trajectories

Object
Interaction
Field
Object

Figure 1. NIFTY Overview. (Left) Our learned object interaction
field guides an object-conditioned diffusion model during sampling to generate plausible human-object interactions like sitting.
(Right) Our automated training data synthesis pipeline generates
data for this model by combining a scene-unaware motion model
with small quantities of annotated interaction anchor pose data.

update object pose during continued motion.
One challenge of generating motion in the last mile is
developing an effective model. Recent generative human
motion models [15, 34, 45] synthesize realistic movements
but are unaware of scene context. To address this, some
approaches condition motion synthesis on entire scene geometry, e.g., a scanned point cloud [20, 50, 52, 53]. However, these methods can be multi-stage and rely on postprocessing optimization [50, 52] or hand-designed guidance
constraints [20] to avoid physical artifacts like scene penetration and foot sliding [53]. Other approaches are conditioned
on a single object [13, 41, 61] and focus on a small set
of actions (e.g., sitting specifically on a chair), but make
action-specific modeling assumptions that require per-frame
annotations for contact, action class, and phase [41].
A second major challenge of learning motion for the
last mile is the lack of reliable paired human-object data.
Datasets that capture humans in general scenes offer a variety of motions but limited quality due to the complexity of
capture [11]. Meanwhile, specific interactions with single
objects can be captured with higher quality [3, 12, 42, 61]
but are of limited size and scope. Methods that train on such
object data require extensive data augmentation [12, 41, 61],
and extending this detailed capture setup to new objects and
motions is difficult and expensive.

947

