This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Layout-Agnostic Scene Text Image Synthesis with Diffusion Models
Qilong Zhangli1,2 Jindong Jiang1 Di Liu1 Licheng Yu2 Xiaoliang Dai2
Ankit Ramchandani2 Guan Pang2 Dimitris N. Metaxas1 Praveen Krishnan2
1
Rutgers University 2 Meta AI

plant in a fancy pot with a 'do
not touch' sign on it

'Only fail when you stop
trying'

a 3d model of a 1980s-style A book cover with a title text
of 'The Blessed Angels'
computer with the text 'my old
habit' on the screen

A TV show poster named
'META'

a graffiti art of the text 'free the
pink' on a wall

A movie poster titled 'The
Luminescent Jewel'

'stop racism' yellow sign

'Science Project' Postage
Stamp

text 'balloons are flying' made
from rainbow balloons, pastel
background

A hand-drawn blueprint for a
a scene with a city in the
time machine, with the caption background, and a single cloud
'Time Traveling Device'
in the foreground, with the text
'contemplate the clouds' in
rounded cursive

Figure 1. Scene Text Generation. Qualitative samples of scene text images generated by our model are presented. These images contain
visually appealing texts that are coherent with the background and are created without relying on any spatial information or predefined
layouts as input, thereby enhancing the Text-to-Image (T2I) Diffusion Model’s capability to generate text.

Abstract
While diffusion models have significantly advanced the
quality of image generation, their capability to accurately
and coherently render text within these images remains a
substantial challenge. Conventional diffusion-based methods for scene text generation are typically limited by their
reliance on an intermediate layout output. This dependency
often results in a constrained diversity of text styles and
fonts, an inherent limitation stemming from the deterministic nature of the layout generation phase. To address these
challenges, this paper introduces SceneTextGen, a novel
diffusion-based model specifically designed to circumvent
the need for a predefined layout stage. By doing so, SceneTextGen facilitates a more natural and varied representation of text. The novelty of SceneTextGen lies in its integration of three key components: a character-level encoder
for capturing detailed typographic properties, coupled with
a character-level instance segmentation model and a word-

level spotting model to address the issues of unwanted text
generation and minor character inaccuracies. We validate
the performance of our method by demonstrating improved
character recognition rates on generated images across different public visual text datasets in comparison to both standard diffusion based methods and text specific methods.

1. Introduction
The text-to-image [50, 57] task has gained popularity with
advancements in diffusion models [41, 45, 49], significantly
enhancing the quality of image generation. However, seamlessly integrating clear and contextually appropriate text
into images is a persistent challenge. Text plays a vital
role in many domains, including media content creation and
artistic design, yet current diffusion models often struggle to
produce text that is lexically correct, in valid font style, and
that naturally complements the overall image aesthetics.

7496

