This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structured Gradient-based Interpretations via
Norm-Regularized Adversarial Training
Shizhan Gong, Qi Dou, Farzan Farnia
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{szgong22, qdou, farnia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Gradient-based saliency maps have been widely used
to explain the decisions of deep neural network classifiers.
However, standard gradient-based interpretation maps, including the simple gradient and integrated gradient algorithms, often lack desired structures such as sparsity and
connectedness in their application to real-world computer
vision models. A frequently used approach to inducing
sparsity structures into gradient-based saliency maps is to
alter the simple gradient scheme using sparsification or
norm-based regularization. A drawback with such postprocessing methods is their frequently-observed significant
loss in fidelity to the original simple gradient map. In this
work, we propose to apply adversarial training as an inprocessing scheme to train neural networks with structured
simple gradient maps. We show a duality relation between
the regularized norms of the adversarial perturbations and
gradient-based maps, based on which we design adversarial training loss functions promoting sparsity and groupsparsity properties in simple gradient maps. We present several numerical results to show the influence of our proposed
norm-based adversarial training methods on the standard
gradient-based maps of standard neural network architectures on benchmark image datasets1 .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have attained remarkable results in
various computer vision tasks including image classification [17], object detection [44], and semantic segmentation [10]. However, understanding and explaining the
decision-making process of these complex models remains
a challenge, which is required for high-risk applications
such as medical imaging [27], autonomous driving [16],
and face recognition [37]. To interpret the predictions of
neural network classifiers, several explanation methodolo1 The paper’s code is available at: https : / / github . com /
peterant330/AdvGrad

Simple Gradient
Gini = 41.64% ()

r-AOPCMoRF = 100.00% ()
Post-processing
(Sparsification)
Gini = 71.53% ()

r-AOPCMoRF = 17.16% ()
Adversarial training
(elastic net)
Gini = 69.99% ()
r-AOPCMoRF = 100.00% ()

Input

Saliency maps

Figure 1. The original simple gradient map could be dense and
noisy. Post-processing methods such as sparsification enhance the
sparsity at the expense of lower fidelity to the original map. Our
proposed in-processing strategy with adversarial training results in
higher sparsity without losing fidelity to the simple-grad map. (We
use the Gini index as a sparsity measure, and relative AOPCMoRF
with respect to simple gradient as a fidelity score.)

gies have been proposed in the literature. Among these
explanation methods, gradient-based saliency maps have
been frequently applied to interpret image classifiers. The
saliency maps provide insight into the regions of the input image contributing to the classifier’s decision and potentially prompt the empirical understanding of phenomena
from data-driven models.
Despite the widespread use of standard gradient-based
interpretation maps such as simple gradients [29] and integrated gradients [32], they often lack desired structures
such as sparsity and connectedness. When applied to
real-world computer vision tasks, the generated saliency
maps have been frequently observed to be noisy and dense.
Such unstructured behavior could hinder the application
of gradient-based maps for detecting the influential features in the classifier’s decision-making process. To obtain more structured saliency maps, several post-processing

11009

