This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Inductive Biases for Surface Normal Estimation
Gwangbin Bae
Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Lab, Imperial College London
{g.bae, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Figure 1. Examples of challenging in-the-wild images and their surface normals predicted by our method.

Abstract
Despite the growing demand for accurate surface normal estimation models, existing methods use generalpurpose dense prediction models, adopting the same inductive biases as other tasks. In this paper, we discuss the
inductive biases needed for surface normal estimation and
propose to (1) utilize the per-pixel ray direction and (2) encode the relationship between neighboring surface normals
by learning their relative rotation. The proposed method
can generate crisp — yet, piecewise smooth — predictions
for challenging in-the-wild images of arbitrary resolution
and aspect ratio. Compared to a recent ViT-based stateof-the-art model, our method shows a stronger generalization ability, despite being trained on an orders of magnitude smaller dataset. The code is available at https:
//github.com/baegwangbin/DSINE.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of estimating per-pixel surface normal from a single RGB image. This task, unlike monocular depth estimation, is not affected by scale ambiguity and
has a compact output space (a unit sphere vs. positive real
value), making it feasible to collect data that densely cov-

ers the output space. As a result, learning-based surface
normal estimation methods show strong generalization capability for out-of-distribution images, despite being trained
on relatively small datasets [2].
Despite their essentially local property, predicted surface normals contain rich information about scene geometry. In recent years, their usefulness has been demonstrated for various computer vision tasks, including image generation [62], object grasping [60], multi-task learning [36], depth estimation [3, 41], simultaneous localization
and mapping [63], human body shape estimation [5, 54, 55],
and CAD model alignment [33]. However, despite the
growing demand for accurate surface normal estimation
models, there has been little discussion on the right inductive biases needed for the task.
State-of-the-art surface normal estimation methods [2,
14, 29, 56] use general-purpose dense prediction models,
adopting the same inductive biases as other tasks (e.g.
depth estimation and semantic segmentation). For example,
CNN-based models [2, 14] assume translation equivariance
and use the same set of weights for different parts of the
image. While such weight-sharing can improve sample efficiency [34], it is sub-optimal for surface normal estimation as a pixel’s ray direction provides important cues and
constraints for its surface normal. This has limited the accu-

9535

