This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text Grouping Adapter: Adapting Pre-trained Text Detector for Layout Analysis
Tianci Bi1 * Xiaoyi Zhang2

Zhizheng Zhang2 Wenxuan Xie2 Cuiling Lan2
Yan Lu2‡ Nanning Zheng1‡
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
tiancibi@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,

xiaoyizhang, zhizzhang, wenxie, culan, yanlu@microsoft.com, nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Significant progress has been made in scene text detection models since the rise of deep learning, but scene text
layout analysis, which aims to group detected text instances
as paragraphs, has not kept pace. Previous works either
treated text detection and grouping using separate models, or train a model from scratch while using a unified
one. All of them have not yet made full use of the already
well-trained text detectors and easily obtainable detection
datasets. In this paper, we present Text Grouping Adapter
(TGA), a module that can enable the utilization of various
pre-trained text detectors to learn layout analysis, allowing
us to adopt a well-trained text detector right off the shelf
or just fine-tune it efficiently. Designed to be compatible
with various text detector architectures, TGA takes detected
text regions and image features as universal inputs to assemble text instance features. To capture broader contextual information for layout analysis, we propose to predict
text group masks from text instance features by one-to-many
assignment. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate
that, even with frozen pre-trained models, incorporating our
TGA into various pre-trained text detectors and text spotters
can achieve superior layout analysis performance, simultaneously inheriting generalized text detection ability from
pre-training. In the case of full parameter fine-tuning, we
can further improve layout analysis performance.

1. Introduction
With the rise of deep learning, text detection [17, 18, 22,
44], text recognition [3, 8, 16, 34], and end-to-end text spotting [19, 20, 38, 39] models have greatly improved the accuracy and efficiency of identifying text instances like words
* Work done during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
‡ Corresponding authors.

Image

Text Detection

Layout Analysis
image

image

🔥

Backbone

Text Detector

Backbone

learnable query

Detection
Branch

Layout
Branch

Detection
Branch

text
regions

affinity
matrix

text
regions

Text Grouping
Adapter

🔥
affinity
matrix

layout

layout

(a)

(b)

group
masks

Figure 1. Top: Visualization of the scene text detection and layout
analysis tasks. The mask with the same color denotes detected as a
group. Bottom: Comparison between (a) the previous work Unified Detector [23] and (b) proposed TGA. TGA also provides the
flexibility of freezing or fine-tuning the pre-trained text detector.

or text lines. To fully understand the text semantics in various applications [1, 2, 30, 41, 45], it is essential to determine
how to organize these text instances into coherent semantic
entities, e.g., determining which detected words constitute a
line and which detected lines form a paragraph. This problem, as visualized in the top of Figure 1, named scene text
layout analysis [23], has not been advanced at the same pace
as other scene text understanding tasks.
Previous layout analysis works [13, 29, 46] adopt separate semantic segmentation models to localize different
high-level entities in scanned and digital document images,
which only focus on limited scenarios instead of generalscope natural scenes and ignore low-level text instances like
words and text lines. Recent design on a Unified Detec-

28150

