This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars
Shunsuke Saito, Gabriel Schwartz, Tomas Simon, Junxuan Li, Giljoo Nam
Codec Avatars Lab, Meta

Relightable head avatars

Close-ups

Env. map relighting

Intrinsic decomp.

Video driven animation

(normal/albedo/diffuse/specular)

(animated avatar/input HMC images)

Figure 1. Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars. Our approach enables real-time relighting of human head avatars with all-frequency
reflections and detailed hair reconstruction using 3D Gaussians and learnable radiance transfer. Our dynamic avatars can be driven live in
real-time from images captured with head mounted cameras (HMC). https://shunsukesaito.github.io/rgca/

Abstract
The fidelity of relighting is bounded by both geometry
and appearance representations. For geometry, both mesh
and volumetric approaches have difficulty modeling intricate structures like 3D hair geometry. For appearance,
existing relighting models are limited in fidelity and often
too slow to render in real-time with high-resolution continuous environments. In this work, we present Relightable
Gaussian Codec Avatars, a method to build high-fidelity
relightable head avatars that can be animated to generate
novel expressions. Our geometry model based on 3D Gaussians can capture 3D-consistent sub-millimeter details such
as hair strands and pores on dynamic face sequences. To
support diverse materials of human heads such as the eyes,
skin, and hair in a unified manner, we present a novel relightable appearance model based on learnable radiance
transfer. Together with global illumination-aware spherical harmonics for the diffuse components, we achieve realtime relighting with all-frequency reflections using spherical Gaussians. This appearance model can be efficiently
relit under both point light and continuous illumination. We
further improve the fidelity of eye reflections and enable explicit gaze control by introducing relightable explicit eye
models. Our method outperforms existing approaches without compromising real-time performance. We also demonstrate real-time relighting of avatars on a tethered consumer VR headset, showcasing the efficiency and fidelity of
our avatars.

1. Introduction
What makes avatar relighting so challenging? Our visual
perception is highly sensitive to facial appearance. Convincing the visual system requires modeling each part of
the head in sufficient detail that is coherent with an environment, and this synthesis typically needs to be performed in
real-time for primary applications of photorealistic avatars
including games and telecommunication [39, 57]. Realtime relighting of animatable human heads with convincing
details remains an open challenge for three reasons.
The first challenge is that human heads are composed
of highly complex and diverse materials that exhibit different properties of scattering and reflectance. For example,
skin produces intricate reflections due to micro-geometry
as well as significant subsurface scattering [53, 78], hair exhibits out-of-plane scattering with multiple reflections due
to its translucent fiber structure [46], and the eyes have multiple layers with highly reflective membranes [33, 67]. By
and large, there is no single material representation that accurately represents them all, especially in real-time. Moreover, precise tracking and modeling of the underlying geometry in motion is extremely challenging because deformations do not always contain sufficient visual markers to
track. Finally, the real-time requirement severely limits the
algorithmic design. Increase in photorealism traditionally
results in an exponential increase in the cost of transporting
light and tracking motion. Our goal is to design a learn-

130

