This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Region-Language Pretraining for Open-Ended Object Detection
Lizhen Qu1
Zehuan Yuan2
Yi Jiang2 *
1
2
Monash University
ByteDance Inc.

1. Introduction
Object detection, a crucial task in computer vision, has
made significant progress in recent years, particularly with
the advent of deep learning [6, 8, 18, 41, 46]. The objective
of this task is to locate objects in images with tight bounding
boxes and recognize their respective categories. However,
* Corresponding Authors

DETR

Text embedding
Predicted classes
‘person’
‘person’
‘tennis racket’
<no object>

Classifier head

(a) Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Image caption
A man and a
young boy play
tennis together
on a court.

Text embedding
Text Encoder

DETR

‘a man’
‘a young boy’

(b) Phrase Grounding

DETR

Decoder

In recent research, significant attention has been devoted to the open-vocabulary object detection task, aiming
to generalize beyond the limited number of classes labeled
during training and detect objects described by arbitrary
category names at inference. Compared with conventional
object detection, open vocabulary object detection largely
extends the object detection categories. However, it relies
on calculating the similarity between image regions and a
set of arbitrary category names with a pretrained visionand-language model. This implies that, despite its open-set
nature, the task still needs the predefined object categories
during the inference stage. This raises the question: What
if we do not have exact knowledge of object categories during inference? In this paper, we call such a new setting
as generative open-ended object detection, which is a more
general and practical problem. To address it, we formulate object detection as a generative problem and propose
a simple framework named GenerateU, which can detect
dense objects and generate their names in a free-form way.
Particularly, we employ Deformable DETR as a region proposal generator with a language model translating visual
regions to object names. To assess the free-form object detection task, we introduce an evaluation method designed to
quantitatively measure the performance of generative outcomes. Extensive experiments demonstrate strong zero-shot
detection performance of our GenerateU. For example, on
the LVIS dataset, our GenerateU achieves comparable results to the open-vocabulary object detection method GLIP,
even though the category names are not seen by GenerateU during inference. Code is available at: https://
github.com/FoundationVision/GenerateU .

Predefined category
‘person’
Text Encoder
‘tennis racket’
‘cat’
…

Classifier head

Abstract

Jianfei Cai1 *

Encoder

Chuang Lin1

Language Model

Generative results
‘person’, ‘man’,…
‘person’, ’boy’,…
‘tennis racket’, ‘racquet’,…
‘fence’, ‘chain link fence’,…

(c) Generative Open-Ended Object Detection

Figure 1. Comparing generative open-ended object detection with
other open-set object detection tasks. Open-vocabulary object detection and phrase grounding typically require predefined categories or phrases in text prompts to align with image regions. In
contrast, our introduced generative open-ended object detection is
a more general and practical setting where categorical information
is not explicitly defined. Such a setting is especially meaningful
for scenarios where users lack precise knowledge of object categories during inference.

most existing object detection algorithms are restricted to a
predetermined set of object categories defined in detection
datasets [9, 14, 17, 26, 42]. For example, an object detector trained on COCO [9] can well identify 80 pre-defined
classes but encounters difficulty in recognizing new classes
that have not been seen or defined during training.
Open-vocabulary learning has been introduced to remedy this problem and considerable efforts have been made
[7, 22, 28, 29, 35, 55, 65]. Open-vocabulary object detection addresses the closed-set limitation typically via

13958

