This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Learning a Generalist Model for Embodied Navigation
Lin Zhao3†
Yiwu Zhong1
Liwei Wang1‡
Shijia Huang1 *
Duo Zheng1,2 *
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
{dzheng23, sjhuang, lwwang}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Building a generalist agent that can interact with the
world is the intriguing target of AI systems, thus spurring
the research for embodied navigation, where an agent is
required to navigate according to instructions or respond
to queries. Despite the major progress attained, previous
works primarily focus on task-specific agents and lack generalizability to unseen scenarios. Recently, LLMs have presented remarkable capabilities across various fields, and
provided a promising opportunity for embodied navigation.
Drawing on this, we propose the first generalist model for
embodied navigation, NaviLLM. It adapts LLMs to embodied navigation by introducing schema-based instruction. The schema-based instruction flexibly casts various
tasks into generation problems, thereby unifying a wide
range of tasks. This approach allows us to integrate diverse data sources from various datasets into the training,
equipping NaviLLM with a wide range of capabilities required by embodied navigation. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the performance and generalizability
of our model. The experimental results demonstrate that
our unified model achieves state-of-the-art performance on
CVDN, SOON, and ScanQA. Specifically, it surpasses the
previous stats-of-the-art method by a significant margin
of 29% in goal progress on CVDN. Moreover, our model
also demonstrates strong generalizability and presents impressive results on unseen tasks, e.g. embodied question
answering and 3D captioning. Our code is available at
https://github.com/LaVi-Lab/NaviLLM .

1. Introduction
The pursuit of artificial intelligence has long been driven by
the desire to construct agents that are capable of acquiring
knowledge through interacting with the physical world, akin
* Equal contribution.
† Lin Zhao was a research assistant at the Centre for Perceptual and

Interactive Intelligence (CPII) under the InnoHK.
‡ Corresponding author.

Orange trajectory

Blue trajectory

!@#$%^

!@#$%^

Go out of the bedroom
and then walk to the
sofa….

Trash can

In-domain VLN:
Go down to the bottom of the
stairs and wait near the table.
Out-of-Domain VLN:
Go to the bathroom and pull the
shower curtain closed.

Task-specific Agent

Trajectory Summarization:
Summarize the following
trajectory (green trajectory).
3D Question-Answering:
What is at the end of the table
close to the tv?

Orange trajectory

NaviLLM

Blue trajectory

Figure 1. Comparison between previous methods and ours. Previous methods learn task-specific navigation agents, suffer from a
low success rate for out-of-domain VLN, and fall short when facing
unseen tasks (e.g., QA and summarization). The different colors
are used to represent different examples. For instance, orange represents an example from In-domain VLN. Our NaviLLM not only
excels in diverse tasks required by embodied navigation, but also
demonstrates promising generalizability even on unseen tasks.

to the complex interaction processes exhibited by humans.
This has led to the emergence of embodied navigation [2, 33,
47], where an agent located in 3D environment is required
to navigate according to various forms of instructions and
provide textual responses based on user queries.
A wide spectrum of tasks have been introduced for embodied navigation, ranging from vision-language navigation that follows step-by-step instructions [3, 34] or coarsegrained directives [17, 43, 61], to the tasks guided by interactions between humans and agents [19, 52], and even to
embodied question answering through proactive exploration
[18, 55]. To tackle these tasks, a myriad of methodologies
have been explored in the past, with some notable approaches
leveraging pre-training techniques [24, 25, 32, 40], data
augmentation [14, 22, 29], and memory structures [11, 27],
etc. These models, while demonstrating considerable proficiency in their specific tasks, unfortunately lack generaliza-

13624

