This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-based Structure-from-Orbit
Ethan Elms† Yasir Latif† Tae Ha Park‡ Tat-Jun Chin† *
†
‡
The University of Adelaide
Stanford University
{ethan.elms,yasir.latif,tat-jun.chin}@adelaide.edu.au† ,tpark94@stanford.edu‡

Abstract
Event sensors offer high temporal resolution visual sensing, which makes them ideal for perceiving fast visual phenomena without suffering from motion blur. Certain applications in robotics and vision-based navigation require 3D
perception of an object undergoing circular or spinning motion in front of a static camera, such as recovering the angular velocity and shape of the object. The setting is equivalent to observing a static object with an orbiting camera.
In this paper, we propose event-based structure-from-orbit
(eSfO), where the aim is to simultaneously reconstruct the
3D structure of a fast spinning object observed from a static
event camera, and recover the equivalent orbital motion of
the camera. Our contributions are threefold: since state-ofthe-art event feature trackers cannot handle periodic selfocclusion due to the spinning motion, we develop a novel
event feature tracker based on spatio-temporal clustering
and data association that can better track the helical trajectories of valid features in the event data. The feature tracks
are then fed to our novel factor graph-based structure-fromorbit back-end that calculates the orbital motion parameters (e.g., spin rate, relative rotational axis) that minimize
the reprojection error. For evaluation, we produce a new
event dataset of objects under spinning motion. Comparisons against ground truth indicate the efficacy of eSfO.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) perception is a fundamental vision
capability [37, 45]. Recent works have focused on the use
of neuromorphic event sensors [19] for 3D perception tasks,
such as visual odometry (VO) [31, 48], structure-frommotion (SfM) and simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) [35, 47]. Event sensors offer several advantages
over conventional cameras, such as high temporal resolution, low power and low data rate asynchronous sensing.
Event sensors also offer a higher dynamic range, enabling
them to see more details in difficult lighting conditions.
* SmartSat CRC Professorial Chair of Sentient Satellites.

Figure 1. In eSfO, we exploit the equivalence between a static
event camera observing a spinning object, and an orbiting event
camera observing a static object. This enables us to jointly estimate the motion parameters (e.g., spin rate, rotational axis relative
to the camera), as well as the sparse structure of the object.

However, the advantages of event sensors come with certain limitations. Firstly, due to the asynchronous nature of
events, the idea of a consistent local neighborhood for a
pixel across multiple views no longer holds. Moreover, image gradients – a fundamental invariant in intensity images
often used as basis for feature detection, description, and
tracking – are not observable in event data. This makes feature detection and tracking challenging, which represents a
major obstacle towards event-only SLAM systems.
In this work, we formulate the task of event-based
Structure-from-Orbit (eSfO), which entails the reconstruction of an object undergoing circular motion while being
observed by a static event camera, and jointly estimating
the motion of the object; see Fig. 1. An object is undergoing a circular motion if it is rotating about a fixed axis,
a.k.a. spinning. Since observing a spinning object from
a static camera is mathematically equivalent to observing
a static object from an orbiting camera, the motion of the
spinning object can be recovered as the motion of the orbiting camera. Using an event sensor to observe the spinning

19541

