This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Calibrating Vicinal Risk Minimisation for Model Calibration
Jiawei Liu, Changkun Ye, Ruikai Cui, Nick Barnes
The Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
{jiawei.liu3, changkun.ye, ruikai.cui, nick.barnes}@anu.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
Binary dense classification tasks [10, 54, 64] have advanced significantly since the debut of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) associated with complex network architectures and large numbers of trainable parameters. Increasing model complexity has been shown to negatively impact
model calibration [14] which has remained under investigated in the binary dense classification [29–31]. Miscalibration, a mis-alignment between model confidence and
prediction accuracy [38], is an undesirable qualify that hinders the deployment of DNNs, especially in safety critical
applications. In this work, we study the model calibration
for dense binary classification models.
The most commonly observed mis-calibration problem
is over-confidence, where the model confidence is signifi-

Mixup

(x4, y4)

(x4, y4)

(x3, y3)

Inconsistent
label confidence
across pixels

(x2, y2)

Model calibration, measuring the alignment between the
prediction accuracy and model confidence, is an important
metric reflecting model trustworthiness. Existing dense binary classification methods, without proper regularisation
of model confidence, are prone to being over-confident. To
calibrate Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), we propose a
Self-Calibrating Vicinal Risk Minimisation (SCVRM) that
explores the vicinity space of labeled data, where vicinal
images that are farther away from labeled images adopt
the groundtruth label with decreasing label confidence. We
prove that in the logistic regression problem, SCVRM can
be seen as a Vicinal Risk Minimisation plus a regularisation term that penalises the over-confident predictions. In
practical implementation, SCVRM is approximated using
Monte Carlo sampling that samples additional augmented
training images and labels from the vicinal distributions.
Experimental results demonstrate that SCVRM can significantly enhance model calibration for different dense classification tasks on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution
data. Code is available at https://github.com/
Carlisle-Liu/SCVRM .

(x2, y2)

(x1, y1)

(x1, y1)

(x2, y2)

(x4, y4)
(x3, y3)

SCVRM

Figure 1. An illustration of Mixup [69] and our proposed SCVRM.
Circles with solid boundary {(xi , yi )}4i=1 are labeled training images. Vicinal images of Mixup (circles with dashed boundary) are
only distributed along the vectors connecting the labeled images.
On the other hand, in SCVRM, the label of vicinal image adopts
the groundtruth category (shown in different colours) of the closest labeled image, but with label confidence (shown in colour intensity) reduced monotonically with increasing Euclidean N
distance
between vicinal and labeled images. The example sample , with
Mixup/SCVRM vicinal image and augmented label shown on the
right, is selected at the same relative position to (x4 , y4 ).

cantly higher than the accuracy of its predictions on a cohort
of samples [14]. Increasing research interest has been dedicated to study model calibration methods that regularise the
probability associated with the prediction to be meaningful in reflecting the chance of the prediction being correct.
The existing methods can be roughly categorised into three
groups: (i) training objective based [2, 8, 13, 21, 23, 38, 45];
(ii) post-processing based [14, 19, 47]; and (iii) label augmentation based [31, 39, 43]. The first two categories focus
on penalising over-confident predictions while the third cat-

3335

