This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diff-BGM: A Diffusion Model for Video Background Music Generation
Sizhe Li1 Yiming Qin1 Minghang Zheng1 Xin Jin2,3 Yang Liu1 *
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
{lisizhe, minghang, yangliu}@pku.edu.cn

kevinqym@stu.pku.edu.cn

jinxinbesti@foxmail.com

Abstract

Diff-BGM Model

k

When editing a video, a piece of attractive background
music is indispensable. However, video background music
generation tasks face several challenges, for example, the
lack of suitable training datasets, and the difficulties in flexibly controlling the music generation process and sequentially aligning the video and music. In this work, we first
propose a high-quality music-video dataset BGM909 with
detailed annotation and shot detection to provide multimodal information about the video and music. We then
present evaluation metrics to assess music quality, including music diversity and alignment between music and video
with retrieval precision metrics. Finally, we propose the
Diff-BGM framework to automatically generate the background music for a given video, which uses different signals to control different aspects of the music during the
generation process, i.e., uses dynamic video features to
control music rhythm and semantic features to control the
melody and atmosphere. We propose to align the video and
music sequentially by introducing a segment-aware crossattention layer. Experiments verify the effectiveness of our
proposed method. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/sizhelee/Diff-BGM .

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of multimedia and social platforms, videos become a common way to convey feelings
and record lives. When creating videos, to make the video
more attractive, a piece of suitable and melodious background music is crucial. However, it is not easy for those
who do not have much knowledge of music or video editing to select or create proper or perfectly matched music.
What’s more, the copyright protection issue has also caused
broader public concern. As a result, it is pragmatic to automatically generate background music for a given video.
* Corresponding author

Melody

𝑡𝑡𝑁𝑁

Rhythm

𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖

𝑡𝑡0

k
"a large plume of
smoke coming from an
open container"

Captions

Videos

Videos with BGM

Figure 1. Overview of the background music generation process of Diff-BGM. At different stages of the generation process,
Diff-BGM uses different features of videos or captions to control
the generation of the music rhythm or melody. We find that the
video dynamic feature has more control over the rhythm and the
semantic feature has more control over the melody.

Existing works [1, 2, 5, 11, 18–22, 24, 25, 29, 32, 34, 38]
have started focusing on music generation and achieved
good results. Besides, some works [7, 35, 36] focus on
generating music for human-centric videos. In comparison,
free-style video background music generation tasks present
more challenges. First, to generate proper background music for a video, the model needs to consider multiple aspects of information in the video to control different aspects of the music. In a piece of music, several elements
work together to make it pleasant and concordant to listen
to. For example, using different rhythms when composing
makes the music sound different in dynamic, and different
melodies often reflect different atmospheres. Faster music
often gives a liveliness or intense feeling, which is suitable
for videos that change quickly while slower music tends
to be more soothing and is suitable as a warm-style video
soundtrack. Sad video clips should correspond to heavy
styles and melodies while cheerful videos are matched by
upbeat music. We conclude that visual dynamic changes are
linked to music rhythm(the time when the notes appear) and

27348

