This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UnionFormer: Uniﬁed-Learning Transformer with Multi-View Representation for
Image Manipulation Detection and Localization
Shuaibo Li1,2

Wei Ma1† Jianwei Guo2 Shibiao Xu3 Benchong Li1 Xiaopeng Zhang2
1
Beijing University of Technology
2
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Abstract

We present UnionFormer, a novel framework that integrates tampering clues across three views by uniﬁed learning
for image manipulation detection and localization. Speciﬁcally, we construct a BSFI-Net to extract tampering features
from RGB and noise views, achieving enhanced responsiveness to boundary artifacts while modulating spatial consistency at different scales. Additionally, to explore the inconsistency between objects as a new view of clues, we combine
object consistency modeling with tampering detection and
localization into a three-task uniﬁed learning process, allowing them to promote and improve mutually. Therefore, we
acquire a uniﬁed manipulation discriminative representation
under multi-scale supervision that consolidates information
from three views. This integration facilitates highly effective concurrent detection and localization of tampering. We
perform extensive experiments on diverse datasets, and the
results show that the proposed approach outperforms stateof-the-art methods in tampering detection and localization.

1. Introduction
The rapid progression of deep generative models, such
as GANs [21, 43, 60], VAEs [31, 50], and Diffusion Models [10, 45, 53], has facilitated the widespread availability of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC) tools [8].
At the same time, image editing tools have become exceptionally user-friendly and powerful, capable of creating highly
realistic images and videos. This assists users in better expressing their creativity but also intensiﬁes the malicious
use of editing techniques to tamper with multimedia content, resulting in the proliferation of faked images on the
Internet [57]. Therefore, developing a universally effective
method to discern the authenticity of images and accurately
locate the modiﬁed regions has become crucial. Research on
related algorithms has become a hot topic [3, 28], and many
† Corresponding author.

state-of-the-art methods based on deep learning models have
been proposed.
Digital image tampering falls into three main categories [19]: splicing, which involves copying regions from
one image to another; copy-move, entailing the copying or
moving of elements within the same image; and removal,
the process of erasing parts of an image and creating visual
consistent content to obscure the alterations. These manipulations leave traces between the tampered regions and their
surroundings, causing inconsistencies between the authentic
and forgery regions. Unlike traditional detection or segmentation tasks emphasizing high-level semantic information, image tampering detection prioritizes local semantic-agnostic
clues that distinguish authenticity rather than semantic content. Therefore, the critical challenge in tampering detection is learning generalizable features that combine different
level information and capture multiple scale inconsistencies
between authentic and tampered areas. Previous methods primarily utilized deep convolutional neural networks designed
for high-level visual tasks as feature encoders or directly connected features from different layers [23, 27, 40, 71], which
could not adequately represent tampering traces. Inspired
by [9, 12, 67], we designed a Boundary Sensitive Feature
Interaction Network (BSFI-Net) speciﬁcally for extracting
forensics artifacts and integrated it as the feature encoder
in our framework. BSFI-Net is a parallel CNN-Transformer
structure that can reinforce edge responses while effectively
interacting between local features and global representations
to explore consistencies within images at different scales.
On the other hand, many tampering artifacts imperceptible in the RGB view become distinctly noticeable in the
noise view. Employing ﬁxed [18] or learnable high-pass
ﬁlters [6, 35, 66] to convert RGB images into noise maps
can suppress content and highlight the low-level forgery
clues. Thus, developing a multi-view strategy that simultaneously models the RGB and noise dimensions is essential
to detect subtle tampering traces. Our framework adopts a
dual-stream architecture to independently construct representation for RGB and noise views, subsequently merging

12523

