This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StrokeFaceNeRF: Stroke-based Facial Appearance Editing in
Neural Radiance Field
Xiao-Juan Li1,2 Dingxi Zhang2,1 Shu-Yu Chen1 Feng-Lin Liu1,2∗
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lixiaojuan,chenshuyu,liufenglin21s}@ict.ac.cn

zhangdingxi20a@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Figure 1. StrokeFaceNeRF enables versatile high-quality color stroke-based appearance editing for facial NeRFs. Users can draw strokes
over a rendered facial image from any angle and define the editing region using masks. The third column showcases the photo-realistic
free-view rendering results with exceptional color correspondence.

Abstract
Current 3D-aware facial NeRF generation approaches
control the facial appearance by text, lighting conditions or
reference images, limiting precise manipulation of local facial regions and interactivity. Color stroke, a user-friendly
and effective tool to depict appearance, is challenging to
edit 3D faces because of the lack of texture, coarse geometry representation and detailed editing operations. To solve
the above problems, we introduce StrokeFaceNeRF, a novel
stroke-based method for editing facial NeRF appearance.
In order to infer the missing texture and 3D geometry information, 2D edited stroke maps are firstly encoded into the
EG3D’s latent space, followed by a transformer-based editing module to achieve effective appearance changes while
preserving the original geometry in editing regions. Notably, we design a novel geometry loss function to ensure
surface density remains consistent during training. To further enhance the local manipulation accuracy, we propose
a stereo fusion approach which lifts the 2D mask (inferred
from strokes or drawn by users) into 3D mask volume, al*Corresponding Author

lowing explicit blending of the original and edited faces.
Extensive experiments validate that the proposed method
outperforms existing 2D and 3D methods in both editing
reality and geometry retention.

1. Introduction
Realistic 3D human face generation is a popular topic
and has wide range applications in character design, virtual meeting and education. Traditional 3D facial modeling methods rely on software like Maya and Zbursh to
construct mesh models while employing texture mapping
for facial appearances. However, these methods are timeconsuming and labor-intensive, especially when editing local appearance details and aiming for photorealistic results.
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [23], a new 3D representation technique, easily render photo-realistic images with
the input of multi-view images. The further combination of
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [10] with NeRF
[5, 11, 24, 30] has enabled the generation of high-quality
facial NeRF through random sampling. Nevertheless, precise control over appearance details remains a challenge.

7538

