This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Characteristics Matching Based Hash Codes Generation for Efficient
Fine-grained Image Retrieval
Zhen-Duo Chen, Li-Jun Zhao, Zi-Chao Zhang, Xin Luo, Xin-Shun Xu*
School of Software, Shandong University, China
chenzd.sdu@gmail.com, 202215247@mail.sdu.edu.cn, zhangzichao1008@163.com
luoxin.lxin@gmail.com, xuxinshun@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
The rapidly growing scale of data in practice poses demands on the efficiency of retrieval models. However, for
fine-grained image retrieval task, there are inherent contradictions in the design of hashing based efficient models.
Firstly, the limited information embedding capacity of lowdimensional binary hash codes, coupled with the detailed
information required to describe fine-grained categories,
results in a contradiction in feature learning. Secondly,
there is also a contradiction between the complexity of finegrained feature extraction models and retrieval efficiency.
To address these issues, in this paper, we propose the characteristics matching based hash codes generation method.
Coupled with the cross-layer semantic information transfer
module and the multi-region feature embedding module, the
proposed method can generate hash codes that effectively
capture fine-grained differences among samples while ensuring efficient inference. Extensive experiments on widely
used datasets demonstrate that our method can significantly
outperform state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a growing interest in efficient FineGrained Image Retrieval (FGIR) due to the ever-increasing
data scale in practical applications. As a representative solution to efficient retrieval, hashing based model has been
introduced for this task. Different from common coarsegrained datasets that most traditional hashing methods are
designed for, the primary feature of fine-grained datasets
is that categories involved in one fine-grained dataset usually belongs to the same meta-category (like bird or aircraft)
[22]. It results in small inter-category difference and relatively large intra-category variance (because of pose and
angle). As a result, how to fully discover and extract subtle fine-grained features and learn discriminative hash codes
* Corresponding author

in an effective and efficient approach becomes the emphasis
and difficulty in the design of fine-grained hashing methods.
In the past several years, a series of fine-grained hashing methods have been published and achieved significant progress on the task of efficient FGIR. Motivated by
the aforementioned difficulty in discriminative fine-grained
hash codes generation, the main attention of researchers
has been paid to the design of feature extraction modules. They sufficiently draw lessons from the basic ideas
of well-developed fine-grained feature learning or classification methods, and attempt to concatenate feature vectors
extracted from multiple image regions and network layers
for generating more discriminative hash codes.
However, there are inherent contradictions between the
fine-grained feature learning and hashing based retrieval,
which has been ignored by nearly all these methods. Firstly,
it is the contradiction in feature learning. Concretely, integrating comprehensive information is critical for describing a fine-grained object, but the length of target hash codes
is usually extremely low and fixed. Therefore, limited by
the information embedding capability of low-dimensional
binary codes, better feature extraction models and more
high-dimensional fine-grained feature vectors cannot always achieve corresponding performance gains because of
the information loss during the mapping from feature vectors to binary codes. Furthermore, there is also a contradiction between effectiveness and efficiency. A comprehensive fine-grained feature extraction module usually leads
to more extra parameters and computational costs, which is
detrimental to the primary target of hashing based retrieval,
i.e., efficient inference and retrieval.
As a result, although fully learning discriminative finegrained information is critical for hashing based FGIR
tasks, it is obvious that the traditional idea, i.e., simply mapping the feature vectors extracted by a complex model to
hash codes, is not the optimal choice to handle this issue.
Furthermore, if a fine-grained hashing method is considered as a whole rather than a simple combination of feature
learning and hash code learning modules, it can be found

17273

