This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffEditor: Boosting Accuracy and Flexibility on Diffusion-based Image Editing
Chong Mou1,3

Xintao Wang2

Jiechong Song1

Ying Shan2

Jian Zhang1,3 *

1

2

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School-Rabbitpre AIGC Joint Research Laboratory
{eechongm, xintao.alpha}@gmail.com, yingsshan@tencent.com, {songjiechong, zhangjian.sz}@pku.edu.cn
Reference

Editing Output

Source Input

Reference

Object Moving

Object Resizing

Content Dragging

Appearance Replacing

Object Pasting

Figure 1. Our DiffEditor can perform various fine-grained image editing tasks. Given an image, users can select an object to move or
resize. Or they can drag content with points. Moreover, users can choose a reference image for object pasting and appearance replacing.

Abstract
Large-scale Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models have
revolutionized image generation over the last few years.
Although owning diverse and high-quality generation capabilities, translating these abilities to fine-grained image editing remains challenging. In this paper, we propose
DiffEditor to rectify two weaknesses in existing diffusionbased image editing: (1) in complex scenarios, editing results often lack editing accuracy and exhibit unexpected
artifacts; (2) lack of flexibility to harmonize editing operations, e.g., imagine new content. In our solution, we introduce image prompts in fine-grained image editing, cooperating with the text prompt to better describe the editing content. To increase the flexibility while maintaining
content consistency, we locally combine stochastic differential equation (SDE) into the ordinary differential equation (ODE) sampling. In addition, we incorporate regional
score-based gradient guidance and a time travel strategy
into the diffusion sampling, further improving the editing
* Corresponding author
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62372016.

quality. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
can efficiently achieve state-of-the-art performance on various fine-grained image editing tasks, including editing
within a single image (e.g., object moving, resizing, and
content dragging) and across images (e.g., appearance replacing and object pasting). Our source code is released at
https://github.com/MC-E/DragonDiffusion.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [29, 32, 33, 35] have
become the mainstream of image generation, praised for
their high-quality and diverse generation capability. The
pre-trained T2I models can serve as a good generation
prior and can be used in various ways, e.g., image editing. Since the excellent text-to-image ability, numerous
diffusion-based image editing methods are implemented
based on the text guidance [5, 6, 11–13, 16]. However, the
generated results of T2I models are usually sensitive to the
quality of text [37]. Therefore, text-guided image editing
struggles to achieve fine-grained content manipulation.
Recently, DragGAN [30] provides a user-friendly way

8488

