This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Separate and Conquer: Decoupling Co-occurrence via Decomposition and
Representation for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Zhiwei Yang1,2,3
Kexue Fu4
*
*
Minghong Duan2,3
Linhao Qu2,3
Shuo Wang2,3
Zhijian Song1,2,3
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
2
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
4
Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan)

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) with
image-level labels aims to achieve segmentation tasks without dense annotations. However, attributed to the frequent
coupling of co-occurring objects and the limited supervision from image-level labels, the challenging co-occurrence
problem is widely present and leads to false activation
of objects in WSSS. In this work, we devise a ’Separate
and Conquer’ scheme SeCo to tackle this issue from dimensions of image space and feature space. In the image space, we propose to ’separate’ the co-occurring objects with image decomposition by subdividing images into
patches. Importantly, we assign each patch a category tag
from Class Activation Maps (CAMs), which spatially helps
remove the co-context bias and guide the subsequent representation. In the feature space, we propose to ’conquer’
the false activation by enhancing semantic representation
with multi-granularity knowledge contrast. To this end,
a dual-teacher-single-student architecture is designed and
tag-guided contrast is conducted, which guarantee the correctness of knowledge and further facilitate the discrepancy
among co-contexts. We streamline the multi-staged WSSS
pipeline end-to-end and tackle this issue without external
supervision. Extensive experiments are conducted, validating the efficiency of our method and the superiority over
previous single-staged and even multi-staged competitors
on PASCAL VOC and MS COCO. Code is available here.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) as an
annotation-efficient alternative to fully supervised semantic
segmentation, has enjoyed enormous popularity in recent
years [50]. It aims to densely classify every pixel of an input
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) Co-occurrence issue. Targets marked by stars (horse
and boat) are falsely activated. (b) To solve this issue, we propose a
single-staged framework SeCo, which acts in a ’separate and conquer’ manner that efficiently tackles co-occurrence issue without
external supervision. It initially separates spatial con-texts in the
image space and then conquers false activation in feature space.
(c) The proposed SeCo accurately localizes the co-categories.

image by only leveraging more accessible labels than pixelwise labels, such as points [3], scribbles [25, 42], bounding
boxes [11, 21], and image-level labels [1, 32]. Among these
forms of annotations, image-level labels are the most economical yet challenging annotation form to accomplish the
segmentation task, as they only indicate the presence of objects and contain the least semantic information.
Formally, the pipeline for WSSS with image-level labels
consists of three steps, i.e., initially training a classification
model to generate CAM seeds [44], then refining CAMs to
generate pseudo labels, and finally training a segmentation
network with the pseudo labels and taking it as the final
model to inference [2, 47]. Such a WSSS paradigm can be
further divided into multi-staged and single-staged groups.

3606

