This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revamping Federated Learning Security from a Defender’s Perspective: A
Unified Defense with Homomorphic Encrypted Data Space
K Naveen Kumar
IIT Hyderabad, India

Reshmi Mitra
SEMO, USA

C Krishna Mohan
IIT Hyderabad, India

cs19m20p000001@iith.ac.in

rmitra@semo.edu

ckm@cse.iith.ac.in

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) facilitates clients to collaborate on training a shared machine learning model without
exposing individual private data. Nonetheless, FL remains
susceptible to utility and privacy attacks, notably evasion
data poisoning and model inversion attacks, compromising
the system’s efficiency and data privacy. Existing FL defenses are often specialized to a particular single attack,
lacking generality and a comprehensive defender’s perspective. To address these challenges, we introduce Federated
Cryptography Defense (FCD), a unified single framework
aligning with the defender’s perspective. FCD employs
row-wise transposition cipher based data encryption with
a secret key to counter both evasion black-box data poisoning and model inversion attacks. The crux of FCD lies in
transferring the entire learning process into an encrypted
data space and using a novel distillation loss guided by the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. This measure compares
the probability distributions of the local pretrained teacher
model’s predictions on normal data and the local student
model’s predictions on the same data in FCD’s encrypted
form. By working within this encrypted space, FCD eliminates the need for decryption at the server, resulting in reduced computational complexity. We demonstrate the practical feasibility of FCD and apply it to defend against evasion utility attack on benchmark datasets (GTSRB, KBTS,
CIFAR10, and EMNIST). We further extend FCD for defending against model inversion attack in split FL on the CIFAR100 dataset. Our experiments across the diverse attack
and FL settings demonstrate practical feasibility and robustness against utility evasion (impact > 30) and privacy
attacks (MSE > 73) compared to the second best method.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the demand for collaborative learning algorithms that meet a comprehensive set of criteria has increased [24]. The criteria encompass key aspects such as

data confidentiality, privacy, enhanced utility, robustness,
and fairness [45]. Federated Learning (FL) [10, 12, 55]
is a pioneering approach to collaborative machine learning
(ML) that fulfils these vital requirements. The applicability
of FL is evident in its wide-ranging applications, including
mobile user personalization (Gboard) [1], healthcare [25],
finance sector [17], among others.
Threats to FL. The decentralized nature of FL makes it
highly susceptible to adversarial threats, primarily categorized as utility-centric and privacy-centric [48]. Utilitycentric threats involve malicious attempts to poison data
or models, thereby compromising accuracy [11, 40, 59].
Privacy-centric threats such as model inversion attacks
(MIA) pertain to participant data reconstruction, risking the
leakage of sensitive information and eroding trust in the
FL system [20, 37, 51]. These threats are further classified based on their origin, distinguishing between causative
(during training) and evasion (during testing) attacks [48].
Notably, evasion attacks manipulate the model’s predictions
by modifying the input test data during inference on deployed models, posing a severe threat to FL’s utility compared to causative attacks [24, 48]. Effectively countering
these threats is pivotal for enhancing FL’s security and preserving the previously mentioned factors. Therefore, this
paper focuses on mitigating the untargeted black-box evasion data poisoning attacks that are commonly encountered
in real-world deployments [48]. Our overall aim is to implement a unified defense framework that can safeguard FL
against both evasion utility and MIA privacy attacks during
inference. This choice is motivated by a research gap to defend evasion attacks [24] [21, 50] and the limited work that
tackles both attacks simultaneously.
Limitations of existing FL defense strategies. Table 1 illustrates the gaps within current FL defense approaches and
underscores the vast scope of our work (please refer to the
Supplementary material for a comprehensive related work
discussion). Notably, existing research in FL adversarial defenses has predominantly concentrated on a particular single type, such as utility or privacy-centred attacks. They often neglect the defender’s perspective, especially address-

24387

