This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAVE – A Detect-and-Verify Paradigm for Low-Shot Counting
Jer Pelhan, Alan Lukežič, Vitjan Zavrtanik, Matej Kristan
Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
jer.pelhan@fri.uni-lj.si

Abstract
Low-shot counters estimate the number of objects corresponding to a selected category, based on only few or no
exemplars annotated in the image. The current state-ofthe-art estimates the total counts as the sum over the object location density map, but does not provide individual
object locations and sizes, which are crucial for many applications. This is addressed by detection-based counters,
which, however fall behind in the total count accuracy. Furthermore, both approaches tend to overestimate the counts
in the presence of other object classes due to many false
positives. We propose DAVE, a low-shot counter based on a
detect-and-verify paradigm, that avoids the aforementioned
issues by first generating a high-recall detection set and
then verifying the detections to identify and remove the outliers. This jointly increases the recall and precision, leading to accurate counts. DAVE outperforms the top densitybased counters by ∼20% in the total count MAE, it outperforms the most recent detection-based counter by ∼20% in
detection quality and sets a new state-of-the-art in zero-shot
as well as text-prompt-based counting. The code and models are available on GitHub.

1. Introduction
Low-shot counting considers estimating the number of target objects in an image, based only on a few annotated exemplars (few-shot) or even without providing the exemplars
(zero-shot). Owing to the emergence of focused benchmarks [22, 26], there has been a surge in low-shot counting research recently. The current state-of-the-art low-shot
counters are all density-based [6, 26, 28, 38]. This means
that they estimate the total count by summing over an estimated object presence density map. Only recently, fewshot detection-based methods emerged [22] that estimate
the counts as the number of detected objects.
Density-based methods substantially outperform the
detection-based counters in total count estimation, but they
do not provide detailed outputs such as object locations and
sizes. The latter are however important in many downstream tasks such as bio-medical analysis [35, 41], where

Input image

Outlier detection

Count: 11

Count: 11 + 14

CounTR

Count: 19.73

Final density

Count: 11.12

Figure 1. Despite considering exemplars (yellow boxes), the stateof-the-art (e.g., CounTR [16]) is prone to false activations on incorrect objects, leading to corrupted counts. DAVE avoids this
issue by detecting all candidates (red and green boxes), verifying
them, removing the outliers (red boxes), and correcting the final
density map, thus jointly improving detection and count estimation.

explainability is crucial for human expert verification as
well as for subsequent analyses. There is thus a large applicability gap between the density-based and detection-based
low-shot counters.
Furthermore, both density-based and detection-based
counters are prone to failure in scenes with several object types (Figure 1). The reason lies in the specificitygeneralization tradeoff. Obtaining a high recall requires
generalizing over the potentially diverse appearances of the
selected object type instances in the image. However, this
also leads to false activations on objects of other categories
(false positives), leading to a reduced precision and count
overestimation. A possible solution is to train on multiple-

23293

