This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text Prompt with Normality Guidance for Weakly Supervised Video Anomaly
Detection
Zhiwei Yang1 , Jing Liu1 *, Peng Wu2
Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
1

{zwyang97, neouma}@163.com, xdwupeng@gmail.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised video anomaly detection (WSVAD) is
a challenging task. Generating ﬁne-grained pseudo-labels
based on weak-label and then self-training a classiﬁer is
currently a promising solution. However, since the existing methods use only RGB visual modality and the utilization of category text information is neglected, thus limiting
the generation of more accurate pseudo-labels and affecting the performance of self-training. Inspired by the manual
labeling process based on the event description, in this paper, we propose a novel pseudo-label generation and selftraining framework based on Text Prompt with Normality
Guidance (TPWNG) for WSVAD. Our idea is to transfer the rich language-visual knowledge of the contrastive
language-image pre-training (CLIP) model for aligning the
video event description text and corresponding video frames
to generate pseudo-labels. Speciﬁcally, We ﬁrst ﬁne-tune
the CLIP for domain adaptation by designing two ranking losses and a distributional inconsistency loss. Further, we propose a learnable text prompt mechanism with
the assist of a normality visual prompt to further improve
the matching accuracy of video event description text and
video frames. Then, we design a pseudo-label generation
module based on the normality guidance to infer reliable
frame-level pseudo-labels. Finally, we introduce a temporal
context self-adaptive learning module to learn the temporal dependencies of different video events more ﬂexibly and
accurately. Extensive experiments show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on two benchmark
datasets, UCF-Crime and XD-Violence, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection has been widely researched and applied
in various ﬁelds, such as computer vision [23, 35, 40, 43,
* Corresponding authors.

Two or more people fighting
together, with violent actions
such as punching and kicking.
“Fighting”

Figure 1. Illustration of the manual video frame labeling process.

49], natural language processing [1], and intelligent optimization [29]. One of the most important research issues is
the video anomaly detection (VAD). The main purpose of
VAD is to automatically identify events or behaviors in the
video that are inconsistent with our expectations.
Due to the rarity of anomalous events and the difﬁculty of frame-level labeling, current VAD methods focus on semi-supervised [14, 16, 18] and weakly supervised
[11, 26, 52] paradigms. Semi-supervised VAD methods aim
to learn normality patterns from normal data, and deviations
from this pattern are considered as anomalies. However,
due to the lack of discriminative anomaly information in
the training phase, these models are often prone to overﬁtting, leading to poor performance in complex scenarios.
Subsequently, weakly supervised video anomaly detection
(WSVAD) methods came into prominence. WSVAD involves both normal and abnormal videos with video-level
labels in the training phase, but the exact location of abnormal frames is unknown. Current WSVAD methods mainly
include one-stage methods based on multi-instance learning
(MIL) [17, 26, 27] and two-stage methods based on pseudolabel self-training [6, 11, 51, 53]. While the one-stage methods based on MIL show promising results, this paradigm
tends to focus on video snippets with prominent anomalous
features and suboptimal attention to minor anomalies, thus
limiting its further performance improvement.
In contrast to the one-stage methods mentioned above,
two-stage methods based on pseudo-label self-training generally use an off-the-shelf classiﬁer or MIL to obtain initial

18899

