This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bayesian Differentiable Physics for Cloth Digitalization
Deshan Gong
University of Leeds
Leeds, United Kingdom

Ningtao Mao
University of Leeds
Leeds, United Kingdom

He Wang *
University College London
London, United Kingdom

scdg@leeds.ac.uk

N.Mao@leeds.ac.uk

he wang@ucl.ac.uk

Figure 1. We introduce a Bayesian Differentiable Physics (BPD) model for digitalizing real cloths by inferring their physical properties
from the standard Cusick drape data (a-1, b-1, c-1 left). The digitalized cloths exhibit various drapabilities, faithfully reflecting their
diverse mechanical characteristics and materials (a-1, b-1, c-1 middle and right). Further, our model enables the generalization of the
learned mechanical characteristics and materials to garments (a-2, b-2, c-2).

Abstract
We propose a new method for cloth digitalization. Deviating from existing methods which learn from data captured under relatively casual settings, we propose to learn
from data captured in strictly tested measuring protocols,
and find plausible physical parameters of the cloths. However, such data is currently absent, so we first propose a
new dataset with accurate cloth measurements. Further, the
data size is considerably smaller than the ones in current
deep learning, due to the nature of the data capture process. To learn from small data, we propose a new Bayesian
differentiable cloth model to estimate the complex material
heterogeneity of real cloths. It can provide highly accurate
digitalization from very limited data samples. Through exhaustive evaluation and comparison, we show our method
is accurate in cloth digitalization, efficient in learning from
* corresponding author, he wang@ucl.ac.uk

limited data samples, and general in capturing material
variations. Code and data are available1

1. Introduction
In the emergence of the Metaverse, being able to build digital replicas of specific real-world objects becomes highly
desirable. Despite many efforts to digitalize relatively simple objects such as rigid bodies [69], human bodies [31],
challenges still remain for objects with complex behaviors
such as cloth, fluid, and gases [48, 66, 76]. One particular
challenge is to digitalize cloths, which can greatly benefit
multiple application domains, e.g. customized fashion design, computer animation, textile manufacturing, etc.
The key to cloth digitalization is a model that can capture the complex physical behaviors of a given cloth (not
1 https : / / github . com / realcrane / Bayesian Differentiable-Physics-for-Cloth-Digitalization

11841

