This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TIGER: Time-Varying Denoising Model
for 3D Point Cloud Generation with Diffusion Process
Zhiyuan Ren, Minchul Kim, Feng Liu, Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University
{renzhiy1, kimminc2, liufeng6, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
Recently, diffusion models have emerged as a new powerful generative method for 3D point cloud generation
tasks. However, few works study the effect of the architecture of the diffusion model in the 3D point cloud, resorting to the typical UNet model developed for 2D images. Inspired by the wide adoption of Transformers, we
study the complementary role of convolution (from UNet)
and attention (from Transformers). We discover that their
respective importance change according to the timestep in
the diffusion process. At early stage, attention has an outsized influence because Transformers are found to generate
the overall shape more quickly, and at later stages when
adding fine detail, convolution starts having a larger impact on the generated point cloud’s local surface quality. In
light of this observation, we propose a time-varying twostream denoising model combined with convolution layers and transformer blocks. We generate an optimizable
mask from each timestep to reweigh global and local features, obtaining time-varying fused features. Experimentally, we demonstrate that our proposed method quantitatively outperforms other state-of-the-art methods regarding visual quality and diversity. Code is avaiable https:
//github.com/Zhiyuan-R/Tiger-Diffusion.

1. Introduction
The point cloud is an essential 3D shape representation
that is easy to obtain (sensed directly from laser scanning),
versatile (serving as a building block of mesh), and easy
to manipulate (geometrically transformed in a straightforward manner by affine matrices). 3D point cloud generative
models benefit extensive applications across robotics [35],
medicine [15] and content creation [36], and lay the groundwork for other vision tasks like point cloud upsampling
[52], point cloud completion [21, 31] and mesh generation
[9]. However, compared to 2D images, the cost and complexity of acquiring 3D point clouds make it crucial to ex-

Figure 1. An illustration of different roles played by convolution
and attention operations in the denoising model. Convolution is
good for learning local relationships, and attention is optimal for
modeling global relationships. We propose to merge these two
properties across different timesteps in the diffusion process.

plore and develop efficient and effective model architectures
for 3D point cloud generation.
Existing point cloud generative models are built on a
range of frameworks, including generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1, 5], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [24],
normalizing flows [23, 27, 51]. However, these methods
neither are stable in training nor produce high-fidelity results. Recently, the denoising diffusion model [18], a novel
generative method, has demonstrated exceptional results in
3D point cloud generation. Typically, diffusion models perturb a point cloud using a forward process and denoising
algorithm. Once trained, the model can be used to generate
new point clouds by iterating the reverse process over a sequence of time steps, with each step adding more noise to
the input point cloud.
Several recent works, including DPM [34] and
PVD [55], have successfully applied diffusion models to
3D point cloud generation, achieving high levels of naturalness and diversity. Very recently, LION [53] further improves by encoding point clouds into latent space. However,
these methods commonly utilize UNet-like convolutional
networks that are originally designed for image processing.
There has been limited research on developing suitable de-

9462

