This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamAvatar: Text-and-Shape Guided 3D Human Avatar Generation via
Diffusion Models
Yukang Cao1 * Yan-Pei Cao2∗
1

Kai Han1†

Ying Shan2
2

The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
We present DreamAvatar, a text-and-shape guided
framework for generating high-quality 3D human avatars
with controllable poses. While encouraging results have
been reported by recent methods on text-guided 3D common
object generation, generating high-quality human avatars
remains an open challenge due to the complexity of the
human body’s shape, pose, and appearance. We propose
DreamAvatar to tackle this challenge, which utilizes a trainable NeRF for predicting density and color for 3D points
and pretrained text-to-image diffusion models for providing
2D self-supervision. Specifically, we leverage the SMPL
model to provide shape and pose guidance for the generation. We introduce a dual-observation-space design that
involves the joint optimization of a canonical space and
a posed space that are related by a learnable deformation field. This facilitates the generation of more complete textures and geometry faithful to the target pose. We
also jointly optimize the losses computed from the full body
and from the zoomed-in 3D head to alleviate the common
multi-face “Janus” problem and improve facial details in
the generated avatars. Extensive evaluations demonstrate
that DreamAvatar significantly outperforms existing methods, establishing a new state-of-the-art for text-and-shape
guided 3D human avatar generation.

1. Introduction
The creation of 3D graphical human models has received
great attention in recent years due to its wide-ranging applications in fields such as film-making, video games, AR/VR,
and human-robotic interaction. Traditional methods for
building such complex 3D models require thousands of
man-hours of trained artists and engineers [10, 12], making the process both time-consuming and highly expert† Corresponding authors
‡ Webpage: https:
* Equal contribution
//yukangcao.github.io/DreamAvatar/
Acknowlegement: This work is partially supported by Hong Kong Research Grant Council - Early Career Scheme (Grant No. 27208022) and
HKU Seed Fund for Basic Research.

Kwan-Yee K. Wong1†

ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

dependent. With the development of deep learning methods, we have witnessed the emergence of promising methods [5, 54, 61] which can reconstruct 3D human models from monocular images. These techniques, however,
still face challenges in fully recovering details from the input images and rely heavily on the training dataset. To
tackle these challenges and simplify the modeling process,
adopting generative models for 3D human avatar modeling
has recently received increasing attention from the research
community. This approach has the potential to alleviate the
need for large 3D datasets and facilitate easier and more accessible 3D human avatar modeling.
To leverage the potential of 2D generative image models
for 3D content generation, recent methods [8, 29, 31, 35, 46]
have utilized pretrained text-guided image diffusion models
to optimize 3D implicit representations (e.g., NeRFs [37]
and DMTet [40, 56]). DreamFusion [46] introduces a
novel Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) strategy to selfsupervise the optimization process and achieves promising
results. However, human bodies, which are the primary focus of this paper, exhibit a complex articulated structure,
with head, arms, hands, trunk, legs, feet, etc., each capable of posing in various ways. As a result, while DreamFusion [46] and subsequent methods (e.g., Magic3D [29],
ProlificDreamer [58], Fantasia3D [8]) produce impressive
results, they lack the proper constraints to enforce consistent 3D human structure and often struggle to generate detailed textures for 3D human avatars. Latent-NeRF [35] introduces a sketch-shape loss based on the 3D shape guidance, but it still faces challenges in generating reasonable
results for human bodies.
In this paper, we present DreamAvatar, a novel framework for generating high-quality 3D human avatars from
text prompts and shape priors. Inspired by previous
works [29, 46], DreamAvatar employs a trainable NeRF
as the base representation for predicting density and color
values for each 3D point. Coupled with pretrained textto-image diffusion models [50, 68], DreamAvatar can be
trained to generate 3D avatars using 2D self-supervision.
The key innovation of DreamAvatar lies in three main aspects. Firstly, we leverage the SMPL model [32] to provide

958

