This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards HDR and HFR Video from Rolling-Mixed-Bit Spikings
Yakun Chang3,4#† Yeliduosi Xiaokaiti1,2# Yujia Liu1,2 Bin Fan5
Zhaojun Huang1,2 Tiejun Huang1,2 Boxin Shi1,2∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Institute of Information Science, School of Computer Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
5
National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
ykchang@bjtu.edu.cn, {yujia liu, binfan, tjhuang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn

1

Abstract
The spiking cameras offer the benefits of high dynamic
range (HDR), high temporal resolution, and low data redundancy. However, reconstructing HDR videos in high-speed
conditions using single-bit spikings presents challenges due
to the limited bit depth. Increasing the bit depth of the spikings is advantageous for boosting HDR performance, but the
readout efficiency will be decreased, which is unfavorable
for achieving a high frame rate (HFR) video. To address
these challenges, we propose a readout mechanism to obtain rolling-mixed-bit (RMB) spikings, which involves interleaving multi-bit spikings within the single-bit spikings in a
rolling manner, thereby combining the characteristics of high
bit depth and efficient readout. Furthermore, we introduce
RMB-Net for reconstructing HDR and HFR videos. RMBNet comprises a cross-bit attention block for fusing mixed-bit
spikings and a cross-time attention block for achieving temporal fusion. Extensive experiments conducted on synthetic
and real-synthetic data demonstrate the superiority of our
method. For instance, pure 3-bit spikings result in 3 times
of data volume, whereas our method achieves comparable
performance with less than 2% increase in data volume.

1. Introduction
Real-world scenes possess a significantly wider dynamic
range that exceeds the capability of conventional sensors.
Typical high dynamic range (HDR) video reconstruction
methods [3, 23, 24, 53] with conventional sensors encode
exposure times to capture images with alternating exposures.
And by fusing the low dynamic range (LDR) images taken
under different exposures, the pitfalls of underexposure and
# Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.
† Majority of this work was done at Peking University.

Project page: https://github.com/yongqiye00/RMB-Net

…

…

Qc

0

single-bit spikings

(a)

N=1

N = 255

N=1

N = 255

Input

HDR and HFR video

7

…

…

Qc

0

multi-bit spikings

(b)

7
1

…

0
time

…

Qc

rolling-mixed-bit spikings

(c)

Figure 1. The HDR performance of a spiking camera is closely tied
to the bit depth of the spikings. (a) From left to right: Single-bit
quantization (Qc is the accumulated photon electrons), diagram of
single-bit spiking planes, and reconstructed image by accumulating
N spiking planes. Increasing N to 255 significantly boosts HDR
performance. (b) HDR can be boosted by reading out multi-bit spikings. However, multi-bit spikings decrease the readout efficiency,
which is not conducive to obtaining HFR videos. (c) The proposed
RMB spikings with time-varying quantization. We further reconstruct HDR and HFR videos from RMB spikings.

overexposure are alleviated. This kind of approach has a
dilemma between the frame rate and exposure time [20], i.e.,
long exposure restricts the improvement of frame rate [2],
which makes it challenging to capture high frame rate (HFR)
videos with conventional sensors in high-speed scenes.
Recent advancements in the field of HDR and HFR photography have benefited from the integration of neuromorphic sensors such as event cameras [6, 29, 30] and spiking
cameras [2, 21]. These sensors offer appealing characteris-

25117

