This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guided Slot Attention for Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation
Minhyeok Lee

Suhwan Cho

Dogyoon Lee Chaewon Park
Yonsei University

Jungho Lee

Sangyoun Lee

{hydragon516,chosuhwan,nemotio,chaewon28,2015142131,syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Unsupervised video object segmentation aims to segment
the most prominent object in a video sequence. However,
the existence of complex backgrounds and multiple foreground objects make this task challenging. To address
this issue, we propose a guided slot attention network to
reinforce spatial structural information and obtain better
foreground–background separation. The foreground and
background slots, which are initialized with query guidance, are iteratively refined based on interactions with template information. Furthermore, to improve slot–template
interaction and effectively fuse global and local features
in the target and reference frames, K-nearest neighbors
filtering and a feature aggregation transformer are introduced. The proposed model achieves state-of-the-art performance on two popular datasets. Additionally, we demonstrate the robustness of the proposed model in challenging scenes through various comparative experiments. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/
Hydragon516/GSANet.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a crucial task in computer vision, which aims to segment objects in a video sequence frame by frame. VOS is used as preprocessing
for video captioning [27], optical flow estimation [2], autonomous driving [1, 12, 17]. The VOS tasks can be divided into semi-supervised and unsupervised approaches
depending on the availability of explicit target supervision.
In semi-supervised VOS, the model is provided with a segmentation mask for the initial frame, and its objective is to
track and segment the specified object throughout the entire video sequence. On the other hand, unsupervised VOS
requires the model to find and segment the most salient objects in the video sequence without any external guidance
or the initial frame mask. The unsupervised VOS is a more
challenging task as it involves searching for common objects that consistently appear in the input video and effectively extracting their features.

(a) RGB

(b) w/o SA

(c) w/ SA

(d) w/ GSA (Ours)

Figure 1. (a) Input RGB image. (b) Activation map of baseline
encoder features. (c) Slot activation map of the existing slot attention method. (d) Slot activation map of the proposed guided slot
attention. When guided slot attention is applied to the encoder,
it surpasses the encoder’s own foreground extraction ability and
shows stronger performance than the previous slot attention even
in complex backgrounds.

Due to the difficulties of unsupervised VOS, deeplearning-based unsupervised VOS models [3, 7, 9, 19, 22,
33, 35, 38] have recently been in the spotlight. In particular, many approaches [3, 7, 9, 38] integrate additional motion information such as optical flow with RGB appearance
information, which is motivated by the fact that the target
object generally exhibits distinctive motion. These methods
focus on how to properly fuse appearance and motion information. These two types of information can mutually complement each other and produce useful cues for prediction.
However, they suffer from the problem that they are overly
dependent on motion cues and overlook structural information of a scene such as color, texture, and shape. In cases
where a scene has complex structures or quality of optical
flow maps is low, those methods cannot operate reliably.
To address these issues, we propose leveraging the slot
attention mechanism originally introduced in object-centric
learning. This mechanism enables the extraction of crucial
spatial structural information, which is necessary for distinguishing between foreground and background, from features that are enriched with contextual information. The
reason why we focus on slot attention is shared intuition
between object-centric learning and unsupervised VOS that
both method aims to self-learn and segment the distinguishing features of objects and backgrounds. In object centric learning, slot attention generates randomly initialized
empty slots and performs iterative multi-head attention with
input image features to store individual object and back-

3807

