This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Eﬃcient Scene Recovery Using Luminous Flux Prior
Zhongyu Li 1 , Lei Zhang 1 ∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
ruin2@mail.ustc.edu.cn, leizh23@ustc.edu.cn,

Abstract
Scene recovery, the restoration of images degraded by
adverse weather conditions, presents signiﬁcant challenges
for existing methods. Physical models, constrained by their
inherent assumptions, often fail when these assumptions are
not met; Deep learning models are powerful, they are limited
by the diversity of their training datasets, leading to poor
generalization and high computational demands. To address these limitations, we propose the Luminous Flux Prior
(LFP), to recover degraded images under diverse adverse
weather without learning. Luminous ﬂux, a physical measure that reﬂects image brightness, has a rate of change that
demonstrates a signiﬁcant correlation with transmission.
Consequently, we leverage this rate of change in luminous
ﬂux as prior knowledge to estimate transmission, which in
turn assists in image recovery. This approach reduces dependency on physical parameters and enhances adaptability
to various weather. Experimental validation under diverse
conditions, such as sandstorms, underwater environments,
and haze, attests to the robustness of LFP in restoring clear
images. With a time complexity of O(N log N ), LFP enables real-time recovery, making it a suitable for devices
with limited computational resources.

1. Introduction
Observational devices encounter signiﬁcant challenges under adverse lighting conditions, which can be caused by phenomena such as sandstorms, underwater environments, and
haze. These conditions lead to image degradation, typiﬁed
by a loss of detail, contrast distortion, and color bias [13, 50].
Such degradation impairs computer vision tasks, including
object detection [31], image segmentation [42], and scene
understanding [43]. Therefore, restoring clear images from
these degraded observations becomes a critical challenge in
the ﬁeld of computer vision [27].
Image degradation primarily arises from the scattering
and absorption of light [10, 11, 16, 26, 49]. Environmental elements, such as the atmosphere and water, scatter
∗ Lei Zhang is the corresponding author.

light sources, engendering intricate environmental light and
the absorption of parts of the visible light spectrum. This
process signiﬁcantly degrades images by diminishing their
brightness. The physical quantity symbolizing the brightness per unit area, referred to as luminous ﬂux, is denoted by
F . The fundamental instigator of this degradation is a decrease in the transmission rate t, representing the proportion
of light brightness received by the camera.
The challenge in image restoration is the estimation of
transmission t. We bifurcate scene restoration methods into
two principal types based on the calculation of t: physical
models and data-driven deep learning methods. Physical
models [1, 2, 16, 19, 20, 38, 54] make assumptions about
the physical parameters or conditions for transmission t to be
valid. However, if these assumptions fall short, the restored
image suﬀers to varying extents. Conversely, data-driven
deep learning methods extrapolate an estimation model for
haze-free images from extensive datasets [3, 23, 40]. Yet,
these supervised learning methods exhibit limited eﬃcacy
in real-world scenarios due to the scarcity of large-scale,
diverse, and fully aligned paired training data. Additionally,
deep learning algorithms necessitate complex loss functions
and training strategies, resulting in high training costs [48].
Most existing methods rely solely on L1/L2 image reconstruction loss and lack robust regularization, which may
induce unsuitable gradient updates and grapple with the uncertainty of ill-posed problems due to a dearth of robust
prior information. Both physical models and deep learning
methods ﬁnd it challenging to adapt to a variety of diﬀerent
scenes owing to their inherent limitations [27].
Typical physical models illustrate the image formation
process impacted by scattering [44]. This model can generally be represented by the following equation [36, 50]:
I(x) = J(x) · t(x) + A(1 − t(x)),

(1)

where x denotes the location information within the image,
I(x) refers to the observed degraded image, J(x) signiﬁes
the clear image (scene radiance) we aim to restore, and A
symbolizes the global ambient light. t(x) describes the
proportion of light reaching the camera. To restore a clear
image J(x), we need to estimate the transmission t(x) and

2743

