This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Virtual Immunohistochemistry Staining for Histological Images Assisted by
Weakly-supervised Learning
Jiahan Li1 , Jiuyang Dong1 , Shenjin Huang1 , Xi Li3 , Junjun Jiang1 , Xiaopeng Fan1 *,
Yongbing Zhang2 *
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Department of Gastroenterology, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital
{jiahan.li, jiuyang.dong, shenjinhuang}@stu.hit.edu.cn,
{junjunjiang, fxp, ybzhang08}@hit.edu.cn, lixi122188@sina.com

Abstract
Recently, virtual staining technology has greatly promoted the advancement of histopathology. Despite the
practical successes achieved, the outstanding performance
of most virtual staining methods relies on hard-to-obtain
paired images in training. In this paper, we propose a
method for virtual immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining,
named confusion-GAN, which does not require paired images and can achieve comparable performance to supervised algorithms. Specifically, we propose a multi-branch
discriminator, which judges if the features of generated images can be embedded into the feature pool of target domain
images, to improve the visual quality of generated images.
Meanwhile, we also propose a novel patch-level pathology
information extractor, which is assisted by multiple instance
learning, to ensure pathological consistency during virtual
staining. Extensive experiments were conducted on three
types of IHC images, including a high-resolution hepatocellular carcinoma immunohistochemical dataset proposed by
us. The results demonstrated that our proposed confusionGAN can generate highly realistic images that are capable
of deceiving even experienced pathologists. Furthermore,
compared to using H&E images directly, the downstream
diagnosis achieved higher accuracy when using images
generated by confusion-GAN. Our dataset and codes will
be available at https://github.com/jiahanli2022/confusionGAN.

1. Introduction
Histopathological staining is a key step in clinical pathological analysis [2, 33]. As the most common histopathological staining method, H&E staining can clearly delineate
* Corresponding author: Xiaopeng Fan, Yongbing Zhang

the cellular structures in tissues. At the same time, immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining is a functional staining
method used for evaluation of protein-specific expression,
which greatly assists in tumor diagnosis and cancer prognosis [1]. For example, breast cancer with overexpression of
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) tends to
have aggressive clinical behaviour [24], while breast cancer
with low expression of estrogen receptor (ER) often accompanies poor response to endocrine therapy [18]. Besides,
glypican-3 (GPC3) is a recently discovered immunohistochemical protein that shows promising potential for indicating the presence of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Unfortunately, the process of IHC staining is laborious,
time-consuming, and expensive [42]. Therefore, many researches have focused on utilizing virtual staining techniques to convert H&E images into IHC images [38, 41, 43].
The existing virtual IHC staining methods can be roughly
divided into two categories: supervised learning-based
methods and unsupervised learning-based methods. Supervised learning-based methods require a large amount of
paired images for training. These H&E-IHC pairs typically
come from adjacent layers of same tissues, accompanied by
complex data processing and alignment. What’s more, these
methods cannot be used in scenarios where adjacent layers
are not available. On the other hand, unsupervised methods
often focus on the style of the generated images, ignoring
the transmission of pathological information.
To address these aforementioned problems, we propose
a virtual IHC staining framework called confusion-GAN,
which utilizes weakly supervised learning to facilitate the
unsupervised staining process of unpaired images. To explore the pathological information of H&E patches, a novel
patch-level pathology information extractor which is assisted by multiple instance learning (MIL) is proposed. This
method utilizes a dual-spherical loss proposed by us to push
positive patches away from negative patches in the feature

11259

