This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AlignMiF: Geometry-Aligned Multimodal Implicit Field for
LiDAR-Camera Joint Synthesis
Tang Tao1

Guangrun Wang3

Yixing Lao4 Peng Chen5
Xiaodan Liang1,2 †

Jie Liu6

Kaicheng Yu8 †

Liang Lin7

1 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 DarkMatter AI Research 3 University of Oxford
4 HKU 5 Cainiao Group 6 NCUT 7 Sun Yat-sen University 8 Westlake University

{trent.tangtao, kaicheng.yu.yt, hxdliang328}@gmail.com

Abstract
Neural implicit fields have been a de facto standard in
novel view synthesis. Recently, there exist some methods
exploring fusing multiple modalities within a single field,
aiming to share implicit features from different modalities
to enhance reconstruction performance. However, these
modalities often exhibit misaligned behaviors: optimizing
for one modality, such as LiDAR, can adversely affect another, like camera performance, and vice versa. In this
work, we conduct comprehensive analyses on the multimodal implicit field of LiDAR-camera joint synthesis, revealing the underlying issue lies in the misalignment of
different sensors. Furthermore, we introduce AlignMiF, a
geometrically aligned multimodal implicit field with two
proposed modules: Geometry-Aware Alignment (GAA) and
Shared Geometry Initialization (SGI). These modules effectively align the coarse geometry across different modalities,
significantly enhancing the fusion process between LiDAR
and camera data. Through extensive experiments across
various datasets and scenes, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in facilitating better interaction between LiDAR and camera modalities within a unified neural field. Specifically, our proposed AlignMiF, achieves
remarkable improvement over recent implicit fusion methods (+2.01 and +3.11 image PSNR on the KITTI-360 and
Waymo datasets) and consistently surpasses single modality
performance (13.8% and 14.2% reduction in LiDAR Chamfer Distance on the respective datasets). Code release:
https://github.com/tangtaogo/alignmif.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing novel views has recently seen significant
progress due to Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [26], which
models a 3D scene as a continuous function and leverages
† Co-corresponding author.

Novel View Synthesis
24.4

8.8

24.6 (+)

11.1 (-)

23.5 (-)

8.7 (+)

25.2 (+)

7.7 (+)

PSNR

C-D

Single
Modality
Camera-Centric LiDAR-Centric
i-NGP, etc.
LiDAR-NeRF, etc.

-

s
eter
aram mera
P
g
a
in
Tun ards C
tow
tow

Implicit Neural Fusion
Unisim, StreetSurf, etc.

ards
Li

DAR

Alignment

Aligned Multiple
Modalities
AlignMiF
(Ours)

Figure 1. The misalignment issue in multimodal implicit field.
For implicit neural fusion, there is a trade-off between the modalities due to the misalignment, making it challenging to improve
both modalities simultaneously. Conversely, our method addresses
the misalignment issue and achieves boosted multimodal performance. The metrics are PSNR and Chamfer Distance (C-D).

differentiable rendering, resulting in a de facto standard to
render novel views. Notably, the recent NeRF methods have
shown impressive performance on downstream tasks such
as autonomous diving [43, 50, 52, 53]. In such practical
scenarios, both images and LiDAR sensors are typically utilized. Currently, researchers extend the NeRF formulation
for novel LiDAR view synthesis [15, 42, 60], which treat
the oriented LiDAR laser beams as a set of rays and render
3D points and intensities in a similar fashion as RGB.
However, the exploration of multimodal learning in
NeRF is still in its early stages. There are initial attempts,
such as UniSim [55] and NeRF-LiDAR [60], to incorporate multimodal inputs through implicit fusion, i.e., sharing
the implicit features in one single field, aiming to lever-

21230

