This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GoMVS: Geometrically Consistent Cost Aggregation for Multi-View Stereo

9mm

Recall

4.5mm

Precision

0mm

Jiang Wu1 * Rui Li1,2 * Haofei Xu2,3 Wenxun Zhao1 Yu Zhu1 ✝ Jinqiu Sun1 Yanning Zhang1✝
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 ETH Zürich 3 University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center

(a) MVSFormer [2]

(b) RA-MVSNet [45]

(c) ET-MVSNet [14]

(d) GeoMVSNet [46]

(e) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of reconstruction errors on Tanks and Temple benchmark. We show precision and recall error maps for the
“Horse” scan. Our method demonstrates notable improvements over existing methods in challenging areas.

Abstract
Matching cost aggregation plays a fundamental role in
learning-based multi-view stereo networks. However, directly aggregating adjacent costs can lead to suboptimal
results due to local geometric inconsistency. Related methods either seek selective aggregation or improve aggregated
depth in the 2D space, both are unable to handle geometric inconsistency in the cost volume effectively. In this paper, we propose GoMVS to aggregate geometrically consistent costs, yielding better utilization of adjacent geometries.
More specifically, we correspond and propagate adjacent
costs to the reference pixel by leveraging the local geometric smoothness in conjunction with surface normals. We
achieve this by the geometric consistent propagation (GCP)
module. It computes the correspondence from the adjacent
depth hypothesis space to the reference depth space using
surface normals, then uses the correspondence to propagate adjacent costs to the reference geometry, followed by
a convolution for aggregation. Our method achieves new
state-of-the-art performance on DTU, Tanks & Temple, and
ETH3D datasets. Notably, our method ranks 1st on the
Tanks & Temple Advanced benchmark. Code is available
at https://github.com/Wuuu3511/GoMVS.
* indicates equal contributions and ✝ indicates corresponding authors.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is a fundamental computer vision problem that recovers 3D shapes from posed images by multi-view correspondence matching [21]. Recent
learning-based MVS [11, 25, 30, 38] estimates scene depth
from the cost volume computed by geometric matching,
which delivers latent geometric cues crucial for the final
depth [7]. However, the initial cost volume can suffer from
challenging matching conditions, e.g., varying illumination,
textless areas, or repetitive patterns, leading to suboptimal
pixel-wise costs that hamper accurate estimations.
To mitigate this issue, cost aggregation plays an important role in removing matching ambiguities and improving
discriminativeness by using the neighboring information.
However, the adjacent costs may deliver inconsistent depth
cues due to the gradual changes in local geometry. As a
result, the aggregated costs are not geometrically guaranteed to have the highest matching score at the real reference depth, leading to suboptimal depth predictions. The
widely adopted cascade framework [7] can potentially exacerbate this issue as the adjacent costs can have more divergent costs due to the shifted depth hypotheses.
As the geometric inconsistency is a common challenge in
multi-view stereo and 2-view stereo matching, related methods either adopt learned aggregation [25, 31] or enforce
consistency to the aggregated depth [9, 15, 42]. Specif-

20207

