This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diversity-aware Channel Pruning for StyleGAN Compression
Jiwoo Chung, Sangeek Hyun, Sang-Heon Shim, Jae-Pil Heo∗
Sungkyunkwan University
{wldn0202, hsi1032, ekzmwww, jaepilheo}@g.skku.edu

Abstract

handle this challenge, the research area of StyleGAN compression [24, 37] is recently introduced.

StyleGAN has shown remarkable performance in unconditional image generation. However, its high computational
cost poses a significant challenge for practical applications.
Although recent efforts have been made to compress StyleGAN while preserving its performance, existing compressed
models still lag behind the original model, particularly in
terms of sample diversity. To overcome this, we propose a
novel channel pruning method that leverages varying sensitivities of channels to latent vectors, which is a key factor in
sample diversity. Specifically, by assessing channel importance based on their sensitivities to latent vector perturbations, our method enhances the diversity of samples in the
compressed model. Since our method solely focuses on the
channel pruning stage, it has complementary benefits with
prior training schemes without additional training cost. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly enhances sample diversity across various datasets.
Moreover, in terms of FID scores, our method not only surpasses state-of-the-art by a large margin but also achieves
comparable scores with only half training iterations. Codes
are available at github.com/jiwoogit/DCP-GAN.

Most of prior StyleGAN compression techniques including CAGAN [24] and StyleKD [37] have two stages:
(1) channel-pruning and (2) distillation stages. In detail, the channel-pruning stage initializes the compressed
model (student) from the pre-trained network (teacher) by
selectively removing channels. Subsequently, in the distillation stage, channel-pruned student model undergoes further training by adversarial objectives and knowledge distillation from the teacher model if needed.

1. Introduction
Thanks to recent progress in generative artificial intelligence, there have been numerous techniques in the research field of image generation [1, 3, 10, 15, 18, 26,
30, 31, 33, 36]. Especially for Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [5], StyleGAN [12–14] is one of the
most successful approaches and leads to the development
of diverse applications of GANs including image editing [7, 27, 39], super resolution [29], and even 3D generation [2, 6, 32]. However, due to their high computation
costs, the deployment of these applications on the edge devices such as mobile phones and embedded systems is still
challenging and remains a significant research problem. To
∗ Corresponding author

The primary goal of the GAN compression is to maintain the diversity and fidelity of generated images from the
teacher model. However, we observe that the compressed
generator often struggles to preserve the diversity compared
to teacher generator (i.e. low recall as reported in Table. 1).
Specifically, in the case of StyleKD, although it retains the
latent space and mapping network of the teacher model
during the pruning stage, the synthesis network of student
model hardly preserves the diversity (recall) in the latent-toimage rendering process. We hypothesize that such degradation in diversity is caused by improper initialization of the
synthesis network (e.g. random initialization or inadequate
pruning method). Hence, in this paper we focus on development of an appropriate channel pruning scheme for synthesis network toward preserving the diversity of teacher.
The diversity of the synthesis network stems from the
variations observed in images generated from different latent signals. Our hypothesis is that the channel-wise behavior differs for different latent vectors, implying that each
channel contributes to the diversity of generated images differently. For instance, channels associated with common
characteristics in the dataset (e.g., the number of eyes in
a facial dataset) may not be sensitive to the latent vector
and its impact on diversity, despite their significant contribution to the generated images. On the other hand, channels related to semantic attributes exhibit distinct behavior
with respect to the latent vector. Furthermore, the common
characteristics within a dataset can be highly recoverable
during further training even if their relevant channels are
pruned. Therefore, to achieve a compressed student model

7902

