This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Refinement for Absolute Pose Regression with Feature Synthesis
Shuai Chen1
Kejie Li1

Yash Bhalgat2
Xinghui Li1
Jia-Wang Bian1
Zirui Wang1
Victor Adrian Prisacariu1
1
Active Vision Lab, University of Oxford
2
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

Abstract
Absolute Pose Regression (APR) methods use deep neural networks to directly regress camera poses from RGB
images. However, the predominant APR architectures only
rely on 2D operations during inference, resulting in limited
accuracy of pose estimation due to the lack of 3D geometry
constraints or priors. In this work, we propose a test-time
refinement pipeline that leverages implicit geometric constraints using a robust feature field to enhance the ability of
APR methods to use 3D information during inference. We
also introduce a novel Neural Feature Synthesizer (NeFeS)
model, which encodes 3D geometric features during training and directly renders dense novel view features at test
time to refine APR methods. To enhance the robustness of
our model, we introduce a feature fusion module and a progressive training strategy. Our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art single-image APR accuracy on indoor and
outdoor datasets. Code will be released at https://
github.com/ActiveVisionLab/NeFeS.

(a) Before Pose Refinement

(b) After Pose Refinement

Figure 1. Our pose refinement (R) improves (coarse) pose predictions from other methods using novel feature synthesis to achieve
pixel-wise alignment. Top left / right: 3D plots of predicted
(green) and ground-truth (red) camera positions. Bottom left /
right: alignment between rendered features and query image.

1. Introduction
Camera relocalization is a crucial task that allows machines
to understand their position and orientation in 3D space.
It is an essential prerequisite for applications such as augmented reality, robotics, and autonomous driving, where the
accuracy and efficiency of pose estimation are important.
Recently, Absolute Pose Regression (APR) methods [21–
23] have been shown to be effective in directly estimating
camera pose from RGB images using convolutional neural networks. The simplicity of APR’s architecture offers
several potential advantages over classical geometry-based
methods [5, 43, 45], involving end-to-end training, cheap
computation cost, and low memory demand.
Latest advances in APR, particularly the use of novel
view synthesis (NVS) [10, 11, 29, 32, 33, 49] to generate
new images from random viewpoints as data augmentation
during training, have significantly improved the pose regression performance. Despite this, state-of-the-art (SOTA)

APRs still have the following limitations: (i) They predict
the pose of a query image by passing it through a CNN,
which typically disregards geometry at inference time. This
causes APR networks to struggle to generalize to viewpoints that the training data fails to cover [46]; (ii) The unlabeled data, often sampled from the validation/testing set,
used for finetuning the APR network [8, 10, 11] may not
be universally available in real-life circumstances, and this
semi-supervised finetuning is also time-consuming.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel testtime refinement pipeline for APR methods. Unlike prior
works that explore extended Kalman filters [34], pose graph
optimization [8], or pose auto-encoders [49], our method
integrates an implicit representation based geometric refinement into an end-to-end learning framework, where gradients can be backpropagated to the APR network. We test
our proposed method across different APR architectures to

20987

