This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Session SLAM with Differentiable Wide-Baseline Pose Optimization
Lahav Lipson
Princeton University

Jia Deng
Princeton University

llipson@princeton.edu

jiadeng@princeton.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new system for Multi-Session SLAM,
which tracks camera motion across multiple disjoint videos
under a single global reference. Our approach couples
the prediction of optical flow with solver layers to estimate
camera pose. The backbone is trained end-to-end using a
novel differentiable solver for wide-baseline two-view pose.
The full system can connect disjoint sequences, perform visual odometry, and global optimization. Compared to existing approaches, our design is accurate and robust to catastrophic failures. Code is available at https://github.
com/princeton-vl/MultiSlam_DiffPose

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is the
task of estimating camera motion and a 3D map from video.
The standard setup assumes a single continuous video.
However, video data in the wild often consists of not a single continuous stream, but rather multiple disjoint sessions,
either deliberately such as in collaborative mapping when
multiple robots perform joint rapid 3D reconstruction, or
inadvertently due to visual discontinuities in the video
stream which can result from camera failures, extreme
parallax, rapid turns, auto-exposure lag, dark areas, or
extreme occlusion by dynamic objects. Handling such disjoint videos is important for many applications in AR and
robotics, and gives rise to the task of Multi-Session SLAM.
In Multi-Session SLAM, the input consists of multiple
disjoint video sequences and the goal is to estimate camera
poses for all video frames under a single global reference.
This is in contrast to “single-video SLAM”, whose input is
a single continuous video. In this work, we focus on the
monocular, RGB-only Multi-Session SLAM setting.
Several approaches have been proposed to deal with
Multi-Session SLAM, however existing solutions typically
require additional sensor data in order to remove gauge freedoms and make tracking easier [16, 28, 37]. Only a small
number of methods, notably CCM-SLAM [36] and ORBSLAM3 [4], support Multi-Session SLAM from monocular video alone, due to the difficulty of aligning disjoint

VO Module

Video Stream

Latest Frame
2-View

2-View

2-View

Estimate
!!"#…% ∈ !#$ 3

Figure 1. Our method estimates camera pose from multiple disconnected video streams.

sequences under the 7-DOF gauge freedoms in monocular
video. However, these approaches are based on classical
feature descriptors, making them less accurate on average
compared to recent designs based on deep networks.
In the standard SLAM setting, Teed and Deng [44]
proposed to use a deep optical flow network (RAFT [43])
to track 2D motion, while jointly updating camera poses
with a bundle adjustment layer. The method, DROIDSLAM, is accurate and avoids tracking failures, but the
design assumes a continuous video stream and is not
capable of the wide-baseline matching and non-local optimization necessary for Multi-Session SLAM. Deep Patch
Visual Odometry [45] (DPVO) introduced a sparse visualodometry-only analog of DROID-SLAM which achieves
similar accuracy on single-video SLAM, but at much lower
cost. However, DPVO also does not support Multi-Session
SLAM for the same reasons as DROID-SLAM.
We propose a method for Multi-Session SLAM, capable of both wide-baseline relative pose and visual odometry
using a single backbone architecture inspired by [45]. We
introduce a differentiable solver layer which minimizes the
symmetric epipolar distance (SED) from bi-directional optical flow. From this we construct a method for two-view
pose which is capable of matching from far-apart views.
This same design can be repurposed for visual odometry
by swapping out the solver for bundle adjustment. By employing a unified backbone architecture for both tasks, we
enable a simple approach to Multi-Session SLAM.
We evaluate our approach on challenging real-world
datasets: EuRoC-MAV [2] and ETH3D [39]. Our sys-

19626

