This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ECLIPSE: A Resource-Efficient Text-to-Image Prior for Image Generations
Maitreya Patel, Changhoon Kim, Sheng Cheng, Chitta Baral, Yezhou Yang
Arizona State University
{maitreya.patel, kch, scheng53, chitta, yz.yang}@asu.edu

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [13, 36, 38, 43] have demonstrated remarkable success in generating high-quality images conditioned on text prompts. This Text-to-Image (T2I) generation paradigm has been effectively applied to various downstream tasks such as subject/segmentation/depth-driven image generation [4, 6, 10, 21, 30]. Central to these advancements are two predominant text-conditioned diffusion models: Latent Diffusion Models (LDM) [38], also known as
1 Our strategy, ECLIPSE, draws an analogy from the way a smaller prior

model, akin to a celestial entity, offers a glimpse of the grandeur within the
larger pre-trained vision-language model, mirroring how an eclipse reveals
the vastness of the cosmos.

72% Reduc3on

SDv2.1

provem

ent

SDXL

Karlo

DALLE-2

Kandinsky v2.2

Kandinsky v2.1

55% Im

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models, notably the unCLIP models (e.g., DALL-E-2), achieve state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance on various compositional T2I benchmarks, at the cost of significant computational resources.
The unCLIP stack comprises T2I prior and diffusion image decoder. The T2I prior model alone adds a billion parameters compared to the Latent Diffusion Models, which increases the computational and high-quality
data requirements. We introduce ECLIPSE1 , a novel contrastive learning method that is both parameter and dataefficient. ECLIPSE leverages pre-trained vision-language
models (e.g., CLIP) to distill the knowledge into the prior
model. We demonstrate that the ECLIPSE trained prior,
with only 3.3% of the parameters and trained on a mere
2.8% of the data, surpasses the baseline T2I priors with an
average of 71.6% preference score under resource-limited
setting. It also attains performance on par with SOTA big
models, achieving an average of 63.36% preference score in
terms of the ability to follow the text compositions. Extensive experiments on two unCLIP diffusion image decoders,
Karlo and Kandinsky, affirm that ECLIPSE priors consistently deliver high performance while significantly reducing resource dependency. Project page: https://eclipset2i.vercel.app/

ECLIPSE

Data Size (M)

Abstract

SDv1.4
Würstchen
5

Figure 1. Comparison between SOTA text-to-image models with
respect to their total number of parameters and the average performance on the three composition tasks (color, shape, and texture). ECLIPSE achieves better results with less number of parameters without requiring a large amount of training data. The shown
ECLIPSE trains a T2I prior model (having only 33M parameters)
using only 5M image-text pairs with Kandinsky decoder.

Stable Diffusion, and unCLIP models [36]. The LDM, notable for its open-source availability, has gained widespread
popularity within the research community. On the other
hand, unCLIP models have remained under-studied. Both
model types fundamentally focus on training the diffusion
models conditioned on text prompts. The LDM contains a
singular text-to-image diffusion model, while unCLIP models have a text-to-image prior, and a diffusion image decoder. Both model families work within the vector quantized latent space of the image [44]. In this paper, we focus
on unCLIP models because they consistently outperform
other SOTA models in various composition benchmarks
such as T2I-CompBench [14] and HRS-Benchmark [2].
These T2I models, typically large in parameter count, require massive amounts of high-quality image-text pairs for
training. unCLIP models like DALL-E-2 [36], Karlo [8],
and Kandinsky [37], feature prior module containing approximately 1 billion parameters, resulting in a significant
increase in overall model size (≥ 2B) compared to LDMs.
These unCLIP models are trained on 250M, 115M, and
177M image-text pairs, respectively. Therefore, two critical

9069

