This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TurboSL: Dense, Accurate and Fast 3D by Neural Inverse Structured Light
Parsa Mirdehghan1,2 Maxx Wu1,2 Wenzheng Chen1,2 David B. Lindell1,2 Kiriakos N. Kutulakos1,2
1 University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute

{parsa,wumaxx,wenzheng,lindell,kyros}@cs.toronto.edu
scene photo

Abstract
We show how to turn a noisy and fragile active triangulation
technique—three-pattern structured light with a grayscale
camera—into a fast and powerful tool for 3D capture: able
to output sub-pixel accurate disparities at megapixel resolution, along with reflectance, normals, and a no-reference
estimate of its own pixelwise 3D error. To achieve this, we
formulate structured-light decoding as a neural inverse rendering problem. We show that despite having just three or
four input images—all from the same viewpoint—this problem can be tractably solved by TurboSL, an algorithm that
combines (1) a precise image formation model, (2) a signed
distance field scene representation, and (3) projection pattern sequences optimized for accuracy instead of precision.
We use TurboSL to reconstruct a variety of complex scenes
from images captured at up to 60 fps with a camera and a
common projector. Our experiments highlight TurboSL’s
potential for dense and highly-accurate 3D acquisition from
data captured in fractions of a second.

projector
camera
3 projection patterns

TurboSL

megapixel surface

megapixel normals

error
(pixels)
100
10
1
-1
-10
-100

residuals (scaled 2x)

no-reference error map

3 video frames (30fps)

1. Introduction
Structured-light (SL) triangulation is one of the oldest and
most widely used techniques for precise and reliable 3D
shape acquisition [12]. Although many other depth-sensing
modalities have advanced over the past decade [2, 23, 39],
SL remains the most accessible way to capture mm- and
sub-mm accurate geometry for a broad range of materials
and appearances: all that is needed is to arrange one camera and a projector in a stereo configuration, adjust their
baseline, and capture images while a sequence of patterns
is projected onto a scene [9, 32, 40]. With multi-megapixel
cameras readily available and inexpensive projectors boasting 4K resolution [10], SL acquisition of sub-mm-accurate,
multi-megapixel depth maps is now fairly straightforward.
Unfortunately, accurate SL is slow: many patterns must
be projected onto a scene while it remains stationary [11],
making 3D acquisition laborious and restrictive.
At the same time, the last few years have seen tremendous
progress on learning 3D scene representations directly from
2D images, entirely passively [48]. These approaches use
just a camera for acquisition and typically need a relatively
large set of images even for desktop scenes. Their reliance
on ambient illumination, however, is not sufficient for accurate surface reconstruction, especially for scenes that lack
surface texture or have complex reflectance [15, 46, 50].
In this work, we show how to leverage recent advances

dynamic reconstruction
snapshot 1

frames 1,2,3

novel view
snapshot 75

frames 75,76,77

snapshot 150

frames 150,151,152

Figure 1: TurboSL for accurate and fast 3D sensing. From three
consecutive grayscale SL video frames of a dynamic scene, TurboSL infers a detailed 3D surface; per-pixel surface normals and
reflectances; and a disparity map with sub-pixel accuracy. It also
estimates residual contributions for indirect and ambient light, and
provides a no-reference proxy for the disparity error at each pixel.

on neural 3D scene modeling to make SL image acquisition much faster. Specifically, by recasting grayscale multipattern SL as an inverse rendering problem—and by using a neural signed distance field method to solve it—we
show that just three or four projection patterns are enough to
obtain highly detailed geometric and photometric information about an unknown scene: (1) sub-pixel-accurate stereo
correspondences, (2) surface normals and reflectances, (3)
residual contributions from ambient and indirect illumination [35], and (4) a proxy for the depth uncertainty at each
pixel. Our approach requires no pre-trained models and relies only on the captured SL images for supervision.

25067

