This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Random Entangled Tokens for Adversarially Robust Vision Transformer
Huihui Gong1,2 , Minjing Dong3 , Siqi Ma4 , Seyit Camtepe2 , Surya Nepal2 , Chang Xu1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 CSIRO Data61
3
City University of Hong Kong, 4 The University of New South Wales
{hgon9611@uni., c.xu@}sydney.edu.au, minjdong@cityu.edu.hk
siqi.ma@unsw.edu.au, {Seyit.Camtepe, surya.nepal}@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have emerged as a compelling alternative to Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) in the realm of computer vision, showcasing
tremendous potential. However, recent research has unveiled a susceptibility of ViTs to adversarial attacks, akin
to their CNN counterparts. Adversarial training and randomization are two representative effective defenses for
CNNs. Some researchers have attempted to apply adversarial training to ViTs and achieved comparable robustness
to CNNs, while it is not easy to directly apply randomization
to ViTs because of the architecture difference between CNNs
and ViTs. In this paper, we delve into the structural intricacies of ViTs and propose a novel defense mechanism termed
Random entangled image Transformer (ReiT), which seamlessly integrates adversarial training and randomization to
bolster the adversarial robustness of ViTs. Recognizing the
challenge posed by the structural disparities between ViTs
and CNNs, we introduce a novel module, input-independent
random entangled self-attention (II-ReSA). This module optimizes random entangled tokens that lead to ”dissimilar”
self-attention outputs by leveraging model parameters and
the sampled random tokens, thereby synthesizing the selfattention module outputs and random entangled tokens to
diminish adversarial similarity. ReiT incorporates two distinct random entangled tokens and employs dual randomization, offering an effective countermeasure against adversarial examples while ensuring comprehensive deduction
guarantees. Through extensive experiments conducted on
various ViT variants and benchmarks, we substantiate the
superiority of our proposed method in enhancing the adversarial robustness of Vision Transformers.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) and their variants have achieved
state-of-the-art performance on various vision benchmarks
[19, 33, 45]. Nevertheless, similar to convolutional neu-

ral networks (CNNs) [23, 44], ViTs are also vulnerable to
maliciously elaborated adversarial samples [25, 27]. Even
minimal perturbations that are hardly noticeable to humans
can derail the predictions of high-performance ViTs. Recent studies [4–6, 21, 36, 37] have manifested that ViTs are
not necessarily more robust than CNNs, often yielding similar responses to adversarial samples. Consequently, robust
methods devised for CNNs can also be utilized to fortify
ViTs against adversarial attacks.
Adversarial training stands out as one of the most effective defences for CNNs, which is proposed to yield robust models through re-training CNN models via adversarial samples, where Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [35]
is one of the most representative methods that iteratively
generates the strongest first-order adversarial perturbations.
For ViTs, researchers leveraged and evaluated the robust
performance of adversarial training on ViTs [14, 15, 30, 38,
42, 48], showing that adversarial training can also effectively enhance ViTs’ robustness. Beyond the training procedure, randomization is also introduced to further improve
adversarial robustness [2, 8, 13, 16, 34, 41, 51]. However,
these randomized defences mainly consider the robustness
of CNNs, which may not work by directly applying existing
methods on ViTs. For example, Dong et al. [16] randomized the normalization layer to reduce the adversarial transferability for CNNs, while it is not so suitable to apply this
randomized defence to ViTs because ViTs primarily use the
Layer Normalization [3] as the normalization layer to adapt
to inconsistent input lengths.
In this paper, a novel randomized robust framework on
ViT architectures is put forward to reinforce the adversarial robustness of ViTs, dubbed as Random entangled image
Transformer (ReiT). Firstly, we deeply analyze the structure
of ViTs, especially the self-attention module, and revise the
vanilla self-attention module by concatenating a random token to the input token as well as defining a new attention operation Local SoftMax (LSM) to compute the self-attention
output. In the training stage, we add different random tokens to input tokens for teaching models adapt to the ex-

24554

