This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Diffusion Policy
for Kinematics-Aware Multi-Task Robotic Manipulation
Xiao Ma, Sumit Patidar, Iain Haughton, Stephen James
Dyson Robot Learning Lab
{xiao.ma, sumit.patidar, iain.haughton, stephen.james}@dyson.com

Abstract
This paper introduces Hierarchical Diffusion Policy
(HDP), a hierarchical agent for multi-task robotic manipulation. HDP factorises a manipulation policy into a hierarchical structure: a high-level task-planning agent which
predicts a distant next-best end-effector pose (NBP), and a
low-level goal-conditioned diffusion policy which generates
optimal motion trajectories. The factorised policy representation allows HDP to tackle both long-horizon task planning while generating fine-grained low-level actions. To
generate context-aware motion trajectories while satisfying
robot kinematics constraints, we present a novel kinematicsaware goal-conditioned control agent, Robot Kinematics
Diffuser (RK-Diffuser). Specifically, RK-Diffuser learns to
generate both the end-effector pose and joint position trajectories, and distill the accurate but kinematics-unaware
end-effector pose diffuser to the kinematics-aware but less
accurate joint position diffuser via differentiable kinematics. Empirically, we show that HDP achieves a significantly
higher success rate than the state-of-the-art methods in both
simulation and real-world.1

1. Introduction
Learning efficient visual manipulation strategies in robotics
is challenging due to diverse environments, objects, and
robot trajectories. The choice of policy representation
strongly influences agent performance.
One way of parameterising the policy is to directly map
visual observations to robot commands, e.g., joint position
or velocity actions [18, 22, 27, 39]. These approaches make
the least assumptions of the task and environment and retain the flexible control of the over-actuated, but they often
suffer from low sample efficiency and poor generalisation
ability, especially for long-horizon tasks [20, 34].
Recent advances in learning next-best-pose (NBP)
agents [6, 7, 15–17, 20, 34, 43] have significantly improved
1 Code and videos are available in our project page.

Denoising

High-Level
Agent

next-best
pose

Figure 1. We introduce HDP, a hierarchical agent for robotic manipulation. At the high-level, HDP learns to predict the next-best
end-effector pose. Conditioned on the current and the predicted
pose (red), a diffusion model generates an action trajectory for the
robot to follow (blue). In contrast, the trajectories generated by
classic planners (yellow) cannot be executed due to violating environment constraints, e.g., the hinge of the box.

the sample efficiency and performance for robotic manipulation. Instead of learning continuous actions, NBP agents
directly predict a distant “keyframe” [17], a next-best endeffector pose, and use a predefined motion planner to compute a trajectory for the agent to follow. However, as the
motion planner is unaware of the task context, it will fail to
perform tasks that require understanding the environment
context, e.g., dynamics. For example, in Fig. 1 to open the
box, the agent has to understand the unknown physics properties of the hinge, e.g., the resistance force, and only a specific curved trajectory can be successfully executed.
In this work, we introduce Hierarchical Diffusion Policy
(HDP), a hierarchical multi-task agent that combines the
best of both worlds. HDP factorises a manipulation policy by chaining a high-level NBP agent with a low-level
learned controller. At the high level, HDP takes the 3D visual observations and language instructions as the inputs,
and predicts a 6-DoF next-best end-effector pose. At the
high level, HDP entails the capability of understanding the
visual environment and language instructions and performing long-horizon task-level decision-making. At the low
level, given the high-level 6-DoF end-effector pose action as
a goal, HDP casts the control task as a context-aware 6-DoF
pose-reaching task. We introduce a novel kinematics-aware
low-level agent, Robot Kinematics Diffuser (RK-Diffuser),
a diffusion-based policy [5] that directly generates the mo-

18081

