This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LEAD: Exploring Logit Space Evolution for Model Selection
Zixuan Hu1

Xiaotong Li1

Shixiang Tang3

Jun Liu4

Yichun Hu1

Ling-Yu Duan1,2 *

1

3

School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hongkong, China, 4 Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
{hzxuan, hycc, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, lixiaotong@stu.pku.edu.cn,
shixiangtang@cuhk.edu.hk, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
The remarkable success of “pretrain-then-finetune”
paradigm has led to a proliferation of available pre-trained
models for vision tasks. This surge presents a significant challenge in efficiently choosing the most suitable pretrained models for downstream tasks. The critical aspect of
this challenge lies in effectively predicting the model transferability by considering the underlying fine-tuning dynamics. Existing methods often model fine-tuning dynamics in
feature space with linear transformations, which do not precisely align with the fine-tuning objective and fail to grasp
the essential nonlinearity from optimization. To this end,
we present LEAD, a finetuning-aligned approach based on
the network output of logits. LEAD proposes a theoretical
framework to model the optimization process and derives an
ordinary differential equation (ODE) to depict the nonlinear evolution toward the final logit state. Additionally, we
design a class-aware decomposition method to consider the
varying evolution dynamics across classes and further ensure practical applicability. Integrating the closely aligned
optimization objective and nonlinear modeling capabilities derived from the differential equation, our method offers a concise solution to effectively bridge the optimization
gap in a single step, bypassing the lengthy fine-tuning process. The comprehensive experiments on 24 supervised and
self-supervised pre-trained models across 10 downstream
datasets demonstrate impressive performances and showcase its broad adaptability even in low-data scenarios.

1. Introduction
The “pretrain-then-finetune” learning paradigm has exhibited remarkable success in a wide range of computer vision
tasks [6, 28], leading to an increasing number of diverse pretrained models open-sourced to the computer vision community. This surge poses a significant challenge in selecting the optimal pre-trained model for a downstream task
* Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. This diagram illustrates the task of model selection,
which aims to rank pre-trained models for choosing the optimal
one. The ground-truth ranking sequence is derived from the models’ accuracy after fine-tuning. However, due to the time-intensive
nature of this process, it requires to design efficient transferability
metrics for accurate ranking prediction. The performance of this
metric is evaluated using rank correlation, e.g., weighted Kendall’s
tau [42], to compare the predicted and ground-truth rankings.

from a vast model zoo. Considering that the brute-force solution of fine-tuning all models on downstream tasks may
be infeasible in many scenarios due to the substantial computational costs, the model selection task emerges [13, 47],
which ranks the transferability of pre-trained models to the
given task without incurring much cost, as shown in Fig. 1.
Predicting model transferability aims to efficiently estimate the final state after fine-tuning on the downstream task,
without network optimization by backward propagation.
Prior studies only depend on specific properties of the initial state (e.g., representation similarity [13, 14], conditional
distribution [33, 47]), to serve as transferability indicators.
Recent studies reveal that modeling the dynamic process of
fine-tuning has become the bottleneck to design more highquality transferability metrics. Following this philosophy,
recent works propose to simulate fine-tuning dynamics on
features through multiple stages of linear transformations
[32, 41], achieving some promising results.
Despite recent progress in this field, there are still two

28664

