This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning with Structural Labels for Learning with Noisy Labels
Noo-ri Kim*
Jin-Seop Lee*
Jee-Hyong Lee†
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea
{pd99j, wlstjq0602, john}@skku.edu

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across diverse domains and tasks
with large-scale datasets. To reduce labeling costs for
large-scale datasets, semi-automated and crowdsourcing
labeling methods are developed, but their labels are inevitably noisy. Learning with Noisy Labels (LNL) approaches aim to train DNNs despite the presence of noisy
labels. These approaches utilize the memorization effect to
select correct labels and refine noisy ones, which are then
used for subsequent training. However, these methods encounter a significant decrease in the model’s generalization
performance due to the inevitably existing noise labels. To
overcome this limitation, we propose a new approach to
enhance learning with noisy labels by incorporating additional distribution information—structural labels. In order
to leverage additional distribution information for generalization, we employ a reverse k-NN, which helps the model
in achieving a better feature manifold and mitigating overfitting to noisy labels. The proposed method shows outperformed performance in multiple benchmark datasets with
IDN and real-world noisy datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved high performance in various domains such as computer vision [13, 14,
20, 25, 29, 52], natural language processing [3, 7, 12, 40],
and signal processing [18, 48, 50] across diverse tasks. To
achieve the high performance of DNNs, well-curated largescale datasets are necessary. However, labeling large-scale
data requires a significant cost. In order to reduce these
labeling costs, semi-automated [35, 42] and crowdsourcing methods [28] are used, but their labels are inevitably
noisy. When trained on data with noisy labels, DNNs suffer degraded performance because they tend to easily overfit
noisy labeled samples [72]. To address these issues, methods for learning with noisy labels (LNL), which aim to ef* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Comparison of t-SNE visualization on CIFAR10 IDN at
noise rate 0.50. (a) DivdeMix on training samples with golden labels. (b) DivdieMix on training samples with predicted labels. (c)
SSR on training samples with golden labels. (d) SSR on training
samples with predicted labels. The black-outlined box represents
areas where samples overlap, similar samples are learned as different classes, or clusters are not separable.

fectively train DNN models in environments with noisy labeled samples, have been proposed [1, 15, 17, 23, 31, 41,
45, 75].
Most methods for learning with noisy labels (LNL) are
based on the fact that DNNs tend to learn from clean samples with simple patterns earlier than from wrong-labeled
samples [1, 69]. Based on the observation, most approaches
adopted an iterative process. Initially, they trained the
model with the entire dataset. The model would learned
some patterns from clean samples rather than noisy samples. Then, they selected confident samples based on the

27610

