This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MiKASA: Multi-Key-Anchor & Scene-Aware Transformer
for 3D Visual Grounding
Chun-Peng Chang, Shaoxiang Wang, Alain Pagani, Didier Stricker
DFKI Augmented Vision
firstname.lastname@dfki.de

Abstract
3D visual grounding involves matching natural language
descriptions with their corresponding objects in 3D spaces.
Existing methods often face challenges with accuracy in
object recognition and struggle in interpreting complex
linguistic queries, particularly with descriptions that
involve multiple anchors or are view-dependent.
In
response, we present the MiKASA (Multi-Key-Anchor
Scene-Aware) Transformer. Our novel end-to-end trained
model integrates a self-attention-based scene-aware
object encoder and an original multi-key-anchor
technique, enhancing object recognition accuracy and
the understanding of spatial relationships. Furthermore,
MiKASA improves the explainability of decision-making,
facilitating error diagnosis. Our model achieves the
highest overall accuracy in the Referit3D challenge
for both the Sr3D and Nr3D datasets, particularly
excelling by a large margin in categories that require
viewpoint-dependent descriptions. The source code and
additional resources for this project are available on
GitHub: https://github.com/dfki-av/MiKASA-3DVG

1. Introduction
3D visual grounding serves as a crucial component in the
intersection of natural language processing and computer
vision. This task aims to identify and localize objects within
a 3D space, using linguistic cues for spatial and semantic
grounding. While existing research has made significant
strides, challenges remain. Key issues include the lack
of explainability in current models, limitations in object
recognition within point cloud data, and the complexity of
handling intricate spatial relationships.
Most existing 3D visual grounding models [2, 15, 16,
33, 40] consist of three parts: (1) object encoder, (2)
text encoder, and (3) fusion model. The object encoder
processes the provided point cloud and generates features
in the embedding space. However, because the points in a

(a) Target category: “chair”

(b) “The chair in the front of the
blue-lit monitor.”

Figure 1. Our methodology utilizes a dual-prediction framework
for 3D visual grounding. First, we assign a target category score
based on object categorization, as detailed in Fig. 1a. Next, a
spatial score is integrated according to the object’s alignment with
the textual description, as shown in Fig. 1b.

point cloud are unordered and inconsistent in sparsity [26],
it is not straightforward to apply the methodology typically
used for 2D images. An additional challenge is that 3D
point cloud datasets are not as extensive as those for 2D
images [10, 25], which makes it difficult for the models to
correctly recognize object categories. While enlarging the
dataset could conceivably improve performance, we refrain
from doing so to ensure a fair comparison with existing
state-of-the-art methods. Existing works [6, 18, 27] mainly
use different techniques such as noise addition, dropping
out colors, and transformations to expand the sample space.
Though these techniques may increase the stability of the
produced object embeddings, the improvement is limited.
Inspired by previous works [20, 21, 39] which aims to
solve object recognition problem, we leverage the fact
that data availability on objects within a specific space
can provide valuable insights into the characteristics and
relationships of their surrounding entities. For instance,
when we come across a cuboid-shaped object in a
kitchen, we may naturally assume that it is a dishwasher.
Conversely, if we spot the same shape in a bathroom, it is
more plausible that it is a washing machine. Contextual
information is crucial in determining the identity of objects
and gives us a nuanced understanding of our surroundings.

14131

