This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How Far Can We Compress Instant-NGP-Based NeRF?
Yihang Chen 1, 2
Qianyi Wu 2
Mehrtash Harandi 2
Jianfei Cai 2
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Monash University
yhchen.ee@sjtu.edu.cn, {qianyi.wu, mehrtash.harandi, jianfei.cai}@monash.edu

Abstract

Feature Embeddings:

45.56MB
33.76dB

Indexing
3D

In recent years, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has
demonstrated remarkable capabilities in representing 3D
scenes. To expedite the rendering process, learnable
explicit representations have been introduced for
combination with implicit NeRF representation, which
however results in a large storage space requirement.
In this paper, we introduce the Context-based NeRF
Compression (CNC) framework, which leverages highly
efficient context models to provide a storage-friendly NeRF
representation. Specifically, we excavate both level-wise
and dimension-wise context dependencies to enable
probability prediction for information entropy reduction.
Additionally, we exploit hash collision and occupancy grids
as strong prior knowledge for better context modeling. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to construct and
exploit context models for NeRF compression. We achieve
a size reduction of 100⇥ and 70⇥ with improved fidelity
against the baseline Instant-NGP on Synthesic-NeRF and
Tanks and Temples datasets, respectively. Additionally, we
attain 86.7% and 82.3% storage size reduction against
the SOTA NeRF compression method BiRF. Our code is
available here: https://github.com/YihangChen-ee/CNC.

1. Introduction
High-quality photo-realistic rendering at novel viewpoints
remains a pivotal challenge in both computer vision and
computer graphics. Traditional explicit 3D representations,
such as voxel grids [17, 25, 34, 37], have earned their
place due to their efficiency across numerous applications.
However, their discrete nature makes them susceptible to
the limitations imposed by the Nyquist sampling theorem,
often necessitating exponentially increased memory for
capturing detailed nuances.
In the past few years, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [28]
has emerged as a game-changer for novel view synthesis.
NeRF defines both density and radiance at a 3D point as
1 The size of INGP is calculated under 16 levels with resolution from
16 to 2048. The feature vector dimension is 2 and represented with FP32.

σ
c

103x

Rendering MLP

smaller

concat

(x, d)

2D

0.444MB
34.35dB

45.56MB
36.98dB

Occupancy Grid

Context Models
0.442MB
37.31dB

3D

3D=>2D

!! ∈ −1; +1

…

103x
smaller

2D

… …

…

Level-wise
Context Models

Dimension-wise
Context Models

Context Models
3D Feature Embeddings
2D Feature Embeddings

Hash
Fusion

Rendering MLP
Occupancy Grid

Figure 1. Motivation of our work. Instant-NGP represents
3D scenes using 3D hash feature embeddings along with a
rendering MLP, which takes a non-negligible storage size with the
embeddings accounting for over 99% of storage size (upper-left).
To tackle this, we introduce context models to substantially
compress feature embeddings, with the three key technical
components (bottom-left). Our approach achieves a size reduction
of over 100⇥ while simultaneously improving fidelity.1

functions of the 3D coordinates. Its implicit representation,
encapsulated within a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP),
captures continuous signals of a 3D scene seamlessly.
Leveraging frequency-based positional embeddings of 3D
coordinates [28, 41, 49], NeRF has showcased superior
novel view synthesis quality in comparison to traditional
explicit 3D representations. While NeRF exhibits good
characteristics in memory efficiency and image quality, its
complex queries of the MLP slow down its rendering speed.
To boost NeRF’s rendering speed, recent approaches
have converged towards a hybrid representation, merging
explicit voxelized feature encoding with implicit neural
networks. This combination promises faster rendering
without compromising on quality. These methods include
varied data structures such as dense grids [7, 38–40],
octrees [26, 50], sparse voxel grids [24], and hash
tables [29]. Among them, Instant-NGP (INGP) [29] which

20321

