This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OA-CNNs: Omni-Adaptive Sparse CNNs for 3D Semantic Segmentation
Bohao Peng1 Xiaoyang Wu2 Li Jiang3 * Yukang Chen1
Hengshuang Zhao2 Zhuotao Tian4* Jiaya Jia1
1
CUHK 2 HKU 3 CUHK, Shenzhen 4 HIT, Shenzhen

Abstract
Raw Points

The booming of 3D recognition in the 2020s began
with the introduction of point cloud transformers. They
quickly overwhelmed sparse CNNs and became state-ofthe-art models, especially in 3D semantic segmentation.
However, sparse CNNs are still valuable networks, due to
their efficiency treasure, and ease of application. In this
work, we reexamine the design distinctions and test the
limits of what a sparse CNN can achieve. We discover
that the key credit to the performance difference is adaptivity. Specifically, we propose two key components, i.e.,
adaptive receptive fields (spatially) and adaptive relation,
to bridge the gap. This exploration led to the creation
of Omni-Adaptive 3D CNNs (OA-CNNs), a family of networks that integrates a lightweight module to greatly enhance the adaptivity of sparse CNNs at minimal computational cost. Without any self-attention modules, OA-CNNs
favorably surpass point transformers in terms of accuracy
in both indoor and outdoor scenes, with much less latency
and memory cost. Notably, it achieves 76.1%, 78.9%, and
70.6% mIoU on ScanNet v2, nuScenes, and SemanticKITTI
validation benchmarks respectively, while maintaining at
most 5× better speed than transformer counterparts. This
revelation highlights the potential of pure sparse CNNs to
outperform transformer-related networks. Our code is built
upon Pointcept [9], which is available at here 1 .

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is critical in various practical applications, including robotics, autonomous driving, and augmented reality [13, 16, 19, 20, 30, 55, 70, 71, 74]. In contrast to images, which typically exhibit densely and uniformly arranged pixels [10, 23, 35, 49, 51, 52], 3D point
clouds often manifest irregular and scattered distributions.
It leads to various feature extractors in 3D scene understanding.
* Corresponding authors.
1 https://github.com/Pointcept/Pointcept

Receptive Fields

Large

③

②

①

④

Small
Specific Objects in Red Boxes

① Table

② Chair

③ Wall

④ Junction

Figure 1. Visualization of 3D scene receptive fields controlled by
our proposed adaptive aggregator. Objects’ edges and junctions require smaller receptive fields due to their sophisticated structures,
while flat planes and unitary structures require broader fields.

There are two mainstream 3D networks. The first is
point-based networks [41, 42], which advocate directly manipulating the unstructured points. Thanks to the flexibility
of point-wise operations, point-based methods, particularly
those with transformer architectures [12, 32, 36, 39, 50, 53,
54, 73], have gradually become dominant. The second is
sparse CNNs [7, 13], where irregular point clouds are converted into voxels during data preprocessing. This allows us
to leverage the locally structured benefits and facilitate high
efficiency. Due to this practical value, sparse CNNs have
been widely exploited in existing literature [37, 45, 65, 75].
However, its accuracy is usually inferior to its transformer
counterparts [21, 36, 60, 73], especially in 3D scene semantic segmentation.
Given the high potential of sparse CNNs, we carefully
examine the inner reasons for the performance gap in this
paper. We find that the key distinction between sparse

21305

