This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionAvatars: Deferred Diffusion for High-fidelity 3D Head Avatars
Tobias Kirschstein

Simon Giebenhain

Matthias Nießner

Technical University of Munich

...

Diffusion
Avatar

Diffusion
Avatar

(a) Avatar creation

(b) Avatar animation

Figure 1. Given a set of multi-view videos and corresponding fitted meshes, we build a DiffusionAvatar of a person. Our method translates
expressions of a morphable model into realistic facial appearances of a person while also providing control over the viewpoint. Project
website: https://tobias-kirschstein.github.io/diffusion-avatars/

Abstract
DiffusionAvatars synthesizes a high-fidelity 3D head
avatar of a person, offering intuitive control over both pose
and expression. We propose a diffusion-based neural renderer that leverages generic 2D priors to produce compelling images of faces. For coarse guidance of the expression and head pose, we render a neural parametric head
model (NPHM) from the target viewpoint, which acts as
a proxy geometry of the person. Additionally, to enhance
the modeling of intricate facial expressions, we condition
DiffusionAvatars directly on the expression codes obtained
from NPHM via cross-attention. Finally, to synthesize consistent surface details across different viewpoints and expressions, we rig learnable spatial features to the head’s
surface via TriPlane lookup in NPHM’s canonical space.
We train DiffusionAvatars on RGB videos and corresponding fitted NPHM meshes of a person and test the obtained
avatars in both self-reenactment and animation scenarios.
Our experiments demonstrate that DiffusionAvatars generates temporally consistent and visually appealing videos for
novel poses and expressions of a person, outperforming existing approaches.

1. Introduction
A significant problem in computer vision and graphics is the
creation of photorealistic animatable avatars. Ideally, these
avatars permit consistent video renderings while providing
free control over desired expression, pose, and viewpoint. A
digital 3D head avatar may then be used in various scenarios
such as VR/AR applications, immersive teleconferencing,
gaming, movie animation, or as a virtual assistant.
Unfortunately, creating a 3D avatar from which one can
render photorealistic images from arbitrary viewpoints is
challenging. The task becomes even more difficult when
the avatar has to simultaneously offer precise control over
poses and expressions, for instance given by a driving sequence from a different video or controlled manually. Technically, this leads to a 4D photometric reconstruction problem which is typically underconstrained. This presents animation systems with a challenging task that traditionally
involves extensive efforts by 3D artists.
Many existing methods have tackled the challenge of
facial image synthesis via 2D neural networks [26, 31,
51, 57, 68, 71]. In particular, Diffusion Models have recently been demonstrated to produce visually appealing imagery [23, 58, 59, 83, 86]. 2D models are great at generating photo-realistic images but generally do not offer

5481

