This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt-Enhanced Multiple Instance Learning for Weakly Supervised Video
Anomaly Detection
Junxi Chen1 , Liang Li2 *, Li Su1,3 *, Zheng-Jun Zha4 , Qingming Huang1,2,5
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., ICT, CAS, 3 Peng Cheng Lab,
4
University of Science and Technology of China, 5 Key Lab of AI Safety, CAS
chenjunxi22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn, {suli,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Weakly-supervised Video Anomaly Detection (wVAD)
aims to detect frame-level anomalies using only videolevel labels in training. Due to the limitation of coarsegrained labels, Multi-Instance Learning (MIL) is prevailing in wVAD. However, MIL suffers from insufficiency of
binary supervision to model diverse abnormal patterns. Besides, the coupling between abnormality and its context hinders the learning of clear abnormal event boundary. In
this paper, we propose prompt-enhanced MIL to detect various abnormal events while ensuring clear event boundaries. Concretely, we design the abnormal-aware prompts
by using abnormal class annotations together with learnable prompt, which can incorporate semantic priors into
video features dynamically. The detector can utilize the
semantic-rich features to capture diverse abnormal patterns. In addition, normal context prompt is introduced to
amplify the distinction between abnormality and its context,
facilitating the generation of clear boundary. With the mutual enhancement of abnormal-aware and normal context
prompt, the model can construct discriminative representations to detect divergent anomalies without ambiguous
event boundaries. Extensive experiments demonstrate our
method achieves SOTA performance on three public benchmarks. The code is available at https://github.
com/Junxi-Chen/PE-MIL.

1. Introduction
To identify anomaly at frame level in video, Video Anomaly
Detection (VAD) has become vital in critical areas, e.g.,
surveillance systems [19], medical imaging [33] and autonomous driving [1]. For great generalization ability
across diverse scenes, researchers [6, 8, 29, 31, 32, 43, 45]
* Corresponding authors

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of prompt-enhanced MIL. In multi-modal
feature space, text prompts integrate abnormal-aware semantic priors into visual features. NCP incorporates normal semantic into
ambiguous context feature. In such manner, our method learns
a more discriminative representation to deliver a precise anomaly
detection. (b) Anomaly detection examples of our method.

turn to weakly-supervised VAD (wVAD) which only leverages video-level labels. Primarily, wVAD faces two key
challenges: 1) detecting complex anomalous patterns in varied scenarios where temporal relationship and visual appearance of anomalies exhibit substantial discrepancies; 2)
generating clear abnormal event boundaries in the absence
of fine-grained boundary annotations.
To tackle wVAD, prior works [52, 55] generate noisy
frame-level abnormal labels and reduce noise subsequently,
but such manner limits the generalization ability to unseen scenarios. Recently, Multi-Instance Learning (MIL) is
leveraged by most methods [5, 6, 8, 23, 29, 45] to tackle
wVAD due to its ability to model patterns under coarse-

18319

