This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BIVDiff: A Training-Free Framework for General-Purpose Video Synthesis
via Bridging Image and Video Diffusion Models
Fengyuan Shi1 Jiaxi Gu2 Hang Xu2 Songcen Xu2 Wei Zhang2 Limin Wang1,3 *
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
https://bivdiff.github.io
Video diffusion foundation models

Image synthesis diffusion models

Pretrained T2V

Pretrained T2I
Controllable image generation

Pretrained T2I
Image editing

Pretrained T2I
Image inpainting

Pretrained T2I
Other tasks

e.g. VidRD, ZeroScope

e.g., ControlNet, T2I Adapter

e.g., Instruct Pix2Pix, Prompt2Prompt

e.g., Stable Diffusion Inpainting

……

Controllable video generation

“A white swan
moving on the lake”

Video editing

“Make him on the road”

Video inpainting

“”

Figure 1. Given an image diffusion model (IDM) for a specific image synthesis task, and a text-to-video diffusion foundation model
(VDM), our model can perform training-free video synthesis, by bridging IDM and VDM.

Abstract
Diffusion models have made tremendous progress in textdriven image and video generation. Now text-to-image
foundation models are widely applied to various downstream image synthesis tasks, such as controllable image
generation and image editing, while downstream video synthesis tasks are less explored for several reasons. First, it
requires huge memory and computation overhead to train a
video generation foundation model. Even with video foundation models, additional costly training is still required
for downstream video synthesis tasks. Second, although
some works extend image diffusion models into videos in a
training-free manner, temporal consistency cannot be well
preserved. Finally, these adaption methods are specifically designed for one task and fail to generalize to different tasks. To mitigate these issues, we propose a trainingfree general-purpose video synthesis framework, coined as
BIVDiff, via bridging specific image diffusion models and
general text-to-video foundation diffusion models. Specifically, we first use a specific image diffusion model (e.g.,
* Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

ControlNet and Instruct Pix2Pix) for frame-wise video generation, then perform Mixed Inversion on the generated
video, and finally input the inverted latents into the video
diffusion models (e.g., VidRD and ZeroScope) for temporal
smoothing. This decoupled framework enables flexible image model selection for different purposes with strong task
generalization and high efficiency. To validate the effectiveness and general use of BIVDiff, we perform a wide range
of video synthesis tasks, including controllable video generation, video editing, video inpainting, and outpainting.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [11, 29, 31] have shown impressive capabilities in generating diverse and photorealistic images.
By scaling up dataset and model size, large-scale text-toimage diffusion models [4, 10, 20, 24, 25, 27] gain strong
generalization ability and make tremendous breakthroughs
in text-to-image generation. By fine-tuning these powerful
image generation foundation models on high-quality data
in specific areas, various downstream image synthesis tasks
also come a long way, such as controllable image genera-

7393

