This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Auto MC-Reward: Automated Dense Reward Design with
Large Language Models for Minecraft
Hao Li1,2∗ , Xue Yang2∗ , Zhaokai Wang2,3∗ , Xizhou Zhu4,5 ,
Jie Zhou4 , Yu Qiao2 , Xiaogang Wang1,5 , Hongsheng Li1 , Lewei Lu5 , Jifeng Dai4,2!
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Tsinghua University 5 SenseTime Research
https://yangxue0827.github.io/auto_mc-reward.html

Figure 1. Overview of our Auto MC-Reward. Auto MC-Reward consists of three key LLM-based components: Reward Designer, Reward
Critic, and Trajectory Analyzer. A suitable dense reward function is iterated through the continuous interaction between the agent and the
environment for reinforcement learning training of specific tasks, so that the model can better complete the task. An example of exploring
diamond ore is shown in the figure: i) Trajectory Analyzer finds that the agent dies from lava in the failed trajectory, and then gives
suggestion for punishment when encountering lava; ii) Reward Designer adopts the suggestion and updates the reward function; iii) The
revised reward function passes the review of Reward Critic, and finally the agent avoids the lava by turning left.

Abstract
Many reinforcement learning environments (e.g.,
Minecraft) provide only sparse rewards that indicate task
completion or failure with binary values. The challenge
in exploration efficiency in such environments makes it
difficult for reinforcement-learning-based agents to learn
complex tasks. To address this, this paper introduces an
advanced learning system, named Auto MC-Reward, that
leverages Large Language Models (LLMs) to automatically
design dense reward functions, thereby enhancing the
learning efficiency. Auto MC-Reward consists of three important components: Reward Designer, Reward Critic, and
Trajectory Analyzer. Given the environment information
∗ Equal contribution. This work was completed by Hao Li and Zhaokai
Wang during their internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. ! Corresponding author: Jifeng Dai <daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

and task descriptions, the Reward Designer first design the
reward function by coding an executable Python function
with predefined observation inputs. Then, our Reward
Critic will be responsible for verifying the code, checking
whether the code is self-consistent and free of syntax
and semantic errors. Further, the Trajectory Analyzer
summarizes possible failure causes and provides refinement
suggestions according to collected trajectories. In the next
round, Reward Designer will further refine and iterate the
dense reward function based on feedback. Experiments
demonstrate a significant improvement in the success rate
and learning efficiency of our agents in complex tasks in
Minecraft, such as obtaining diamond with the efficient
ability to avoid lava, and efficiently explore trees and
animals that are sparse in the plains biome.

16426

