This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relightable and Animatable Neural Avatar from Sparse-View Video
Zhen Xu 1
Zihan Yan 3
1

Sida Peng 1∗
Jiaming Sun 1
2

Zhejiang University

Chen Geng 1,2
Hujun Bao 1
3

Stanford University

Linzhan Mou 1
Xiaowei Zhou 1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Specular

Time

Render Geometry Visibility

Specular

Novel Light & View & Pose

Visibility

Sparse-View (Monocular) Video
Inverse Rendering
Relightable and Animatable Neural Avatar
Figure 1. Reconstructing relightable and animatable neural avatar from sparse-view (or monocular) video. Our method takes only a
sparse-view (or monocular) video as input and reconstructs a relightable and animatable neural avatar under unknown illumination, which
can then be relit with arbitrary environment lights and animated with arbitrary motion sequences. Note that our method successfully
captures the shininess of the skin and pants as well as the specular highlights on the t-shirt’s plastisol printings.

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of creating relightable and
animatable neural avatars from sparse-view (or monocular)
videos of dynamic humans under unknown illumination.
Previous neural human reconstruction methods produce
animatable avatars from sparse views using deformed Signed
Distance Fields (SDF) but are non-relightable. While differentiable inverse rendering methods have succeeded in the
material recovery of static objects, it is not straightforward to
extend them to dynamic humans since it is computationally
intensive to compute pixel-surface intersection and light
visibility on deformed SDFs for relighting. To solve this
challenge, we propose a Hierarchical Distance Query (HDQ)
algorithm to approximate the world space SDF under
arbitrary human poses. Specifically, we estimate coarse SDF
based on a parametric human model and compute fine SDF
by exploiting the invariance of SDF w.r.t. local deformation.
Based on HDQ, we leverage sphere tracing to efficiently
estimate the surface intersection and light visibility. This allows us to develop the first system to recover relightable and
animatable neural avatars from sparse or monocular inputs.
Experiments show that our approach produces superior results compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our project page
is available at https://zju3dv.github.io/relightable avatar.
The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key Lab
of CAD&CG. ∗ Corresponding author: Sida Peng.

1. Introduction
Realistic human avatars have a range of applications [13, 55]
in various domains, e.g., virtual reality, filmmaking, and
video games. This work focuses on the specific setting of creating animatable and relightable human avatars from sparseview or monocular RGB videos. This problem is challenging
due to the inherent ambiguity of acquiring human geometry,
materials, and motions from sparse view images [20, 46].
Traditional methods [17, 19, 20, 22, 32, 55, 62] resolve this
ambiguity via customized and costly capture devices, e.g.,
light stages with controllable illumination and dense camera
arrays. However, such devices are restricted to professional
users, impeding their universality and generalization.
Recent neural scene representation-based methods [38,
45, 60] have demonstrated the ability to extract detailed geometry and photorealistic appearance of human performers
from sparse-view videos without sophisticated studio setup.
These methods typically define the human model in canonical space and warp it into world space through a deformation
module to represent human performers observed in videos.
For example, AniSDF [45] models the human geometry and
appearance as neural signed distance and radiance fields,
and deforms them using linear blend skinning (LBS) [35]
and learned local deformation networks. Albeit showing
the capability of novel pose synthesis, the reconstructed
avatars in these works [38, 44, 60] are not relightable as they

990

