This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EmoGen: Emotional Image Content Generation with
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Jingyuan Yang, Jiawei Feng, Hui Huang*
Shenzhen University
{jingyuanyang.jyy, fengjiawei0909, hhzhiyan}@gmail.com

“Amusement”

“Awe”

“Contentment”

“Excitement”

“Anger”

“Disgust”

“Fear”

“Sadness”

Figure 1. Emotional Image Content Generation (EICG). Given an emotion category, our network produces images that exhibit unambiguous
meanings (semantic-clear), reflect the intended emotion (emotion-faithful) and incorporate varied semantics (semantic-diverse).

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed remarkable progress in image generation task, where users can create visually astonishing images with high-quality. However, existing textto-image diffusion models are proficient in generating concrete concepts (dogs) but encounter challenges with more
abstract ones (emotions). Several efforts have been made to
modify image emotions with color and style adjustments,
facing limitations in effectively conveying emotions with
fixed image contents. In this work, we introduce Emotional Image Content Generation (EICG), a new task to
generate semantic-clear and emotion-faithful images given
emotion categories. Specifically, we propose an emotion
space and construct a mapping network to align it with the
powerful Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)
space, providing a concrete interpretation of abstract emo* Corresponding author

tions. Attribute loss and emotion confidence are further proposed to ensure the semantic diversity and emotion fidelity
of the generated images. Our method outperforms the stateof-the-art text-to-image approaches both quantitatively and
qualitatively, where we derive three custom metrics, i.e.,
emotion accuracy, semantic clarity and semantic diversity.
In addition to generation, our method can help emotion understanding and inspire emotional art design. Project page:
https://vcc.tech/research/2024/EmoGen.

1. Introduction
“What I cannot create, I do not understand.”
–Richard Feynman
Emotions, often elusive yet profoundly influential, shape
our actions, foster connections, and spark passions. With
the prevalence of social medias, users tend to share specially
crafted images to express their feelings. Aiming to find out

6358

