This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoDE: CLIP Data Experts via Clustering
Jiawei Ma2,∗ Po-Yao Huang1 Saining Xie3 Shang-Wen Li1
Luke Zettlemoyer1,4 Shih-Fu Chang2 Wen-Tau Yih1 Hu Xu1,+
1
FAIR, Meta 2 Colubmia University 3 New York University 4 University of Washington
Tree guard to stop the cats

Abstract
The success of contrastive language-image pretraining
(CLIP) relies on the supervision from the pairing between
images and captions, which tends to be noisy in webcrawled data. We present Mixture of Data Experts (MoDE)
and learn a system of CLIP data experts via clustering.
Each data expert is trained on one data cluster, being less
sensitive to false negative noises in other clusters. At inference time, we ensemble their outputs by applying weights
determined through the correlation between task metadata
and cluster conditions. To estimate the correlation precisely, the samples in one cluster should be semantically
similar, but the number of data experts should still be reasonable for training and inference. As such, we consider
the ontology in human language and propose to use finegrained cluster centers to represent each data expert at a
coarse-grained level. Experimental studies show that four
CLIP data experts on ViT-B/16 outperform the ViT-L/14 by
OpenAI CLIP and OpenCLIP on zero-shot image classification but with less (<35%) training cost. Meanwhile, MoDE
can train all data expert asynchronously and can flexibly
include new data experts. The code is available here.

1. Introduction
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) learns
versatile vision-language representations which are transferable across diverse downstream tasks. Existing models, such as OpenAI CLIP [35], OpenCLIP [40] and MetaCLIP [46], are trained with a large collection of webcrawled image-caption pairs. Specifically, for each image,
its paired caption is viewed as a positive example, and the
captions of all the other images are viewed as negatives.
The model then learns to project both images and captions
into a shared space, where the embedding of the positive
caption is drawn closer to the image embedding, compared
to the embeddings of all the other negative captions.
The key to the success of contrastive vision-language
∗ Research done while Jiawei Ma was an intern at FAIR.
+ Project Lead.

a cat with its front paws
stretched up against the tree

The tiger reaches up to a
tree trunk in a wooded area

A picture took in a national park

f(⋅ |𝑐)

CLIP f(⋅)
MoDE
(Ours)

f(⋅ |𝑐)

f(⋅ |𝑐)

Figure 1. For an image-caption pair, the caption may describe
limited visual content or even be unrelated, and such noises unavoidably hurt the quality of negative examples to learning a single model. We propose to uncover the clusters from training data,
where 1) the pairs with similar images but different captions are
assigned to different clusters and 2) the samples in each cluster
are of related meanings, and learn a Data Expert for each cluster.
These experts are then selectively ensembled for inference.

representation learning lies in the creation of quality negative examples for training [7, 13]. A single image can be
depicted by texts with different meanings (i.e., semantics),
covering multiple details and interpretations, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. Because the paired caption usually describes
limited visual content, it is common to see that two similar images have drastically different textual descriptions,
especially in noisy web-crawled data. When those imagecaption pairs are sampled in the same batch, captions of
other images become false negatives — acceptable captions
yet being treated as negative descriptions of the target image. Conversely, if only dissimilar image-caption pairs are
sampled, the contrastive learning problem becomes trivial.
Incorporating hard negatives [7, 33, 45] (e.g., incorrect yet
similar captions that share many words of a correct textual
description) in training batches has often been shown to improve the model performance.
In this work, we introduce the Mixture of Data Experts
(MoDE) framework (shown in Fig. 1-bottom) via clustering. MoDE separates false negative samples into different

26354

