This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shadow Generation for Composite Image Using Diffusion Model
Qingyang Liu1 , Junqi You1 , Jianting Wang1 , Xinhao Tao1 , Bo Zhang1 , Li Niu1,2 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 miguo.ai
1

{narumimaria,yjqsjtu2022,glory1299,taoxinhao,bo-zhang,ustcnewly}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In the realm of image composition, generating realistic
shadow for the inserted foreground remains a formidable
challenge. Previous works have developed image-to-image
translation models which are trained on paired training
data. However, they are struggling to generate shadows
with accurate shapes and intensities, hindered by data
scarcity and inherent task complexity. In this paper, we
resort to foundation model with rich prior knowledge of
natural shadow images. Specifically, we first adapt ControlNet to our task and then propose intensity modulation
modules to improve the shadow intensity. Moreover, we
extend the small-scale DESOBA dataset to DESOBAv2 using a novel data acquisition pipeline. Experimental results
on both DESOBA and DESOBAv2 datasets as well as real
composite images demonstrate the superior capability of
our model for shadow generation task. The dataset, code,
and model are released at https://github.com/bcmi/ObjectShadow-Generation-Dataset-DESOBAv2.

1. Introduction
Image composition [28] aims to merge the foreground of
one image with another background image to produce a
composite image, which has a wide range of applications
like virtual reality, artistic creation, and E-commerce. Simply pasting the foreground onto the background often results in visual inconsistencies, including the incompatible
illumination between foreground and background [3], lack
of foreground shadow/reflection [12, 34], and so on. In this
paper, we focus on the shadow issue, i.e., the inserted foreground does not have plausible shadow on the background,
which could significantly degrade the realism and quality of
composite image.
As illustrated in Figure 1, shadow generation is a challenging task because the foreground shadow is determined
by many complicated factors like the lighting information
and the geometry of foreground/background. The exist* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. A composite image can be obtained by pasting the foreground on the background. Shadow generation aims to generate
plausible shadow for the inserted foreground in the composite image to produce a more realistic image.

ing shadow generation methods can be divided into rendering based methods [34–36] and non-rendering based
methods [12, 22, 53]. Rendering based methods usually
impose restrict assumptions on the geometry and lighting,
which could hardly be satisfied in real-world scenarios. Besides, [35, 36] require users to specify the lighting information, which hinders its direct application in our task.
Non-rendering based methods usually train an image-toimage translation network, based on pairs of composite images without foreground shadows and real images with foreground shadows. However, due to the training data scarcity
and task difficulty, these methods are struggling to generate
shadows with reasonable shapes and intensities.
Recently, foundation model (e.g., stable diffusion [32])
pretrained on large-scale dataset has demonstrated unprecedented potential for image generation and editing. In previous works [44, 48] on object-guided inpainting or composition, they show that the generated foregrounds are accompanied by shadows even without considering the shadow issue, probably because of the rich prior knowledge of natural
shadow images in foundation model. However, they could
only generate satisfactory shadows in simple cases and the
object appearance could be altered unexpectedly.

8121

