This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FocSAM: Delving Deeply into Focused Objects in Segmenting Anything
You Huang1 , Zongyu Lan1 , Liujuan Cao1 ,* Xianming Lin1 , Shengchuan Zhang1 , Guannan Jiang2 , Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
Intelligent Manufacturing Department, Contemporary Amperex Technology Co. Limited (CATL)

Positive Click

1. Introduction
Interactive segmentation [5, 23, 28, 36] enhances the efficiency of enlarging image segmentation datasets by using limited manual annotations, avoiding the exhaustive
effort of full labeling. Recently, the Segment Anything
* Corresponding author

IoU=12.78
10th Click

IoU=93.24
9th Click

IoU=93.23
10th Click

FocSAM
GT

The Segment Anything Model (SAM) marks a notable
milestone in segmentation models, highlighted by its robust
zero-shot capabilities and ability to handle diverse prompts.
SAM follows a pipeline that separates interactive segmentation into image preprocessing through a large encoder
and interactive inference via a lightweight decoder, ensuring efficient real-time performance. However, SAM faces
stability issues in challenging samples upon this pipeline.
These issues arise from two main factors. Firstly, the image preprocessing disables SAM to dynamically use imagelevel zoom-in strategies to refocus on the target object during interaction. Secondly, the lightweight decoder struggles to sufficiently integrate interactive information with image embeddings. To address these two limitations, we propose FocSAM with a pipeline redesigned on two pivotal aspects. First, we propose Dynamic Window Multi-head SelfAttention (Dwin-MSA) to dynamically refocus SAM’s image embeddings on the target object. Dwin-MSA localizes
attention computations around the target object, enhancing object-related embeddings with minimal computational
overhead. Second, we propose Pixel-wise Dynamic ReLU
(P-DyReLU) to enable sufficient integration of interactive
information from a few initial clicks that have significant
impacts on the overall segmentation results. Experimentally, FocSAM augments SAM’s interactive segmentation
performance to match the existing state-of-the-art method
in segmentation quality, requiring only about 5.6% of this
method’s inference time on CPUs. Code is available at
https://github.com/YouHuang67/focsam.

Negative Click

IoU=88.59
9th Click

SAM

Abstract

Figure 1. Interactive segmentation stability on a challenging example. The bottom-left shows the example overlaid with GT (purple masks). The top and middle rows illustrate the interactive segmentation of SAM and the proposed FocSAM, where each click
is placed at the center of erroneously predicted regions and categorized as either positive (green) or negative (red). SAM’s performance is unstable in this example (top row), where the 9th click
yields an IoU of 88.59 (left) but a subsequent click significantly
reduces the IoU to 12.78 (right). In contrast, FocSAM (middle
row) shows consistent performance. The plot (bottom-right) summarizes the trends of 20 clicks’s segmentation, clearly contrasting
SAM’s IoU fluctuations with FocSAM’s stable performance.

Model (SAM) [28] excels in real-time, high-quality interactive segmentation, responding to annotator prompts such
as clicks [23], bounding boxes [28], or coarse masks [29].
SAM’s generalizability and efficiency in processing diverse prompts make it a versatile tool across a spectrum
of segmentation-related tasks. This study focuses on clickbased interactive segmentation building upon SAM [28].
SAM [28] alongside the concurrent InterFormer [23]
has pioneered a new interactive segmentation pipeline.

3120

