This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PolarRec: Improving Radio Interferometric Data Reconstruction
Using Polar Coordinates
Ruoqi Wang1 , Zhuoyang Chen1 , Jiayi Zhu1 , Qiong Luo*,1,2 , Feng Wang3
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 3 Guangzhou University
{rwang280, zchen190, jzhu718}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, luo@ust.hk, fengwang@gzhu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
In radio astronomy, visibility refers to radio signal data from
celestial objects, obtained by radio telescopes. These data
are represented as complex values in the uv-plane, a geometric plane defined for interferometric observations. Vis* Corresponding Author.

Reconstruction

Imaginary Part

Imaging

Clean Image

Dirty Image

Sparse Visibility

Real Part

(a) Traditional method: imaging followed by reconstruction

Imaging

Reconstruction

Imaginary Part

In radio astronomy, visibility data, which are measurements of wave signals from radio telescopes, are transformed into images for observation of distant celestial objects. However, these resultant images usually contain both
real sources and artifacts, due to signal sparsity and other
factors. One way to obtain cleaner images is to reconstruct
samples into dense forms before imaging. Unfortunately,
existing reconstruction methods often miss some components of visibility in frequency domain, so blurred object
edges and persistent artifacts remain in the images. Furthermore, the computation overhead is high on irregular
visibility samples due to the data skew. To address these
problems, we propose PolarRec, a transformer-encoderconditioned reconstruction pipeline with visibility samples
converted into the polar coordinate system. This coordinate
system matches the way in which radio telescopes observe
a celestial area as the Earth rotates. As a result, visibility samples distribute in the polar system more uniformly
than in the Cartesian space. Therefore, we propose to use
radial distance in the loss function, to help reconstruct complete visibility effectively. Also, we group visibility samples
by their polar angles and propose a group-based encoding
scheme to improve the efficiency. Our experiments demonstrate that PolarRec markedly improves imaging results by
faithfully reconstructing all frequency components in the
visibility domain while significantly reducing the computation cost in visibility data encoding. The code is available
at https://github.com/RapidsAtHKUST/PolarRec.

Real Part

Abstract

Clean Image

Sparse Visibility

Dense Inpainting

(b) Recent method: reconstruction followed by imaging.

Figure 1. Two visibility data processing flows.

ibility data are subsequently converted into images through
imaging for further analysis. However, these images,
known as dirty images, are often dominated by artifacts
[23]. This phenomenon is due to limitations in telescope
configurations, under which not the entire uv-plane is sampled. Therefore, visibility data normally have to be reconstructed before being utilized in scientific analysis. In this
paper, we propose a visibility reconstruction method, aiming to reconstruct the real sky by recovering all visibility
components in the uv-plane effectively and efficiently.
Traditional methods first transfer the sparse visibility
data into dirty images through the imaging process and then
reconstruct the dirty images to clean images [1, 3, 10, 14,
26, 30]. The process is shown in Figure 1 (a). In contrast,
some recent deep-learning-based studies [23, 31] have proposed to first do inpainting on the visibility data to reconstruct the sparse samples to dense coverage and then perform imaging to obtain the clean image, as shown in Figure 1 (b), showing better performance. In order to produce
a high-fidelity sharp image, it is crucial to densely sample
the full visibility domain [31]. In this paper, we adopt the
reconstruction-and-imaging processing flow.
Existing methods for reconstructing visibility data face

12841

