This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMCert: Provable Defense against Adversarial Attacks to Multi-modal Models
Yanting Wang1 , Hongye Fu2 ,* Wei Zou1 , and Jinyuan Jia1
1
The Pennsylvania State University, 2 Zhejiang University
1
{yanting, weizou, jinyuan}@psu.edu, 2 3200102866@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Different from a unimodal model whose input is from a
single modality, the input (called multi-modal input) of a
multi-modal model is from multiple modalities such as image, 3D points, audio, text, etc. Similar to unimodal models, many existing studies show that a multi-modal model
is also vulnerable to adversarial perturbation, where an attacker could add small perturbation to all modalities of a
multi-modal input such that the multi-modal model makes
incorrect predictions for it. Existing certified defenses are
mostly designed for unimodal models, which achieve suboptimal certified robustness guarantees when extended to
multi-modal models as shown in our experimental results.
In our work, we propose MMCert, the first certified defense
against adversarial attacks to a multi-modal model. We derive a lower bound on the performance of our MMCert under arbitrary adversarial attacks with bounded perturbations to both modalities (e.g., in the context of auto-driving,
we bound the number of changed pixels in both RGB image and depth image). We evaluate our MMCert using
two benchmark datasets: one for the multi-modal road segmentation task and the other for the multi-modal emotion
recognition task. Moreover, we compare our MMCert with
a state-of-the-art certified defense extended from unimodal
models. Our experimental results show that our MMCert
outperforms the baseline.

1. Introduction
With the rapid advancement of machine learning, multimodal models have emerged as a powerful paradigm. Differing from their unimodal counterpart whose input is from
a singular modality, these multi-modal models leverage input (called multi-modal input) from diverse modalities such
as images, 3D data points, audio, and text [8, 11, 24, 39, 50].
Those multi-modal models have been widely used in many
security and safety critical applications such as autonomous
driving [11, 30, 35, 44, 48] and medical imaging [15].
* Hongye Fu performed this research when he was a remote intern.

As shown in many existing studies [13, 37, 42], unimodal models are susceptible to adversarial attacks. There
is no exception for multi-modal models. In particular, many
recent studies [6, 41, 43, 45, 54, 61] showed that multimodal models are also vulnerable to adversarial perturbations. In particular, an attacker could simultaneously manipulate all modalities of a multi-modal input such that
a multi-modal model makes incorrect predictions. For
instance, in the scenario of road segmentation for autodriving, the attacker can add small perturbations to both
the RGB image (captured by a camera) and the depth image (captured by a LiDAR depth sensor) to degrade the segmentation quality. Similarly, in the scenario of video emotion recognition, the attacker can apply subtle disruptions to
both visual and audio data to reduce prediction accuracy.
Many defenses were proposed to defend against adversarial attacks, In particular, they can be categorized into empirical defenses [25, 34, 40, 45, 49, 52, 56] and certified defenses [7, 10, 14, 19, 27, 28, 51, 53, 57, 60]. Many existing
studies [4, 5, 46] showed that most empirical defenses could
be broken by strong, adaptive attacks (one exception is adversarial training [34]). Therefore, we focus on certified
defense in this work. Existing certified defenses are mainly
designed for unimodal models (its input is from a single
modality). Our experimental results show that they achieve
sub-optimal performance when extended to defend against
adversarial attacks for multi-modal models. The key reason is that when the attacker adds lp bounded perturbations
to all modalities, the space of perturbed multi-modal inputs
cannot be simply formulated as a lp ball. In this work, we
focus on l0 -like adversarial attacks applied to each modality (i.e., manipulate a certain number of features for each
modality) due to their straightforward applicability across
various modalities. The investigation of alternative forms
of attacks is reserved for future research.
Our work. We propose MMCert, the first certified defense
against adversarial attacks to multi-modal models. Suppose
we have a multi-modal input M = (m1 , m2 , · · · , mT )
with T modalities, where mi contains a set/sequence of basic elements from the i-th modality. We consider a general
scenario, where each element could be arbitrary. For in-

24655

