This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from Observer Gaze: Zero-Shot Attention Prediction Oriented by
Human-Object Interaction Recognition
Yuchen Zhou, Linkai Liu, Chao Gou*
Sun Yat-sen University
https://yuchen2199.github.io/Interactive-Gaze/
{zhouych37,liulk6}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, gouchao@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing attention prediction research focuses on
salient instances like humans and objects. However, the
more complex interaction-oriented attention, arising from
the comprehension of interactions between instances by
human observers, remains largely unexplored. This is
equally crucial for advancing human-machine interaction
and human-centered artificial intelligence. To bridge this
gap, we first collect a novel gaze fixation dataset named IG,
comprising 530,000 fixation points across 740 diverse interaction categories, capturing visual attention during human observers’ cognitive processes of interactions. Subsequently, we introduce the zero-shot interaction-oriented
attention prediction task (ZeroIA), which challenges models to predict visual cues for interactions not encountered
during training. Thirdly, we present the Interactive Attention model (IA), designed to emulate human observers’
cognitive processes to tackle the ZeroIA problem. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed IA outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches in both ZeroIA and
fully supervised settings. Lastly, we endeavor to apply
interaction-oriented attention to the interaction recognition
task itself. Further experimental results demonstrate the
promising potential to enhance the performance and interpretability of existing state-of-the-art HOI models by incorporating real human attention data from IG and attention
labels generated by IA.

1. Introduction
Human visual attention reveals a wealth of information
about internal cognitive states, including bottom-up visual
stimulation and top-down goal-directed empirical knowledge [10,47,61]. Predicting visual attention provides a valuable understanding of how humans perceive, comprehend,
and interact with the world, especially within the context
* Corresponding author.

Instance-centric Attention Prediction

(Our) Interaction-oriented Attention Prediction

person, donut

person, banana

<person,smell,dount>

<person,eat,banana>

person, horse

person, sheep

<person,straddle,horse>

<person,hug,sheep>

person, car

person, book

<person,drive,car>

<person,read,book>

Figure 1. Previous attention prediction models have traditionally
focused on the instance-level, primarily emphasizing foreground
humans and objects. In contrast, our proposed interaction-oriented
attention aims to capture subtler and more fine-grained visual cues
associated with actions, such as body parts (row 1), human-object
contact (row 2), and scene context (row 3). This proposition challenges the research community with a more intricate and cognitively demanding task.

of goal-directed attention [3–5, 39, 46, 50]. This holds profound implications for enhancing human-computer interaction [11, 25, 49], and contributing to fields such as assistance for visual impaired [15, 16], education [1, 51], and
autonomous driving [13, 21, 43, 65].
Goal-oriented attention prediction studies have made
some progress recently [8, 12, 24, 37, 42, 55–57], mostly focusing on predicting gaze fixation when searching or recognizing objects with relative explicit and invariant visual
cues. However, interactions [27,38,68,69,71], another fundamental component of visual understanding that encapsulates how humans and objects interact with each other, remain largely unexplored. Interactions pose greater cognitive challenges than objects, due to their diverse and subtle
visual cues, as shown in Figure 1. Consequently, predicting
1
28390

