This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Smart Help: Strategic Opponent Modeling for
Proactive and Adaptive Robot Assistance in Households
Zhihao Cao1,2, *, Zidong Wang1,2,∗ , Siwen Xie3 , Anji Liu4 , Lifeng Fan1,B
1

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
2

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 3 Yuanpei College, Peking University
4

Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
Despite the significant demand for assistive technology
among vulnerable groups (e.g., the elderly, children, and
the disabled) in daily tasks, research into advanced AIdriven assistive solutions that genuinely accommodate their
diverse needs remains sparse. Traditional human-machine
interaction tasks often require machines to simply help without nuanced consideration of human abilities and feelings,
such as their opportunity for practice and learning, sense
of self-improvement, and self-esteem. Addressing this gap,
we define a pivotal and novel challenge Smart Help, which
aims to provide proactive yet adaptive support to human
agents with diverse disabilities and dynamic goals in various tasks and environments. To establish this challenge, we
leverage AI2-THOR [32] to build a new interactive 3D realistic household environment for the Smart Help task. We introduce an innovative opponent modeling module that provides a nuanced understanding of the main agent’s capabilities and goals, in order to optimize the assisting agent’s
helping policy. Rigorous experiments validate the efficacy
of our model components and show the superiority of our
holistic approach against established baselines. Our findings illustrate the potential of AI-imbued assistive robots in
improving the well-being of vulnerable groups.

1. Introduction
All of us may find ourselves within vulnerable demographics at some point. Throughout the human life span, we
confront an array of challenges, whether originating from
physical discomfort [12], emotional turmoil [53], or the inevitable march of aging [22], that can hinder our ability to
perform even the simplest tasks that we once accomplished
* Indicates equal contribution. Work was conducted during Zhihao Cao
and Zidong Wang’s internships at BIGAI. B Corresponding author: Lifeng
Fan (lifengfan@bigai.ai). Our environment, dataset, and codes are available at https://github.com/caozh20/SmartHelp.

effortlessly (e.g., lifting a heavy object). This predicament often triggers a complex emotional response. The
fear of being labeled as “special” or “disabled” can evoke
feelings of diminished self-esteem, reduced self-efficacy
and self-sufficiency, and a sense of personal boundary violation [8, 40]. However, previous research in humanrobot interaction has primarily focused on pure cooperation [30, 38, 42, 43, 52, 57], and assistive technologies [4, 7]
have been designed to simply take over everything for human users, often disregarding their emotional well-being.
Considering the importance of sensitivity and consideration
when offering help, we need new assistance technologies
with an emphasis not only on the successful completion of
the task but also on the recipient’s emotional acceptance of
the assistance [8, 40]. This introduces a new dimension to
the concept of learning to help in AI, extending the boundaries beyond technical proficiency and into the realm of empathetic engagement.
To tackle this issue, we propose a novel and pivotal
challenge Smart Help, aiming to provide both proactive
and adaptive support to human agents with diverse disabilities and dynamic goals in different tasks and environments.
Fig. 1 exemplifies the concept of the Smart Help strategy as
applied to an assistive robot aiding a human in a household
task. The Basic Helper fails to provide proactive assistance
due to its inability to infer the user’s goals accurately. The
Ordinary Helper successfully infers the user’s goals from
observations and offers proactive help, but it lacks adaptability to different user needs. Its simple “take-over” helping strategy can cause a feeling of discomfort in the human
user. In contrast, the Smart Helper not only infers both the
user’s goals distribution but also reasons about the user’s capability of completing each goal independently. As a result,
the Smart Helper can identify critical goals that hinder task
completion and provide proactive and adaptive help that selectively addresses those bottlenecks. This approach allows
the user to accomplish the task successfully and joyfully.
Leveraging AI2-THOR [32], a 3D interactive environ-

18091

