This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SURE: SUrvey REcipes for building reliable and robust deep networks
Yuting Li1,2 , Yingyi Chen3 , Xuanlong Yu4,5 , Dexiong Chen†6 , and Xi Shen†1
1

Intellindust, China
China Three Gorges University, China
3
ESAT-STADIUS, KU Leuven, Belgium
4
SATIE, Paris-Saclay University, France
5
U2IS, ENSTA Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
6
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany
2

Abstract

Long-tailed classification

CIFAR10-LT
Baseline

In this paper, we revisit techniques for uncertainty estimation within deep neural networks and consolidate a
suite of techniques to enhance their reliability. Our investigation reveals that an integrated application of diverse
techniques–spanning model regularization, classifier and
optimization–substantially improves the accuracy of uncertainty predictions in image classification tasks. The synergistic effect of these techniques culminates in our novel
SURE approach. We rigorously evaluate SURE against the
benchmark of failure prediction, a critical testbed for uncertainty estimation efficacy. Our results showcase a consistently better performance than models that individually
deploy each technique, across various datasets and model
architectures. When applied to real-world challenges, such
as data corruption, label noise, and long-tailed class distribution, SURE exhibits remarkable robustness, delivering
results that are superior or on par with current state-of-theart specialized methods. Particularly on Animal-10N and
Food-101N for learning with noisy labels, SURE achieves
state-of-the-art performance without any task-specific adjustments. This work not only sets a new benchmark for
robust uncertainty estimation but also paves the way for
its application in diverse, real-world scenarios where reliability is paramount. Our code is available at https:
//yutingli0606.github.io/SURE/.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have established themselves
as powerful and adaptable tools for prediction tasks on
† Corresponding Author.

89.4

RegMixup

92.4

CRL

89.6

FMFP

92.0

SURE (Ours)

93.9

Accuracy ↑

Learning with noisy labels
<cat>

Animal-10N

<cat>

Baseline

83.5

RegMixup (not converge)
<dog>

<dog>

CRL

84.2

FMFP

87.9

SURE (Ours)

89.0

Accuracy ↑

Robustness under data corruptions CIFAR10-C
Gaussian Noise Shot Noise

Baseline 83.1

Motion Blur

Zoom Blur

RegMixup

85.3

CRL

85.4

FMFP

88.0

SURE (Ours)

89.6

AUROC ↑

Figure 1. SURE consistently performs better than previous approaches to uncertainty estimation under various scenarios.
Note that we did not manage to scale RegMixup [59] to the learning with noisy label task. Baseline refers to the MSP [31] method.

structured data. However, accurately assessing the reliability of their predictions continues to be a substantial
challenge. In safety-critical areas such as medical diagnostics [2, 43, 56], robotics [29, 49], autonomous driving [9, 18, 49], and earth observation systems [24, 52], decisions based on overconfident predictions can result in severe
17500

