This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenEQA: Embodied Question Answering in the Era of Foundation Models
https://open-eqa.github.io

Arjun Majumdar1⇤ Anurag Ajay2⇤ Xiaohan Zhang3⇤
Pranav Putta
Sriram Yenamandra1 Mikael Henaff4 Sneha Silwal4 Paul Mcvay4
Oleksandr Maksymets4 Sergio Arnaud4 Karmesh Yadav4 Qiyang Li5 Ben Newman6
Mohit Sharma6 Vincent Berges4 Shiqi Zhang3 Pulkit Agrawal2 Yonatan Bisk4,6 Dhruv Batra1,4
Mrinal Kalakrishnan4 Franziska Meier4 Chris Paxton4 Alexander Sax4 Aravind Rajeswaran4
1

⇤

Equal contribution.

1. Georgia Tech

2. MIT

3. Binghamton University

4. Meta AI

5. UC Berkeley

6. CMU

Work done at Fundamental AI Research (FAIR), Meta.

RGB

t

Answer:
Two microwaves.
Question:
Where did I leave my paper bag?

Depth

t

Camera

Environment Trajectory

Question:
What is below the white plastic
storage bin?

t

Answer:
Near two microwaves and a
plastic drawer.
Question:
Where can I get some pop drinks?

[R | t]
K

Answer:
Buy some from the vending machine
near the corner of the laundry room

Multimodal Observations

Open-Vocabular Q&A

Figure 1. Illustration of an episode history along with questions and answers from our OpenEQA benchmark, which contains
1600+ untemplated questions that test aspects of attribute recognition, spatial understanding, functional reasoning, and world knowledge.
In episodic-memory EQA (EM-EQA), agents parse a sequence of historical sensory observations, and in active EQA (A-EQA), agents
must explore real-world scanned environments to gather information to answer questions. Natural language answers are scored using our
proposed LLM-Match metric, which showed excellent agreement with human scoring.

Abstract
We present a modern formulation of Embodied Question
Answering (EQA) as the task of understanding an environment well enough to answer questions about it in natural
language. An agent can achieve such an understanding
by either drawing upon episodic memory, exemplified by
agents on smart glasses, or by actively exploring the environment, as in the case of mobile robots. We accompany
our formulation with OpenEQA – the first open-vocabulary
benchmark dataset for EQA supporting both episodic memory and active exploration use cases. OpenEQA contains
over 1600 high-quality human generated questions drawn
from over 180 real-world environments. In addition to the
dataset, we also provide an automatic LLM-powered evaluation protocol that has excellent correlation with human
judgement. Using this dataset and evaluation protocol,

we evaluate several state-of-the-art foundation models including GPT-4V, and find that they significantly lag behind
human-level performance. Consequently, OpenEQA stands
out as a straightforward, measurable, and practically relevant benchmark that poses a considerable challenge to current generation of foundation models. We hope this inspires
and stimulates future research at the intersection of Embodied AI, conversational agents, and world models.

1. Introduction
AI agents are starting to transcend their digital origins and
enter the physical world through devices like smartphones,
smart glasses, and robots. These technologies are typically used by individuals who are not AI experts. To effectively assist them, Embodied AI (EAI) agents must possess a natural language interface and a type of “common

16488

