This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single View Refractive Index Tomography with Neural Fields
Brandon Zhao1∗
1

Aviad Levis1

Liam Connor2

Pratul P. Srinivasan3

Katherine L. Bouman1,2

Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology
2
Cahill Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics, California Institute of Technology
3
Google Research
∗

byzhao@caltech.edu

Abstract
Refractive Index Tomography is the inverse problem of
reconstructing the continuously-varying 3D refractive index in a scene using 2D projected image measurements.
Although a purely refractive field is not directly visible, it
bends light rays as they travel through space, thus providing a signal for reconstruction. The effects of such fields
appear in many scientific computer vision settings, ranging
from refraction due to transparent cells in microscopy to the
lensing of distant galaxies caused by dark matter in astrophysics. Reconstructing these fields is particularly difficult
due to the complex nonlinear effects of the refractive field
on observed images. Furthermore, while standard 3D reconstruction and tomography settings typically have access
to observations of the scene from many viewpoints, many
refractive index tomography problem settings only have access to images observed from a single viewpoint. We introduce a method that leverages prior knowledge of light
sources scattered throughout the refractive medium to help
disambiguate the single-view refractive index tomography
problem. We differentiably trace curved rays through a neural field representation of the refractive field, and optimize
its parameters to best reproduce the observed image. We
demonstrate the efficacy of our approach by reconstructing
simulated refractive fields, analyze the effects of light source
distribution on the recovered field, and test our method on a
simulated dark matter mapping problem where we successfully recover the 3D refractive field caused by a realistic
dark matter distribution.

1. Introduction
When light passes from one medium to another, such as
from air to water, it encounters a change in refractive index
(RI). As a result, light rays are bent, or refracted, according to the magnitude of this change, causing effects like
the shimmering (caustics) at the bottom of a pool of water.
Media such as hot gas or translucent cell samples have RIs

that continuously vary in space, causing light to take paths
curved by the gradient of the underlying RI field. Although
the RI field is not directly visible, its effect on the scene’s
illumination provides clues to its structure.
Spatially varying RI fields are present in a diverse range
of scientific applications. For example, certain fiber optic
cables are designed to smoothly refract light away from the
cable’s outside padding [31]. In seismology, pressure waves
from earthquakes are refracted continuously as they travel
through ground structures of varying density [23]. In astrophysics, gravitational effects from massive dark matter
structures lens the light from faraway galaxies resulting in
observable effects in telescope images. When the degree of
these gravitational lensing effects is relatively weak, they
can be modeled as refraction [15].
In this work, we seek to tackle the problem of singleview RI tomography: 3D reconstruction of RI fields where
image measurements are available only from a single viewpoint. This problem setting occurs when using telescope
images or a single camera on scenes in the wild, and poses
several challenges. First, image measurements are produced
by rays traveling along continuously curving trajectories
through the scene, where curvature is due to the structure of
the underlying RI field. Unlike in linear tomography problems, where the projection geometry is independent of the
medium, in RI tomography the ray paths are dictated by the
unknown medium properties themselves. Thus the measurements are a non-linear function of the targeted refractive field. Second, limiting image measurements to a single
viewing angle makes the problem severely ill-posed. That
is, there are many possible refractive fields which could
potentially produce the same image measurements. However, by leveraging the location of light sources distributed
throughout the scene we can better constrain the recovery.
We propose a novel approach using neural fields with
continuous ray tracing that leverages the physics of light
propagation to recover an underlying refractive field. In
particular, we represent the spatially varying RI field with

25358

