This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards CLIP-driven Language-free 3D Visual Grounding via 2D-3D Relational
Enhancement and Consistency
Yuqi Zhang∗ Han Luo∗ Yinjie Lei
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Sichuan University
yqcheung@stu.scu.edu.cn

luo han@stu.scu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D visual grounding plays a crucial role in scene understanding, with extensive applications in AR/VR. Despite
the significant progress made in recent methods, the requirement of dense textual descriptions for each individual object, which is time-consuming and costly, hinders
their scalability. To mitigate reliance on text annotations
during training, researchers have explored language-free
training paradigms in the 2D field via explicit text generation or implicit feature substitution. Nevertheless, unlike 2D images, the complexity of spatial relations in 3D,
coupled with the absence of robust 3D visual language
pre-trained models, makes it challenging to directly transfer previous strategies. To tackle the above issues, in this
paper, we introduce a language-free training framework
for 3D visual grounding. By utilizing the visual-language
joint embedding in 2D large cross-modality model as a
bridge, we can expediently produce the pseudo-language
features by leveraging the features of 2D images which
are equivalent to that of real textual descriptions. We further develop a relation injection scheme, with a Neighboring Relation-aware Modeling module and a Cross-modality
Relation Consistency module, aiming to enhance and preserve the complex relationships between the 2D and 3D
embedding space. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our proposed language-free 3D visual grounding approach
can obtain promising performance across three widely used
datasets – ScanRefer, Nr3D and Sr3D. Our codes are available at https://github.com/xibi777/3DLFVG

1. Introduction
3D Visual Grounding (3DVG) [1, 3–6, 25, 36, 42, 43], also
known as referring 3D object localization, aims to accurately locate and identify specific objects within an input
point cloud based on provided textual descriptions. The ad∗ Equal contribution

Corresponding Author: Yinjie Lei (yinjie@scu.edu.cn)

Textual Description

yinjie@scu.edu.cn

3D Scene

Muti-view Images

3D Scene

Masks

This is a brown
armchair in the
corner. It is in front
of the blackboard.

Fully-Supervised Training
Referring
Object

Language-Free Training
Referring
Object

(a) Comparison of fully-supervised and our language-free paradigm
Muti-view Images Vision

Replace

Text Textual Description

Masks

CLIP Visual
Encoder

CLIP Text
Encoder

This is a brown
armchair in the
corner. It is in front
of the blackboard.

CLIP Embedding Space
(b) Foundation of multi-view image replacing text

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of fully-supervised and our languagefree training paradigm. (b) Based on CLIP embedding space,
our language-free training method uses multi-view images corresponding to the scene instead of the textual descriptions.

vancements in visual grounding technology possess the potential to greatly enhance various real-world applications,
including autonomous robots and augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) systems [27, 38]. However, training current
3DVG models demands sufficient detailed text descriptions
of each object, which are time-consuming and costly to acquire. As a case in point, the ScanRefer [4] collection, involving 1,929 AMT workers over a month, required approximately 4,984 man hours for both description collection and
verification. In light of this, our research pivots towards a
promising language-free training paradigm for 3DVG.
In recent years, language-free training methods have
been widely explored for numerous 2D vision-language
tasks. Early methods typically generate explicit pseudolanguage to replace human-annotated texts during training.
Notably, Nam et al. [28] and Jiang et al. [16] have respectively developed language-free video localization and
image grounding methods. They both utilize off-the-shelf

13063

