This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ColorPCR: Color Point Cloud Registration with
Multi-Stage Geometric-Color Fusion
Juncheng Mu1
1
2

Lin Bie1

Shaoyi Du2

Yue Gao1 *

{BNRist, THUIBCS, School of Software}, Tsinghua University

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, National Engineering Research Center for
Visual Information and Applications, and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{mujc21, biel20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dushaoyi@xjtu.edu.cn, gaoyue@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud registration is still a challenging and open
problem. For example, when the overlap between two point
clouds is extremely low, geo-only features may be not sufficient. Therefore, it is important to further explore how to
utilize color data in this task. Under such circumstances,
we propose ColorPCR for color point cloud registration
with multi-stage geometric-color fusion. We design a Hierarchical Color Enhanced Feature Extraction module to extract multi-level geometric-color features, and a GeoColor
Superpoint Matching Module to encode transformationinvariant geo-color global context for robust patch correspondences. In this way, both geometric and color data
can be used, thus leading to robust performance even under extremely challenging scenarios, such as low overlap
between two point clouds. To evaluate the performance
of our method, we colorize 3DMatch/3DLoMatch datasets
as Color3DMatch/Color3DLoMatch and evaluations on
these datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method. Our method achieves state-of-the-art registration
recall of 97.5%/88.9% on them.

1. Introduction
Rigid point cloud registration is a cornerstone in 3D vision and robotics [12, 21], which is fundamental to a series
of downstream applications, including 3D semantic segmentation [19, 20] and 3D reconstruction [17]. The objective of registration is to estimate a rigid transformation
aligning two overlapping 3D point clouds.
Recently, keypoint-based and correspondence-based
methods [3, 6, 10] have shown promising results, which
leverage a neural network to estimate the correspondences
of the input point clouds and employ a robust estimator,
such as random sample consensus (RANSAC [9]), to derive
* Corresponding author

(a) GeoTransformer, Patch Correspondences

(b) GeoTransformer, Point Correspondences

(c) ColorPCR, Patch Correspondences

(d) ColorPCR, Point Correspondences

Figure 1. In challenging scenarios with extremely low overlap and
geometric distinctiveness, geo-only method fails, while ColorPCR
successfully identifies the blue chair.

the transformation. Recent methods in the image matching
domain have underscored the importance of local neighborhood information [23, 40], inspiring approaches in point
cloud registration [21, 34]. These methods perform downsampling to achieve hierarchical points. Then they utilize a
transformer to augment the superpoint features, thereby establishing the superpoint correspondences, which can guide
the registration of up-sampled points.
Although point cloud registration has been investigated
for decades, it is still a challenging and open problem dealing with open scenario tasks. When the overlap between two
point clouds is extremely low, the registration process may
fail in many cases. Geometric features have been deeply
explored to deal with this scenario, while the performance
is still limited. Therefore, it is important to further explore
new representations for robust point cloud registration.
Thanks to recent progress on acquiring color point
clouds, it is possible to further investigate how to better explore such color information for registration. Fig. 1 shows
examples of how color information is important for registration. As the geometric information is not discriminative,

21061

