This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Reflectance Map:
Single-Image Stochastic Inverse Rendering of Illumination and Reflectance
Yuto Enyo
Ko Nishino
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

DRMNet
Input

Illumination Reflectance
Estimates

Raw Reflectance Map Observed Reflectance Map

Replacement Relighting
Applications

Figure 1. We introduce the first single-image stochastic inverse rendering method, a principled approach for recovering the attenuated
frequency spectrum of the illumination and reflectance by seamlessly integrating a neural generative process in inverse rendering. Our key
idea is to recover the illumination as a reflectance map of a perfect mirror. The results enable arbitrary object insertion and relighting.

Abstract
Reflectance bounds the frequency spectrum of illumination in the object appearance. In this paper, we introduce
the first stochastic inverse rendering method, which recovers the attenuated frequency spectrum of an illumination
jointly with the reflectance of an object of known geometry
from a single image. Our key idea is to solve this blind inverse problem in the reflectance map, an appearance representation invariant to the underlying geometry, by learning
to reverse the image formation with a novel diffusion model
which we refer to as the Diffusion Reflectance Map Network (DRMNet). Given an observed reflectance map converted and completed from the single input image, DRMNet generates a reflectance map corresponding to a perfect
mirror sphere while jointly estimating the reflectance. The
forward process can be understood as gradually filtering
a natural illumination with lower and lower frequency reflectance and additive Gaussian noise. DRMNet learns to
invert this process with two subnetworks, IllNet and RefNet,
which work in concert towards this joint estimation. The
network is trained on an extensive synthetic dataset and is
demonstrated to generalize to real images, showing stateof-the-art accuracy on established datasets.

1. Introduction
Light interacting with surfaces narrate our rich visual world.
The light from illuminants reflect off object surfaces deeply

entangling the surface material and geometry in its process.
Deciphering the surface geometry, reflectance properties,
and the incident illumination from this reflected radiance
has been the central focus of physics-based vision research.
Our focus is achieving this from a single image.
The ability to explicitly recover rich situational information from a single glance at an object goes to the very heart
of embodied perception and enables effective use of visual
information both in human perception and robot vision. For
instance, decisions on how to act on an object needs to be
made as the visual information is captured, and cannot be
stalled until a hundred images are captured.
Even when the shape is known, i.e., with an RGB-D
smartphone sensor, disentangling the reflectance and illumination from a single image remains ill-posed due to two
key problems. The first is color ambiguity—it is unclear
whether to associate, for instance, the green object appearance to the illumination or the reflectance which cannot be
resolved without assumptions on the color of either. The
bigger and fatal obstacle is the loss of information. The
reflectance acts as an angular filter on the incident illumination while the geometry determines its orientation [56]. As
a result, the frequency spectrum of the object appearance is
bounded by the highest frequency of either the reflectance
or the illumination, the former of which is usually lower [8].
The frequency bound limits the utility of the estimated
reflectance and illumination of past methods which do not
pay attention to it. Due to low-pass reflectance, the illumination estimate is blurry and can only be used to insert an
object in the scene that has lower frequency characteristics

11873

