This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVCPS-NeuS: Multi-view Constrained Photometric Stereo
for Neural Surface Reconstruction
Hiroaki Santo
Fumio Okura
Yasuyuki Matsushita
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University
{santo.hiroaki, okura, yasumat}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Multi-view photometric stereo (MVPS) recovers a highfidelity 3D shape of a scene by benefiting from both multiview stereo and photometric stereo. While photometric stereo
boosts detailed shape reconstruction, it necessitates recording images under various light conditions for each viewpoint.
In particular, calibrating the light directions for each view
significantly increases the cost of acquiring images. To make
MVPS more accessible, we introduce a practical and easy-toimplement setup, multi-view constrained photometric stereo
(MVCPS), where the light directions are unknown but constrained to move together with the camera. Unlike conventional multi-view uncalibrated photometric stereo, our
constrained setting reduces the ambiguities of surface normal estimates from per-view linear ambiguities to a single
and global linear one, thereby simplifying the disambiguation process. The proposed method integrates the ambiguous
surface normal into neural surface reconstruction (NeuS) to
simultaneously resolve the global ambiguity and estimate
the detailed 3D shape. Experiments demonstrate that our
method estimates accurate shapes under sparse viewpoints
using only a few multi-view constrained light sources.

1. Introduction
Multi-view photometric stereo (MVPS) is a 3D reconstruction approach that combines photometric stereo (PS) and
multi-view stereo (MVS). In a conventional setting, a scene
is recorded from multiple viewpoints, and at each viewpoint, multiple images are captured under varying light directions [14, 19, 29, 40]. With the advancement of neural
surface reconstruction [37, 41], recent works [14, 40] have
achieved high-fidelity 3D reconstruction by incorporating
the surface normal derived from PS via inverse rendering.
To eliminate the cost of calibrating the cameras and light
directions in MVPS, it is generally favored to work in an
uncalibrated setting, where the camera can freely move and
light directions are treated unknown. For determining the

camera
strobe

⋯
rotation stage
Figure 1. The minimal setting for multi-view constrained photometric stereo, equipping a camera, three strobes, and a manual rotation
stage with markers. The camera and light sources move together
with respect to the target object.

camera parameters including its postures, we can safely rely
on mature Structure-from-Motion (SfM) methods; however,
uncalibrated light directions pose a problem in determining surface details. Namely, when the light directions are
unknown, the problem becomes uncalibrated photometric
stereo (UPS), and it is known that surface normal can only
be estimated up to a linear ambiguity. As a result, in uncalibrated MVPS, it yields an ambiguous surface normal map
for each view, where each of them has a different liner ambiguity. Due to the per-view linear ambiguity in the estimated
surface normal maps, it remains challenging to fully take
advantage of PS’s capability in uncalibrated MVPS.
In this paper, we consider a setting of MVPS, where light
directions are unknown but constrained to move together
with a camera, which we call multi-view constrained photometric stereo (MVCPS). Such a setup can be easily achieved
by employing a rig that secures a camera and light sources,
or by using a rotation stage to move a target object in front
of a camera and light sources, as shown in Fig. 1. In fact, the
setting is hardly new, and most existing single-view or multiview PS works employ such setups [19, 22, 25, 27, 31, 33–

20475

