This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ES3 : Evolving Self-Supervised Learning
of Robust Audio-Visual Speech Representations

1

Yuanhang Zhang1,2 , Shuang Yang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
zhangyuanhang15@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {shuang.yang, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction

prediction [30, 59, 80]. However, learning representations
in the audio-visual speech domain faces unique challenges
brought by the inherent asymmetry between the two modalities involved. First, audio and video often convey distinct
and complementary types of speech information. For example, /m/ and /n/ sound similar, but are visually different; on the contrary, /p/ and /b/ are visually similar but
can be distinguished with audio [70]. Even more interesting is the presence of synergistic information – information
that can further enhance speech perception [55] but only
emerges when audio and video are considered together, and
cannot be inferred when either modality is absent. Second, they manifest different amounts of noise and information. Specifically, in most existing audio-visual speech
datasets, audio is characterized by high sampling rate and
relatively clean speech samples, making audio representations readily learnable from these datasets. In contrast,
the visual modality often presents several challenging factors, including missing (e.g. due to self-occlusion in profile
faces or low image quality), redundant (e.g. due to appearance variations, makeup and beards etc.) and ambiguous
(e.g. due to the lower sampling rate and the presence of homophenes) visual information. Their presence complicates
learning meaningful and robust representations solely from
video. The difficulties encountered in the continuous efforts to improve the performance of visual speech recognition (VSR) [15, 24, 40, 41] models illustrate this persistent
obstacle. Additionally, these differences between the two
modalities lead to an imbalance between their learning dynamics, requiring additional manual settings [3, 39, 42, 61].

The task of learning audio-visual speech representations has
gained increasing importance due to its potential to support
a wide range of relevant applications. Building on the success in other domains [9, 11, 12, 14, 22, 31], several effective self-supervised approaches have recently emerged
for this task by pre-training models on paired or mixed audio, visual and text data with pretext tasks like speech unit

In this work, we break down the problem of learning audio-visual speech representations into the learning of
three different types of information: shared (across modalities), unique (modality-specific) and synergistic speech information. Based on our formulation, we propose a novel
strategy called ES3 (short for Evolving Self-Supervised
Learning of Robust Audio-Visual Speech Representations)

We propose a novel strategy, ES3 , for self-supervised learning of robust audio-visual speech representations from unlabeled talking face videos. While many recent approaches
for this task primarily rely on guiding the learning process using the audio modality alone to capture information shared between audio and video, we reframe the problem as the acquisition of shared, unique (modality-specific)
and synergistic speech information to address the inherent
asymmetry between the modalities. Based on this formulation, we propose a novel “evolving” strategy that progressively builds joint audio-visual speech representations
that are strong for both uni-modal (audio & visual) and bimodal (audio-visual) speech. First, we leverage the more
easily learnable audio modality to initialize audio and visual representations by capturing audio-unique and shared
speech information. Next, we incorporate video-unique
speech information and bootstrap the audio-visual representations on top of the previously acquired shared knowledge. Finally, we maximize the total audio-visual speech
information, including synergistic information to obtain robust and comprehensive representations. We implement ES3
as a simple Siamese framework and experiments on both
English benchmarks and a newly contributed large-scale
Mandarin dataset show its effectiveness. In particular, on
LRS2-BBC, our smallest model is on par with SoTA models
with only 1/2 parameters and 1/8 unlabeled data (223h).

27069

