This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-Time Zero-Shot Temporal Action Localization
Benedetta Liberatori1

Alessandro Conti1

University of Trento1

Paolo Rota1

Yiming Wang2

Elisa Ricci1,2

Fondazione Bruno Kessler2

https://github.com/benedettaliberatori/T3AL

Abstract
Zero-Shot Temporal Action Localization (ZS-TAL) seeks
to identify and locate actions in untrimmed videos unseen
during training. Existing ZS-TAL methods involve finetuning a model on a large amount of annotated training
data. While effective, training-based ZS-TAL approaches assume the availability of labeled data for supervised learning,
which can be impractical in some applications. Furthermore,
the training process naturally induces a domain bias into the
learned model, which may adversely affect the model’s generalization ability to arbitrary videos. These considerations
prompt us to approach the ZS-TAL problem from a radically
novel perspective, relaxing the requirement for training data.
To this aim, we introduce a novel method that performs TestTime adaptation for Temporal Action Localization (T 3AL).
In a nutshell, T 3AL adapts a pre-trained Vision and Language Model (VLM). T 3AL operates in three steps. First, a
video-level pseudo-label of the action category is computed
by aggregating information from the entire video. Then, action localization is performed adopting a novel procedure
inspired by self-supervised learning. Finally, frame-level textual descriptions extracted with a state-of-the-art captioning
model are employed for refining the action region proposals. We validate the effectiveness of T 3AL by conducting
experiments on the THUMOS14 and the ActivityNet-v1.3
datasets. Our results demonstrate that T 3AL significantly
outperforms zero-shot baselines based on state-of-the-art
VLMs, confirming the benefit of a test-time adaptation approach.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot Temporal Action Localization (ZS-TAL) aims
to locate and recognize actions in any video sequence, enabling the recognition of classes unseen during training.
Large-scale Vision and Language models (VLMs) [1, 12,
22, 28, 31] are renowned for the exceptional generalization capability derived from their extensive pre-training on
web-scale image-text datasets, outperforming traditional image classification methods [4, 13, 32]. When applied to

v
tennis swing

(a) Previous approaches

(b) Our proposal

Figure 1. Task setup. Previous approaches tackling ZS-TAL (a)
train the model on labelled data and test it in-domain. Due to
lack of out-of-distribution generalization, we propose to update the
parameters at test-time on a stream of unlabelled videos without
prior supervised training (b).

the video domain, however, VLMs typically require finetuning to account for the image-video structural domain
shift [11, 26, 28].
Recent methods exploiting VLMs for ZS-TAL also abide
by this limitation, requiring training data to learn the video
domain and localize unseen actions at test time [9, 20, 30]
(see Fig. 1(a)).
While model fine-tuning has the clear objective of learning video representations, which allows to effectively localize actions in the untrimmed videos, it also assumes the
availability of a large annotated data collection. In certain
applications, however, such datasets may be unavailable.
Furthermore, fine-tuning inherently carries the downside of
producing models with decreased out-of-domain generalization capabilities [35]. This latter issue is especially severe
for ZS-TAL. A preliminary investigation (see Sec. 3) demon-

18720

