This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hunting Attributes: Context Prototype-Aware Learning for
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Feilong Tang1,2 * Zhongxing Xu3 * Zhaojun Qu4
Xingjian Jiang5 Zongyuan Ge1,2†

Wei Feng1,2

1

AIM Lab, Faculty of IT, Monash University 2 Faculty of IT, Monash University
3
Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell University 4 Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
5
Ann Arbor, University of Michigan
{feilong.tang,zongyuan.ge}@monash.edu

Abstract
Recent weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) methods strive to incorporate contextual knowledge to improve the completeness of class activation maps
(CAM). In this work, we argue that the knowledge bias
between instances and contexts affects the capability of the
prototype to sufficiently understand instance semantics. Inspired by prototype learning theory, we propose leveraging
prototype awareness to capture diverse and fine-grained
feature attributes of instances. The hypothesis is that
contextual prototypes might erroneously activate similar
and frequently co-occurring object categories due to this
knowledge bias. Therefore, we propose to enhance the prototype representation ability by mitigating the bias to better
capture spatial coverage in semantic object regions. With
this goal, we present a Context Prototype-Aware Learning
(CPAL) strategy, which leverages semantic context to
enrich instance comprehension. The core of this method
is to accurately capture intra-class variations in object
features through context-aware prototypes, facilitating the
adaptation to the semantic attributes of various instances.
We design feature distribution alignment to optimize prototype awareness, aligning instance feature distributions with
dense features. In addition, a unified training framework
is proposed to combine label-guided classification supervision and prototypes-guided self-supervision. Experimental
results on PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014 show
that CPAL significantly improves off-the-shelf methods
and achieves state-of-the-art performance. The project is
available at https://github.com/Barrett-python/CPAL.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation serves as a fundamental task in
the field of computer vision. Weakly Supervised Semantic
*
†

The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding author: Zongyuan Ge

···
cat

cat

(a) Single prototype learning
and inference (e.g., [2, 7, 34])

(b) Context prototypes learning and
inference (e.g., [8, 13, 16, 36, 70, 75])

···
cat
Attributes

𝑤" = 1
Current instance attributes

···
Positiveness

𝑤!

Hunting Attributes

𝑤 ! ∈ (0, 1)
Relevant attributes
𝑤! = 0
Irrelevant attributes

Prototype-aware learning

(c) Context prototypes-aware learning and inference

Figure 1. The main idea promoted throughout the paper is that
semantic context prototype-aware underpins localization of individual objects in WSSS. Our CPAL performs adaptive perception
of diverse attributes (e.g., cat) with attribute hunting (c) rather
than from single prototype (a) and plain context prototypes (b).
This attribute-specific adaptation not only mitigates the risk of errors where (b) mistakenly identifies similar categories (e.g., dog)
but also ensures accurate activation of the complete object region.

Segmentation (WSSS) has become a popular approach in
the community, learning from weak labels such as imagelevel labels [25, 30], scribbles [37, 56], or bounding boxes
[11, 31, 49], instead of pixel-level annotations. Most WSSS
approaches utilize Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [74]
to provide localization cues for target objects, thereby mapping visual concepts to pixel regions.
The key in WSSS is generating CAM with better coverage on the complete object. Recent studies [3, 51, 59, 71]
primarily aim to optimize model segmentation accuracy and
stability by integrating contextual knowledge. Inspired by
the progress of representation learning [15, 62], some studies [36, 50, 69, 70] introduce semantic context and instance
knowledge for global-scale context modeling to more ac-

3324

