This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PaReNeRF: Toward Fast Large-scale Dynamic NeRF with Patch-based
Reference
Xiao Tang∗1 ,

Min Yang1 , Penghui Sun1 , Hui Li1 , Yuchao Dai2 , Feng Zhu1 ,
1
Samsung R&D Institute China Xi’an (SRCX)
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University

Hojae Lee1

{xiao1.tang, min16.yang, penghui.sun, hui01.li}@samsung.com
daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn, {f15.zhu, hojae72.lee}@samsung.com

Training↓: 64 h
Inference↓: 12.86 s
PSNR↑: 28.31

Abstract
With photo-realistic image generation, Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) is widely used for large-scale dynamic scene
reconstruction as autonomous driving simulator. However,
large-scale scene reconstruction still suffers from extremely
long training time and rendering time. Low-resolution (LR) rendering combined with upsampling can alleviate this
problem but it degrades image quality. In this paper, we
design a lightweight reference decoder which exploits prior information from known views to improve image reconstruction quality of new views. In addition, to speed up prior
information search, we propose an optical flow and structural similarity based prior information search method. Results on KITTI and VKITTI2 datasets show that our method
significantly outperforms the baseline method in terms of
training speed, rendering speed and rendering quality.

1. Introduction
With the development of autonomous driving, it is challenging to conduct experiments in various driving scenarios due
to complex geographical locations, varying surroundings
and road conditions. With simulators like CARLA [8], developers can test thousands of times faster than road testing,
but there are some serious issues such as domain gap and
costly manual effort. With the rapid development of neural
rendering technology, we can reconstruct higher-fidelity 3D
scenes from real road test data at a lower cost.
NeRF [29] was first proposed in ECCV 2020 as a novel view synthesis method and has attracted more and more
attention because of photo-realistic image generation. However, NeRF is originally designed for small static scene reconstruction, requiring camera views to be heavily overlapped. With the expansion of data collected by self-driving
∗ Corresponding author.

SUDS

Training↓: 26 h (↓60%)
Inference↓: 1.61 s(↓87%)
PSNR↑: 32.6(↑13%)

VS

PaReNeRF

Figure 1. Comparison of image reconstruction performance on
KITTI dataset. We show some local details of the image reconstruction results of the SUDS method and our PaReNeRF method.
SUDS, the state-of-the-art neural rendering method for large-scale
dynamic scenes, faces the problem of long training time and inference time, while PaReNeRF can generate higher-quality rendered
images and significantly reduce training time (by 60%) and inference time (by 87%).

cars such as KITTI [12], nuScenes [3], and Waymo [9], researchers are paying increasing attention to the reconstruction and novel view rendering of large-scale dynamic scenes
[22, 23, 26, 28, 32, 48, 51, 55, 57, 60].
Due to the sparsity of the collected data and the single trajectory, it is still challenging to reconstruct largescale dynamic scenes. To solve this, many current studies design NeRF models for both the large-scale environment (background) and the moving objects (foreground)
[22, 32, 55, 57, 60], and make use of RGB images, depth
images, optical flow, semantic labels and other data to boost
the training, which has achieved impressive reconstruction
effect. However, the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) largescale dynamic scene reconstruction algorithms suffer from

5428

