This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Semi-DETR: Sparse Learnable Queries for
Semi-Supervised Object Detection
Tahira Shehzadi1,2,3 , Khurram Azeem Hashmi1,2,3 , Didier Stricker1,2,3 , Muhammad Zeshan Afzal1,2,3
1
2
3
DFKI,
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau,
MindGarage-RPTU

Figure 1. (a)-(b) Comparative Overview of SSOD advancements: Sparse Semi-DETR’s major improvement lies in its Query Refinement
Module and Reliable Pseudo-label Filtering Module, significantly enhancing detection of small or obscured objects and reliability in complex
scenarios, surpassing all other methods as shown in the graph in (c).

Abstract
In this paper, we address the limitations of the DETRbased semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) framework,
particularly focusing on the challenges posed by the quality
of object queries. In DETR-based SSOD, the one-to-one assignment strategy provides inaccurate pseudo-labels, while
the one-to-many assignments strategy leads to overlapping
predictions. These issues compromise training efficiency and
degrade model performance, especially in detecting small or
occluded objects. We introduce Sparse Semi-DETR, a novel
transformer-based, end-to-end semi-supervised object detection solution to overcome these challenges. Sparse SemiDETR incorporates a Query Refinement Module to enhance
the quality of object queries, significantly improving detection capabilities for small and partially obscured objects.
Additionally, we integrate a Reliable Pseudo-Label Filtering Module that selectively filters high-quality pseudo-labels,
thereby enhancing detection accuracy and consistency. On
the MS-COCO and Pascal VOC object detection benchmarks,
Sparse Semi-DETR achieves a significant improvement over
current state-of-the-art methods that highlight Sparse SemiDETR’s effectiveness in semi-supervised object detection,
particularly in challenging scenarios involving small or par-

tially obscured objects.

1. Introduction
Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SSOD) aims to improve
the effectiveness of fully supervised object detection through
the integration of abundant unlabeled data [3, 12, 15, 19, 28,
39, 49–52, 58]. It has applications in diverse fields, ranging
from autonomous vehicles [14, 20] to healthcare [31, 44],
where obtaining extensive labeled datasets is often impractical or cost-prohibitive [1].
Several SSOD methods [3, 12, 15, 19, 28, 39, 49–52, 58]
have been proposed. Two prevalent approaches in this domain are pseudo-labeling [27, 30, 39, 45, 50–52, 58] and
consistency-based regularization [3, 12, 15, 19, 28, 49].
STAC [39] introduced a simple multi-stage SSOD training method with pseudo-labeling and consistency training,
later simplified by a Teacher-Student framework for generating pseudo-labels [27]. Based on this framework, considerable research efforts have been directed towards enhancing the quality of pseudo-labels [51, 58]. These traditional SSOD methods are built upon conventional detectors like one-stage [33, 42] and two-stage [9, 35], which
involve various manually designed components such as an-

5840

