This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Deep Unrolling Networks for Phase Unwrapping
Zhile Chen1,2
1

Yuhui Quan1,2 *

Hui Ji3

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510320, China
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
cs zhilechen@mail.scut.edu.cn, csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Phase unwrapping (PU) is a technique to reconstruct
original phase images from their noisy wrapped counterparts, finding many applications in scientific imaging. Although supervised learning has shown promise in PU, its
utility is limited in ground-truth (GT) scarce scenarios.
This paper presents an unsupervised learning approach that
eliminates the need for GTs during end-to-end training.
Our approach leverages the insight that both the gradients
and wrapped gradients of wrapped phases serve as noisy
labels for GT phase gradients, along with sparse outliers
induced by the wrapping operation. A recorruption-based
self-reconstruction loss in the gradient domain is proposed
to mitigate the adverse effects of label noise, complemented
with a self-distillation loss for improved generalization. Additionally, by unfolding a variational model of PU that utilizes wrapped gradients of wrapped phases for its datafitting term, we develop a deep unrolling network that encodes physics of phase wrapping and incorporates special
treatments on outliers. In the experiments on three types
of phase data, our approach outperforms existing GT-free
methods and competes well against the supervised ones.

1. Introduction
In many imaging systems, the direct acquisition of original
phases of a target signal is both challenging and costly. Typically, initial measurement yields a phase image wrapped in
[−π, π). Let X ∈ RM ×N and Y ∈ [−π, π)M ×N denote
the true phase image and its noisy wrapped counterpart, respectively. The wrapping process can be formulated as:
Y = W(X + N ),

W : RM ×N → [−π, π)M ×N , (1)

* Corresponding author: Yuhui Quan.
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No. 62372186), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong
Province (Grant No. 2022A1515011755, 2023A1515012841), Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities (Grant No. x2jsD2230220),
and Singapore MOE AcRF Tier 1 (Grant No. A-8000981-00-00).

where W denotes the wrapping operator with its entry-wise

operation defined as W(θ) = (θ + π) mod 2π − π for
θ ∈ R, and N ∈ RM ×N denotes the measurement noise,
typically assumed to be Gaussian [22]. Consequently, the
original phase image, which exhibits strong smoothness, is
degraded to a wrapped version with both incorrect values
and artificial discontinuities induced by the modulo operation, which adversely affects subsequent processing.
Phase unwrapping (PU) is about recovering the original unwrapped phase image X (up to an additive constant)
from its noisy wrapped counterpart Y . Serving as a critical step in many optical imaging techniques for generating clear and coherent phase images, PU finds extensive
applications in diverse domains such as quantitative phase
imaging, magnetic resonance imaging, synthetic aperture
radar interferometry, 3D depth sensing, phase contrast microscopy, fringe projection, and digital holographic interferometry; see e.g. [10, 14, 16, 23, 41, 47, 56, 57].
The model (1) is also usually formulated as follows:
Y = X − 2πK + N ′ , K ∈ ZM ×N ,

(2)

where K ∈ ZM ×N denotes the map of wrap counts, indicating the number of times a phase value has been wrapped
around by 2π, and N ′ denotes the noise dependent on both
X and N , whose distribution can be complex even when
N follows a simple distribution such as the normal distribution. It can be seen that PU is a challenging ill-posed inverse
problem involving a continuous variable X and a discrete
variable K. Direct solutions by integrating wrapped phase
differences are insufficient for ensuring spatial consistency
in all directions of the unwrapped phases and may accumulate significant errors due to substantial noise.
Limitations of existing works: Conventional approaches
for PU include reliability-guided methods (e.g. [3, 9, 11,
23, 36]), filtering-based methods (e.g. [2, 45]), and modeldriven methods (e.g. [1, 12, 15]). These approaches are either sensitive to measurement noise, due to their heuristic
rules, or overly simplistic for complex phase structures, due
to their handcrafted image priors. In contrast, deep learning

25182

