This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discontinuity-preserving Normal Integration with Auxiliary Edges
Hyomin Kim∗

Yucheol Jung∗

Seungyong Lee

POSTECH
{min00001, ycjung, leesy}@postech.ac.kr

Ground truth

Poisson [10]

BiNI [5]

Ours

Figure 1. Our normal integration recovers a depth map from an input normal map while preserving surface discontinuities. Compared to
the state-of-the-art discontinuity-preserving normal integration method, BiNI [5], our method recovers small discontinuities accurately.

Abstract
Many surface reconstruction methods incorporate normal
integration, which is a process to obtain a depth map from
surface gradients. In this process, the input may represent
a surface with discontinuities, e.g., due to self-occlusion.
To reconstruct an accurate depth map from the input
normal map, hidden surface gradients occurring from the
jumps must be handled. To model these jumps correctly,
we design a novel discretization scheme for the domain of
normal integration. Our key idea is to introduce auxiliary
edges, which bridge between piecewise-smooth patches in
the domain so that the magnitude of hidden jumps can be
explicitly expressed. Using the auxiliary edges, we design a
novel algorithm to optimize the discontinuity and the depth
map from the input normal map. Our method optimizes discontinuities by using a combination of iterative re-weighted
∗ Equal contribution.

least squares and iterative filtering of the jump magnitudes
on auxiliary edges to provide strong sparsity regularization.
Compared to previous discontinuity-preserving normal
integration methods, which model the magnitudes of jumps
only implicitly, our method reconstructs subtle discontinuities accurately thanks to our explicit representation of
jumps allowing for strong sparsity regularization.

1. Introduction
Normal integration is a fundamental problem in 3D shape
reconstruction. Most photometric stereo frameworks estimate the surface normal of objects, and normal integration
recovers the depth of the object from the estimated normal
map [2]. Normal integration is often used in single-image
3D reconstruction to reconstruct a detailed surface because
a high-quality normal map is relatively easy to infer from
an image compared to a fully detailed 3D surface [19].

11915

