This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SG-BEV: Satellite-Guided BEV Fusion for Cross-View Semantic Segmentation
Junyan Ye1,2 ,* Qiyan Luo1 , Jinhua Yu1 , Huaping Zhong3 ,
Zhimeng Zheng2,4 , Conghui He2,3 , Weijia Li1†
1
Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 SenseTime Research, 4 Zhejiang University
{yejy53, luoqy26, yujh56}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhonghuaping@sensetime.com,
{zhengzhimeng, heconghui}@pjlab.org.cn, liweij29@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper aims at achieving fine-grained building attribute segmentation in a cross-view scenario, i.e., using
satellite and street-view image pairs. The main challenge
lies in overcoming the significant perspective differences
between street views and satellite views. In this work, we
introduce SG-BEV, a novel approach for satellite-guided
BEV fusion for cross-view semantic segmentation. To overcome the limitations of existing cross-view projection methods in capturing the complete building facade features, we
innovatively incorporate Bird’s Eye View (BEV) method to
establish a spatially explicit mapping of street-view features. Moreover, we fully leverage the advantages of multiple perspectives by introducing a novel satellite-guided
reprojection module, optimizing the uneven feature distribution issues associated with traditional BEV methods.
Our method demonstrates significant improvements on four
cross-view datasets collected from multiple cities, including New York, San Francisco, and Boston. On average
across these datasets, our method achieves an increase in
mIOU by 10.13% and 5.21% compared with the state-ofthe-art satellite-based and cross-view methods. The code
and datasets of this work will be released at https:
//github.com/yejy53/SG-BEV .

1. Introduction
Fine-grained building attribute segmentation is a crucial
task for urban planning, environment monitoring and residential management [11, 16, 26]. Satellite images offers a
comprehensive outline of building footprints, while streetview images contribute detailed facade features. Integrating
these two types of data has demonstrated significant potential in achieving precise attribute segmentation of buildings
[18, 32, 38, 39]. In this paper, we focus on the cross-view
* This work was partially done during the internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of cross-view semantic segmentation of
fine-grained building. (a) Satellite imagery lacks information on
building facades, making it difficult to distinguish detailed building attributes. (b) Existing cross-view transformation methods
face issues with incomplete feature capture and uneven feature distribution. (c) Our method integrates satellite and street-view features to precisely segment building attributes and floor numbers.

semantic segmentation of fine-grained attributes using pairs
of satellite and street-view images.
Previous studies on the semantic segmentation of finegrained attributes for buildings or other terrestrial objects
have predominantly relied on satellite images [16, 19, 43].
However, as shown in Figure 1(a), the satellite perspective captures only the top and outline information, making
it challenging to distinguish the fine-grained attribute differences between different buildings [15, 38, 39]. To address this issue, recent research has incorporated the streetview perspective to supplement facade information of buildings. The typical approach involves mapping street-view
features to corresponding areas in the satellite view, thereby
creating a link between satellite and street-view images
[8, 32, 38, 39]. However, existing approaches often reflect only general characteristics near the area, struggling to
map street-view building features precisely to specific loca-

27748

