This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Doodle Your 3D: From Abstract Freehand Sketches to Precise 3D Shapes
Hmrishav Bandyopadhyay1 Subhadeep Koley1,2 Ayan Das1 Ayan Kumar Bhunia1
Aneeshan Sain1 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1 Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{h.bandyopadhyay, s.koley, a.das, a.bhunia, a.sain, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Editing

Sketches

Edgemaps Sketches

Edgemaps

Generation

Sketch

Ours

LAS-D

Sketch

Ours

LAS-D

Figure 1. Unlike prior methods (LAS-D [90]), our sketch-based shape generation algorithm generalises to abstract doodles without training
on human sketches. Thanks to our part-disentangled sketch and shape representations, we exhibit (a) fine-grained correspondence between
sketches and generated shapes, allowing us to (b) perform highly localised shape edits through edits in sketches.

Abstract
In this paper, we democratise 3D content creation,
enabling precise generation of 3D shapes from abstract
sketches while overcoming limitations tied to drawing skills.
We introduce a novel part-level modelling and alignment
framework that facilitates abstraction modelling and crossmodal correspondence. Leveraging the same part-level
decoder, our approach seamlessly extends to sketch modelling by establishing correspondence between CLIPasso
edgemaps and projected 3D part regions, eliminating the
need for a dataset pairing human sketches and 3D shapes.
Additionally, our method introduces a seamless in-position
editing process as a byproduct of cross-modal part-aligned
modelling. Operating in a low-dimensional implicit space,
our approach significantly reduces computational demands
and processing time.

1. Introduction

ify 3D shapes. This shared vision has spurred collective efforts, initially centred on using text as a condition for 3D
shape creation [45, 48]. However, the pivotal challenge
arises when delving into fine-grained [8, 57, 64] creation
– text can be ambiguous, lacking the nuanced cues essential
for precise idea conveyance. This is where sketches step in
as a complementary input modality [5, 16, 65, 66] , inherently and accurately capturing users’ intent – the promise
being “what you sketch is what you get”.
All that stands in the way of fulfilling that promise is you
and your sketch, or the lack of it – “I can’t sketch”, I hear
you say! Prior works [9, 22, 26, 90] in this space do generate shapes given rough sketches, but the issue lies in the
resulting output – a poorly drawn sketch yields a deformed
3D shape where your lack of drawing skills is accurately
reflected – “what you sketch is literally what you get” (see
Fig. 1). In this paper, we aim to democratise sketch-to-3D
creation 1 by definitively addressing this very point – for the

We envisage a world where 3D content creation is democratised, granting everyone the liberty to freely create and mod-

1 https://hmrishavbandy.github.io/doodle23d/

9795

