This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Orthogonality in Open World Object Detection
Zhicheng Sun, Jinghan Li, Yadong Mu*
Peking University, Beijing, China
sunzc@pku.edu.cn, li.jh@stu.pku.edu.cn, myd@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Open world object detection aims to identify objects of
unseen categories and incrementally recognize them once
their annotations are provided. In distinction to the traditional paradigm that is limited to predefined categories,
this setting promises a continual and generalizable way
of estimating objectness using class-agnostic information.
However, achieving such decorrelation between objectness
and class information proves challenging. Without explicit
consideration, existing methods usually exhibit low recall
on unknown objects and can misclassify them into known
classes. To address this problem, we exploit three levels
of orthogonality in the detection process: First, the objectness and classification heads are disentangled by operating on separate sets of features that are orthogonal to each
other in a devised polar coordinate system. Secondly, a prediction decorrelation loss is introduced to guide the detector towards more general and class-independent prediction.
Furthermore, we propose a calibration scheme that helps
maintain orthogonality throughout the training process to
mitigate catastrophic interference and facilitate incremental learning of previously unseen objects. Our method is
comprehensively evaluated on open world and incremental
object detection benchmarks, demonstrating its effectiveness in detecting both known and unknown objects. Code
and models are available at this link.

1. Introduction
Object detection, a fundamental task in computer vision,
has conventionally followed a closed-world paradigm. Despite remarkable advances in this approach [4, 18, 59], it
is limited by the assumption that all object classes to be detected are predefined and known during training. This inherently hinders the detector from identifying unseen objects
and learning about newfound objects in the evolving world.
To address these limitations, Joseph et al. [30] recently drew
inspiration from open world recognition [2] and proposed a
* Corresponding author.

known
objects

unknown
objects

(a)

known
objects

unknown
objects

vs
background

background

known
objects
(b)

unknown
background

Figure 1. Motivation for enforcing orthogonality in open world
object detection. (a) In the presence of evolving unknown classes,
off-the-shelf detectors can easily neglect or misclassify unknown
objects. This is largely due to the model’s overreliance on class
information to predict objectness, which we resolve by orthogonalizing them. (b) For example, by projecting features onto a polar
coordinate system and having the decision boundary for objectness
(by radius) to be orthogonal to that for categories (by angle), such
interference could be mitigated. See the text for more approaches.

new setup called open world object detection, which tackles
object detection in a more adaptable way by autonomously
discovering unknown objects and incrementally recognizing them after oracle annotation, thus enabling the detector
to operate continuously in an open world.
However, embracing this new open-world setting raises
several key challenges due to the open-set [9, 53] and incremental [65] nature of the problem. Pivotally, the model
should generalize to detect unknown objects and correctly
assign them to a special unknown category. It also needs to
adaptively incorporate new object knowledge without interfering with known classes. To these ends, a number of new
methods [21, 30, 49, 50, 71, 85] have been developed. Unfortunately, their performance in this regard is usually subpar, as evidenced by the low recall for unknown classes and
a tendency to confuse unknown objects with known ones.

17302

Best viewed

