This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Constructing and Exploring Intermediate Domains in Mixed Domain
Semi-supervised Medical Image Segmentation

1

Qinghe Ma1 , Jian Zhang1 , Lei Qi2 , Qian Yu3 , Yinghuan Shi1, *, Yang Gao1
Nanjing University 2 Southeast University 3 Shandong Women’s University

Abstract

* Corresponding author.
Qinghe Ma, Jian Zhang, Yinghuan Shi
and Yang Gao are with the State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology and National Institute of Healthcare Data Science,
Nanjing University, China. This work was supported by the NSFC
Program (62222604, 62206052, 62192783), Jiangsu Natural Science
Foundation (BK20210224), and Shandong Natural Science Foundation
(ZR2023MF037).

Unlabeled data

Testing data

Domain shift

Different domains

Limited labeled data
SSMS

Both challenge
MiDSS (ours)

Domain shift
UDA

100
Dice (%)

Both limited annotation and domain shift are prevalent challenges in medical image segmentation. Traditional semi-supervised segmentation and unsupervised domain adaptation methods address one of these issues separately. However, the coexistence of limited annotation and
domain shift is quite common, which motivates us to introduce a novel and challenging scenario: Mixed Domain
Semi-supervised medical image Segmentation (MiDSS). In
this scenario, we handle data from multiple medical centers, with limited annotations available for a single domain and a large amount of unlabeled data from multiple domains. We found that the key to solving the problem lies in how to generate reliable pseudo labels for the
unlabeled data in the presence of domain shift with labeled data. To tackle this issue, we employ Unified CopyPaste (UCP) between images to construct intermediate domains, facilitating the knowledge transfer from the domain of labeled data to the domains of unlabeled data.
To fully utilize the information within the intermediate domain, we propose a symmetric Guidance training strategy
(SymGD), which additionally offers direct guidance to unlabeled data by merging pseudo labels from intermediate
samples. Subsequently, we introduce a Training Process
aware Random Amplitude MixUp (TP-RAM) to progressively incorporate style-transition components into intermediate samples. Compared with existing state-of-the-art
approaches, our method achieves a notable 13.57% improvement in Dice score on Prostate dataset, as demonstrated on three public datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/MQinghe/MiDSS

Labeled data

80
60
40

FixMatch

BCP

Test performance of labeled domain

SIFA

UDA-VAE++

Ours

Average test performance of other domains

Figure 1. The upper figure illustrates SSMS, UDA, and MiDSS.
The lower figure shows the comparison between different methods
on the labeled domain (BIDMC) [23] and other domains.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised medical image segmentation (SSMS) has
aroused lots of attention in recent years, due to its advantage of improving performance while reducing the labeling
burden [13, 20, 21, 43]. Surprisingly, the performance of
semi-supervised methods [12, 22] is sometimes close to or
even better than that of its upper bound—supervised methods [8, 32]. With 1) only a few labeled data as guidance, and
2) the development of unsupervised learning techniques,
e.g., contrastive learning [18], SSMS is becoming a promising direction to utilize unlabeled data. In traditional SSMS
tasks, it is typically assumed that labeled and unlabeled data
come from the same distribution [1, 3, 42]. In this case, the
model applies the information gained from labeled data directly to predict pseudo labels for unlabeled data.
Despite their success, we notice a significant yet easily underestimated issue: During clinical data collection,
do we really check and guarantee, whether each unlabeled
sample belongs to the same distribution as labeled samples? For example, given a certain amount of labeled data
collected and well annotated from a typical center, since
unlabeled data are easily accessed and collected, when the

11642

