This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PeVL: Pose-Enhanced Vision-Language Model for Fine-Grained Human Action
Recognition
Haosong Zhang1,2 , Mei Chee Leong1 , Liyuan Li1 , Weisi Lin2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore2
haosong001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent progress in Vision-Language (VL) foundation
models has revealed the great advantages of cross-modality
learning. However, due to a large gap between vision and
text, they might not be able to sufficiently utilize the benefits
of cross-modality information. In the field of human action recognition, the additional pose modality may bridge
the gap between vision and text to improve the effectiveness of cross-modality learning. In this paper, we propose a
novel framework, called Pose-enhanced Vision-Language
(PeVL) model, to adapt the VL model with pose modality
to learn effective knowledge of fine-grained human actions.
Our PeVL model includes two novel components: an Unsymmetrical Cross-Modality Refinement (UCMR) block and
a Semantic-Guided Multi-level Contrastive (SGMC) module. The UCMR block includes Pose-guided Visual Refinement (P2V-R) and Visual-enriched Pose Refinement (V2PR) for effective cross-modality learning. The SGMC module
includes Multi-level Contrastive Associations of vision-text
and pose-text at both action and sub-action levels, and a
Semantic-Guided Loss, enabling effective contrastive learning with text. Built upon a pre-trained VL foundation model,
our model integrates trainable adapters and can be trained
end-to-end. Our novel PeVL design over VL foundation
model yields remarkable performance gains on four finegrained human action recognition datasets, achieving a new
SOTA with a significantly small number of FLOPs for lowcost re-training.1

1 This research/project is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI Singapore Programme (AISG Award No:
AISG2-GC-2022-005) and the Agency for Science, Technology and Research, under the AME Programmatic Funding Scheme A18A2b0046.
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of National Research Foundation, Singapore.

Figure 1. The top row shows the architecture comparison between
(a) VL model and (b) our proposed PeVL, where the blocks with
red texts in PeVL are the novel modules. The bottom row shows
the effectiveness of PeVL cross-modality joint learning, where the
images in the 3rd row shows much better spatial attentions on bodies and temporal attentions on sequential sub-actions learned by
PeVL compared to existing VL model results.

1. Introduction
Understanding human actions through video is a complex
and multifaceted challenge. Human beings perform the
task by exploiting multiple intelligent capabilities, such as
visual perception, body structure and motion recognition,
and concept-level semantic descriptions (text). The majority of previous works focus on video modality utilizing convolutional networks or transformers. Recently, human action recognition has undergone substantial evolution due to the advent of Vision Language (VL) foundation models [21, 27, 41]. VL models have shown great
advantages in cross-modality learning, aligning image and
text features through shared embedding spaces derived from
vast paired image-text datasets. The raw vision modality
presents low-level detailed visual features, while the text
provides high-level coarse semantic descriptions. While

18857

