This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-image Alignment for Diffusion-based Perception
Neehar Kondapaneni1 * Markus Marks1⇤ Manuel Knott1,2⇤
Rogerio Guimaraes1 Pietro Perona1
California Institute of Technology
ETH Zurich, Swiss Data Science Center, Empa
1

2

Abstract
Diffusion models are generative models with impressive
text-to-image synthesis capabilities and have spurred a new
wave of creative methods for classical machine learning
tasks. However, the best way to harness the perceptual
knowledge of these generative models for visual tasks is
still an open question. Specifically, it is unclear how to
use the prompting interface when applying diffusion backbones to vision tasks. We find that automatically generated captions can improve text-image alignment and significantly enhance a model’s cross-attention maps, leading to better perceptual performance. Our approach improves upon the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) in diffusionbased semantic segmentation on ADE20K and the current overall SOTA for depth estimation on NYUv2. Furthermore, our method generalizes to the cross-domain setting. We use model personalization and caption modifications to align our model to the target domain and
find improvements over unaligned baselines. Our crossdomain object detection model, trained on Pascal VOC,
achieves SOTA results on Watercolor2K. Our cross-domain
segmentation method, trained on Cityscapes, achieves
SOTA results on Dark Zurich-val and Nighttime Driving.
Project page: vision.caltech.edu/TADP/ Code
page: github.com/damaggu/TADP

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have set the state-of-the-art (SOTA) for
image generation [32, 35, 38, 52]. Recently, a few works
have shown diffusion pre-trained backbones have a strong
prior for scene understanding that allows them to perform
well in advanced discriminative vision tasks, such as semantic segmentation [17, 53], monocular depth estimation
[53], and keypoint estimation [28, 43]. We refer to these
works as diffusion-based perception methods. Unlike contrastive vision language models (e.g., CLIP) [22, 26, 31],
* Equal contribution.

Single-domain

Depth Estimation
Diffusion-Pretrained
Vision Model

CLIP

Captioner

Segmentation

“a dog and a bird”

+
Cross-domain

”in a watercolor style”

Object Detection

Caption Modifier

Figure 1. Text-Aligned Diffusion Perception (TADP). In TADP,
image captions align the text prompts and images passed to
diffusion-based vision models. In cross-domain tasks, target domain information is incorporated into the prompt to boost performance.

generative models have a causal relationship with text, in
which text guides image generation. In latent diffusion
models, text prompts control the denoising U-Net [36],
moving the image latent in a semantically meaningful direction [5].
We explore this relationship and find that text-image
alignment significantly improves the performance of
diffusion-based perception. We then investigate text-target
domain alignment in cross-domain vision tasks, finding that
aligning to the target domain while training on the source
domain can improve a model’s target domain performance
(Fig. 1).
We first study prompting for diffusion-based perceptual
models and find that increasing text-image alignment improves semantic segmentation and depth estimation perfor-

13883

