This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAT-DM: Controllable Accelerated Virtual Try-on with Diffusion Model
Jianhao Zeng1

Dan Song1∗
Weizhi Nie1
Hongshuo Tian1
Tongtong Wang2
An-An Liu1∗
1

Tianjin University

2

Tencent LightSpeed Studio

Figure 1. CAT-DM not only enhances the controllability of the image generation process for virtual try-on but also effectively accelerates
the sampling speed of the diffusion models. Top: Comparison results with other methods. CAT-DM accurately generates the pattern details
on garments and produces images that are sufficiently clear. Bottom: CAT-DM requires fewer sampling steps than other diffusion models
to generate clear and realistic virtual try-on images. Compared to the default 50 sampling steps of DCI-VTON [8], CAT-DM achieves a
25-fold acceleration.

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) dominate the
research field in image-based virtual try-on, but have not
resolved problems such as unnatural deformation of garments and the blurry generation quality. While the generative quality of diffusion models is impressive, achieving controllability poses a significant challenge when applying it to virtual try-on and multiple denoising iterations
limit its potential for real-time applications. In this paper,
we propose Controllable Accelerated virtual Try-on with
Diffusion Model (CAT-DM). To enhance the controllability,
a basic diffusion-based virtual try-on network is designed,
which utilizes ControlNet to introduce additional control
conditions and improves the feature extraction of garment
images. In terms of acceleration, CAT-DM initiates a reverse denoising process with an implicit distribution gener* Corresponding Author: Dan Song (dan.song@tju.edu.cn), An-An Liu
(anan0422@gmail.com). The code is available at https://github.
com/zengjianhao/CAT-DM.
† The research is supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (U21B2024, 62232337, 61902277).

ated by a pre-trained GAN-based model. Compared with
previous try-on methods based on diffusion models, CATDM not only retains the pattern and texture details of the inshop garment but also reduces the sampling steps without
compromising generation quality. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority of CAT-DM against both GANbased and diffusion-based methods in producing more realistic images and accurately reproducing garment patterns.

1. Introduction
Image-based virtual try-on has emerged as a prominent and
popular research topic within the field of AIGC, particularly
focusing on conditional person image generation. By taking a person image and a target garment image as inputs,
the objective of this task is to generate a photo of the person
seamlessly wearing the desired garment. Requirements are
expected in both aspects of person and clothes: 1) the posture and identity such as face and skin should be the same as
the person; 2) target garment is naturally warped and seamlessly put on the body without losing characteristics such as

8372

