This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UDiFF: Generating Conditional Unsigned Distance Fields with Optimal Wavelet
Diffusion
Junsheng Zhou1∗ , Weiqi Zhang1∗ , Baorui Ma1,2† , Kanle Shi3 , Yu-Shen Liu1† , Zhizhong Han4
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
BAAI, Beijing, China2 , Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China3
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA4
zhoujs21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zwq23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, brma@baai.ac.cn
shikanle@kuaishou.com, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu

Figure 1. Diverse shapes with and without open surfaces generated by our UDiFF model. Top-Left: Conditional generation of clothes with
prompts ‘A short-sleeved dress in spiderman style’, ‘A Batman upper with long sleeves’, ‘A superman pant’, ‘A camouflage slip dress’.
Around: A shape gallery generated by UDiFF conditionally and unconditionally.

Abstract
Diffusion models have shown remarkable results for image generation, editing and inpainting. Recent works explore diffusion models for 3D shape generation with neural
implicit functions, i.e., signed distance function and occupancy function. However, they are limited to shapes with
closed surfaces, which prevents them from generating diverse 3D real-world contents containing open surfaces. In
this work, we present UDiFF, a 3D diffusion model for un*Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and
in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

signed distance fields (UDFs) which is capable to generate textured 3D shapes with open surfaces from text conditions or unconditionally. Our key idea is to generate UDFs
in spatial-frequency domain with an optimal wavelet transformation, which produces a compact representation space
for UDF generation. Specifically, instead of selecting an
appropriate wavelet transformation which requires expensive manual efforts and still leads to large information loss,
we propose a data-driven approach to learn the optimal
wavelet transformation for UDFs. We evaluate UDiFF to
show our advantages by numerical and visual comparisons
with the latest methods on widely used benchmarks. Page:
https://weiqi-zhang.github.io/UDiFF.

21496

