This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HRVDA: High-Resolution Visual Document Assistant
Chaohu Liu1,2⇤§ , Kun Yin3⇤ , Haoyu Cao3 , Xinghua Jiang3 , Xin Li3
Yinsong Liu3 , Deqiang Jiang3 , Xing Sun3 , Linli Xu1,2†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, 3 Tencent YouTu Lab
liuchaohu@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhanyin, rechycao, clarkjiang, fujikoli, jasonysliu, dqiangjiang, winfredsun}@tencent.com
linlixu@ustc.edu.cn

9216 tokens

9216 tokens

Abstract
Leveraging vast training data, multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have demonstrated formidable general visual comprehension capabilities and achieved remarkable performance across various tasks. However, their
performance in visual document understanding still leaves
much room for improvement. This discrepancy is primarily
attributed to the fact that visual document understanding
is a fine-grained prediction task. In natural scenes, MLLMs
typically use low-resolution images, leading to a substantial
loss of visual information. Furthermore, general-purpose
MLLMs do not excel in handling document-oriented instructions. In this paper, we propose a High-Resolution
Visual Document Assistant (HRVDA), which bridges the
gap between MLLMs and visual document understanding.
This model employs a content filtering mechanism and
an instruction filtering module to separately filter out the
content-agnostic visual tokens and instruction-agnostic visual tokens, thereby achieving efficient model training and
inference for high-resolution images. In addition, we construct a document-oriented visual instruction tuning dataset
and apply a multi-stage training strategy to enhance the
model’s document modeling capabilities. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-theart performance across multiple document understanding
datasets, while maintaining training efficiency and inference speed comparable to low-resolution models.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT [47],
LLaMA [61, 62], have taken a significant stride towards
⇤ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. § Work done during
an internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.

Content Filtering

!

Which country has the
highest GDP and what is
its proportion?

United States and its
proportion is 23.9%.

9216 tokens

Previous Methods

❄

LLM

Instruction Filtering

"
330 tokens

HRVDA

Figure 1. Comparison of the visual processing workflow between
HRVDA and previous methods. Previous methods generally employ a low-resolution image encoder to extract features. In contrast, HRVDA utilizes a content filtering mechanism and an instruction filtering module to selectively filter out content-agnostic
and instruction-agnostic visual tokens, making high-resolution image processing computationally feasible.

general artificial intelligence. By leveraging massive
amounts of data, they have developed powerful reasoning and instruction understanding capabilities. The proliferation of LLMs has also faciliated the development of
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), which can
perceive and analyze information from images and other
sources [14, 39, 40, 48, 70, 77]. Some existing works have
demonstrated that MLLMs exhibit preliminary visual document understanding capabilities, as they can extract and
comprehend information from complex documents containing textual and visual elements, such as tables, charts, and
graphics [4, 65, 68, 69]. Given their ability to capture the
relationships between textual and visual information, employing MLLMs for visual document understanding tasks
shows great potential.
However, the document image processing capabilities
of MLLMs are restricted in real-world scenarios, primarily
due to two reasons: the limitations posed by low-resolution
image inputs and the lack of document-oriented visual in-

15534

