This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Novel View Synthesis with View-Dependent Effects from a Single Image
Juan Luis Gonzalez Bello

Munchurl Kim

juanluisgb@kaist.ac.kr

mkimee@kaist.ac.kr (corresponding author)

School of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Figure 1. Comparison of single-view NVS. See Supplemental and https://shorturl.at/ltJT7 for videos.

Abstract
In this paper, we address single image-based novel view
synthesis (NVS) by firstly integrating view-dependent effects
(VDE) into the process. Our approach leverages camera
motion priors to model VDE, treating negative disparity as
the representation of these effects in the scene. By identifying that specularities align with camera motion, we infuse
VDEs into input images by aggregating pixel colors along
the negative depth region of epipolar lines. Additionally, we
introduce a ’relaxed volumetric rendering’ approximation,
enhancing efficiency by computing densities in a single pass
for NVS from single images. Notably, our method learns
single-image NVS from image sequences alone, making it
a fully self-supervised learning approach that requires no
depth or camera pose annotations. We present extensive experimental results and show that our proposed method can
learn NVS with VDEs, outperforming the SOTA single-view
NVS methods on the RealEstate10k and MannequinChallenge datasets. Visit our project site1 .

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) is a fundamental computer
vision task that aims to generate new views of the input

scene from arbitrarily different camera positions. Recent
advances in NVS have shown that view-dependent effects
(VDE), which increase the realism and perceived quality of
the novel views, can also be learned and incorporated into
the rendering pipelines. Particularly, NeRF [32] has demonstrated that radiance fields can be effectively learned by a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) that allows rendering geometry and VDEs from multi-view captures.
NeRF relies purely on multi-view consistency and cannot exploit prior knowledge, such as textures and depth
cues common across natural scenes. This limits NeRF
when only a few or only one view is available. On the
other hand, to leverage the 3D prior knowledge in multiview datasets, PixelNeRF [46] proposed to train an MLP
that takes as inputs the spatial locations, the viewing directions, and the pixel-aligned deep features to generate the
colors and densities in the radiance fields. However, PixelNeRF is still limited in learning the ill-posed task of directly
mapping input image pixels to VDEs. Other works, such
as single-image MPIs [40], MINE [26], BehindTheScenes
[42], and SceneNeRF [2] have also proposed single-viewbased NVS, but poorly model VDEs.
VDEs depend on the material’s reflectance, which is a
function of the material properties and the light’s angle
of incidence. Learning such material properties and light
sources from a single image is a very ill-posed problem.

1 https://kaist-viclab.github.io/monovde-site

10413

