This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Move Anything with Layered Scene Diffusion
Jiawei Ren1,2,∗

Mengmeng Xu1
1

Meta AI

Jui-Chieh Wu1
2

Ziwei Liu2

Tao Xiang1

Antoine Toisoul1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{jiawei011,ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

{frostxu,jerryjcw,txiang,atoisoul}@meta.com

“bed, wooden cabinet, window, bedroom”
Add window

Add bed

Move all

Shrink all

Clone window

Scene

Control

“a photo of a giant macaron and a croissant splashing in the Seine with the Eiffel Tower in the background”
a) Original

b) Swap orders

c) Swap positions

d) Shrink & move

e) Empty out

f) Clone macaron

Editing

Figure 1. Move anything on an image. Top: our approach generates playable scenes: objects are spatially disentangled, thus can be
freely moved, resized, and cloned in the scene. Bottom: a scene can be generated conditioned on a reference image, thus supporting
extensive spatial image editing operations. Our approach is training-free and compatible with general text-to-image diffusion models.
Once optimized, rendering a new layout requires less than a second on a single GPU, allowing interactive interactions.

Abstract
Diffusion models generate images with an unprecedented level of quality, but how can we freely rearrange
image layouts? Recent works generate controllable scenes
via learning spatially disentangled latent codes, but these
methods do not apply to diffusion models due to their fixed
forward process. In this work, we propose SceneDiffusion
to optimize a layered scene representation during the diffusion sampling process. Our key insight is that spatial disentanglement can be obtained by jointly denoising scene ren-

derings at different spatial layouts. Our generated scenes
support a wide range of spatial editing operations, including moving, resizing, cloning, and layer-wise appearance
editing operations, including object restyling and replacing.
Moreover, a scene can be generated conditioned on a reference image, thus enabling object moving for in-the-wild
images. Notably, this approach is training-free, compatible
with general text-to-image diffusion models, and responsive
in less than a second.

∗ Work done during an internship at Meta AI.

6380

