This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Audio-Visual Segmentation via Unlabeled Frame Exploitation
Jinxiang Liu1 , Yikun Liu1 , Fei Zhang1 , Chen Ju1 , Ya Zhang1,2B , Yanfeng Wang1,2
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{jinxliu, yikunliu, ferenas, ju chen, ya zhang, wangyanfeng622}@sjtu.edu.cn

Unlabeled Frames

Labeled Frame

…

GT Supervision

Labeled Frame

Unlabeled Frames

…

No exploitation

Distant Frames

Neighboring Frames

…

GT Supervision

(a) Previous methods (w/ GTM)

Motion Cues

…

Semantic Cues

(b) Our proposed method (Ours)

(c) Performance comparison

Figure 1. Comparison between previous methods and ours on how to harness the unlabeled frames. (a) Previous methods perform
global temporal modeling (GTM) to process all frames from a sequence including labeled and unlabeled ones, without the exploitation of
the unlabeled frames. (b) Our method employs two types of unlabeled frames: (i) the neighboring frames (NFs) provide motion cues for
accurately segmenting the sounding object; (ii) the distant frames (DFs) contain semantic cues for enhancing data diversity. (c) Based on
TPAVI method, compared to the model trained only using labeled frames (w/o GTM), previous methods using global temporal modeling
(w/ GTM) only show marginal performance gain; while our method achieves significant improvement with the unlabeled frames.

Abstract
Audio-visual segmentation (AVS) aims to segment the
sounding objects in video frames. Although great progress
has been witnessed, we experimentally reveal that current
methods reach marginal performance gain within the use of
the unlabeled frames, leading to the underutilization issue.
To fully explore the potential of the unlabeled frames for
AVS, we explicitly divide them into two categories based on
their temporal characteristics, i.e., neighboring frame (NF)
and distant frame (DF). NFs, temporally adjacent to the labeled frame, often contain rich motion information that assists in the accurate localization of sounding objects. Contrary to NFs, DFs have long temporal distances from the
labeled frame, which share semantic-similar objects with
appearance variations. Considering their unique characteristics, we propose a versatile framework that effectively
leverages them to tackle AVS. Specifically, for NFs, we exploit the motion cues as the dynamic guidance to improve
the objectness localization. Besides, we exploit the semantic
cues in DFs by treating them as valid augmentations to the
labeled frames, which are then used to enrich data diversity
in a self-training manner. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate the versatility and superiority of our method,
unleashing the power of the abundant unlabeled frames.

1. Introduction
Humans perceive the surroundings not only by seeing but
also by hearing to accurately and efficiently obtain the target information [23]. In the audio-visual understanding
field, the demand to visually attend to the auditory objects
has driven the exploration of the audio-visual segmentation
(AVS) task [81]. The goal of AVS is to localize and segment
the sounding objects in the video frames with the guidance
of audio signals. And the successful grounding of auditory
objects with the AVS task will benefit a wide range of downstream tasks such as multi-modal content editing [1, 42, 43],
video surveillance [6, 7], and robot industry [17, 74].
To address the task, current methods [19, 44, 47, 49,
50, 54, 81] are based on the dataset which is sparsely annotated. Concretely, due to the high labeling costs, only
few frames in a video frame sequence are annotated with
groundtruth masks, leaving the rest abundance of frames
unlabeled. For example, in AVSBench-S4 dataset [81],
only one sampled frame is annotated for a 5-second video.
Despite the predominance of unlabeled frames within the
datasets, current approaches [19, 44, 47, 49, 54, 81] adopt
global temporal modeling module (GTM) that overemphasizes on exploiting the labeled frames to help address AVS,
which may lead to the underutilization of the abundant unlabeled frames. To further verify this, we perform experi-

26328

