This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stationary Representations: Optimally Approximating Compatibility and
Implications for Improved Model Replacements
Niccolò Biondi Federico Pernici
Simone Ricci Alberto Del Bimbo
DINFO (Department of Information Engineering), University of Florence, Italy,
MICC (Media Integration and Communication Center),
name.surname@unifi.it

Abstract
Learning compatible representations enables the interchangeable use of semantic features as models are updated
over time. This is particularly relevant in search and retrieval systems where it is crucial to avoid reprocessing of
the gallery images with the updated model. While recent
research has shown promising empirical evidence, there
is still a lack of comprehensive theoretical understanding
about learning compatible representations. In this paper, we
demonstrate that the stationary representations learned by
the d-Simplex fixed classifier optimally approximate compatibility representation according to the two inequality constraints of its formal definition. This not only establishes a
solid foundation for future works in this line of research but
also presents implications that can be exploited in practical
learning scenarios. An exemplary application is the nowstandard practice of downloading and fine-tuning new pretrained models. Specifically, we show the strengths and critical issues of stationary representations in the case in which
a model undergoing sequential fine-tuning is asynchronously
replaced by downloading a better-performing model pretrained elsewhere. Such a representation enables seamless
delivery of retrieval service (i.e., no reprocessing of gallery
images) and offers improved performance without operational disruptions during model replacement. Code available
at: https://github.com/miccunifi/iamcl2r.

1. Introduction
By learning powerful internal feature representations from
data, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [1–4] have made
tremendous progress in some of the most challenging
search tasks such as face recognition [5–9], person reidentification [10–12], image retrieval [13–15] and this significance also extends to a variety of other data modalities
[16, 17]. Although all of the works mentioned above have
focused on learning feature representations from static and,

𝜙

𝜙1
task 1

𝜙2
task 2

Stationary
Representation
(⟹ Compatible)

𝜙𝑇
task 𝑇

Figure 1. Improved Asynchronous Model Compatible Lifelong
Learning Representation (IAM-CL2 R pronounced “I am clear”). In
the process of lifelong learning, a model is sequentially fine-tuned
and asynchronously replaced with improved third-party models
that are pre-trained externally. Stationary representations ensure
seamless retrieval services and better performance, without the
need to reprocess gallery images.

more recently, dynamic datasets [18–21], the now-standard
practice is downloading and fine-tuning representations from
models pre-trained elsewhere [22, 23]. These “third-party”
pre-trained models often incorporate new data, utilize alternative architectures, adopt different loss functions or more
in general provide novel methodologies. Whether applied
individually or combined, these advancements aim to encapsulate the field’s rapid progress within a single unified
model [24]. This greatly facilitates the exploitation of internally learned semantic representations, particularly as
models, datasets, and computational infrastructure continue
to expand in size, complexity, and cost [25, 26].
The challenge of fully exploiting such standard practice
in retrieval/search systems has to deal with the underlying

28793

