This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unleashing Network Potentials for Semantic Scene Completion
Fengyun Wang1 Qianru Sun2 Dong Zhang3 Jinhui Tang1 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science & Technology

2

Singapore Management University 3 The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology
E-mail: {fereenwong, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn; qianrusun@smu.edu.sg; dongz@ust.hk

Abstract
Semantic scene completion (SSC) aims to predict complete 3D voxel occupancy and semantics from a single-view
RGB-D image, and recent SSC methods commonly adopt
multi-modal inputs. However, our investigation reveals two
limitations: ineffective feature learning from single modalities and overfitting to limited datasets. To address these
issues, this paper proposes a novel SSC framework - Adversarial Modality Modulation Network (AMMNet) - with
a fresh perspective of optimizing gradient updates. The
proposed AMMNet introduces two core modules: a crossmodal modulation enabling the interdependence of gradient flows between modalities, and a customized adversarial training scheme leveraging dynamic gradient competition. Specifically, the cross-modal modulation adaptively
re-calibrates the features to better excite representation potentials from each single modality. The adversarial training
employs a minimax game of evolving gradients, with customized guidance to strengthen the generator’s perception
of visual fidelity from both geometric completeness and semantic correctness. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that AMMNet outperforms state-of-the-art SSC methods by a large margin, providing a promising direction for
improving the effectiveness and generalization of SSC methods. Our code is available at this link.

1. Introduction
Semantic scene completion (SSC) is a crucial task in 3D
scene understanding domain that seeks to forecast complete 3D voxel occupancy and semantics from a single-view
RGB-D image [17, 20, 21]. Current SSC methods rely on
multi-modal inputs like RGB images and depth represented
as Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF) representations, as shown in Figure 1 (b), which provide complementary cues for scene geometry reconstruction and semantic prediction. These methods typically utilize an encoder* Corresponding author.

RGB

TSDF

RGB

TSDF

RGB

Enc_r

Enc_t

Enc_r

Enc_t

Enc_r

TSDF

Enc_t
ℳ

Dec

Dec

Dec

Dec

ℳ

Real or Fake?
(ℒ(",$) )

(a) Single-Modal Training

(b) Multi-Modal Training

(c) The Proposed AMMNet

Figure 1. Comparisons of encoder representation power. For
the multi-modal training in (b), the informative representations in
RGB and TSDF are not fully unleashed compared to learning them
individually in (a). The proposed Adversarial Modality Modulation Network (AMMNet) in (c) enables a more thorough unleashing of potentials via “cross-modal modulation M” and “adversarial training L(D,G) ”.

decoder paradigm to exploit multi-modal data, where the
RGB image and TSDF are encoded separately and subsequently combined for final predictions. Despite the promising results demonstrated by these multi-modal models on
indoor scene completion benchmarks [29], two key observations can still be made from these models [4, 34].
Observation 1: When learned jointly in multi-modal models, the rich information in individual modalities is not sufficiently unleashed compared to single-modal models. To
validate this observation, we conducted a two-stage experiment. In the first stage, we trained uni-modal and multimodal SSC models using the same dataset and settings.
In the second stage, we evaluated separate single-modal
networks initialized with encoder weights from stage one
models to assess the learned representations. Through controlled comparison, we found degraded representation capabilities of the multi-modal encoders compared to their unimodal counterparts. Specifically, we examined the representation power of RGB and TSDF encoders by initializing two RGB-only networks and two TSDF-only networks
using corresponding encoder weights from uni-modal and
multi-modal stage one models. With the encoders frozen,
the decoders were then trained. As the only difference was
the frozen encoder, performance gaps demonstrated the insufficient unleashing of modalities in multi-modal training.

10314

