This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Constrained Layout Generation with Factor Graphs
Yanfei Dong1,2
Mohammed Haroon Dupty1, *
Yong Liang Goh1
Wei Lu3

Sicong Leng3
Wee Sun Lee 1

Guoji Fu1

1

National University of Singapore 2 Paypal 3 Singapore University of Technology and Design
{haroon, dyanfei, guoji.fu, gyl}@u.nus.edu, sicong leng@mymail.sutd.edu.sg,
luwei@sutd.edu.sg, leews@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of object-centric layout generation under spatial constraints, seen in multiple domains including floorplan design process. The design process typically involves specifying a set of spatial constraints that include object attributes like size and
inter-object relations such as relative positioning. Existing
works, which typically represent objects as single nodes,
lack the granularity to accurately model complex interactions between objects. For instance, often only certain parts
of an object, like a room’s right wall, interact with adjacent
objects. To address this gap, we introduce a factor graph
based approach with four latent variable nodes for each
room, and a factor node for each constraint. The factor
nodes represent dependencies among the variables to which
they are connected, effectively capturing constraints that
are potentially of a higher order. We then develop messagepassing on the bipartite graph, forming a factor graph neural network that is trained to produce a floorplan that aligns
with the desired requirements. Our approach is simple and
generates layouts faithful to the user requirements, demonstrated by a large improvement in IOU scores over existing
methods. Additionally, our approach, being inferential and
accurate, is well-suited to the practical human-in-the-loop
design process where specifications evolve iteratively, offering a practical and powerful tool for AI-guided design.

1. Introduction
The incorporation of AI into the layout design process represents a significant advancement in design methodologies.
Researchers have predominantly adopted a generative modeling approach, enabling the generation of diverse designs
with limited user inputs [1, 15, 17, 20, 21]. Although very
useful, this approach faces practical challenges when we
have a fixed uneven boundary and users have several spe* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Given a building boundary and a graph that encodes user
requirements and room constraints, we first transform the inputs
into a factor graph that can model higher-order constraints, and
then produce the floorplan based on the factor graph model.

cific requirements and seek active involvement in the design
process. In such instances, inferential models specifically
trained to produce layouts that align precisely with user requirements are likely more beneficial.
The challenge of layout design generation with constraints is more prominently seen in the design of floorplan
layouts [1, 11, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 31, 33], which can
include both user-defined and structural constraints. Userdefined constraints stem from individual preferences regarding room sizes, adjacencies, and other design considerations. Structural constraints may require the layout to
remain within the boundary of a building or adhere to other
geometric restrictions. For example, given a boundary, a
user may want two rooms adjacent to each other in a particular corner of the house. A good inferential model would be
able to produce a layout satisfying these constraints. With
partial output available, users can append or update their
requirements and thereby, refine the design iteratively.
One common approach for producing floorplan layouts
is to use a two-stage method, where the first stage involves
predicting bounding boxes for individual objects/rooms,
followed by a refinement network that converts the bounding boxes into an image [4, 11]. For the first stage, the
room-adjacency graph is taken as input, and a Graph Neural Network(GNN)-based model is often used to predict the

12851

