This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Edit One for All: Interactive Batch Image Editing
Thao Nguyen

Utkarsh Ojha Yuheng Li Haotian Liu
University of Wisconsin–Madison

Yong Jae Lee

https://thaoshibe.github.io/edit-one-for-all

Abstract
In recent years, image editing has advanced remarkably.
With increased human control, it is now possible to edit an
image in a plethora of ways; from specifying in text what we
want to change, to straight up dragging the contents of the
image in an interactive point-based manner. However, most
of the focus has remained on editing single images at a time.
Whether and how we can simultaneously edit large batches
of images has remained understudied. With the goal of minimizing human supervision in the editing process, this paper
presents a novel method for interactive batch image editing
using StyleGAN as the medium. Given an edit specified by
users in an example image (e.g., make the face frontal), our
method can automatically transfer that edit to other test images, so that regardless of their initial state (pose), they all
arrive at the same final state (e.g., all facing front). Extensive experiments demonstrate that edits performed using
our method have similar visual quality to existing singleimage-editing methods, while having more visual consistency and saving significant time and human effort.

Example

Edited Image

Example

Automatic!

Test Image

Output

Edited Image

Automatic!

Test Image

Output

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Interactive Batch Image Editing. Given a single user
edited image, the goal is to automatically transfer that edit to new
unseen images, so that all edited images end up with the same final
state as the user edited image.

Image editing has undergone a transformation in recent
years with the aid of modern generative models. The process has been greatly democratized, where many of the
sophisticated edits, which previously might have required
hours and niche expertise, can now be completed with relative ease in a matter of minutes. For example, different
types of learning based algorithms can be used for image
correction/adjustment [1–12] and for manipulating the semantic contents of real images [13–22]. Moreover, there are
many different ways to edit an image. For instance, a user
can specify in text what changes they want - e.g., “make the
hair darker” [14, 15, 23, 24], or they can drag the contents
of the image in an interactive manner to shrink, enlarge, or
move a part of an object [12, 16, 17, 19, 25].
A common theme across many of these works is that the
edits are designed to work for a single image at a time. For
example, given an image of a cat with open eyes, DragGAN [17] allows the user to drag the contents of that par-

ticular image so that both the eyes can be closed in the resulting cat image. But what if we wish to apply the same
edit to many different types of cats so that we can close all
of their eyes? While one could perform dragging on each
cat separately, the whole process would be quite cumbersome (requiring lots of human annotation) and time intensive (requiring optimization for each image).
In this paper, we introduce the new problem of Interactive Batch Image Editing. Given a user-specified edit
I → I ′ , the goal is to automatically transfer that edit to new
unseen images, so that all edited images end up with the
same final state as I ′ (e.g., all cats with eyes closed) regardless of their original starting states (e.g., varying degrees
of original eye openness); see Figure 1. Hence, a solution
to this problem requires two components: (i) modeling the
user edit in the example pair (I, I ′ ) so that it can be transferred to new images; and (ii) controlling the degree of the

8271

