This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Unsupervised Hierarchical Representation
with Reinforcement Learning
Ruyi An1 * Yewen Li1 *† Xu He3 Pengjie Gu1 Mengchen Zhao4
Dong Li3 Jianye Hao3 Chaojie Wang1,2 Bo An1,2 Mingyuan Zhou5
1 Nanyang Technological University
2 Skywork AI, Singapore
3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4 South China University of Technology
5 The University of Texas at Austin
https://github.com/ruyianry/rep_hierarchy_rl

Abstract
Learning representations to capture the very fundamental
understanding of the world is a key challenge in machine
learning. The hierarchical structure of explanatory factors
hidden in data is such a general representation and could be
potentially achieved with a hierarchical VAE. However, training a hierarchical VAE always suffers from the “posterior
collapse”, where the data information is hard to propagate
to the higher-level latent variables, hence resulting in a bad
hierarchical representation. To address this issue, we first analyze the shortcomings of existing methods for mitigating the
posterior collapse from an information theory perspective,
then highlight the necessity of regularization for explicitly
propagating data information to higher-level latent variables
while maintaining the dependency between different levels.
This naturally leads to formulating the inference of the hierarchical latent representation as a sequential decision
process, which could benefit from applying reinforcement
learning (RL). Aligning RL’s objective with the regularization, we first introduce a skip-generative path to acquire
a reward for evaluating the information content of an inferred latent representation, and then the developed Q-value
function based on it could have a consistent optimization
direction of the regularization. Finally, policy gradient, one
of the typical RL methods, is employed to train a hierarchical
VAE without introducing a gradient estimator. Experimental
results firmly support our analysis and demonstrate that our
proposed method effectively mitigates the posterior collapse
issue, learns an informative hierarchy, acquires explainable
latent representations, and significantly outperforms other
hierarchical VAE-based methods in downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Deriving meaningful representations of data with minimal supervision is a central challenge in machine learn* Equal contribution, authors listed alphabetically by last name.
† Corresponding to: Yewen Li <yewen001@e.ntu.edu.sg>.

x

z1

z2

z3

z4

z5

x

z1

z2

z3

z4

z5

HVAE
IVAE

HVAE
IVAE

Hierarchy level→

Hierarchy level→

Figure 1. Visualization of different levels’ latent representations of
hierarchical VAEs on FashinMNIST and CelebA [53] to demonstrate the learned hierarchical structure. HVAE fails to learn a
5-level hierarchy, where higher-level latent representations display
posterior collapse, collapsing into the same modes of “clothing”
and “female faces” regardless of the input. For IVAE, reconstructions of certain consecutive layers appear highly similar, suggesting
a disrupted hierarchy. In contrast, our method preserves detailed
information of inputs at low levels and captures increasingly abstract semantics at higher levels, mitigating posterior collapse and
establishing an informative hierarchy.

ing [5], while existing research has predominantly concentrated on the discriminative approach [10] that relies on
meticulously crafted preprocessing pipelines like pretext
tasks [22, 30, 62, 65, 95] and data augmentations [3, 59].
Methods such as contrastive learning [8, 9, 11, 12, 14–
16, 27, 29, 32, 34, 36, 49, 87, 97, 98] exemplify the success
of this discriminative approach. However, representations
derived from these methods are only limited to tasks invariant to the preprocessing pipelines [24], e.g. representations
learned with the random cropping data augmentation cannot
be applied to pixel-level localization tasks [83, 84], limiting their broader applicability. To transcend these confines,
Bengio et al. [5] advocate for the pursuit of a universal and
fundamental understanding of the world-a “general-purpose
prior”-enabling the direct learning of representations without prior knowledge or assumptions about downstream tasks.
Such representations could be learned by generative ap-

22946

