This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fairy: Fast Parallelized Instruction-Guided Video-to-Video Synthesis
Bichen Wu Ching-Yao Chuang Xiaoyan Wang Yichen Jia
Kapil Krishnakumar Tong Xiao Feng Liang Licheng Yu Peter Vajda
GenAI, Meta
Project page: https://fairy-video2video.github.io

[ Input Video ]

[ Input Video ]

Turn into a metal knight sculpture

Turn into a wood sculpture

In Van Gogh Style

In Picasso Style

Figure 1. Fairy for Instruction-Guided Video Editing. Given a video and an instruction for editing, Fairy performs accurate edits while
ensuring temporal coherence. Remarkably efficient, 120 frames of 512⇥384 video can be generated in just 14 seconds. We refer readers
to our supplementary material to check the results in video format.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Fairy, a minimalist yet robust adaptation of image-editing diffusion models, enhancing them for video editing applications. Our approach centers on the concept of anchor-based cross-frame attention,
a mechanism that implicitly propagates diffusion features
across frames, ensuring superior temporal coherence and
high-fidelity synthesis. Fairy not only addresses limitations
of previous models on memory and processing speed, but
also improves temporal consistency through a unique data
augmentation strategy. This strategy renders the model
equivariant to affine transformations in both source and
target images. Remarkably efficient, Fairy generates 120-

frame 512⇥384 videos (4-second duration at 30 FPS) in
just 14 seconds, outpacing prior works by at least 44⇥. A
comprehensive user study, involving 1000 generated samples, confirms that our approach delivers superior quality,
decisively outperforming established methods.

1. Introduction
The advent of generative artificial intelligence has heralded
a new era of creative potential, characterized by the ability to create or modify content in an effortless manner. In
particular, image editing has undergone a significant evolution, driven by text-to-image diffusion models pretrained on
billion-scale datasets. This surge has catalyzed a vast array

8261

