This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRFDeformer: NeRF Transformation from a Single View via 3D Scene Flows
Zhenggang Tang,1 Zhongzheng Ren,1 Xiaoming Zhao,1 Bowen Wen,2 Jonathan Tremblay2
Stan Birchfield,2 Alexander Schwing1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign: {ztang, zr5, xz23, aschwing}@illinois.edu
2
NVIDIA: {bowenw, jtremblay, sbirchfield}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Inputs

We present a method for automatically modifying a
NeRF representation based on a single observation of a
non-rigid transformed version of the original scene. Our
method defines the transformation as a 3D flow, specifically
as a weighted linear blending of rigid transformations of 3D
anchor points that are defined on the surface of the scene.
In order to identify anchor points, we introduce a novel correspondence algorithm that first matches RGB-based pairs,
then leverages multi-view information and 3D reprojection
to robustly filter false positives in two steps. We also introduce a new dataset for exploring the problem of modifying
a NeRF scene through a single observation. Our dataset1
contains 113 synthetic scenes leveraging 47 3D assets. We
show that our proposed method outperforms NeRF editing
methods as well as diffusion-based methods, and we also
explore different methods for filtering correspondences.

Output

Original NeRF trained from multiview scene

Novel views of the transformed scene

Single RGB-D from transformed scene

Exported mesh of the transformed scene

Figure 1. Problem definition. Given a NeRF of the original scene,
and a single RGBD image of the transformed scene, we are interested in producing novel views and exporting a mesh of this
transformed scene. Here we visualize the NeRF (top left) and a
transformation of the scene (bottom left). We then show how the
scene is re-rendered given a new camera pose in the transformed
scene (top right) and its scene mesh (bottom right).

1. Introduction
Transforming a neural radiance field (NeRF) based on a single RGBD image is an important problem. Consider the
field of robotics as an example, where NeRFs are often used
to represent complicated 3D scenes [17, 35, 42, 48, 55]. Notably, whenever the scene is modified, the robot has to recapture multiple views to re-train a new NeRF. This process
discards important information from the original scene and
is time consuming. We are hence interested in developing
tools that allow a given NeRF scene to be transformed into a
new scene observed via a single RGBD image (see Fig. 1).
Concretely, we are interested in retrieving the transformed
scene geometry and rendering the new scene from different
perspectives.
NeRF editing is a natural approach for solving this problem, and current works have shown tremendous success at
modifying NeRF appearance [1] or geometry [12] from user
inputs. However, most NeRF editing methods [24, 31, 36]
1 https://nerfdeformer.github.io/

do not offer an automatic mechanism to match the transformed scene and thus require to manually define the transform (which can be non-trivial for non-rigid transformations). In our problem setting, user input is not available.
Other successful works have looked at NeRF transformation through time [29, 32], where the time component is
densely sampled. In contrast, we only assume a single
RGBD view of the transformed scene. Although this single observation alone (without access to the original NeRF
scene) can be used to directly retrieve the transformed scene
via pretrained methods such as DreamGaussian [40], our
experiments show that this approach struggles to recover
the real geometry of the object.
Transforming a NeRF using a single RGBD introduces
challenges: what is the non-rigid transformation being observed? what object parts correspond to each other? how
did the unseen part (not visible in the RGBD image) deform? Inspired by mesh shape manipulation [37], we pro-

10293

