This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Asymmetric Augmented Self-Supervised Learning Method for Unsupervised
Fine-Grained Image Hashing
Feiran Hu1

Chenlin Zhang3
Jiangliang Guo4
Xiu-Shen Wei2, *
Lin Zhao1,∗
Anqi Xu5
Lingyan Gao4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, and Key Laboratory of New Generation Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications, Southeast University
3
4
5
4Paradigm Inc.
AInnovation Technology Group Co., Ltd
University of Toronto
Abstract
Unsupervised ﬁne-grained image hashing aims to learn
compact binary hash codes in unsupervised settings, addressing challenges posed by large-scale datasets and dependence
on supervision. In this paper, we ﬁrst identify a granularity
gap between generic and ﬁne-grained datasets for unsupervised hashing methods, highlighting the inadequacy of
conventional self-supervised learning for ﬁne-grained visual objects. To bridge this gap, we propose the Asymmetric Augmented Self-Supervised Learning (A2 -SSL) method,
comprising three modules. The asymmetric augmented SSL
module employs suitable augmentation strategies for positive/negative views, preventing ﬁne-grained category confusion inherent in conventional SSL. Part-oriented dense
contrastive learning utilizes the Fisher Vector framework
to capture and model ﬁne-grained object parts, enhancing
unsupervised representations through part-level dense contrastive learning. Self-consistent hash code learning introduces a reconstruction task aligned with the self-consistency
principle, guiding the model to emphasize comprehensive
features, particularly ﬁne-grained patterns. Experimental
results on ﬁve benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of A2 -SSL over existing methods, afﬁrming its efﬁcacy in
unsupervised ﬁne-grained image hashing.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained image retrieval [44] in computer vision and
pattern recognition aims to retrieve images from multiple subordinate categories within a super-category, aka a
* Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (2021YFA1001100), National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant (62272231, 62172222), Natural Science
Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China under Grant (BK20210340), the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (4009002401),
and CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open Fund.

Binary hash codes
same
instance
Encoder

ͼͼͼ

different
instances

Convolutional
Neural Networks

ͼͼͼ

Figure 1. Illustration of the unsupervised ﬁne-grained hashing task,
aimed at generating compact binary codes with Hamming distance
for ﬁne-grained images without class labels. The goal is to ensure
that images within a particular subcategory share identical codes,
while images from different subcategories possess distinct codes.

meta-category. Examples include different species of animals/plants [37], various models of cars [17], assorted types
of defects [1], and diverse types of retail products [43],
among others. The primary challenge lies in discerning
ﬁne-grained visual differences that subtly distinguish objects with high overall similarity but varying ﬁne-grained
features. Additionally, ﬁne-grained retrieval necessitates the
ranking of all instances so that images depicting the same
sub-category label receive the highest rank, based on the
ﬁne-grained details in the query.
Particularly, given the explosive growth of ﬁne-grained
data in real-world applications [2, 12, 21, 37, 43], ﬁnegrained hashing emerges as a promising solution for handling large-scale ﬁne-grained retrieval tasks. It has demonstrated the ability to signiﬁcantly reduce storage costs and
enhance query speeds [7, 14, 33], leveraging learned compact binary hash code representations. While prior works,
e.g., [7, 14, 33], achieved commendable retrieval performance, they still rely on ﬁne-grained category annotations
provided by domain experts. In some cases, obtaining extensive and accurate ﬁne-grained supervision information is
challenging or even impossible. In this study, aiming to mitigate the dependence on supervision, particularly for the task
in Figure 1, we propose the development of an unsupervised
17648

