This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAGE: Controllable Articulation GEneration
Jiayi Liu

Hou In Ivan Tam Ali Mahdavi-Amiri
Simon Fraser University

Manolis Savva

3dlg-hcvc.github.io/cage
Generated Articulated Objects

Joint Type à Part
revolute
fixed

CAGE

Storage

Oven

Table

+ Object Category
“Storage”

Refrigerator

Joint Axis à Part

Part à Motion

Shape Abstraction
+ Articulation Parameters

Figure 1. We present CAGE: a user-controllable generative model for 3D articulated objects. Left: given an object category label and
a directed graph describing the interconnections among constituent parts, our model generates an abstraction of the articulated object
specifying both geometry and motion parameters for each part. Right: the generated shape abstraction combined with appropriately
constrained part retrieval allows for generating high-quality articulated objects under various user-specified constraints. Users can specify
a desired object category, part shape, articulation type, or articulation axis and obtain generated objects that respect the provided constraints.

Abstract
We address the challenge of generating 3D articulated
objects in a controllable fashion. Currently, modeling articulated 3D objects is either achieved through laborious manual authoring, or using methods from prior work that are
hard to scale and control directly. We leverage the interplay
between part shape, connectivity, and motion using a denoising diffusion-based method with attention modules designed to extract correlations between part attributes. Our
method takes an object category label and a part connectivity graph as input and generates an object’s geometry and
motion parameters. The generated objects conform to userspecified constraints on the object category, part shape, and
part articulation. Our experiments show that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art in articulated object generation, producing more realistic objects while conforming
better to user constraints.

1. Introduction
Articulated objects are ubiquitous in real-world scenes.
Kitchen cabinetry, refrigerators, storage drawers, and
wardrobes are a few examples. Thus, digital 3D models of these objects are useful for a variety of tasks in
robotics [4, 51], 3D vision [10, 22, 42], and embodied AI

systems [38, 47]. Unfortunately, despite this clear value in
many research areas, 3D models of articulated objects are
predominantly authored manually and existing datasets of
such models are few and relatively small [19, 26].
Unsurprisingly, there is much recent work on reconstructing articulated objects from real-world observations [9, 11, 18, 40] and on predicting how object parts can
articulate for existing 3D object models [16, 44, 49]. However, these methods either rely on laborious acquisition of
real-world data, or assume the existence of large datasets
of 3D objects with sufficiently complete part geometry to
enable articulation. These assumptions limit the scalability
and practical utility of these approaches.
An alternative strategy recently proposed in NAP [13]
is to learn a generative model for articulated 3D objects
that can directly generate a complete articulated object. Although the NAP generative model conceptually supports
conditional generation of articulated objects for partially
specified inputs, as we will see it often fails to respect input constraints, and exhibits limited controllability. This
limitation stands in stark contrast with the natural desire for
user-driven control over the output of generative models, especially for highly structured and compositional output as is
the case with articulated objects.
In this paper, we tackle the challenge of controllable articulated object generation. To address the limitations of

17880

