This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CrowdDiff : Multi-hypothesis Crowd Density Estimation using Diffusion Models
Yasiru Ranasinghe, Nithin Gopalakrishnan Nair, Wele Gedara Chaminda Bandara, and Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
{dranasi1, ngopala2, wbandar1, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Crowd counting is a fundamental problem in crowd analysis which is typically accomplished by estimating a crowd
density map and summing over the density values. However, this approach suffers from background noise accumulation and loss of density due to the use of broad Gaussian kernels to create the ground truth density maps. This
issue can be overcome by narrowing the Gaussian kernel. However, existing approaches perform poorly when
trained with ground truth density maps with broad kernels. To deal with this limitation, we propose using conditional diffusion models to predict density maps, as diffusion
models show high fidelity to training data during generation. With that, we present CrowdDiff that generates the
crowd density map as a reverse diffusion process. Furthermore, as the intermediate time steps of the diffusion process are noisy, we incorporate a regression branch for direct crowd estimation only during training to improve the
feature learning. In addition, owing to the stochastic nature of the diffusion model, we introduce producing multiple density maps to improve the counting performance contrary to the existing crowd counting pipelines. We conduct extensive experiments on publicly available datasets
to validate the effectiveness of our method. CrowdDiff outperforms existing state-of-the-art crowd counting methods
on several public crowd analysis benchmarks with significant improvements. CrowdDiff project is available at:
https://dylran.github.io/crowddiff.github.io.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting has been a fundamental problem in surveillance, public safety, and crowd control. Various methods
have been proposed in the literature, including methods that
directly predict the count [21, 51, 58] or use a surrogate task
such as density estimation [13, 16, 46, 47, 49, 50], object
detection [30, 39], or point localization [9, 22, 45, 56].
While density-based methods sum the estimated pixel
density values for counting [13], localization-based methods count proposals with confidence scores higher than a
threshold [45]. As a result, density-based methods are more
susceptible to introducing background noise into the final

(a) Ground truth: 1155 (4)

(b) Ours: 1142 (4)

(c) Chfl: 1187.6 (2.42)

(d) SUA: 1199.4 (3.20)

Figure 1. Predicted density results for (a) a dense crowd from (b)
our method, (c) Chfl [41], and (d) SUA [34]. The count of the
enlarged crop is given in brackets.

count compared to localization-based methods [48]. Furthermore, density estimation methods are affected by variations in crowd density distributions that arise due to different congestion levels of the crowd [3]. This could result in a loss of accuracy in the density estimation. In contrast, recent localization-based methods with point queries
do not have the issue of background noise accumulation
[22], like in density-based methods [41], as there is no interference between neighboring point proposals. However,
localization-based methods require crowd density heuristics
for proposal setting [45], which is not required by densitybased methods. Thus, if the premise of point supervision is
translated into density-based methods, it is possible to circumvent the requirement for crowd density heuristics, and
the flaws of conventional density-based methods, and a narrow density kernel can be used to achieve this. However,
Xu et al. [56] demonstrated that using a narrow kernel with
density regression methods is ineffective.
Alternatively, it is feasible to use a generative model
to predict the density map of a given crowd image that

12809

