This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not All Voxels Are Equal: Hardness-Aware Semantic Scene Completion
with Self-Distillation
Song Wang1 ,

Jiawei Yu1 , Wentong Li1 , Wenyu Liu1 ,
Junbo Chen2 ,* Jianke Zhu1 *
1
Zhejiang University 2 Udeer.ai

Abstract
Semantic scene completion, also known as semantic occupancy prediction, can provide dense geometric and semantic information for autonomous vehicles, which attracts
the increasing attention of both academia and industry. Unfortunately, existing methods usually formulate this task as
a voxel-wise classification problem and treat each voxel
equally in 3D space during training. As the hard voxels have
not been paid enough attention, the performance in some
challenging regions is limited. The 3D dense space typically
contains a large number of empty voxels, which are easy to
learn but require amounts of computation due to handling
all the voxels uniformly for the existing models. Furthermore, the voxels in the boundary region are more challenging to differentiate than those in the interior. In this paper,
we propose HASSC approach to train the semantic scene
completion model with hardness-aware design. The global
hardness from the network optimization process is defined
for dynamical hard voxel selection. Then, the local hardness with geometric anisotropy is adopted for voxel-wise
refinement. Besides, self-distillation strategy is introduced
to make training process stable and consistent. Extensive
experiments show that our HASSC scheme can effectively
promote the accuracy of the baseline model without incurring the extra inference cost. Source code is available at:
https://github.com/songw-zju/HASSC.

1. Introduction
The accurate 3D perception of the surrounding environment
is critical for both autonomous vehicles and robots [38, 40,
43, 60]. Early semantic scene completion works mainly focus on indoor scenes [3, 26, 33, 41]. For outdoor driving
scenarios, SemanticKITTI [1] provides the first large benchmark, in which LiDAR-based methods [7, 37, 47, 49] occupy a dominant position with promising performance. Recently, vision-centric methods [16, 28, 30] have made en* Corresponding authors

Xiaolu Liu1 ,

(a) Previous SSC Methods
Camera
Encoder
2D Features
Images
(b) Our HASSC Method

2D-to-3D
Transform

Comp.
Head

3D Features

Result

HVM
Camera
2D-to-3D
Transform
Head
Encoder
3D Features
Result
2D Features
EMA
Distill.

Images

HVM
Camera
2D-to-3D
Transform
Head
Encoder
2D Features
3D Features

Result

Figure 1. Comparing our proposed hardness-aware semantic scene
completion (HASSC) approach against previous semantic scene
completion methods. We present an effective hard voxel mining
(HVM) head with self-distillation during training.

couraging progress in bird’s-eye-view (BEV) perception.
Researchers have further started to complete the entire 3D
semantic scene with only the camera as input and obtain
impressive results [4, 17, 29].
Generally, it is not trivial to infer semantic occupancy information in 3D dense space from the current camera observation alone. For vision-centric semantic scene completion
models, the 2D backbone needs high-resolution images as
input and consumes most of the GPU memory, as shown in
Fig. 1(a). After the forward or backward 2D-to-3D transformation [21, 29, 31], the 3D dense voxel volume features are
captured while it is impossible to perform feature extraction
under high-resolution in 3D space due to the GPU memory
limitation. The 3D backbone adopts convolution [4, 21] or
self-attention [29] operators and extracts fine-grained features on reduced-resolution 3D feature maps. As voxel-wise
outputs are required at full resolution, the completion head
typically derives the final result through trilinear interpolation or transposed convolution directly without considering the hardness for different voxels. Meanwhile, existing
methods [4, 29] mainly formulate semantic scene completion as a voxel-wise classification problem and compute the
loss for each voxel equally. Such a scheme ignores that the
hardness in classifying various voxels in 3D space is quite
different. Since more than 90% of the voxel space is empty,

14792

