This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Up Video Summarization Pretraining with Large Language Models
Dawit Mureja Argaw1,2 Seunghyun Yoon2 Fabian Caba Heilbron2 Hanieh Deilamsalehy2
Trung Bui2 Zhaowen Wang2 Franck Dernoncourt2 Joon Son Chung1
1

KAIST

Abstract
Long-form video content constitutes a significant portion of internet traffic, making automated video summarization an essential research problem. However, existing video summarization datasets are notably limited in
their size, constraining the effectiveness of state-of-the-art
methods for generalization. Our work aims to overcome
this limitation by capitalizing on the abundance of longform videos with dense speech-to-video alignment and the
remarkable capabilities of recent large language models
(LLMs) in summarizing long text. We introduce an automated and scalable pipeline for generating a large-scale
video summarization dataset using LLMs as Oracle summarizers. By leveraging the generated dataset, we analyze the limitations of existing approaches and propose a
new video summarization model that effectively addresses
them. To facilitate further research in the field, our work
also presents a new benchmark dataset that contains 1200
long videos each with high-quality summaries annotated by
professionals. Extensive experiments clearly indicate that
our proposed approach sets a new state-of-the-art in video
summarization across several benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In the current era of information, long-form video content
constitutes a significant portion of internet traffic. Consequently, developing models for automated video summarization has become an essential research topic [5, 9, 10,
14, 20, 25, 35, 45–47, 49]. Video summarization involves
automatically creating a condensed summary video from a
longer input video, highlighting the key information. This
task is highly practical as it allows users to selectively filter
the content they wish to explore in greater detail (e.g. promotional trailers) or obtain concise summaries of the content they intend to consume (e.g. recap videos).
Learning to summarize videos, however, is a very illposed problem. This is mainly because of the diverse nature
of video content and the subjective nature of what constitutes a meaningful summary. Therefore, an intuitive, data-

2

Adobe Research

driven approach to developing a robust video summarizer
would involve exposing the model to a large set of videosummary pairs during training. However, obtaining such a
dataset is a daunting and resource-intensive task, primarily
due to the manual labor required for annotating summary
videos. This challenge is reflected in existing video summarization datasets like TVSum [36] and SumMe [7] which are
characterized by a notably small number of video-summary
pairs, with only 50 and 25 pairs, respectively. Consequently,
state-of-the-art video summarization methods [8, 9, 25, 26]
tend to overfit to a specific video domain and their ability to
generalize effectively is significantly limited.
The main focus of this work is to address these limitations. Motivated by the abundance of long-form videos
with dense speech-to-video alignment [23] and the recent
achievements of large language models (LLMs) [22, 27, 38]
in comprehending and summarizing extensive textual content, we propose an automatic and scalable pipeline for
large-scale video summarization pretraining. Our key idea
is to leverage LLMs as Oracle summarizers to transfer their
capabilities from text to the video domain. This enables the
scaling up of visual summarization datasets, facilitating the
training of video summarizers for scenarios where narration
or text is not available.
Given a long narrated video, we first use a speech-totext model [2, 32] to obtain the textual transcription of the
video. Next, we input the text into the LLM in a format
where each sentence in the transcript is accompanied by its
corresponding timestamp. We then prompt the LLM to output an extractive summary of the video transcript by selecting only the most critical and informative moments from the
video while maintaining the timestamp and original wording of the selected sentences. The main reason for providing
this particular instruction is to guarantee that the extracted
textual summary can be seamlessly associated with the corresponding video segments. Finally, we carefully map the
extracted textual summary back to the relevant video segments. This process results in a sequence of clips that,
when aggregated, form a pseudo-ground truth visual summary. Following this methodology, we create a large-scale

8332

