This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BrainWash: A Poisoning Attack to Forget in Continual Learning
Ali Abbasi
Vanderbilt University

Parsa Nooralinejad
University of California, Davis

Hamed Pirsiavash
University of California, Davis

ali.abbasi@vanderbilt.edu

pnoorali@ucdavis.edu

hpirsiav@ucdavis.edu

Soheil Kolouri
Vanderbilt University
soheil.kolouri@vanderbilt.edu

Task 𝑇 − 1

H1

Continual learning has gained substantial attention
within the deep learning community, offering promising solutions to the challenging problem of sequential learning.
Yet, a largely unexplored facet of this paradigm is its susceptibility to adversarial attacks, especially with the aim
of inducing forgetting. In this paper, we introduce “BrainWash,” a novel data poisoning method tailored to impose
forgetting on a continual learner. By adding the BrainWash noise to a variety of baselines, we demonstrate how
a trained continual learner can be induced to forget its
previously learned tasks catastrophically, even when using these continual learning baselines. An important feature of our approach is that the attacker requires no access to previous tasks’ data and is armed merely with the
model’s current parameters and the data belonging to the
most recent task. Our extensive experiments highlight the
efficacy of BrainWash, showcasing degradation in performance across various regularization and memory replaybased continual learning methods. Our code is available
here: https://github.com/mint-vu/Brainwash

1. Introduction
In real-world scenarios, data distributions are inherently
non-stationary, constantly evolving and shifting in unpredictable ways. Such variability poses a significant challenge to machine learning and computer vision, where
model generalizability assumes stationary training and testing/deployment distributions. Continual Learning (CL)
[13, 37, 61] has emerged as a prolific research domain focusing on efficient learning from an ongoing stream of data
or tasks. CL primarily seeks to: 1) enhance backward
knowledge transfer, which aims to maintain or improve performance on previously learned tasks, thereby mitigating
catastrophic forgetting, and 2) bolster forward knowledge

Continual
Learner

Task 𝑇, Poisoned
H1

H1

…

Continual
Learner

H2
H T-1

Continual
Learner

H2

…

Task 1

…

Abstract

H T-1
HT

Figure 1. BrainWash is a poisoning attack targeting continual
learning systems. It sabotages a task so that, upon learning it, the
system’s rate of forgetting previously learned tasks is increased.

transfer, where learning a current task can boost performance on or reduce the learning time for future tasks. CL
has significantly progressed in computer vision tasks, including incremental image recognition [33, 59]. With the
increase in the adoption of CL algorithms, examining their
vulnerabilities is imperative to inform the development of
more robust CL methodologies.
Most research in CL has focused on overcoming catastrophic forgetting. Existing methods can be categorized into
three groups: 1) memory replay, 2) regularization, and 3)
parameter isolation methods. Nonetheless, there has been
limited focus on the robustness of CL approaches against
various types of adversarial attacks. Recent studies have
begun to address this gap by proposing backdoor attacks
[32, 57] and certain poisoning attacks [27, 39] within the
CL context. These contributions are critical in profiling
the vulnerabilities of CL methods, paving the way for developing more resilient CL algorithms. Additionally, these
findings have implications for closely related and emerging
fields such as machine unlearning [3, 9].
Recent works show that an adversary can insert misinformation into a task to distort a continual learner’s performance. For instance, Umer et al. [57] show that backdoors
can be placed into a task to hijack the performance of a CL
method, and the backdoor remains effective even when new
tasks are learned. Here, we pose a fundamental question: Is
it possible to ‘brainwash’ a continual learner by poisoning
its current task in such a way that performance on all pre-

24057

