This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Initialization Matters for Adversarial Transfer Learning
Andong Hua1

Jindong Gu2 Zhiyu Xue1 Nicholas Carlini3 Eric Wong4
1
University of California, Santa Barbara 2 University of Oxford
3
Google 4 University of Pennsylvania

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the advancement of large-scale deep learning models, the Pretraining-Finetuning paradigm takes a more dominant role compared to training from scratch across various
tasks [2], including computer vision [12, 15, 22, 28], natural language processing [20, 36, 41], and speech recognition [35]. Under the paradigm of Pretraining-Finetuing, advanced parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods [4,
16–18, 27, 48] have emerged. Compared to full finetuning,
PEFT methods either introduce small modules into a fixed
pretrained model or optimize only part of the pretrained
model, demonstrating exceptional performance while keep-

44

PGD Robustness

With the prevalence of the Pretraining-Finetuning
paradigm in transfer learning, the robustness of downstream tasks has become a critical concern. In this work,
we delve into adversarial robustness in transfer learning and reveal the critical role of initialization, including both the pretrained model and the linear head. First,
we discover the necessity of an adversarially robust pretrained model. Specifically, we reveal that with a standard
pretrained model, Parameter-Efficient Finetuning (PEFT)
methods either fail to be adversarially robust or continue
to exhibit significantly degraded adversarial robustness on
downstream tasks, even with adversarial training during
finetuning. Leveraging a robust pretrained model, surprisingly, we observe that a simple linear probing can outperform full finetuning and other PEFT methods with random
initialization on certain datasets. We further identify that
linear probing excels in preserving robustness from the robust pretraining. Based on this, we propose Robust Linear
Initialization (RoLI) for adversarial finetuning, which initializes the linear head with the weights obtained by adversarial linear probing to maximally inherit the robustness from pretraining. Across five different image classification datasets, we demonstrate the effectiveness of RoLI and
achieve new state-of-the-art results. Our code is available
at https://github.com/DongXzz/RoLI.

46

42
40

Yao Qin1,3

TWINS-AT
AutoLoRa
RanLI - Full-FT
RanLI - Adapter
RanLI - LoRA
RanLI - Bias
RanLI - VPT
RanLI - Linear
RoLI - Full-FT
RoLI - Adapter
RoLI - LoRA
RoLI - Bias

38
36

70

72

74

76

78

Clean Accuracy

80

82

84

Figure 1. Robust Linear Initialization (RoLI), significantly improves adversarial robustness. RoLI, denoted in red, achieves
an average 3.88% increase in clean accuracy and a 2.44% increase in robust accuracy compared to Random Linear Initialization (RanLI) of the linear head during adversarial finetuning, averaged across five downstream datasets. Our best-performing RoLI
- Full-FT, which represents adversarial full finetuning with robust
linear initialization, achieves a new state-of-the-art performance.
We include six popular finetuning methods with Swin Transformer [28] and two existing state-of-the-art techniques for adversarial transfer learning: TWINS-AT [29] and AutoLoRA [43].

ing storage usage low.
While the success of transfer learning is evident, the
robustness of downstream models has become a critical
concern in real-world applications. For example, as suggested by previous studies, full finetuning will distort the
pretrained features, leading to compromised robustness in
terms of image corruptions and out-of-distribution (OOD)
performance [26, 44]. In addition, adversarial robustness
poses another significant challenge to real-world deployment, as a non-robust model demonstrates nearly zero accuracy under adversarial attacks [40]. Many approaches have
been proposed to enhance adversarial robustness in transfer learning, including improving the robustness of pretraining through self-supervised techniques [7, 19] and preserving robustness from pretrained models during finetuning [29, 43]. However, most previous works [29, 43] apply

24831

