This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Template Free Reconstruction of Human-object Interaction with Procedural
Interaction Generation
Xianghui Xie1,2,3

Bharat Lal Bhatnagar4
1

3

Jan Eric Lenssen3
2

University of Tübingen, Germany

Gerard Pons-Moll1,2,3

Tübingen AI Center, Germany

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatic Campus, Germany

4

Meta Reality Labs

https://virtualhumans.mpi-inf.mpg.de/procigen-hdm/

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modelling interactions between humans and their surroundings is important for applications like creating realistic
avatars, robotic control and gaming. In this paper, we address the task of jointly reconstructing human and object
from a monocular RGB image, without any prior object
templates. This is very challenging due to depth-scale ambiguity, occlusions, diverse human pose and object shape
variations. Data-driven methods have shown great progress
in reconstructing humans [31, 41, 46, 69–71, 85] or objects [55, 112] from monocular inputs thanks to large-scale
datasets [1, 9, 12, 19, 37, 63, 94, 108]. However, meth-

Interaction pose

Reconstructing human-object interaction in 3D from a
single RGB image is a challenging task and existing data
driven methods do not generalize beyond the objects present
in the carefully curated 3D interaction datasets. Capturing large-scale real data to learn strong interaction and
3D shape priors is very expensive due to the combinatorial nature of human-object interactions. In this paper, we
propose ProciGen (Procedural interaction Generation), a
method to procedurally generate datasets with both, plausible interaction and diverse object variation. We generate 1M+ human-object interaction pairs in 3D and leverage this large-scale data to train our HDM (Hierarchical
Diffusion Model), a novel method to reconstruct interacting human and unseen object instances, without any templates. Our HDM is an image-conditioned diffusion model
that learns both realistic interaction and highly accurate
human and object shapes. Experiments show that our HDM
trained with ProciGen significantly outperforms prior methods that require template meshes, and our dataset allows
training methods with strong generalization ability to unseen object instances. Our code and data are released.

Our dataset: synthetic interaction with diverse object shapes

Object shape
Train only on our synthetic data

Input image

Our diffusion
model

Output: 3D human, high-fidelity
object shape and contact

Figure 1. Given a single RGB image, our method trained only on
our proposed synthetic interaction dataset, can reconstruct the human, object and contacts, without any predefined template meshes.

ods for joint interaction reconstruction are still constrained
by the amount of available data. Recent datasets like BEHAVE [7], InterCap [35] capture real interactions with 10
to 20 different objects, which is far away from the number
of objects in reality: the chair category from ShapeNet [12]
alone has more than 6k different shapes. Training on these
real datasets has limited generalization ability to unseen objects (Sec. 4.3). Capturing real interaction data with more
objects is prohibitively expensive due to the combinatorial
nature: the number of humans times the number of objects
leads to a huge number of variations. This motivates us to
generate synthetic data which has been shown effective for
pre-training reconstruction methods [9, 29, 55, 63, 70].
Synthesizing realistic interaction for different objects is
non-trivial due to variations of object topology, geometry
details and complex interaction patterns. To address this,
we propose Procedural interaction Generation (ProciGen),
a method to generate interaction data with diverse object

10003

