This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GigaTraj: Predicting Long-term Trajectories of Hundreds of Pedestrians in
Gigapixel Complex Scenes
Haozhe Lin1 *, Chunyu Wei1 *, Li He1 *, Yuchen Guo1 *, Yunqi Zhao1 , Shanglong Li1 , Lu Fang1B
1
Tsinghua University
*These authors contributed equally to this work.

BCorresponding author: fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. A representative scene Water Sprinkling Festival from GigaTraj dataset. Hundreds of pedestrians interacted within a ∼ 4×104 m2
area, observed through a gigapixel-level camera array and annotated with minute-level long-term trajectories. Bounding boxes, IDs, world
coordinates, group and interaction relationships, and scene semantics are annotated for predicting the minute-level long-term trajectory of
hundreds of pedestrians in gigapixel complex scenes.

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is a well-established
task with significant recent advancements. However, existing datasets are unable to fulfill the demand for studying
minute-level long-term trajectory prediction, mainly due to
the lack of high-resolution trajectory observation in the
wide field of view (FoV). To bridge this gap, we introduce
a novel dataset named GigaTraj, featuring videos capturing a wide FoV with ∼ 4 × 104 m2 and high-resolution
imagery at the gigapixel level. Furthermore, GigaTraj includes comprehensive annotations such as bounding boxes,
identity associations, world coordinates, group/interaction
relationships, and scene semantics. Leveraging these multimodal annotations, we evaluate and validate the stateof-the-art approaches for minute-level long-term trajectory
prediction in large-scale scenes. Extensive experiments and
analyses have revealed that long-term prediction for pedestrian trajectories presents numerous challenges, indicating
a vital new direction for trajectory research. The dataset is
available at www.gigavision.ai.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is a crucial problem that has
significant implications for many industries including unmanned system planning, smart city, human behavior understanding, and service systems. Currently, there are numerous datasets [1–7] available for trajectory prediction
research, and previous work [8–13] has achieved promising results. In such context, attention has shifted towards
long-term trajectory prediction [14–17]. However, current
datasets may not be well-suited to facilitate this challenge.
On the one hand, datasets with narrow field of view (FoV),
such as ETH [1]/UCY [2], cannot observe long-term trajectories. On the other hand, datasets with a wide FoV
usually lack high-resolution details, such as SDD [3] and
InD [4], which are uninformative to support long-term trajectory prediction. Therefore, there is a pressing need for
a new dataset that provides videos with both wide FoV and
high-resolution, and abundant annotations to advance longterm trajectory prediction research.

19331

