This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Retraining-free Model Quantization via One-Shot Weight-Coupling Learning
Chen Tang1∗

Yuan Meng1∗ Jiacheng Jiang1 Shuzhao Xie1
Xinzhu Ma2 Zhi Wang1† Wenwu Zhu1†
1

Tsinghua University

2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Quantization is of significance for compressing the overparameterized deep neural models and deploying them on
resource-limited devices. Fixed-precision quantization suffers from performance drop due to the limited numerical
representation ability. Conversely, mixed-precision quantization (MPQ) is advocated to compress the model effectively by allocating heterogeneous bit-width for layers.
MPQ is typically organized into a searching-retraining twostage process. Previous works only focus on determining
the optimal bit-width configuration in the first stage efficiently, while ignoring the considerable time costs in the
second stage and thus hindering deployment efficiency significantly. In this paper, we devise a one-shot trainingsearching paradigm for mixed-precision model compression. Specifically, in the first stage, all potential bit-width
configurations are coupled and thus optimized simultaneously within a set of shared weights. However, our observations reveal a previously unseen and severe bit-width
interference phenomenon among highly coupled weights
during optimization, leading to considerable performance
degradation under a high compression ratio. To tackle
this problem, we first design a bit-width scheduler to dynamically freeze the most turbulent bit-width of layers during training, to ensure the rest bit-widths converged properly. Then, taking inspiration from information theory, we
present an information distortion mitigation technique to
align the behaviour of the bad-performing bit-widths to the
well-performing ones. In the second stage, an inferenceonly greedy search scheme is devised to evaluate the goodness of configurations without introducing any additional
training costs. Extensive experiments on three representative models and three datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Code can be available on
https://github.com/1hunters/retraining-free-quantization.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the tremendous achievements
made by deep network-driven applications, ranging from
* Equal contributions.

†

Corresponding authors.

Rongwei Lu1

Z. Wang is also with TBSI.

classification [19, 22, 42], object detection [40, 41, 46], and
segmentation [5, 20]. However, the huge number of parameters in these deep models poses intractable challenges
for both training [4, 24, 32] and inference [16, 39]. To
enable efficient deep learning on inference, several techniques are proposed, including pruning [31, 33], quantization [12, 47, 67], and neural architecture search [21, 50].
Ultra-low bit-width neural network quantization [12, 53,
67] is an appealing model compression technique to simplify the hardware complexity and improve the runtime efficiency of over-parameterized deep models. However, under
severely limited numerical representation capabilities, performing such compression across the whole neural network
usually incurs an unacceptable performance drop. Mixedprecision quantization (MPQ) [3, 15, 23, 47, 57], by allocating unequally bit-width for weight and activation tensors
of each layer, can largely avoid accuracy degradation while
maintaining the proper model size and runtime overhead
(e.g. on-device latency). The underlying principle of MPQ
is that layers contribute very differently to the final accuracy
[3, 47, 57], so the compression algorithm should apply heterogeneous precision rather than a uniform one across the
whole network. Besides, hardware starts to support mixedprecision computation [6, 57] in these years, which further
pushes the study for mixed-precision compression.
Recently, MPQ has been extensively studied from several perspectives, e.g. through reinforcement learning [11,
57], differentiable methods [3, 60], and proxy-based approaches [6, 9]. They all try to solve one challenge, that
says, how to find the optimal bit-width configuration for
each layer, in an exponentially large O(n2L ) space, where
n is the number of bit-width candidates and L is the number of layers in the deep network. To this end, they organize a searching-then-retraining pipeline, in which the
first stage aims to finish the bit-width allocation as fast as
possible, and naturally becomes the focus of the research.
Nevertheless, previous works tend to ignore the importance
of the second stage, which in fact consumes considerable
time cost for retraining the model to fit the obtained bitwidth configurations (a.k.a, the policy). To recover the performance, LIMPQ [47] needs about 200 GPU-hours to re-

15855

