This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Video Super-Resolution via Implicit Resampling-based Alignment
Kai Xu1
Ziwei Yu1
Xin Wang2
Michael Bi Mi2
Angela Yao1
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Huawei International Pte Ltd, Singapore

Abstract
In video super-resolution, it is common to use a framewise alignment to support the propagation of information
over time. The role of alignment is well-studied for lowlevel enhancement in video, but existing works overlook
a critical step – resampling. We show through extensive
experiments that for alignment to be effective, the resampling should preserve the reference frequency spectrum
while minimizing spatial distortions. However, most existing works simply use a default choice of bilinear interpolation for resampling even though bilinear interpolation
has a smoothing effect and hinders super-resolution. From
these observations, we propose an implicit resamplingbased alignment. The sampling positions are encoded by
a sinusoidal positional encoding, while the value is estimated with a coordinate network and a window-based
cross-attention. We show that bilinear interpolation inherently attenuates high-frequency information while an MLPbased coordinate network can approximate more frequencies. Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
show that alignment with our proposed implicit resampling
enhances the performance of state-of-the-art frameworks
with minimal impact on both compute and parameters.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) recovers a high spatial resolution sequence of frames from a low-resolution sequence.
While image super-resolution can be applied naively to
each frame individually, the temporal correlations across
the frames give an extra source of information to improve the super-resolved output. As such, the main difference in video versus image super-resolution architectures
lies in the use of temporal dependencies. Previous works
[2, 9, 26, 28] have shown that spatial alignment is an essential pre-processing step for effective information exchange
across the frames. Given the frame-to-frame camera and
object motions, alignment provides indications of sub-pixel
information which can benefit the super-resolution.
Frame-wise alignment estimates and compensates for
motion. Motion estimation determines pixel displacements
based on optical flow or additional offset prediction net-

GT

Nearest-neighbour

Bilinear

Bicubic

Implicit (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparisons with super-resolved outcomes employing
nearest-neighbor interpolation, bilinear and bicubic resampling.
The red arrow highlights smoothing effects for bilinear and bicubic interpolation, while the blue arrow highlights the ragged edge.

works [3, 18, 28]. Motion compensation warps the reference to be aligned with the current frame. During compensation, resampling is necessary because the warping may
require non-discrete pixel values which are not present in
the reference image.
Alignment is well-studied in low-level vision [2, 19, 31],
but the role of resampling in alignment has been overlooked. In fact, almost all existing works [2, 3, 18, 28] use
a default bilinear interpolation due to its simplicity. Yet resampling is a critical step of alignment which should not
be overlooked. As Fig. 1 shows, the choice in resampling
method can greatly impact the output. Resampling with bilinear and bicubic interpolation preserves the spatial structures of the original image, but tends to smooth out the intensity values. Resampling with nearest-neighbour interpolation gives sharper results, albeit with spatial distortions
and ragged edges.
To our knowledge, we are the first to investigate resampling in alignment for super-resolution; we take a deep dive
and show the significant impact it can have. The distinctions between resampling methods, particularly their impact
on frequency reconstruction for sub-pixel values, become
more evident when estimated motion can provide accurate
sub-pixel offsets, that is, when the flow algorithms are more
precise. As the resampling accuracy is hard to evaluate sep-

2546

