This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupled Pseudo-labeling for Semi-Supervised Monocular 3D Object Detection
Jiacheng Zhang1 * Jiaming Li1∗ Xiangru Lin2∗ Wei Zhang2
Xiao Tan2 Junyu Han2 Errui Ding2 Jingdong Wang2 Guanbin Li1,3†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., China
3
GuangDong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
{zhangjch58,lijm48}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {liguanbin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{linxiangru,zhangwei99,tanxiao01,hanjunyu,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract

Detection

Car: 0.90

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D Object Detection (M3OD) is designed to
detect objects in 3D space using a single 2D RGB image
as input, playing a pivotal role in contemporary 3D perception systems across applications like autonomous driv* Equally-contributed authors.
Baidu.
† Corresponding author.

Work done during an internship at

Car: 0.83

Car: 0.79

Car: 0.45

(b)

Gradient conflict
Propotion
Inter
0.37
Intra
0.386
Other
0.251

Ground Truth

Propotion

We delve into pseudo-labeling for semi-supervised
monocular 3D object detection (SSM3OD) and discover
two primary issues: a misalignment between the prediction quality of 3D and 2D attributes and the tendency of
depth supervision derived from pseudo-labels to be noisy,
leading to significant optimization conflicts with other reliable forms of supervision. To tackle these issues, we
introduce a novel decoupled pseudo-labeling (DPL) approach for SSM3OD. Our approach features a Decoupled Pseudo-label Generation (DPG) module, designed
to efficiently generate pseudo-labels by separately processing 2D and 3D attributes. This module incorporates a
unique homography-based method for identifying dependable pseudo-labels in Bird’s Eye View (BEV) space, specifically for 3D attributes. Additionally, we present a Depth
Gradient Projection (DGP) module to mitigate optimization conflicts caused by noisy depth supervision of pseudolabels, effectively decoupling the depth gradient and removing conflicting gradients. This dual decoupling strategy—at both the pseudo-label generation and gradient levels—significantly improves the utilization of pseudo-labels
in SSM3OD. Our comprehensive experiments on the KITTI
benchmark demonstrate the superiority of our method over
existing approaches.

PCC: -0.196

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

0.37

0.251

Inter

(𝑔𝑢𝑑 𝑣𝑠 g𝑜 )

(a)

0.386

Intra

(𝑔𝑢𝑑 𝑣𝑠 g𝑠𝑑 )

Graident Conflict

Other

(𝑔𝑠𝑑 𝑣𝑠 g𝑜 )

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Visualization of Pseudo-Labels and Ground Truth
in Image Plane and Bird’s Eye View (BEV) Plane. Red: Ground
Truth. Yellow: Detected Bounding Boxes. (b) Statistical analysis
of classification scores and depth errors (PCC: Pearson Correlation Coefficient). (c) The proportion of different types of gradient conflicts occurring. gsd : Gradient of ground truth depth loss.
gud : Gradient of pseudo-label depth loss. go : Gradient of other
attribute supervision loss. Gradient conflicts between gi , gj when
cos(gi , gj ) < 0.

ing and robotic navigation. The major challenge in current
M3OD methods lies in their dependence on precise annotations, a labor-intensive and costly process. To overcome
this obstacle, Semi-Supervised Monocular 3D Object Detection (SSM3OD) has emerged as a promising solution.
It capitalizes on the abundance of readily available unlabeled images to enhance the performance of M3OD detectors. In line with prevalent semi-supervised learning
techniques [1, 30, 31, 39], pseudo-labeling and consistency
regularization are two kinds of widely used technology in
SSM3OD [16, 37]. This paper specifically explores the
pseudo-labeling technique within the realm of SSM3OD.
M3OD is inherently a multi-task challenge, encompassing a range of both 2D (e.g. classification) and
3D (e.g. depth) attribute predictions. We observe that there
is a significant disparity between the 2D and 3D attributes.

16923

