This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Continual Learning of Vision-Language Models via Mixture-of-Experts
Adapters
Jiazuo Yu1 , Yunzhi Zhuge1 , Lu Zhang1, *, Ping Hu2 , Dong Wang1 , Huchuan Lu1 and You He3
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Tsinghua University, China
yujiazuo@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zhangluu@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Continual learning can empower vision-language models to continuously acquire new knowledge, without the
need for access to the entire historical dataset. However,
mitigating the performance degradation in large-scale models is non-trivial due to (i) parameter shifts throughout lifelong learning and (ii) significant computational burdens associated with full-model tuning. In this work, we present
a parameter-efficient continual learning framework to alleviate long-term forgetting in incremental learning with
vision-language models. Our approach involves the dynamic expansion of a pre-trained CLIP model, through
the integration of Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) adapters in response to new tasks. To preserve the zero-shot recognition
capability of vision-language models, we further introduce
a Distribution Discriminative Auto-Selector (DDAS) that
automatically routes in-distribution and out-of-distribution
inputs to the MoE Adapter and the original CLIP, respectively. Through extensive experiments across various settings, our proposed method consistently outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches while concurrently reducing parameter training burdens by 60%. Our code locates at https://github.com/JiazuoYu/MoEAdapters4CL

1. Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI), particularly in the realm of
large-scale foundation models, has made significant strides
in understanding the open world, as evidenced by recent
advancements [44, 45, 56, 61, 67]. An ideal AI, akin to
human cognition, should be able to continuously assimilate
new knowledge from the dynamic environment. Traditional
fully-supervised training paradigms can’t adapt to this scenario due to the high computational costs of integrating new
* Corresponding author

data with historical datasets. In contrast, Continual Learning (CL), offering an efficient incremental training strategy, emerges as a solution by focusing on new data at each
training stage. However, CL faces the significant hurdle
of “catastrophic forgetting” where a model loses previously
acquired knowledge upon learning new tasks [24, 52].
To remedy this issue, one of the popular solutions in current CL methods [1, 16, 23, 43] is to develop dynamic expansion frameworks by incrementally adding task-specific
components to a shared base model (see Figure 1 (a)). Although these methods show promise in memorization and
scalability, they cannot distinguish unseen data and thus
overlook zero-shot transfer capability. Recent advancements like ZSCL [79] have brought the zero-shot transfer
ability into continual learning by leveraging a pretrained
Vision Language Model (VLM). As illustrated in Figure 1
(b), this method relies on knowledge distillation to integrate
zero-shot generalization ability from the frozen CLIP and
uses parameter regularization to prevent knowledge degradation in continual learning. However, these designs often
entail large computational burdens and exhibit limitations in
long-term memorization. It’s then natural to ask whether we
can combine the merits of the pretrained foundation model
and dynamic expansion strategy to form an effective system
with robust memorization and zero-shot transfer abilities.
Recently, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tune (PEFT) methods [22, 28, 30, 66, 74, 77] have demonstrated that largescale models can quickly adapt to downstream tasks via
only fine-tuning less-parameterized adapters. This inspires
us to build a dynamic expansion framework on VLM with
task-specific adapters to relieve the parameter burdens in
long-term CL. Nevertheless, the intuitive approach of stacking adapters during incremental learning introduces a dependency on task identity. This poses challenges in practical scenarios such as class incremental learning where task
identity may be unavailable. Furthermore, the use of independent adapters neglects the potential for inter-task knowl-

23219

