This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Interactive Image Segmentation
with Low Latency, High Quality, and Diverse Prompts
Qin Liu

Jaemin Cho Mohit Bansal Marc Niethammer
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
https://github.com/uncbiag/SegNext

Abstract
The goal of interactive image segmentation is to delineate specific regions within an image via visual or language
prompts. Low-latency and high-quality interactive segmentation with diverse prompts remain challenging for existing
specialist and generalist models. Specialist models, with
their limited prompts and task-specific designs, experience
high latency because the image must be recomputed every
time the prompt is updated, due to the joint encoding of image and visual prompts. Generalist models, exemplified by
the Segment Anything Model (SAM), have recently excelled
in prompt diversity and efficiency, lifting image segmentation to the foundation model era. However, for high-quality
segmentations, SAM still lags behind state-of-the-art specialist models despite SAM being trained with ×100 more
segmentation masks. In this work, we delve deep into the
architectural differences between the two types of models.
We observe that dense representation and fusion of visual
prompts are the key design choices contributing to the high
segmentation quality of specialist models. In light of this,
we reintroduce this dense design into the generalist models, to facilitate the development of generalist models with
high segmentation quality. To densely represent diverse visual prompts, we propose to use a dense map to capture
five types: clicks, boxes, polygons, scribbles, and masks.
Thus, we propose SegNext, a next-generation interactive
segmentation approach offering low latency, high quality,
and diverse prompt support. Our method outperforms current state-of-the-art methods on HQSeg-44K and DAVIS,
both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Interactive image segmentation is a long-standing computer
vision task that aims to precisely delineate specific image regions, typically using visual or linguistic prompts.
Low-latency interactive segmentation is crucial for prompt
decision-making in real-time applications [16, 25, 38]. With

SimpleClick (specialist)

clicks
(dense map)
dense
fusion

decoder

encoder

high latency
single prompt

image

SAM (generalist)
sparse
fusion

encoder

decoder
low quality

image

clicks, box, text
(sparse vectors)

Ours (generalist)
clicks, box, scribbles
(dense map)

encoder
image

dense
fusion

sparse
fusion
text
(sparse vectors)

decoder

low latency
high quality
diverse prompts

Figure 1. Conceptual comparison between our approach SegNext and prior state-of-the-art methods, SimpleClick [27] and
SAM [16], for the interactive segmentation task. Our method combines the best of both worlds for interactive segmentation with low
latency, high quality, and diverse prompts.

rapid advancements in camera and display technologies,
image resolution has been significantly elevated, making
4K and 6K formats increasingly becoming the norm [34].
Therefore, the importance of high-quality interactive segmentation for high-resolution images has become more pronounced. On top of these, an effective and practical interactive segmentation approach that supports diverse prompts is
key to improving user experience.
However, these requirements remain challenging for existing interactive segmentation approaches, including specialist [4, 13, 27, 36] and generalist [14, 16, 43, 47] models. Specialist models, represented by FocalClick [4] and
SimpleClick [27], suffer from the high latency issue due to
the joint encoding of image and visual prompts. Although
InterFormer [13] circumvents this issue with a decoupled
design, it still lacks diversity in the prompts, as only clicks
are explored. Generalist models, represented by SAM [16]
and SEEM [47], have recently achieved great success in

3773

