This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LAA-Net: Localized Artifact Attention Network for Quality-Agnostic and
Generalizable Deepfake Detection
Dat NGUYEN⋆ , Nesryne MEJRI⋆ , Inder Pal SINGH⋆ , Polina KULESHOVA⋆
Marcella ASTRID⋆ , Anis KACEM⋆ , Enjie GHORBEL⋆,⋊ , Djamila AOUADA⋆
CVI2 , SnT, University of Luxembourg⋆
Cristal Laboratory, National School of Computer Sciences, University of Manouba⋊
{dat.nguyen,nesryne.mejri,inder.singh,polina.kuleshova,
marcella.astrid,anis.kacem,enjie.ghorbel,djamila.aouada}@uni.lu

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel approach for high-quality
deepfake detection called Localized Artifact Attention Network (LAA-Net). Existing methods for high-quality deepfake detection are mainly based on a supervised binary
classifier coupled with an implicit attention mechanism.
As a result, they do not generalize well to unseen manipulations. To handle this issue, two main contributions
are made. First, an explicit attention mechanism within
a multi-task learning framework is proposed. By combining heatmap-based and self-consistency attention strategies, LAA-Net is forced to focus on a few small artifactprone vulnerable regions. Second, an Enhanced Feature
Pyramid Network (E-FPN) is proposed as a simple and effective mechanism for spreading discriminative low-level
features into the final feature output, with the advantage
of limiting redundancy. Experiments performed on several benchmarks show the superiority of our approach in
terms of Area Under the Curve (AUC) and Average Precision (AP). The code is available at https://github.
com/10Ring/LAA-Net.

(a)

1. Introduction
Thanks to the development of generative models,
tremendous advances in deepfake creation have been witnessed. Unfortunately, these fake visual data can be employed for malicious purposes, as shown in [4, 48]. The fact
that deepfake generation techniques are rapidly gaining in
realism only exacerbates this issue. It is, therefore, crucial
to design methods capable of automatically detecting deepfakes, including the most realistic ones that are commonly
referred to as high-quality deepfakes. Nonetheless, detecting high-quality deepfakes remains extremely challenging
as they usually enclose subtle and localized artifacts.

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison of LAA-Net (•) with respect to existing
methods, namely, Multi-attentional (•) [55], SBI (•) [41], Xception (•) [37], RECCE (•) [6], CADDM (•) [14], using (a) the
AUC performance with respect to different ranges of Mask SSIM,
and (b) its associated boxplots. *The results were obtained using the official source codes pretrained on FF+ [37] and testing on
Celeb-DFv2 [25]. Figure best viewed in colors.

Recent works have mostly focused on improving the
generalization capabilities of deepfake detection methods
by adopting multi-task learning [7, 24, 54] and/or heuris-

17395

