This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Symphonize 3D Semantic Scene Completion with Contextual Instance Queries
Haoyi Jiang1 * Tianheng Cheng1∗ Naiyu Gao2 Haoyang Zhang2 Tianwei Lin2
Wenyu Liu1 Xinggang Wang 1†
1
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
Horizon Robotics
{haoyi jiang,thch,liuwy,xgwang}@hust.edu.cn
{naiyu.gao,haoyang.zhang,tianwei.lin}@horizon.cc

Abstract
3D Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) has emerged as
a nascent and pivotal undertaking in autonomous driving, aiming to predict the voxel occupancy within volumetric scenes. However, prevailing methodologies primarily focus on voxel-wise feature aggregation, while neglecting instance semantics and scene context. In this paper,
we present a novel paradigm termed Symphonies (Scenefrom-Insts), that delves into the integration of instance
queries to orchestrate 2D-to-3D reconstruction and 3D
scene modeling. Leveraging our proposed Serial InstancePropagated Attentions, Symphonies dynamically encodes
instance-centric semantics, facilitating intricate interactions between the image and volumetric domains. Simultaneously, Symphonies fosters holistic scene comprehension by capturing context through the efficient fusion of instance queries, alleviating geometric ambiguities such as
occlusion and perspective errors through contextual scene
reasoning. Experimental results demonstrate that Symphonies achieves state-of-the-art performance on the challenging SemanticKITTI and SSCBench-KITTI-360 benchmarks, yielding remarkable mIoU scores of 15.04 and
18.58, respectively. These results showcase the promising
advancements of our paradigm. The code for our method
is available at https : / / github . com / hustvl /
Symphonies.

1. Introduction
The advent of autonomous driving has brought forth novel
challenges in the realm of 3D perception. In the pursuit of
safe navigation and obstacle avoidance, autonomous vehicles must be equipped with the ability to accurately predict
* Equal contribution. Work done during Haoyi Jiang’s internship at
Horizon Robotics.
† Corresponding author.

the occupancy of their immediate surroundings. This task,
however, is not a facile endeavor, given the inherent complexities of the real world, characterized by clutter, ambiguity, and rapid evolution.
3D Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) formulates this
challenge as the reconstruction of occupancy and semantics
for every voxel grid within a 3D scene. Recent advancements in vision-based solutions, such as MonoScene [3] and
OccDepth [30], adopt 3D convolutional networks to elevate
2D image features to 3D volumes. TPVFormer [16], OccFormer [46], and CTF-Occ [38] explore decomposing 3D
volumes into multiple coarse view representations and enhancing voxel interactions using Transformer [23, 39, 48]
architectures.
Despite these advancements, contemporary approaches
tend to prioritize voxel-wise modeling for 3D scenes resorting to pixel-voxel projection [6, 23, 31, 32] for the feature
promotion from 2D to 3D. While focusing on these localized representations, they inadvertently neglect higher-level
instance semantics, leading to vulnerability to geometric
ambiguities arising from occlusion and perspective errors.
Humans, in contrast, naturally perceive and comprehend
through the concept of “instance”, rather than isolated pixels or voxels, each imbued with semantic significance and
cohesively contributing to the contextual whole of a scene.
In light of these limitations, a fundamental question arises:
How can we leverage the notion of instances to steer 3D
scene modeling and 2D-to-3D reconstruction?
Drawing inspiration from this notion, we propose Symphonies (Scene-from-Insts), a novel method that leverages
contextual instance queries derived from image inputs to
enhance scene modeling, exploiting inherent instance semantics and scene context. Stemming from this basis, we
propose Serial Instance-Propagated Attentions to intricately
interact with image and voxel features, deformably aggregating instance-centric semantics. This seamless interaction
bridges the gap between low-level pixel or voxel representations and high-level semantics, facilitating feature promo-

20258

