This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UV-IDM: Identity-Conditioned Latent Diffusion Model for
Face UV-Texture Generation
Hong Li1 *, Yutang Feng1 *, Song Xue2 , Xuhui Liu1 , Bohan Zeng1
Shanglin Li1 , Boyu Liu1 , Jianzhuang Liu3 , Shumin Han2 , Baochang Zhang1,4,5†
1
Beihang University 2 Baidu VIS 3 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Shenzhen, China
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China 5 Nanchang Institute of Technology, Nanchang, China

Abstract
3D face reconstruction aims at generating high-fidelity
3D face shapes and textures from single-view or multi-view
images. However, current prevailing facial texture generation methods generally suffer from low-quality texture, identity information loss, and inadequate handling of occlusions. To solve these problems, we introduce an IdentityConditioned Latent Diffusion Model for face UV-texture
generation (UV-IDM) to generate photo-realistic textures
based on the Basel Face Model (BFM). UV-IDM leverages
the powerful texture generation capacity of a latent diffusion model (LDM) to obtain detailed facial textures. To
preserve the identity during the reconstruction procedure,
we design an identity-conditioned module that can utilize
any in-the-wild image as a robust condition for the LDM to
guide texture generation. UV-IDM can be easily adapted
to different BFM-based methods as a high-fidelity texture
generator. Furthermore, in light of the limited accessibility
of most existing UV-texture datasets, we build a large-scale
and publicly available UV-texture dataset based on BFM,
termed BFM-UV. Extensive experiments show that our UVIDM can generate high-fidelity textures in 3D face reconstruction within seconds while maintaining image consistency, bringing new state-of-the-art performance in facial
texture generation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the importance of facial digitization in the
fields of VR, AR, and film has become increasingly prominent. The task of reconstructing the 3D shape and texture
of a face from one in-the-wild image is a significant and
difficult challenge within the fields of computer vision and
graphics. In the past two decades, active research efforts
have been devoted to the effective reconstruction through
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding Author: bczhang@buaa.edu.cn.

parametric fitting with a linear statistical model known as
the 3D Morphable Model (3DMM), which was first introduced by Blanz and Vetter [5]. To enhance the quality of
facial reconstruction, a central challenge is generating realistic facial textures from the original images. This can be
primarily accomplished through linear and nonlinear methods. The former [9, 11, 13, 57] tends to generate lowquality reconstruction textures and is unable to capture the
high-frequency features of in-the-wild images due to the
limited expressive power of linear models. The latter attempts to utilize the nonlinear fitting ability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), to generate realistic textures. For example,
[62, 63] use an encoder-decoder structure to generate position and texture maps, but they lose too much detailed information and have high convergence difficulty. [13, 54]
attempt to achieve detailed textures indirectly by generating geometry structures with high-frequency details. GANbased methods [4, 14, 16, 34–36, 73] commonly combine
iterative optimization [10] to generate high-resolution textures. However, GANs may cause identity leakage due to
over-smoothing, while iterative optimization approaches in
practice are prone to incurring high time costs and overfitting from occlusion. Relightify [46] first demonstrates
that image translation through an unconditional diffusion
model can address the texture generation problem, thereby
improving both realism and efficiency simultaneously.
In this paper, we introduce an Identity Conditional Latent Diffusion Model for facial UV texture generation (UVIDM) as our texture generator to generate high-fidelity textures from individual in-the-wild images. In specific, we
treat texture generation as a texture-completion task. We
first extract incomplete textures from in-the-wild images using visibility masks and UV mapping relationships. Then,
to fully utilize the features provided by the incomplete
textures, we design an identity-conditioned module (ICM)
to encode them and use the cross-attention mechanism to
guide the generation process. This enhances the ability
of UV-IDM to preserve identity and details. Our method

10585

