This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Misalignment-Robust Frequency Distribution Loss for Image Transformation
Zhangkai Ni1 , Juncheng Wu1† , Zian Wang1† , Wenhan Yang2∗ , Hanli Wang1∗ , Lin Ma3
1
Tongji University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Meituan

GT

LPIPS

PDL

FDL (Ours)

Figure 1. Qualitative results trained on our synthetic DIV2K dataset with strong misalignments. Compared with LPIPS [41], and PDL [8],
the proposed method FDL yields clearer results with fewer artifacts. Zoom in to observe details.

Abstract
This paper aims to address a common challenge in deep
learning-based image transformation methods, such as image enhancement and super-resolution, which heavily rely
on precisely aligned paired datasets with pixel-level alignments. However, creating precisely aligned paired images
presents significant challenges and hinders the advancement of methods trained on such data. To overcome this
challenge, this paper introduces a novel and simple Frequency Distribution Loss (FDL) for computing distribution distance within the frequency domain. Specifically, we
transform image features into the frequency domain using
Discrete Fourier Transformation (DFT). Subsequently, frequency components (amplitude and phase) are processed
separately to form the FDL loss function. Our method is
empirically proven effective as a training constraint due to
the thoughtful utilization of global information in the frequency domain. Extensive experimental evaluations, focusing on image enhancement and super-resolution tasks,
demonstrate that FDL outperforms existing misalignmentrobust loss functions. Furthermore, we explore the potential of our FDL for image style transfer that relies solely
† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

on completely misaligned data. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/eezkni/FDL

1. Introduction
Image transformation refers to the process of changing the
visual appearance or characteristics of images to achieve
specific goals or effects. Various studies [10, 15, 29, 31, 43]
have showcased impressive results by integrating deep neural networks into image transformation tasks. For example, single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to enhance
the spatial properties of images, while image enhancement
strives to improve the quality, visibility, interpretability, etc.
However, a key limitation of these methods is the implicit
assumption of pixel-aligned training data, thereby restricting their scope of applicability. This assumption is problematic as not all image transformation tasks can access
perfectly aligned training data, particularly those involving
natural distortions. Besides, one prominent example is style
transfer, a task that involves optimizing the style distance
between images that lack content-related associations. The
misalignment of content in training data significantly challenges the effectiveness of these methods.
To mitigate this challenge, a considerable body of re-

2910

