This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UFOGen: You Forward Once Large Scale Text-to-Image Generation via
Diffusion GANs
Yanwu Xu*[1,2]†, Yang Zhao[1]†, Zhisheng Xiao[1]†, Tingbo Hou[1]
1

Google

{yanwuxu,yzhaoeric,zsxiao,tingbo}@google.com
2

Department of Electrical Computer Engineering, Boston University
yanwuxu@bu.edu

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in transforming text prompts into coherent images, yet the computational cost of the multi-step
inference remains a persistent challenge. To address this
issue, we present UFOGen, a novel generative model designed for ultra-fast, one-step text-to-image generation. In
contrast to conventional approaches that focus on improving samplers or employing distillation techniques for diffusion models, UFOGen adopts a hybrid methodology, integrating diffusion models with a GAN objective. Leveraging
a newly introduced diffusion-GAN objective and initialization with pre-trained diffusion models, UFOGen excels in
efficiently generating high-quality images conditioned on
textual descriptions in a single step. Beyond traditional
text-to-image generation, UFOGen showcases versatility in
applications. Notably, UFOGen stands among the pioneering models enabling one-step text-to-image generation and
diverse downstream tasks, presenting a significant advancement in the landscape of efficient generative models.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [18, 56, 58] has recently emerged as a
powerful class of generative models, demonstrating unprecedented results in many generative modeling tasks [6,
20, 29, 49, 51, 63]. In particular, they have shown the remarkable ability to synthesize high-quality images conditioned on texts [1, 43, 47, 49, 51, 66]. Beyond the textto-image synthesis tasks, large-scale text-to-image models
serve as foundational building blocks for various downstream applications, including personalized generation [9,
13, 30, 50], controlled generation [42, 70] and image edit*Work done as a student researcher of Google, † indicates equal contribution.

ing [5, 15, 67]. Yet, despite their impressive generative
quality and wide-ranging utility, diffusion models have a
notable limitation: they rely on iterative denoising to generate final samples, which leads to slow generation speeds.
The slow inference and the consequential computational demands of large-scale diffusion models pose significant impediments to their deployment.
In the seminal work by Song et al. [58], it was revealed
that sampling from a diffusion model is equivalent to solving the probability flow ordinary differential equation (PFODE) associated with the diffusion process. Presently, the
majority of research aimed at enhancing the sampling efficiency of diffusion models centers on the ODE formulation.
One line of work seeks to advance numerical solvers for the
PF-ODE, with the intention of enabling the solution of the
ODE with greater discretization size, ultimately leading to
fewer requisite sampling steps [2, 37, 38, 57]. However, the
inherent trade-off between step size and accuracy still exists. Given the highly non-linear and complicated trajectory
of the PF-ODE, it would be extremely difficult to reduce
the number of required sampling steps to a minimal level.
Even the most advanced solvers [37, 38] can generate images within 10 to 20 sampling steps, and further reduction
leads to a noticeable drop in image quality. An alternative
approach seeks to distill the PF-ODE trajectory from a pretrained diffusion model. For instance, progressive distillation [31, 41, 52] tries to condense multiple discretization
steps of the PF-ODE solver into a single step by explicitly
aligning with the solver’s output. Similarly, consistency distillation [39, 59] works on learning consistency mappings
that preserve point consistency along the ODE trajectory.
These methods have demonstrated the potential to significantly reduce the number of sampling steps. However, due
to the intrinsic complexity of the ODE trajectory, they still
struggle in the extremely small step regime.
The pursuit of developing ultra-fast large-scale diffusion
models that require just one or two sampling steps, remains

8196

