This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ContextSeg: Sketch Semantic Segmentation by Querying the Context
with Attention
Jiawei Wang
Shandong University

Changjian Li
The University of Edinburgh

https://enigma-li.github.io/projects/contextSeg/contextSeg.html

1. Introduction
Sketches are widely used as a human-computer interaction
tool. Many studies keep exploring its capabilities in modeling [13, 14], retrieval [2, 3] and generation [1, 5]. Among
these tasks, sketch interpretation serves as the foundation.
However, it still remains challenging for computers due to
the inherent ambiguity and sparsity of user sketches [31].
In this paper, we focus on sketch semantic segmentation, an
essential task in finer-level sketch interpretation.
Sketches are typically represented in three data formats,
i.e., the raster image, graph and point sequence. Recently, many learning-based approaches have adopted the
aforementioned sketch representations revealing various advantages and disadvantages (see the inset table). Specif-

StetchSegformer
Ours
Ground
Truth

Sketch semantic segmentation is a well-explored and pivotal problem in computer vision involving the assignment
of pre-defined part labels to individual strokes. This paper
presents ContextSeg– a simple yet highly effective approach
to tackling this problem with two stages. In the first stage,
to better encode the shape and positional information of
strokes, we propose to predict an extra dense distance field
in an autoencoder network to reinforce structural information learning. In the second stage, we treat an entire stroke
as a single entity and label a group of strokes within the
same semantic part using an auto-regressive Transformer
with the default attention mechanism. By group-based labeling, our method can fully leverage the context information when making decisions for the remaining groups of
strokes. Our method achieves the best segmentation accuracy compared with state-of-the-art approaches on two
representative datasets and has been extensively evaluated
demonstrating its superior performance. Additionally, we
offer insights into solving part imbalance in training data
and the preliminary experiment on cross-category training,
which can inspire future research in this field.

Input

Abstract

Figure 1. Given an input sketch, semantic segmentation is to assign labels to strokes based on their semantics so as to form semantic groups. Our method is robust to stroke variations achieving
superior results (e.g., the correctly labeled airplane windows).

ically, image-based methods [16, 35, 36] take raster images as input, exploiting absolute coordinates to capture the
proximity
between
strokes.
However,
they
tend to perform
poorly in learning
the structural information about strokes and overlook
the sequential relationships between them. Graph-based
methods [29, 31, 34] take graphs as input, which consists of
stroke points as nodes and point connections as edges. The
graph representation also exploits absolute coordinates,
which facilitate proximity learning between strokes but
is challenging to capture the structural information of a
stroke. Sequence-based methods [10, 15, 22, 30] take
as input point sequences, which use relative coordinates
to better encode structural information of individual
strokes. However, they struggle to capture the proximity
relationships and spatial information between strokes.
Nevertheless, stroke structural and positional information
and the proximity relationship between strokes are essential
for sketch interpretation.
Motivated by the observations, we propose ContextSeg,

3679

