This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Direct2.5: Diverse Text-to-3D Generation via Multi-view 2.5D Diffusion
Yuanxun Lu1 * Jingyang Zhang2 Shiwei Li2 Tian Fang2 David McKinnon2
Yanghai Tsin2 Long Quan3 Xun Cao1 Yao Yao1 †
1

Nanjing University

luyuanxun@smail.nju.edu.cn, {caoxun,yaoyao}@nju.edu.cn
2

Apple

{jingyang zhang,shiwei,fangtian,dmckinnon,ytsin}@apple.com
3

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
quan@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Recent advances in generative AI have unveiled significant potential for the creation of 3D content. However,
current methods either apply a pre-trained 2D diffusion
model with the time-consuming score distillation sampling
(SDS), or a direct 3D diffusion model trained on limited
3D data losing generation diversity. In this work, we approach the problem by employing a multi-view 2.5D diffusion fine-tuned from a pre-trained 2D diffusion model.
The multi-view 2.5D diffusion directly models the structural
distribution of 3D data, while still maintaining the strong
generalization ability of the original 2D diffusion model,
filling the gap between 2D diffusion-based and direct 3D
diffusion-based methods for 3D content generation. During inference, multi-view normal maps are generated using
the 2.5D diffusion, and a novel differentiable rasterization
scheme is introduced to fuse the almost consistent multiview normal maps into a consistent 3D model. We further
design a normal-conditioned multi-view image generation
module for fast appearance generation given the 3D geometry. Our method is a one-pass diffusion process and does
not require any SDS optimization as post-processing. We
demonstrate through extensive experiments that, our direct
2.5D generation with the specially-designed fusion scheme
can achieve diverse, mode-seeking-free, and high-fidelity
3D content generation in only 10 seconds. Project page:
https://nju-3dv.github.io/projects/direct25.

* This project was performed during Yuanxun Lu’s internship at Apple.
† Corresponding Author

1. Introduction
Creating 3D content from generative models has become
a heated research topic in the past year, which is key to
a variety of downstream applications, including game and
film industries, autonomous driving simulation, and virtual
reality. Specifically, DreamFusion [28] was proposed to
optimize a neural radiance field (NeRF) [24] using a pretrained 2D text-to-image diffusion model and the score distillation sampling (SDS) technique, showing promising results for text-to-3D generation of arbitrary objects without
any 3D data. However, the indirect 3D probability distribution modeling inevitably deteriorates the final generation
quality. For example, it has been reported in DreamFusion
and its follow-ups [6, 15, 39, 42] that the overall generation
success rate is low and the multi-face Janus problem exists.
Another line of work focuses on direct 3D generation
by training on large-scale 3D data. For example, [22, 26]
apply the probabilistic diffusion model for point cloud generation and [12, 34] model the denoise diffusion process
on signed distance field (SDF). These methods usually apply a specific 3D representation and train the denoise diffusion on such representation using a specific 3D dataset, e.g.,
ShapeNet [3], and show high-quality generation results on
objects similar to the training set. However, the scale of the
current 3D dataset is still too small when compared with the
text-image data [32]. Even with the largest 3D dataset [7]
available, it is still challenging to train a 3D diffusion model
for diverse text-to-3D generation.
In this work, we instead extend existing text-to-2D models to a denoising diffusion process on multi-view 2.5D
depth/normal data. Compared with full 3D representations
such as 3D point clouds or meshes, 1) 2.5D information
such as depth or normal are much easier to capture or col-

8744

