This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Circuit Design and Efficient Simulation of Quantum Inner Product and Empirical
Studies of Its Effect on Near-Term Hybrid Quantum-Classic Machine Learning
Hao Xiong† , Yehui Tang† , Xinyu Ye† , Junchi Yan*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{taxuexh,yehuitang,xinyu_ye,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/ShawXh/qip_cvpr24

1. Introduction

Quantum algorithms have been actively studied to solve
some classical problems with theoretically much lower complexity compared with their classic counterparts, e.g. Quantum SVM [27], HHL algorithm for linear equations [12],
quantum Fourier transform [8] etc. The power of quantum
computing (QC) comes from the inherent quantum parallelism associated with the superposition principle [7].
* Corresponding author. † Equal contribution. We acknowledge Zhanpeng Zhou who helped the IBM Quantum access and experiments during
his stay in Tokyo, Japan. This is an independent work without any funding.

function

vectors

quantum circuit

accurate
result

a) Classical computing
c) Hybrid quantumclassical computing

...

For the essential operation, namely inner product (IP)
as widely adopted in classic computing e.g. matrix multiplication, its quantum counterpart: quantum inner product
(QIP), has also been recently theoretically explored with a
verifiable lower complexity on quantum computers. However, it remains unclear for the embodiment of the quantum
circuits (QC) for QIP, let alone a (thorough) evaluation of
the QIP circuits, especially in a practical context in the
NISQ era by applying QIP to ML via hybrid quantum-classic
pipelines. In this paper, we carefully design the QIP circuits
from scratch, whose complexity is in accordance with the
theoretical complexity. To make the simulation tractable on
classic computers, especially when it is integrated in the
gradient-based hybrid ML pipelines, we further devise a
highly-efficient simulation scheme by directly simulates the
output state. Experiments show that the scheme accelerates the simulation for more than 68k times compared with
the previous circuit simulator. This allows our empirical
evaluation on typical machine learning tasks, ranging from
supervised and self-supervised learning via neural nets, to
K-Means clustering. The results show that the calculation
error brought by typical quantum mechanisms would incur
in general little influence on the final numerical results given
sufficient qubits. However, certain tasks e.g. ranking in
K-Means could be more sensitive to quantum noise.

vectors

...

Abstract

basis
quantum
states

approximate
result

mearsure

process
classically

b) Quantum computing
Computation
program

classical machine

input vectors
results

1-to-1/1-to-N/
M-to-N QIP circuits

quantum machine

Figure 1. a/b) Inner product computing in classic and quantum
ways. c) Hybrid quantum-classical computing scheme with QIP.

Despite the theoretical advantages, the pure quantum
methods still face challenges to be put into practical use due
to the limited number of available qubits and capability in
dealing with deep quantum circuits of the NISQ computers.
Compared with the pure quantum methods, hybrid quantumclassical algorithms are regarded as well-suited for execution
on NISQ devices by combining quantum computers with
classical computers [10]. Researchers design quantum circuits as the substitutions of specific classical parts to gain
super high efficiency, e.g. Hardamad transform to replace the
classical Conv2D layer [25], or to achieve specific functions
that are computationally impractical on classical computers,
e.g. feature extraction in quantum Hilbert space [20, 31].
Seeing the essential role of inner product (IP) in classic
machine learning (ML) and their quantum counterparts QIP
in QML (as will be discussed in detail), this paper studies
several basic yet less-studied problems regarding QIP. On the
one hand, we develop the detailed embodiment of quantum
circuits of QIP with its behavior on quantum computers.
On the other hand, we develop highly-efficient simulation
scheme for QIP and empirically evaluate the effect of noise
brought by quantum mechanisms, by integrating simulated
QIP into popular ML methods on classic computers.
As aforementioned, IP is a fundamental operator in modern ML methods. From vector inner product and matrix
multiplication, to distance measurement in clustering algorithms, to linear layers of deep neural networks, a large
number of IP operations are involved. The acceleration of
the IP operation will greatly improve the running speed of
classical ML algorithms that contain a lot of IP operations.

26162

