This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionLight: Light Probes for Free by Painting a Chrome Ball
Pakkapon Phongthawee*1
Worameth Chinchuthakun*1,2
Varun Jampani3
Amit Raj4
Pramook Khungurn5
1

VISTEC

2

Tokyo Tech

3

Stability AI

4

Nontaphat Sinsunthithet 1
Supasorn Suwajanakorn1

Google Research

5

Pixiv

https://diffusionlight.github.io/

Figure 1. We leverage a pre-trained diffusion model (Stable Diffusion XL) for light estimation by rendering an HDR chrome ball. In each
scene, we show our normally exposed chrome ball on top and our underexposed version, which reveals bright light sources, on the bottom.

Abstract
We present a simple yet effective technique to estimate
lighting in a single input image. Current techniques rely
heavily on HDR panorama datasets to train neural networks
to regress an input with limited field-of-view to a full environment map. However, these approaches often struggle with
real-world, uncontrolled settings due to the limited diversity
and size of their datasets. To address this problem, we leverage diffusion models trained on billions of standard images
to render a chrome ball into the input image. Despite its
simplicity, this task remains challenging: the diffusion models often insert incorrect or inconsistent objects and cannot
readily generate chrome balls in HDR format. Our research
uncovers a surprising relationship between the appearance
of chrome balls and the initial diffusion noise map, which we
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

utilize to consistently generate high-quality chrome balls. We
further fine-tune an LDR diffusion model (Stable Diffusion
XL) with LoRA, enabling it to perform exposure bracketing
for HDR light estimation. Our method produces convincing light estimates across diverse settings and demonstrates
superior generalization to in-the-wild scenarios.

1. Introduction
Single-view lighting estimation is the problem of inferring
the lighting conditions from an input image. In this work, we
represent lighting as an environment map [8], which facilitates seamless insertion of virtual objects, including highly
reflective ones. This problem is ill-posed because the environment map extends beyond the limited field of view of the
input image. Moreover, the output must have a high dynamic
range (HDR) to capture the true intensity of the incoming
light. These difficulties have spurred numerous attempts to

98

