This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WHAM: Reconstructing World-grounded Humans with Accurate 3D Motion
Soyong Shin1
1

Juyong Kim1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Eni Halilaj1

Michael J. Black2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent System

{soyongs, juyongk, ehalilaj}@andrew.cmu.edu

GT trajectory

black@tuebingen.mpg.de

TRACE

SLAHMR

WHAM (Ours)

P4_36.png

Figure 1. WHAM: World-grounded Humans with Accurate Motion. State-of-the-art methods like TRACE [43] and SLAHMR [53] fail
to capture global 3D human trajectories accurately when given in-the-wild videos captured using a moving camera, producing implausible
world-grounded motion (e.g., foot sliding). To address this, WHAM uses two novel strategies: (1) feature integration from 2D keypoints and
pixels to reconstruct precise and pixel-aligned 3D human motion and (2) contact-aware trajectory recovery to place the human in a global
coordinate system without foot sliding. Gray dots show the ground-truth global trajectory. See Supplemental Video.

Abstract
The estimation of 3D human motion from video has progressed rapidly but current methods still have several key
limitations. First, most methods estimate the human in camera coordinates. Second, prior work on estimating humans
in global coordinates often assumes a flat ground plane and
produces foot sliding. Third, the most accurate methods rely
on computationally expensive optimization pipelines, limiting their use to offline applications. Finally, existing videobased methods are surprisingly less accurate than singleframe methods. We address these limitations with WHAM
(World-grounded Humans with Accurate Motion), which accurately and efficiently reconstructs 3D human motion in a
global coordinate system from video. WHAM learns to lift
2D keypoint sequences to 3D using motion capture data and
fuses this with video features, integrating motion context and
visual information. WHAM exploits camera angular velocity
estimated from a SLAM method together with human motion to estimate the body’s global trajectory. We combine
this with a contact-aware trajectory refinement method that

lets WHAM capture human motion in diverse conditions,
such as climbing stairs. WHAM outperforms all existing
3D human motion recovery methods across multiple in-thewild benchmarks. Code is available for research purposes
at http://wham.is.tue.mpg.de/.

1. Introduction
Our goal is to accurately estimate the 3D pose and shape
of a person from monocular video. This is a longstanding
problem and, while the field has made rapid progress, several key challenges remain. First, human motion should be
computed in a consistent global coordinate system. Second,
the method should be computationally efficient. Third, the
results should be accurate, temporally smooth, detailed, natural looking, and have realistic foot-ground contact. Fourth,
the capture should work with an arbitrary moving camera.
These constraints need to be satisfied to make markerless
human motion capture widely available for applications in
gaming, AR/VR, autonomous driving, sports analysis, and
human-robot interaction. We address these challenges with

2070

