This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CuVLER: Enhanced Unsupervised Object Discoveries through Exhaustive
Self-Supervised Transformers
Shahaf Arica
Or Rubin
Sapir Gershov
Shlomi Laufer
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
shahaftech@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce VoteCut, an innovative
method for unsupervised object discovery that leverages
feature representations from multiple self-supervised models. VoteCut employs normalized-cut based graph partitioning, clustering and a pixel voting approach. Additionally,
We present CuVLER (Cut-Vote-and-LEaRn), a zero-shot
model, trained using pseudo-labels, generated by VoteCut,
and a novel soft target loss to refine segmentation accuracy.
Through rigorous evaluations across multiple datasets and
several unsupervised setups, our methods demonstrate significant improvements in comparison to previous state-ofthe-art models. Our ablation studies further highlight the
contributions of each component, revealing the robustness
and efficacy of our approach. Collectively, VoteCut and
CuVLER pave the way for future advancements in image
segmentation. The project code is available on GitHub at
https://github.com/shahaf-arica/CuVLER

1. Introduction
Object localization remains a cornerstone in computer vision, empowering AI systems with abilities ranging from
perception and inference to strategic planning and interactions centered around objects. The conventional training
paradigm for such models often requires specialized annotations—be it object bounding boxes, masks, or localized
keypoints. Unfortunately, acquiring these manual annotations is time-consuming and resource-heavy [38]. Consequently, there is a burgeoning interest in automated object
detection and segmentation, particularly in unsupervised
settings, circumventing the exhaustive annotation process
[39].
Wang et al. [33] introduced CutLER (Cut-and-LEaRn),
a new approach for training unsupervised object detection
and segmentation models. CutLER employs a two-step
process. First, it generates pseudo-labels using the MaskCut method. This novel approach leverages a single self-

supervised model to create a fixed number of pseudo-labels
per image. In the second phase, these pseudo-labels train a
segmentation model, resulting in the CutLER model. Additionally, CutLER exhibits potential as a base model for
supervised detection, demonstrating efficacy in few-shot
benchmarks.
Our research builds on this pioneering work, progressing through three critical stages: (1) We employ our innovative method, referred to as ’VoteCut’, to harness feature
representations from multiple Vision Transformers (ViTs)
[14] trained in a self-supervised manner [8, 27] to generate
pseudo-labels with corresponding confidence scores, aided
by the eigenvectors of Normalized Cuts (NCut) [28]; (2)
The generated pseudo-labels are then used to train a robust
object detector, which we refer to as ”CuVLER”; (3) The
output from this detector aids mask refinement in a separate
domain, involving the generation of pseudo-labels from detector predictions in this new domain, followed by filtering.
These refined pseudo-labels undergo a subsequent retraining phase, encapsulating our self-training approach.
Our methodology, the proposed CuVLER model, distinguishes itself from Wang et al.’s work in its capability to
generate superior object masks and detections in a given domain, without the need of several ”in domain” self-training
stages. We achieve this by integrating insights from multiple ViT models, enhancing the cluster separation process. We also pioneer a self-training strategy that operates
within the original and the target domain, unlike the approach in CutLER, which restricts self-training to the original domain. This innovation allows our model to enter selftraining stages beyond its initial domain, achieving significant enhancements after just one epoch, showcasing its efficiency and flexibility.
This paper underscores the following contributions in the
domain of unsupervised object detection and segmentation:
1. In-Domain Mask and Detection Discovery - VoteCut:
At the heart of our work is a novel method for identifying high-quality masks and detections within a specific domain. We considerably elevate object localization and segmentation’s efficacy by harnessing multiple

23105

