This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Adaptive Reality-Guided Diffusion for Artifact-Free Super-Resolution
Qingping Zheng1 , Ling Zheng3 , Yuanfan Guo2 , Ying Li1 *, Songcen Xu2 , Jiankang Deng2 , Hang Xu2
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University

2

x𝑡

Abstract
Artifact-free super-resolution (SR) aims to translate lowresolution images into their high-resolution counterparts
with a strict integrity of the original content, eliminating any distortions or synthetic details. While traditional
diffusion-based SR techniques have demonstrated remarkable abilities to enhance image detail, they are prone to artifact introduction during iterative procedures. Such artifacts, ranging from trivial noise to unauthentic textures, deviate from the true structure of the source image, thus challenging the integrity of the super-resolution process. In this
work, we propose Self-Adaptive Reality-Guided Diffusion
(SARGD), a training-free method that delves into the latent
space to effectively identify and mitigate the propagation of
artifacts. Our SARGD begins by using an artifact detector to identify implausible pixels, creating a binary mask
that highlights artifacts. Following this, the Reality Guidance Refinement (RGR) process refines artifacts by integrating this mask with realistic latent representations, improving alignment with the original image. Nonetheless, initial
realistic-latent representations from lower-quality images
result in over-smoothing in the final output. To address this,
we introduce a Self-Adaptive Guidance (SAG) mechanism.
It dynamically computes a reality score, enhancing the
sharpness of the realistic latent. These alternating mechanisms collectively achieve artifact-free super-resolution.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
method, delivering detailed artifact-free high-resolution images while reducing sampling steps by 2×. We release
our code at https://github.com/ProAirVerse/
Self-Adaptive-Guidance-Diffusion.git.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) techniques strive to restore highresolution images from their corresponding low-resolution
counterparts [8, 29]. This process is inherently ill-posed
since the same LR image can yield many plausible HR solutions. Traditional deep learning SR methods, leverag* Corresponding author

3

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Tsinghua-Fuzhou Institute for Data Technology

x𝑡−1

x𝑡−2

⋯

x0

(a) Variation of Artifacts within StableSR

(b) Variation of Artifacts within Our SARGD

Figure 1. Visual comparison of artifact variability between (a)
StableSR and (b) Our SARGD method. In the lower panel, the
left image is the decoded output, while the right image is the artifact mask. Regions containing artifacts are highlighted in red,
utilizing a binary map to serve as the artifact mask. Our SARGD
method exhibits a superior capability in reducing artifacts.

ing techniques like squeeze layers [49], transposed convolutions [38], and sub-pixel convolutions [29], bind themselves to fixed upsampling scales, limiting output resolution
adjustments without architectural changes. This causes inflexibility in real-world applications. To tackle the inherent
one-to-many inverse challenge in SR, it is intuitive to envision the solution space as a distribution. Yet, this perspective often prompts generative models to introduce details
that deviate from the authentic content of the original lowresolution image. As a result, a wide range of generativebased SR approaches have emerged to address this intrinsically ill-posed problem, particularly in diffusion models.
Diffusion-based SR (Diffusion-SR for short) has exhibited significant potential in improving the resolution of images from their low-resolution counterparts. SRDiff [17] is
the first diffusion-based model for image super-resolution,
progressively transforming the Gaussian noise into a highresolution (HR) image conditioned on its low-resolution
(LR) input through a Markov chain. Building on the foundational concept of denoising score matching [31], Saharia et al. [28] propose SR3 model. This model advances the field of super-resolution by learning an empirical data distribution and leveraging U-Net architec-

25806

