This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConsistDreamer: 3D-Consistent 2D Diffusion for High-Fidelity Scene Editing
Jun-Kun Chen1†

Samuel Rota Bulò2
Norman Müller2
Lorenzo Porzi2
Peter Kontschieder2
Yu-Xiong Wang1
1
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Meta
{junkun3,yxw}@illinois.edu
{rotabulo,normanm,porzi,pkontschieder}@meta.com

Figure 1. Our ConsistDreamer lifts 2D diffusion with 3D awareness and consistency, achieving high-fidelity instruction-guided scene
editing with superior sharpness and detailed textures. Left: The three synergistic components within ConsistDreamer that enable 3D
consistency. Right: State-of-the-art performance of ConsistDreamer across various editing tasks and scenes, especially when prior work
(e.g., IN2N [8]) fails and in challenging large-scale indoor scenes from ScanNet++ [43]. More results are on our project page.

Abstract
This paper proposes ConsistDreamer – a novel framework that lifts 2D diffusion models with 3D awareness
and 3D consistency, thus enabling high-fidelity instructionguided scene editing. To overcome the fundamental limitation of missing 3D consistency in 2D diffusion models,
our key insight is to introduce three synergistic strategies
that augment the input of the 2D diffusion model to become 3D-aware and to explicitly enforce 3D consistency
during the training process. Specifically, we design surrounding views as context-rich input for the 2D diffusion
model, and generate 3D-consistent structured noise instead
of image-independent noise. Moreover, we introduce selfsupervised consistency-enforcing training within the perscene editing procedure. Extensive evaluation shows that
our ConsistDreamer achieves state-of-the-art performance
for instruction-guided scene editing across various scenes
and editing instructions, particularly in complicated largescale indoor scenes from ScanNet++, with significantly improved sharpness and fine-grained textures. Notably, ConsistDreamer stands as the first work capable of successfully editing complex (e.g., plaid/checkered) patterns. Our
project page is at immortalco.github.io/ConsistDreamer.

† Work started during an internship at Meta Reality Labs Zurich.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of instruction-guided 2D generative
models as in [2], it has never been easier to generate or
edit images. Extending this success to 3D, i.e., instructionguided 3D scene editing, becomes highly desirable for
artists, designers, and the movie and game industries. Nevertheless, editing 3D scenes or objects is inherently challenging. The absence of large-scale, general 3D datasets
makes it difficult to create a counterpart generative model
similar to [2] that can support arbitrary 3D scenes. Therefore, state-of-the-art solutions [8, 25] circumvent this challenge by resorting to generalizable 2D diffusion models.
This approach, known as 2D diffusion distillation, renders
the scene into multi-view images, applies an instructionconditioned diffusion model in 2D, and then distills the editing signal back to 3D, such as through a neural radiance
field (NeRF) [6, 8, 15].
However, a fundamental limitation of this solution is the
lack of 3D consistency: a 2D diffusion model, acting independently across views, is likely to produce inconsistent
edits, both in color and shape. For example, a person in
one view might be edited to be wearing a red shirt, while
appearing in a green shirt in another view. Using these images to train a NeRF can still produce reasonable edits, but
the model will naturally converge towards an “averaged”
representation of the inconsistent 2D supervision, and lose

21071

