This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Neural Edge Reconstruction
Lei Li1

Songyou Peng1,2†
Zehao Yu3,4
Shaohui Liu1 Rémi Pautrat1,6
Xiaochuan Yin5
Marc Pollefeys1,6
1
2
ETH Zurich
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 3 University of Tübingen
4
5
6
Tübingen AI Center
Utopilot
Microsoft
neural-edge-map.github.io

Abstract
Real-world objects and environments are predominantly
composed of edge features, including straight lines and
curves. Such edges are crucial elements for various applications, such as CAD modeling, surface meshing, lane mapping, etc. However, existing traditional methods only prioritize lines over curves for simplicity in geometric modeling.
To this end, we introduce EMAP, a new method for learning 3D edge representations with a focus on both lines and
curves. Our method implicitly encodes 3D edge distance
and direction in Unsigned Distance Functions (UDF) from
multi-view edge maps. On top of this neural representation,
we propose an edge extraction algorithm that robustly abstracts parametric 3D edges from the inferred edge points
and their directions. Comprehensive evaluations demonstrate that our method achieves better 3D edge reconstruction on multiple challenging datasets. We further show that
our learned UDF field enhances neural surface reconstruction by capturing more details.

1. Introduction
The straight line belongs to men, the curved one to God.
— Antonio Gaudı́
This sentiment is evident in the visual composition of our
environments. While straight lines are common in manmade scenes such as walls, windows, and doors [25], curves
are more general and ubiquitous from cups, bridges, architectures, to Gothic arts. Edges, which are composed of both
lines and curves, are the fundamental elements of visual perception. Therefore, accurate edge modeling is crucial for
understanding the geometry and structure of our 3D world.
Conventional approaches on 3D reconstruction typically
involve inferring dense geometry and abstracting meshes
from 2D images [15, 34, 48, 50, 67, 69]. However, the
presence of 3D edges offers substantial advantages. First,
† Corresponding author

(a) An Indoor Scene

(b) LIMAP [25]

(c) NEAT [64]

(d) EMAP (Ours)

Figure 1. Example 3D edge reconstruction on Replica [53].
While prior methods such as LIMAP [25] and NEAT [64] only reconstruct distinctive line segments, our method generates a more
complete 3D edge map combining both line and curve features.

edges are naturally compact representations that capture the
salient features oftentimes around geometric boundaries,
which are good indicators for more lightweight and adaptive meshing and 3D modeling with comparably less redundancy. Secondly, in contrast to dense surface modeling from images, 3D edges are unaffected to illumination
changes, thus exhibiting better reliability on multi-view reconstruction. Last but not least, 3D edges serve as a universal representation in real-world scenarios, and can be potentially integrated into many applications such as lane mapping [10, 22, 42, 43, 56], motion forecasting [12, 13, 51],
medical imaging [45], etc.
The reconstruction of 3D edges is conventionally approached by matching their 2D observations across views.
While Bignoli et al. [5] proposed edge point matching using the sparse map from Structure-from-Motion (SfM), it
is inherently ill-posed due to its heavy reliance on crossview edge correspondences, which are generally sparse and
prone to ambiguity. Recent works have also improved the
quality of 3D line reconstruction [18, 25, 61, 64], but primarily excel in specific scenes where straight lines domi-

21219

