This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Multi-dimensional Human Preference for Text-to-Image Generation
Sixian Zhang,* Bohan Wang,* Junqiang Wu,* Yan Li†, Tingting Gao, Di Zhang, Zhongyuan Wang
Kuaishou Technology

Abstract

5
Left

Right

4

Current metrics for text-to-image models typically rely
on statistical metrics which inadequately represent the real
preference of humans. Although recent work attempts to
learn these preferences via human annotated images, they
reduce the rich tapestry of human preference to a single
overall score. However, the preference results vary when
humans evaluate images with different aspects. Therefore, to learn the multi-dimensional human preferences,
we propose the Multi-dimensional Preference Score (MPS),
the first multi-dimensional preference scoring model for
the evaluation of text-to-image models. The MPS introduces the preference condition module upon CLIP model
to learn these diverse preferences. It is trained based on
our Multi-dimensional Human Preference (MHP) Dataset,
which comprises 918,315 human preference choices across
four dimensions (i.e., aesthetics, semantic alignment, detail
quality and overall assessment) on 607,541 images. The images are generated by a wide range of latest text-to-image
models. The MPS outperforms existing scoring methods
across 3 datasets in 4 dimensions, enabling it a promising
metric for evaluating and improving text-to-image generation. The model and dataset will be made publicly available to facilitate future research. Project page: https:
//wangbohan97.github.io/MPS/.

1. Introduction
“There are a thousand Hamlets in a thousand people’s eyes.”
–Vissarion Belinsky

Text-to-image generative models [10, 14, 15] have
achieved remarkable advancements in recent years, and
these models have the capability to generate high-fidelity
and contextually relevant images based on textual descriptions (i.e., prompts). To evaluate the quality of generated
images, several evaluation metrics are proposed, including
Inception Score (IS) [16], Fréchet Inception Distance (FID)
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

3
2
1
0

Overall

Aesthetics Alignment

Detail

Prompt: A picture depicting the Grand Canal of Venice, with a row of houses on
both sides of the canal and boatman rowing two boats on the river, illustration,
vivid colors, high-contrast.

5
Left

Right

4
3
2
1
0

Overall

Aesthetics Alignment

Detail

Prompt: A family of three poses in the Grand Canyon, with the man wearing
sunglasses and smiling, 4k resolution, extremely detailed

Figure 1. As humans evaluate images from different perspectives,
their preference for the images also varies. Specifically, when examining the images in the top row, the image on the left stands
out in terms of aesthetic appeal, though it falls short in semantic
alignment (e.g., two boats on the river) compared to its counterpart on the right. In the case of the bottom row, both images are
aesthetically pleasing, yet the image on the right is marred by poor
detail quality (e.g., as signified by the red bounding boxes around
the distorted hand and foot).

[5], and CLIP Score [12]. However, these statistical metrics
fall short of aligning with human perceptual preferences.
For instance, metrics like the IS or the FID, although indicative of image quality to some extent, might not necessarily
reflect how a human observer would rate the image in terms
of fidelity, coherence, or aesthetic appeal.
Contrary to these statistical metrics, several approaches
[6, 20–22, 24] turn towards human-centric evaluations,
where generated images are manually annotated according
to human preferences. Subsequently, models are trained
with these annotations to predict preference scores. However, these approaches typically utilize a single score to
summarize all human preferences, overlooking the multidimensionality of human preferences. As Fig. 1 shows, the
preference results differ when humans evaluate images from
various perspectives. Therefore, using a single-dimensional
evaluation method is insufficient in capturing the broad

8018

