This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Just Add π ! Pose Induced Video Transformers for
Understanding Activities of Daily Living
Dominick Reilly
UNC Charlotte

Srijan Das
UNC Charlotte

dreilly1@charlotte.edu

sdas24@charlotte.edu

PourFromKettle

Snap Fingers

Brushing Hair (0° view)

Shake Fist

Brushing Hair (90° view)

Training
Training + inference

2D Poses
Induce 2D pose
information

Video
Transformer

Action recognition

Multiple Viewpoints

RGB Frames

PourFromBottle

Fine-grained Motion

Fine-grained Appearance

Visually Similar Actions

Induce 3D pose
information

3D Poses

Figure 1. Left: we illustrate the challenges of Activities of Daily Living. Notice the visual similarity in the action pairs (PourFromBottle,
PourFromKettle) and (Snap Fingers, Shake Fist). Also notice the significant change in appearance when viewing Brushing Hair from
different angles. Right: we present an overview of our proposed approach to address these challenges. We induce human pose information
into the representations learned by video transformers. This induction of information is only required during training.

Abstract
Video transformers have become the de facto standard
for human action recognition, yet their exclusive reliance
on the RGB modality still limits their adoption in certain domains. One such domain is Activities of Daily Living (ADL),
where RGB alone is not sufficient to distinguish between
visually similar actions, or actions observed from multiple
viewpoints. To facilitate the adoption of video transformers for ADL, we hypothesize that the augmentation of RGB
with human pose information, known for its sensitivity to
fine-grained motion and multiple viewpoints, is essential.
Consequently, we introduce the first Pose Induced Video
Transformer: PI-ViT (or π -ViT), a novel approach that
augments the RGB representations learned by video transformers with 2D and 3D pose information. The key elements
of π -ViT are two plug-in modules, 2D Skeleton Induction
Module and 3D Skeleton Induction Module, that are responsible for inducing 2D and 3D pose information into the
RGB representations. These modules operate by performing pose-aware auxiliary tasks, a design choice that allows
π -ViT to discard the modules during inference. Notably,
π -ViT achieves the state-of-the-art performance on three
prominent ADL datasets, encompassing both real-world
and large-scale RGB-D datasets, without requiring poses or
additional computational overhead at inference. We release
code and models at https://github.com/dominickrei/pi-vit/.

1. Introduction
Recently, the task of monitoring Activities of Daily Living (ADL) has gained prominence as it enables many applications, such as advanced security systems or assisting
the elderly. Historically, the learning of ADL representations has borrowed heavily from the action recognition literature, where advanced vision models are trained primarily
on internet-sourced videos [8, 26, 28, 46] such as sports,
YouTube, and movie clips. These models, however, are
predominantly appearance-based, aligning actions strongly
with their scenes [24], and do not adequately capture the
intrinsic challenges of ADL. In Figure 1, we present the
challenges in ADL which broadly includes the presence of
visually similar actions and actions captured from different camera views. Firstly, ADL involves visually similar
but fine-grained actions, distinguishable through subtle appearance or motion cues. Secondly, the actors of ADL can
be observed from multiple viewpoints, thus requiring the
learning of view-agnostic representations that can recognize
actions regardless of camera viewpoint.
Video representation learning has undergone a paradigm
shift with the emergence of video transformers [3, 6, 34].
However, despite their effectiveness in learning action representations, they predominantly rely only on the RGB
modality. These unimodal RGB representations are insuf-

18340

