This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPOC: Imitating Shortest Paths in Simulation
Enables Effective Navigation and Manipulation in the Real World
Kiana Ehsani† Tanmay Gupta† Rose Hendrix† Jordi Salvador†
Kunal Pratap Singh‡
Yejin Kim†
Winson Han†
Ranjay Krishna†
Dustin Schwenk†
Eli VanderBilt†
†

Allen Institute for AI

“Navigate to a basketball”

Luca Weihs† Kuo-Hao Zeng†
Alvaro Herrasti†
Aniruddha Kembhavi†

University of Washington

“Locate a laptop”

Bedroom

Office
Bathroom

End

Begin

SPOC begins in the
living room

“Fetch a mug”

Kitchen
Storage

Corridor

SPOC explores
3 rooms and a hallway

SPOC locates the house plant
and navigates towards it

“Fetch an apple”

SPOC explores
until it sees the apple

SPOC picks
up the apple

REAL WORLD

SIMULATOR

EPFL

“Navigate to a house plant”

Living
Room

SPOC’s manipulation camera view
while picking up the mug

‡

SPOC’s manipulation camera view
while picking up the apple

Figure 1. We present S POC, an embodied navigation and manipulation agent trained by imitating shortest-path experts in simulation.
Visualized paths in simulation are white in the beginning and red at the end; red circles and squares highlight target object locations only
for illustration. Top-Left: A variant of S POC, trained only on shortest path episodes for object goal navigation demonstrates complex
behavior like exploration, obstacle avoidance, and back-tracking in novel environments; Top-Right: The same agent transfers to the real
world with no further adaptation and navigates to the house plant; Bottom-Left: S POC exploring the house to navigate to the mug and then
picking it up; Bottom-Right: S POC navigating and picking up objects in the real world, again with no change in weights.

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) with dense rewards and
imitation learning (IL) with human-generated trajectories
are the most widely used approaches for training modern
embodied agents. RL requires extensive reward shaping
and auxiliary losses and is often too slow and ineffective
for long-horizon tasks. While IL with human supervision
is effective, collecting human trajectories at scale is extremely expensive. In this work, we show that imitating
shortest-path planners in simulation produces agents that,
given a language instruction, can proficiently navigate, explore, and manipulate objects in both simulation and in
the real world using only RGB sensors (no depth map or

GPS coordinates). This surprising result is enabled by our
end-to-end, transformer-based, S POC architecture, powerful visual encoders paired with extensive image augmentation, and the dramatic scale and diversity of our training data: millions of frames of shortest-path-expert trajectories collected inside approximately 200,000 procedurally generated houses containing 40,000 unique 3D assets. Our models, data, training code, and newly proposed 10-task benchmarking suite C HORES are available
in spoc-robot.github.io.

1. Introduction
The prevalent method to build embodied agents employs a
rich set of sensors such as RGB, depth maps, and GPS co-

16238

