This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Non-Stationary Textures using Self-Rectification
Yang Zhou1
Rongjun Xiao1
Dani Lischinski2
Daniel Cohen-Or1,3
Hui Huang1 *
1
2
3
Shenzhen University
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Tel Aviv University

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of example- based
non- stationary texture synthesis. We introduce a novel twostep approach wherein users first modify a reference texture using standard image editing tools, yielding an initial
rough target for the synthesis. Subsequently, our proposed
method, termed “self- rectification", automatically refines
this target into a coherent, seamless texture, while faithfully
preserving the distinct visual characteristics of the reference exemplar. Our method leverages a pre- trained diffusion network, and uses self- attention mechanisms, to gradually align the synthesized texture with the reference, ensuring the retention of the structures in the provided target. Through experimental validation, our approach exhibits exceptional proficiency in handling non- stationary
textures, demonstrating significant advancements in texture
synthesis when compared to existing state- of- the- art techniques. Code is available at https://github.com/
xiaorongjun000/Self- Rectification

1. Introduction
Example-based texture synthesis aims to generate a texture that faithfully captures all the visual characteristics
of a provided reference texture exemplar. The key challenge is to generate a texture that visually mimics the reference, while avoiding exact replication and without producing conspicuous, unnatural artifacts.
Over the past decades, numerous methods have emerged
for synthesizing textures from examples, and many have
demonstrated impressive results, particularly for homogeneous textures that can be accurately captured by stationary
models [45]. Nonetheless, a significant challenge remains
when dealing with real-world textures that are inherently
inhomogeneous, and non-stationary.
Non-stationary textures exhibit distinctive attributes,
such as sprawling irregular large-scale structures or variations in attributes such as color, local orientation, and local
scale. Fig. 1 (left) shows two examples. Mimicking such
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our method takes as input a reference texture (left), and a
crude target texture provided by the user (middle column), which
may lack coherence and completeness. Self-rectification is used
to transform the target into a visually coherent texture (right) that
complies with the structure of the crude target, while exhibiting
the visual characteristics of the reference texture.

complex structures and variations through example-based
synthesis is a long-standing challenging task [31].
The emergence of neural networks has provided powerful means to deal with non-stationary textures. Zhou et
al. [51] introduced a method that involves overfitting a
GAN, where the encoder extracts structural guidance for the
decoder. This approach provides a viable means of spatially
extending non-stationary textures while preserving the visual characteristics of the reference. However, this technique requires an extremely long optimization process for
a single texture examplar, and moreover, it fails to provide
any controllability or editability.
In this paper, we introduce a two-step lazy-editing technique where the user first edits the given reference texture
using conventional image editing tools, to obtain an extremely rough initial result, which may be incomplete and
incoherent, as demonstrated in Fig. 1 (middle). Next, our
technique automatically rectifies the edited texture into a
regularized, coherent and seamless texture that follows the
rough target, while retaining the local characteristics of the
reference; see, e.g., Fig. 1 (right). We term this regulariza-

7767

