This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discover and Mitigate Multiple Biased Subgroups in Image Classifiers
* Zeliang Zhang

∗

Mingqian Feng † Zhiheng Li
University of Rochester

Chenliang Xu

{zeliang.zhang,mingqian.feng,zhiheng.li,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models can perform well on indistribution data but often fail on biased subgroups that
are underrepresented in the training data, hindering the robustness of models for reliable applications. Such subgroups
are typically unknown due to the absence of subgroup labels.
Discovering biased subgroups is the key to understanding
models’ failure modes and further improving models’ robustness. Most previous works of subgroup discovery make
an implicit assumption that models only underperform on a
single biased subgroup, which does not hold on in-the-wild
data where multiple biased subgroups exist.
In this work, we propose Decomposition, Interpretation, and Mitigation (DIM), a novel method to address a
more challenging but also more practical problem of discovering multiple biased subgroups in image classifiers.
Our approach decomposes the image features into multiple components that represent multiple subgroups. This
decomposition is achieved via a bilinear dimension reduction method, Partial Least Square (PLS), guided by useful supervision from the image classifier. We further interpret the semantic meaning of each subgroup component
by generating natural language descriptions using visionlanguage foundation models. Finally, DIM mitigates multiple biased subgroups simultaneously via two strategies,
including the data- and model-centric strategies. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-100 and Breeds datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of DIM in discovering and mitigating multiple biased subgroups. Furthermore, DIM uncovers the failure modes of the classifier on Hard ImageNet, showcasing its broader applicability to understanding model bias in image classifiers. The code is available at
https://github.com/ZhangAIPI/DIM .

1. Introduction
Machine learning models can achieve overall good performance on in-distribution data [10, 13]. However, they often underperform on certain biased subgroups that are un* Equal contribution.
† Project lead. Work done before Zhiheng Li joining Amazon.

Image
Classifier y∈{-1，1}

SVM-based decomposition
×

√
√

Subgroup 1

Aquatic
mammals

×
×

Subgroup 2

There is one easy
subgroup, “dolphin &
otter.” The reversed
subgroup is biased.

Previous Unknown Biased Subgroup Discovery
Subgroup 1

Subgroup 2

Subgroup 5

Subgroup 3

Image
Classifier Training

dynamics

Subgroup 4
PLS-based decomposition

There exits five subgroups in the class
aquatic
mammals,
including beaver, dolphin, otter, seal and
whale. Among them,
beaver and whale are
biased subgroups.

Our method: Decomposition, Interpretation, and Mitigation (DIM)

Figure 1. While the previous method [12] exploits the SVM to
detect the single biased subgroup using the classification correctness on samples, we propose to integrate the training dynamics of
biased image classifiers as the supervision into PLS decomposition
to discover multiple unknown subgroups. This allows us to further
subtly interpret discovered subgroups and precisely mitigate biases.

derrepresented in the training data, undermining model robustness against group distributional shifts [39]. For instance, ResNet [9] trained on ImageNet [5] fails to recognize the “balance beam” when kids are not present, where
the image classifier is biased towards the subgroup of “balance beam” when kids are present (cf . Fig. 5). Therefore,
identifying and mitigating subgroup biases in image classifiers is crucial to improve models’ reliability and robustness [16, 19, 28, 48, 49].
However, previous research on model bias has many limitations. First, most existing methods [3, 15, 50] for bias
discovery require structured attributes, demanding expensive human labor to collect and label data. The impracticality of annotating every possible attribute also leads to
potential biases remaining hidden [23]. Second, few works
involve mining the unknown multi-bias. While Eyuboglu
et al. [8] approach this problem by employing a Gaussian
Mixed Model [2] to detect biases through clustering, their
method relies on proxies of clusters to explain unknown
biases, which can result in interpretation distortion (see the
Domino part of Fig. 3 in Sec. 5.2). To address this issue,

10906

