This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FinePOSE: Fine-Grained Prompt-Driven 3D Human Pose Estimation via
Diffusion Models

1

Jinglin Xu1 Yijie Guo2 Yuxin Peng2 *
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
xujinglinlove@gmail.com; 2000012936@stu.pku.edu.cn; pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

FinePOSE
(Single)

Gaussian
Noise

FinePOSE
(Multiple)
Tagging

Sitting Down

Class

Phoning

Person

Body

Fencing

Head

Arms

Legs

Discussion

Single Human Scenario

●
●
●

Speed
Learnable
Modifier

Human
Body Part

Legoassemble

Multi-Human Scenario

Figure 1. Illustration of Fine-grained Prompt-driven Denoiser (FinePOSE). FinePOSE, the proposed diffusion model-based 3D
human pose estimation approach, enables multi-granularity manipulation controlled by learnable modifiers (e.g., “action class”, coarseand fine-grained human body parts including “person, head, body, arms, legs”, and kinematic information “speed”), boosting motion
reconstruction for single human and multi-human scenarios.

Abstract
The 3D Human Pose Estimation (3D HPE) task uses
2D images or videos to predict human joint coordinates in
3D space. Despite recent advancements in deep learningbased methods, they mostly ignore the capability of coupling accessible texts and naturally feasible knowledge of
humans, missing out on valuable implicit supervision to
guide the 3D HPE task. Moreover, previous efforts often
study this task from the perspective of the whole human
body, neglecting fine-grained guidance hidden in different
body parts. To this end, we present a new Fine-Grained
Prompt-Driven Denoiser based on a diffusion model for 3D
HPE, named FinePOSE. It consists of three core blocks
enhancing the reverse process of the diffusion model: (1)
Fine-grained Part-aware Prompt learning (FPP) block constructs fine-grained part-aware prompts via coupling accessible texts and naturally feasible knowledge of body parts
with learnable prompts to model implicit guidance. (2) Fine* Corresponding author.

grained Prompt-pose Communication (FPC) block establishes fine-grained communications between learned partaware prompts and poses to improve the denoising quality.
(3) Prompt-driven Timestamp Stylization (PTS) block integrates learned prompt embedding and temporal information
related to the noise level to enable adaptive adjustment at
each denoising step. Extensive experiments on public singlehuman pose estimation datasets show that FinePOSE outperforms state-of-the-art methods. We further extend FinePOSE
to multi-human pose estimation. Achieving 34.3mm average
MPJPE on the EgoHumans dataset demonstrates the potential of FinePOSE to deal with complex multi-human scenarios. Code is available at https://github.com/PKUICST-MIPL/FinePOSE_CVPR2024.

1. Introduction
Given monocular 2D images or videos, 3D Human Pose
Estimation (3D HPE) aims to predict the positions of human
body joints in 3D space. It is vital in various applications,
including self-driving [50, 56], sports analysis [13, 31, 46],

561

