This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OrthCaps: An Orthogonal CapsNet with Sparse Attention Routing and Pruning
Xinyu Geng1
Jiaming Wang1
Jiawei Gong1
Yuerong Xue1
Jun Xu1†
Fanglin Chen1†
Xiaolin Huang2
2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{22s153095, 21s153144}@stu.hit.edu.cn, {jiawei gong, xyuerong}@163.com,
xujunqgy@hit.edu.cn, chenfanglin@gmail.com, xiaolinhuang@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Redundancy is a persistent challenge in Capsule Networks (CapsNet), leading to high computational costs
and parameter counts. Although previous studies have
introduced pruning after the initial capsule layer, dynamic routing’s fully connected nature and non-orthogonal
weight matrices reintroduce redundancy in deeper layers.
Besides, dynamic routing requires iterating to converge,
further increasing computational demands. In this paper,
we propose an Orthogonal Capsule Network (OrthCaps)
to reduce redundancy, improve routing performance and
decrease parameter counts. Firstly, an efficient pruned
capsule layer is introduced to discard redundant capsules.
Secondly, dynamic routing is replaced with orthogonal
sparse attention routing, eliminating the need for iterations
and fully connected structures. Lastly, weight matrices
during routing are orthogonalized to sustain low capsule
similarity, which is the first approach to use Householder
orthogonal decomposition to enforce orthogonality in CapsNet. Our experiments on baseline datasets affirm the
efficiency and robustness of OrthCaps in classification
tasks, in which ablation studies validate the criticality of
each component. OrthCaps-Shallow outperforms other
Capsule Network benchmarks on four datasets, utilizing
only 110k parameters – a mere 1.25% of a standard
Capsule Network’s total. To the best of our knowledge, it
achieves the smallest parameter count among existing Capsule Networks. Similarly, OrthCaps-Deep demonstrates
competitive performance across four datasets, utilizing only
1.2% of the parameters required by its counterparts.

1. Introduction
While convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) excel in
computer vision tasks, certain challenges remain, which
include information loss in pooling layers, low robustness,
and poor spatial feature correlation [8, 30]. To address
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Dynamic routing mechanism. ui , vj are the lower-level
capsule, and higher-level capsule, respectively. W is the weight
matrix to produce the pose prediction ûi of ui for next level. bij
is a temporary variable to calculate the coupling coefficient cij .

these limitations, Capsule Network (CapsNet) was proposed, using capsule vectors instead of traditional neurons.
In CapsNet, each capsule vector’s length represents the
presence probability of specific entities in the input image,
and its direction encodes the captured features [30]. This
setup allows the capsule vectors to capture features related
to corresponding entities. CapsNet’s architecture includes
a primary capsule extraction layer, a digit capsule layer,
dynamic routing, and class-conditioned reconstruction. As
a key component of CapsNet, dynamic routing aligns lowerlevel capsules with higher-level ones, which is described
in Fig. 1. First, lower-level capsules Ul (in matrix form)
predict poses Ûl for higher-level capsules Vl+1 via weight
matrix W . Then, the routing process iteratively clusters
to adjust the coupling coefficients cij of each lower-level
capsule ul,i to all higher-level capsules, with more crucial
capsules receiving larger cij .
Recent studies have mentioned that CapsNet contains
redundant capsules [1, 28, 31]. As evidence, Fig. 2 shows
48.2% of primary capsule pairs exhibit cosine similarities
above 0.65, indicating significant redundancy. Although
certain studies have implemented pruning techniques at

6037

