This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KP-RED: Exploiting Semantic Keypoints for Joint 3D Shape
Retrieval and Deformation
Ruida Zhang1∗ , Chenyangguang Zhang1∗ , Yan Di2 , Fabian Manhardt3 ,
Xingyu Liu1 , Federico Tombari2,3 , Xiangyang Ji1
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Technical University of Munich, 3 Google
{zhangrd23@mails, zcyg22@mails, xyji@}.tsinghua.edu.cn *

Abstract
In this paper, we present KP-RED, a uniﬁed KeyPointdriven REtrieval and Deformation framework that takes
object scans as input and jointly retrieves and deforms
the most geometrically similar CAD models from a preprocessed database to tightly match the target. Unlike existing dense matching based methods that typically struggle
with noisy partial scans, we propose to leverage categoryconsistent sparse keypoints to naturally handle both full
and partial object scans. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst employ a
lightweight retrieval module to establish a keypoint-based
embedding space, measuring the similarity among objects by dynamically aggregating deformation-aware localglobal features around extracted keypoints. Objects that are
close in the embedding space are considered similar in geometry. Then we introduce the neural cage-based deformation module that estimates the inﬂuence vector of each
keypoint upon cage vertices inside its local support region
to control the deformation of the retrieved shape. Extensive experiments on the synthetic dataset PartNet and the
real-world dataset Scan2CAD demonstrate that KP-RED
surpasses existing state-of-the-art approaches by a large
margin. Codes and trained models will be released in
https://github.com/lolrudy/KP-RED.

1. Introduction
Creating high-quality 3D models from noisy object scans
has attracted wide research interest [21, 24, 39, 44, 48] due
to its potential applications in 3D scene perception [32, 51],
robotics [49] and artistic creation [10, 40]. Previous priorfree methods [32, 39] directly utilize deep neural networks
to recover the object model. However, due to heavy (self)occlusion and non-negligible noise, it is often infeasible to
infer ﬁne-grained geometric structures without prior knowledge. To address this issue, Retrieval and Deformation
* Authors with equal contributions.

Figure 1. Top Two Rows: Given the target point cloud, KP-RED
ﬁrst retrieves the most similar CAD model from the preprocessed
database and deforms it to match the target using the keypoints for
guidance. Bottom Two Rows: Given a scene scan, KP-RED reconstructs the CAD models of all objects and represents the scene
by gathering the reconstructed models.

(R&D) methods [7, 19, 21, 31, 36, 40, 41, 44, 48] are proposed. These methods ﬁrst retrieve the most geometrically
similar source shape from a certain shape database and then
deform the retrieved shape to tightly match the target, yielding a CAD model with ﬁne-grained structural details inherited from the source shape.
However, existing R&D methods typically suffer from
two challenges, making them vulnerable to noise and occluded observations. First, when constructing the embedding space for retrieval, most methods [7, 11, 15, 21, 26, 41]
resort to single global feature of the input point cloud,
which is usually obtained via pooling of point-wise features.
Unfortunately, this strategy inevitably causes the loss of local geometric information, leading to less accurate retrieval,
and further deteriorates the deformation quality. Furthermore, such global feature based embedding is sensitive to

20540

