This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compositional Video Understanding
with Spatiotemporal Structure-based Transformers
Hoyeoung Yun1⇤ , Jinwoo Ahn2⇤ , Minseo Kim1 , Eun-Sol Kim1, 2†
1
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence Application, Hanyang University
{yhy17520, jinwooahn, simon1011, eunsolkim}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we suggest a new novel method to understand complex semantic structures through long video inputs. Conventional methods for understanding videos have
been focused on short-term clips, and trained to get visual
representations for the short clips using convolutional neural networks or transformer architectures. However, most
real-world videos are composed of long videos ranging
from minutes to hours, therefore, it essentially brings limitations to understanding the overall semantic structures
of the long videos by dividing them into small clips and
learning the representations of them. We suggest a new algorithm to learn the multi-granular semantic structures of
videos, by defining spatiotemporal high-order relationships
among object-based representations as semantic units. The
proposed method includes a new transformer architecture
capable of learning spatiotemporal graphs, and a compositional learning method to learn disentangled features for
each semantic unit. Using the suggested method, we resolve
the challenging video task, which is compositional generalization understanding of unseen videos. In experiments,
we demonstrate new state-of-the-art performances for two
challenging video datasets.

1. Introduction
Recently, as video-content-based services have obviously
proliferated, human-level video understanding using artificial intelligence has been regarded as one of the fundamental problems in the computer vision field. However previous
methods of video understanding [15, 31, 32] have been focused on short-term clips ranging from seconds to a few
minutes, and, it is considered one of the challenging problems to understand the semantic structures in long video
due to the complex and high-order dependencies between
* These authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Overall scheme of proposed compositional learning
strategy. We introduce an object-centric spatiotemporal graph as
an alternative representation of the given video and decompose it
to obtain fine-grained semantic units. Subsequently, by composing
these semantic units, we can reproduce higher-level semantics corresponding to the complex semantics present in the given video.

scenes or events throughout the spatial and temporal axis.
Due to the complexity, most conventional video understanding methods [15, 31, 32] represent each frame (or uniformly segmented short-term clips) as a real-valued vector
which makes it hard to consider high-order relationships between objects within the frame. Moreover, the methods have
limitations in modeling various lengths of actions inherent
within videos and the complex relationships between the actions as the length of the video increases. In other words, it
is hard to understand multi-granular semantic structures encompassing objects, scenes, and video-wide contexts with
conventional video understanding methods. To tackle this
problem, we suggest a novel video understanding method
based on object-oriented representations that can learn the
spatiotemporal semantic structures of the videos in compositional ways.
The two main goals of this paper are 1) to propose a

18751

