This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAFDNet: A Simple and Effective Network for Fully Sparse 3D Object Detection
Gang Zhang1 Junnan Chen2 Guohuan Gao3 Jianmin Li1 Si Liu4 Xiaolin Hu1,5,6 *
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for AI, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 3 Beijing Institute of Technology
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
5
Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (THBI),
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua University
6
Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR), Beijing 100010, China
zhang-g19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, chen jn@hust.edu.cn, gaoguohuan@bit.edu.cn,
liusi@buaa.edu.cn, lijianmin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
LiDAR-based 3D object detection plays an essential role
in autonomous driving. Existing high-performing 3D object
detectors usually build dense feature maps in the backbone
network and prediction head. However, the computational
costs introduced by the dense feature maps grow quadratically as the perception range increases, making these models
hard to scale up to long-range detection. Some recent works
have attempted to construct fully sparse detectors to solve
this issue; nevertheless, the resulting models either rely on
a complex multi-stage pipeline or exhibit inferior performance. In this work, we propose a fully sparse adaptive
feature diffusion network (SAFDNet) for LiDAR-based 3D
object detection. In SAFDNet, an adaptive feature diffusion
strategy is designed to address the center feature missing
problem. We conducted extensive experiments on Waymo
Open, nuScenes, and Argoverse2 datasets. SAFDNet performed slightly better than the previous SOTA on the first two
datasets but much better on the last dataset, which features
long-range detection, verifying the efficacy of SAFDNet in
scenarios where long-range detection is required. Notably,
on Argoverse2, SAFDNet surpassed the previous best hybrid detector HEDNet by 2.6% mAP while being 2.1× faster,
and yielded 2.1% mAP gains over the previous best sparse
detector FSDv2 while being 1.3× faster. The code will be
available at https://github.com/zhanggang001/HEDNet.

1. Introduction
LiDAR-based 3D object detection poses a significant challenge in computer vision and has received increasing attention for its potential applications in autonomous driving [1]
and advanced robotics [2]. Currently, most LiDAR-based

3D Sparse Voxel
Feature Encoder

Prediction from
Dense Voxels

2D Dense CNN
(a) One-stage Hybrid Detectors

Group Correction Head
for Refinement

Point Segmentation
& Center Voting

Prediction from
Instances

3D Sparse Voxel
Feature Extractor

Instance Clustering

Instance Feature
Extractor

(b) FSDv1
3D Sparse Voxel
Feature Encoder

AFD &
2D Sparse CNN

Prediction from
Sparse Voxels

(c) SAFDNet

Figure 1. Comparison among previous one-stage hybrid detectors,
the fully sparse detector FSDv1, and our SAFDNet.

3D detectors [3–7] convert sparse features into dense feature maps to facilitate further feature extraction and prediction, termed hybrid detectors (see Figure 1(a)). These methods demonstrate excellent performance on well-established
benchmarks like nuScenes [8] and Waymo Open [9], primarily designed for a relatively short perception range (below
75 meters). However, scaling these methods to more practical long-range scenarios (exceeding 200 meters) becomes
challenging because the computational costs associated with
dense feature maps grow quadratically as the perception
range increases [10]. Additionally, processing unoccupied
areas is often unnecessary and might even hinder detection
accuracy. Consequently, there’s a growing interest among
researchers in developing fully sparse detectors [10–13].
Constructing fully sparse detectors by removing dense
feature maps from existing hybrid detectors is non-trivial, as
these feature maps play a crucial role in these methods. Most

14477

