This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DREAM: Diffusion Rectification and Estimation-Adaptive Models
Jinxin Zhou1∗

Tianyu Ding2∗†

Tianyi Chen2

Zhihui Zhu1
1

Jiachen Jiang1

Ilya Zharkov2

Luming Liang2†

Ohio State University

2

Microsoft

{zhou.3820,jiang.2880,zhu.3440}@osu.edu, {tianyuding,tiachen,zharkov,lulian}@microsoft.com

Standard

DREAM
Training iterations

10k

20k

50k

100k

150k

200k

400k

800k

Turning the top to the bottom by adding only three lines of code (line 4-6 in Algorithm 3).
Figure 1. Comparative training of conditional diffusion models for super-resolution. Top: standard conditional DDPM [44]. Bottom:
enhancing the same model training with just three additional lines of code, leaving the sampling process unchanged. DREAM facilitates
notably faster and more stable training convergence, significantly surpassing baseline models in key metrics of perception and distortion.

Abstract
We present DREAM, a novel training framework representing Diffusion Rectification and Estimation-Adaptive
Models, requiring minimal code changes (just three lines)
yet significantly enhancing the alignment of training with
sampling in diffusion models. DREAM features two components: diffusion rectification, which adjusts training to reflect the sampling process, and estimation adaptation, which
balances perception against distortion. When applied to image super-resolution (SR), DREAM adeptly navigates the
tradeoff between minimizing distortion and preserving high
image quality. Experiments demonstrate DREAM’s superiority over standard diffusion-based SR methods, showing a
2 to 3× faster training convergence and a 10 to 20× reduction in sampling steps to achieve comparable results. We
hope DREAM will inspire a rethinking of diffusion model
training paradigms. Our source code is available at link.

1. Introduction
Single-image super-resolution (SISR) [3, 12, 50, 59] involves generating high-resolution (HR) images from low∗ Equal contribution. This work was done when Jinxin Zhou was an
intern at Applied Sciences Group, Microsoft.
† Corresponding author.

resolution (LR) counterparts, a process crucial in various
applications including video surveillance, medical diagnosis, and photography. SISR is challenging due to the diverse
real-world degradation patterns and the inherent ill-posed
nature of the task, where different HR images can correspond to the same LR image.
SISR methods are generally categorized into regressionbased and generation-based approaches. Regression-based
methods [7, 31, 34, 69] focus on minimizing pixel-level discrepancies, i.e., distortion, between SR predictions and HR
references. However, this approach often fails to capture the
perceptual quality of images. To address this, generationbased methods employ deep generative models, including autoregressive models [40, 41], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [27, 53], normalizing flows (NFs) [11, 26],
and generative adversarial networks (GANs) [16, 24, 33,
42], aiming to improve the perceptual aspects of SR images.
Recently, Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) [19,
48], a novel class of generative models, have attracted increased interest for their impressive generative abilities, especially in the SISR task [14, 20, 43, 44, 62]. Nonetheless, DPM-based methods face challenges due to their dependence on a long sampling chain, which can lead to error
accumulation and reduce training and sampling efficiency.
A further issue is the discrepancy between training and sampling [39, 61]: training typically involves denoising noisy
images conditioned on ground truth samples, whereas test-

8342

