This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decomposing Disease Descriptions for Enhanced Pathology Detection: A
Multi-Aspect Vision-Language Pre-training Framework
Vu Minh Hieu Phan1 , Yutong Xie1 , Yuankai Qi2 , Lingqiao Liu1 , Liyang Liu1 , Bowen Zhang1 ,
Zhibin Liao1 , Qi Wu1 , Minh-Son To3 , Johan W. Verjans1
1
1

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide; 2 Macquarie University; 3 Flinders University

{vuminhhieu.phan,yutong.xie,lingqiao.liu,akide.liu,b.zhang,zhibin.liao,qi.wu01,

johan.verjans}@adelaide.edu.au, 2 yuankai.qi@mq.edu.au, 3 minhson.to@flinders.edu.au

Covid-19

Medical vision language pre-training (VLP) has
emerged as a frontier of research, enabling zero-shot pathological recognition by comparing the query image with the
textual descriptions for each disease. Due to the complex
semantics of biomedical texts, current methods struggle to
align medical images with key pathological findings in unstructured reports. This leads to the misalignment with the
target disease’s textual representation. In this paper, we
introduce a novel VLP framework designed to dissect disease descriptions into their fundamental aspects, leveraging
prior knowledge about the visual manifestations of pathologies. This is achieved by consulting a large language model
and medical experts. Integrating a Transformer module,
our approach aligns an input image with the diverse elements of a disease, generating aspect-centric image representations. By consolidating the matches from each aspect,
we improve the compatibility between an image and its associated disease. Additionally, capitalizing on the aspectoriented representations, we present a dual-head Transformer tailored to process known and unknown diseases,
optimizing the comprehensive detection efficacy. Conducting experiments on seven downstream datasets, ours improves the accuracy of recent methods by up to 8.56% and
17.26% for seen and unseen categories, respectively. Our
code is released at https://github.com/HieuPhan33/MAVL.

1. Introduction
The advent of vision-language pre-training (VLP) methods,
notably CLIP [30], has yielded impressive zero-shot and
low-shot fine-tuning in object recognition [21, 22, 30, 42].
Pre-training on 400M image-text pairs, VLP models [21,
29, 30, 43] learn a strong semantic mapping between image
and text spaces. During inference, they enable zero-shot
recognition by computing the similarity between the query

High compatibility with
visual descriptions

Low compatibility with
disease's name

Abstract

0.25
0.56

Edema
Cardiomegaly

0.41

Covid – AUC = 73.13%

Lung edges
Grainy texture
0.67
Average
Lung base
Speckled spots
0.47
Average
Heart region
Large heart
Average

0.62
0.60

0.71

0.43
0.52

0.31
0.23
0.27

Covid – AUC = 83.86% ( 14.67%)

Figure 1. Predictions of CheXzero [34] (Left), a strong CLIPlike model, and our multi-aspect matching model (Right).
Edema and Covid-19 belong to the domain of lung diseases,
while cardiomegaly is a heart disease. CheXzero [34] misaligns
the image feature with the target Covid-19, while it over-aligns
with edema. We leverage the medical knowledge base to decompose disease terms into distinct visual components, enhancing the
image alignment with the representations of the target disease.

image and the text representation of each category. In the
medical field, recent methods [3, 34, 35, 39] adopt CLIP
and align images with their corresponding reports to enable
zero-shot disease recognition, i.e., classifying without further fine-tuning. As such, this strategy reduces the reliance
on costly medical data annotation. Adding supervisory signals can enhance discriminative features, exemplified by a
concurrent work [39] that extracts disease terms from reports and directly matches with the disease’s definitions.
However, current VLP methods [3, 34, 35, 39] often produce low compatibility scores when aligning with the target disease’s name, particularly for novel categories. Fig. 1
(Left) shows the misalignment between an image showing
previously unseen disease, Covid-19, and its target disease name. This issue arises from various inherent challenges of VLP. First, medical imaging analysis is inherently fine-grained, which requires distinguishing between
diseases that are visually similar, such as differentiating
Covid-19 from other lung diagnoses like edema. Secondly, biomedical texts contain complex clinical terminologies, and there is an imbalance between important entities

11492

