This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M E LF USION: Synthesizing Music from Image and Language Cues using
Diffusion Models
Sanjoy Chowdhury∗1,3†
Sayan Nag∗2,3†
K J Joseph3
3
Balaji Vasan Srinivasan
Dinesh Manocha1
1

University of Maryland, College Park

{sanjoyc,dmanocha}@umd.edu

2

University of Toronto

sayan.nag@mail.utoronto.ca

3

Adobe Research

{josephkj,balsrini}@adobe.com

Project page - https://schowdhury671.github.io/melfusion_cvpr2024/

Abstract
Music is a universal language that can communicate
emotions and feelings. It forms an essential part of the
whole spectrum of creative media, ranging from movies to
social media posts. Machine learning models that can synthesize music are predominantly conditioned on textual descriptions of it. Inspired by how musicians compose music
not just from a movie script, but also through visualizations,
we propose M E LF USION, a model that can effectively use
cues from a textual description and the corresponding image to synthesize music. M E LF USION is a text-to-music
diffusion model with a novel “visual synapse”, which effectively infuses the semantics from the visual modality into the
generated music. To facilitate research in this area, we introduce a new dataset MeLBench, and propose a new evaluation metric IMSM. Our exhaustive experimental evaluation suggests that adding visual information to the music
synthesis pipeline significantly improves the quality of generated music, measured both objectively and subjectively,
with a relative gain of up to 67.98% on the FAD score. We
hope that our work will gather attention to this pragmatic,
yet relatively under-explored research area.

1. Introduction
Music is an essential tool for creative professionals and content creators. It can complement and set the mood for an
accompanying still image, animation, video, or even text
descriptions while creating a social media post. Finding
music that matches a specific setting, can indeed be an arduous task. A conditional music generation approach, that
can synthesize a music track by analyzing the visual content
and the textual description can find a wide range of practical
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done during internship at Adobe Research.

We introduce a new
problem setting and an
approach to synthesize
music, conditioned on both
visual and textual
modalities.

MELFUSION
(Ours)

A soft musical track of folk
acoustic genre played on violin.

OVL: 88.45

Long Caption
An
Alternate
Approach

Caption
Generator

A tranquil scenery is captured with the view of the
night sky just before sunrise. The sky consists of
dynamic spiralling clouds which symbolizes
movement and aliveness. The stars are bright and
prominent with strokes of yellows and whites
represent a vivid yet peaceful moment. The village
in the scene has houses whose windows emit warm
and glowing light, giving a contrast to the cool,
celestial tones of sky depicting pleasant emotions.

Text-to-Music
OVL: 83.86

A soft musical track of folk acoustic genre played
on violin.

Figure 1. We present M E LF USION, a music diffusion model
equipped with a novel “visual synapse”, that can effectively infuse image semantics into a text-to-music diffusion model. This
task indeed requires a detailed understanding of the concepts in
the image. An alternate approach like using a caption generator to
convert image to text space to be further used with existing text-tomusic methods leads to a sub-optimal overall audio quality (OVL)
score. Our approach can knit together complementary information
from both modalities to synthesize high-quality music.

applications in various fields including social media.
Inspired by the progress in generative modeling of images, music generation has also garnered significant attention from the community [1, 30, 42]. Recently, Agostinelli
et al. [1], Copet et al. [4] proposed conditioning in the form
of melody or humming. While Sheffer and Adi [43] pursue
image-guided audio generation. Despite these efforts, music generation conditioned on multiple modalities like text
and image, is largely uncharted.
Images are more expressive [13] than text-only information and capture more fine-grained semantic information
about various visual aspects. For example, as depicted in
Fig 1, to generate a musical track that goes well with a
given image, without indeed using it, one has to make the
tedious effort of producing long, descriptive captions (either
generated by an image captioning model or human annota-

26826

