This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grounding Everything: Emerging Localization Properties
in Vision-Language Transformers
Walid Bousselham1,2
1

2

Felix Petersen3

Vittorio Ferrari4

3

Hilde Kuehne1,2,5

4

5

Bowl

Man

University of Bonn, Goethe University Frankfurt, Stanford University, Synthesia.io, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

1. Introduction
Vision-Language models, trained on large-scale web-based
datasets such as WIT-400M [29], LAION400M [30], or
metaclip-400M [35] with image-text supervision only, have
so far shown a remarkable set of capabilities. These models such as CLIP [29], OpenCLIP [30], BLIP [15], or recently MetaCLIP [35] exhibit the ability to generalize to a
broad range of downstream tasks like zero-shot image classification [6, 12, 29], visual question answering [13], action
recognition [38, 40], image captioning [15, 16], and view
synthesis [11]. However, models trained with image-level
objectives such as contrastive loss, image-text matching, or
1 Code is available at https://github.com/WalBouss/GEM.

Jet ski

MaskCLIP
CLIPSurgery
GEM (ours)

Vision-language foundation models have shown remarkable performance in various zero-shot settings such as image retrieval, classification, or captioning. But so far, those
models seem to fall behind when it comes to zero-shot localization of referential expressions and objects in images.
As a result, they need to be fine-tuned for this task. In
this paper, we show that pretrained vision-language (VL)
models allow for zero-shot open-vocabulary object localization without any fine-tuning. To leverage those capabilities, we propose a Grounding Everything Module (GEM)
that generalizes the idea of value-value attention introduced
by CLIPSurgery [17] to a self-self attention path. We show
that the concept of self-self attention corresponds to clustering, thus enforcing groups of tokens arising from the same
object to be similar while preserving the alignment with
the language space. To further guide the group formation,
we propose a set of regularizations that allows the model
to finally generalize across datasets and backbones. We
evaluate the proposed GEM framework on various benchmark tasks and datasets for semantic segmentation. GEM
not only outperforms other training-free open-vocabulary
localization methods, but also achieves state-of-the-art results on the recently proposed OpenImagesV7 large-scale
segmentation benchmark. 1

Hamburger

CLIP

Abstract

Figure 1. Qualitative results of training-free methods: given a text
prompt, the similarity of each image token with the prompt is calculated (red:high, blue:low). The proposed GEM method provides
improved grouping and alignment compared to other approaches.

image captioning struggle to maintain their zero-shot capabilities for tasks related to visual localization [17, 42].
Even worse, when prompting such models, e.g., for specific objects, they often exhibit an inverse vision-language
relation: the prompt embedding has a larger distance from
image patches containing the object compared to patches of
the background, as shown in Figure 1.
In order to leverage vision-language models (VLMs)
to localize objects in an open-vocabulary setting, different
sets of approaches have been proposed. The first line of
work trains models to detect or segment regions in an im-

3828

