This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Memorization-Free Diffusion Models
Chen Chen
Daochang Liu
Chang Xu
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
{cche0711@uni., daochang.liu@, c.xu@}sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Pretrained diffusion models and their outputs are widely
accessible due to their exceptional capacity for synthesizing high-quality images and their open-source nature.
The users, however, may face litigation risks owing to
the models’ tendency to memorize and regurgitate training data during inference. To address this, we introduce
Anti-Memorization Guidance (AMG), a novel framework
employing three targeted guidance strategies for the main
causes of memorization: image and caption duplication,
and highly specific user prompts. Consequently, AMG ensures memorization-free outputs while maintaining high image quality and text alignment, leveraging the synergy of
its guidance methods, each indispensable in its own right.
AMG also features an innovative automatic detection system for potential memorization during each step of inference process, allows selective application of guidance
strategies, minimally interfering with the original sampling
process to preserve output utility. We applied AMG to pretrained Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM)
and Stable Diffusion across various generation tasks. The
results demonstrate that AMG is the first approach to successfully eradicates all instances of memorization with no
or marginal impacts on image quality and text-alignment,
as evidenced by FID and CLIP scores.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [12, 23, 34] have attracted substantial interest, given their superiority in terms of diversity, fidelity,
scalability [28] and controllability [24] over previous generative models including VAEs [17], normalizing flows [29],
and GANs [10, 14–16]. With guidance techniques [7, 11],
diffusion models can be further improved by the strategical
diversity-fidelity trade-off. State-of-the-art diffusion models trained on vast web-scale datasets are widespreadly used
and have seen deployment at a commercial scale [1, 30, 31].
Such widespread adoption, however, has significantly
heightened the litigation risks for companies using these
models, particularly due to allegations that the models
memorize and reproduce training data during inference
without informing the data owners and the users of diffusion

Figure 1. Stable Diffusion’s capacity to memorize training data,
manifested as pixel-level memorization (left) and object-level
memorization (right). Our approach successfully guides pretrained diffusion models to produce memorization-free outputs.

models. This potentially violates copyright laws and introduces ethical dilemmas, further complicated by the fact that
the extensive size of training sets impedes detailed human
review, leaving the intellectual property rights of the data
sources largely undetermined. An ongoing example is that a
legal action contends that Stable Diffusion is a 21st-century
collage tool that remixes the copyrighted works of millions
of artists whose work was used as training data [32].
Prior studies [4, 35, 36] have observed memorization in
pretrained diffusion models, particularly during unconditional CIFAR-10 [18] and text-conditional LAION dataset
[33] generations. While previous research proposed strategies to reduce memorization, these often lead to only modest improvements and fail to fully eliminate the issue. The
effectiveness often come with reduced output quality and
text-alignment [36], the need for retraining models [4], and
extensive manual intervention [19]. Moreover, these strategies lack an automated way to differentiate potential memorization cases for targeted mitigation. For example, [19]
relies on a predefined list of text prompts prone to causing
memorization, and [36] applies randomization mechanisms
uniformly without distinguishing between scenarios.
In this paper, we undertake the following systematic efforts to address the issue of memorization. Firstly, we have

8425

