This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RLHF-V: Towards Trustworthy MLLMs via Behavior Alignment from
Fine-grained Correctional Human Feedback
Tianyu Yu1 Yuan Yao2 * Haoye Zhang1 Taiwen He1 Yifeng Han1
Ganqu Cui1 Jinyi Hu1 Zhiyuan Liu1∗ Hai-Tao Zheng134∗ Maosong Sun1
1

Tsinghua University 2 National University of Singapore
3
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
4
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
yiranytianyu@gmail.com

yaoyuanthu@gmail.com

https://rlhf-v.github.io

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have recently demonstrated impressive capabilities in multimodal
understanding, reasoning, and interaction. However, existing MLLMs prevalently suffer from serious hallucination
problems, generating text that is not factually grounded in
associated images. The problem makes existing MLLMs untrustworthy and thus impractical in real-world (especially
high-stakes) applications. To address the challenge, we
present RLHF-V, which enhances MLLM trustworthiness
via behavior alignment from fine-grained correctional human feedback. Specifically, RLHF-V collects human preference in the form of segment-level corrections on hallucinations, and performs dense direct preference optimization
over the human feedback. Comprehensive experiments on
five benchmarks in both automatic and human evaluation
show that, RLHF-V can enable substantially more trustworthy MLLM behaviors with promising data and computation
efficiency. Remarkably, using 1.4k annotated data samples, RLHF-V significantly reduces the hallucination rate
of the base MLLM by 34.8%, outperforming the concurrent LLaVA-RLHF trained on 10k annotated data. The final
model achieves state-of-the-art performance in trustworthiness among open-source MLLMs, and shows better robustness than GPT-4V in preventing hallucinations aroused
from over-generalization.

1. Introduction
The recent success of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) marks a significant milestone in AI research [2, 4,
* Corresponding authors

11, 12, 19, 27, 29, 42, 51]. By connecting visual signals and
Large Language Models (LLMs), MLLMs show unprecedented capabilities in multimodal understanding, reasoning,
and interaction [28, 29, 44]. The models are typically pretrained on large-scale image-text data to learn the foundational multimodal knowledge and capabilities [2, 4, 12, 19].
To steer the model behavior, most MLLMs are further finetuned with instruction tuning (also known as supervised
fine-tuning), which supervises models to clone the behavior from demonstration data, enabling MLLMs to engage
users in various open-world tasks [4, 11, 25, 27, 47].
However, current MLLM behaviors are not well aligned
with human preferences. A glaring issue is their tendency
to produce hallucinations — responses that are not factually grounded in the associated images [21, 25, 29, 37].
This typically includes descriptions of non-existing visual
contents and errors in descriptions. As shown in Figure 1,
current MLLMs can hallucinate about objects, attributes,
numbers, positions, actions, etc. Quantitatively, our human evaluation shows that the problem is prevalent among
state-of-the-art MLLMs, where even the most advanced
GPT-4V [29] contains obvious hallucinations in 45.9% responses. The problem makes existing MLLMs untrustworthy and thus impractical in real-world (especially highstakes) applications, such as guiding visually impaired individuals [29] or autonomous driving systems [43].
We argue that the problem arises from the lack of positive/negative human feedback in instruction-tuned models,
making it challenging to learn the precise behavior boundaries to exclude hallucination. To address the problem, we
propose RLHF-V, a novel framework that aligns MLLM behavior by learning from human feedback. However, simply applying traditional Reinforcement Learning from Hu-

13807

