This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Concept Weaver: Enabling Multi-Concept Fusion in Text-to-Image Models
Gihyun Kwon1 Simon Jenni2 Dingzeyu Li2 Joon-Young Lee2
Jong Chul Ye1 Fabian Caba Heilbron2
KAIST1
[gihyun, jong.ye]@kaist.ac.kr

Adobe2

[jenni, dinli, jolee, caba]@adobe.com

Figure 1. Concept Weaver’s Generation Results. Our method, Concept Weaver, can inject the appearance of arbitrary off-the-shelf
concepts (from a Bank of Concepts) to generate realistic images.

Abstract
While there has been significant progress in customizing text-to-image generation models, generating images
that combine multiple personalized concepts remains challenging. In this work, we introduce Concept Weaver, a
method for composing customized text-to-image diffusion
models at inference time. Specifically, the method breaks the
process into two steps: creating a template image aligned
with the semantics of input prompts, and then personalizing the template using a concept fusion strategy. The fusion
strategy incorporates the appearance of the target concepts
into the template image while retaining its structural details. The results indicate that our method can generate
multiple custom concepts with higher identity fidelity compared to alternative approaches. Furthermore, the method
is shown to seamlessly handle more than two concepts and
This work is done when Gihyun Kwon was an intern at Adobe Research.

closely follow the semantic meaning of the input prompt
without blending appearances across different subjects.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image generation models have shown impressive
capabilities [21, 23, 28] in the last few years. Existing
open source [21] and commercial solutions such as Adobe
Firefly have enabled aspiring creatives to generate images
with unprecedented quality by simply crafting text prompts.
Progress has also been attained in developing models that
can customize images for your own subjects or visual concepts [3, 11, 22, 25]. These technologies have opened the
door for new ways of content creation, where aspiring creators can craft stories with personalized characters under
different scenes and styles.
While there has been significant progress in customizing
text-to-image generation models, generating images that

8880

