This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sequential Modeling Enables Scalable Learning for Large Vision Models
Yutong Bai1,2,*
Alan L. Yuille2
1

Xinyang Geng1, *
Trevor Darrell1

UC Berkeley (BAIR)

Abstract
We introduce a novel sequential modeling approach which
enables learning a Large Vision Model (LVM) without making use of any linguistic data. To do this, we define a common
format, “visual sentences”, in which we can represent raw
images and videos as well as annotated data sources such
as semantic segmentations and depth reconstructions without needing any meta-knowledge beyond the pixels. Once
this wide variety of visual data (comprising 420 billion tokens) is represented as sequences, the model can be trained
to minimize a cross-entropy loss for next token prediction.
By training across various scales of model architecture and
data diversity, we provide empirical evidence that our models
scale effectively. Many different vision tasks can be solved
by designing suitable visual prompts at test time.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT [10] and
LLaMA [80] have taken the world by storm. What would
it take to build a Large Vision Model (LVM)? From the
animal world, we know that visual competences are not dependent on language. In particular, many experiments have
shown that the visual world of non-human primates is remarkably similar to that of humans. So while the space of
vision-language models such as LLaVA [53] is interesting
and worthwhile to pursue, in this paper we seek an answer to
a different question – how far can we go from pixels alone?
The key features of contemporary LLMs that we seek
to emulate in LVMs are: 1) scaling in the presence of big
data, and 2) flexible specification of tasks through prompting
(in-context learning). How do we achieve this? As usual,
there are three main components that must be specified:
Data: We want to exploit all the remarkable diversity in
visual data. First of all, just raw unannotated images and
videos. Next, we want to exploit the variety of annotated
visual data sources that have been produced over the last
* Equal Contribution. Webpage: https://yutongbai.com/lvm.html.

Karttikeya Mangalam1
Amir Bar1
Jitendra Malik1
Alexei A. Efros1
2

Johns Hopkins University

couple of decades – semantic segmentations, depth reconstructions, keypoints, multiple views of 3D objects, among
others. We define a common format, “visual sentences”, in
which to represent these different annotations without needing any meta-knowledge beyond the pixels. The total size of
our training dataset is 1.64 billion images/frames.
Architecture: We use a large transformer architecture
(3 billion parameters) trained on visual data represented as
sequence of tokens, using a learned tokenizer that maps each
image to a string of 256 vector-quantized tokens.
Loss function: We draw inspiration from the natural
language community, where masked token modeling has
given way to sequential autoregressive prediction. Once
images/videos/annotated images can all be represented as
sequences, we can train the model to minimize the crossentropy loss for predicting the next token.
With this extremely simple design, we demonstrate some
noteworthy behaviors:
• Appropriate scaling behavior as one increases model size
and data size.
• Many different vision tasks can now be “solved” by designing suitable prompts at test time. While the results don’t
show as high performance as bespoke, specifically-trained
models, the fact that so many tasks are all addressed by a
single vision model is quite encouraging.
• We see a clear benefit of the amount of unsupervised data
on the performance on various standard vision tasks.
• We see a hint of an ability for general visual reasoning –
handling out-of-distribution data, and performing novel
tasks. But further investigation is needed.

2. Related Work
Pretrained Vision Models. The value of using pretrained
models (such as ImageNet-pretrained AlexNet [45]) has
been demonstrated as far back as 2015 in R-CNN [34],
and it has since become standard practice in computer vision. Self-supervised pretraining was proposed as a way
to vastly increase the amount of data available for pretraining [16, 25, 37, 61, 62, 99]. Unfortunately, this was not
very successful, likely because the CNN-based architectures

22861

