This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapt or Perish: Adaptive Sparse Transformer with Attentive Feature
Refinement for Image Restoration
Jufeng Yang1,2
Shihao Zhou1,2
Duosheng Chen1
Jinshan Pan3
Jinglei Shi1 *
1
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN· FUTIAN)
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
zhoushihao96@mail.nankai.edu.cn, duoshengchen@mail.nankai.edu.cn, sdluran@gmail.com
jinglei.shi@nankai.edu.cn,yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Transformer-based approaches have achieved promising
performance in image restoration tasks, given their ability
to model long-range dependencies, which is crucial for recovering clear images. Though diverse efficient attention
mechanism designs have addressed the intensive computations associated with using transformers, they often involve redundant information and noisy interactions from
irrelevant regions by considering all available tokens. In
this work, we propose an Adaptive Sparse Transformer
(AST) to mitigate the noisy interactions of irrelevant areas
and remove feature redundancy in both spatial and channel domains. AST comprises two core designs, i.e., an
Adaptive Sparse Self-Attention (ASSA) block and a Feature Refinement Feed-forward Network (FRFN). Specifically, ASSA is adaptively computed using a two-branch
paradigm, where the sparse branch is introduced to filter out the negative impacts of low query-key matching
scores for aggregating features, while the dense one ensures
sufficient information flow through the network for learning discriminative representations. Meanwhile, FRFN employs an enhance-and-ease scheme to eliminate feature redundancy in channels, enhancing the restoration of clear
latent images. Experimental results on commonly used
benchmarks have demonstrated the versatility and competitive performance of our method in several tasks, including
rain streak removal, real haze removal, and raindrop removal. The code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/joshyZhou/AST.

1. Introduction
Image restoration aims to restore clear images from degraded ones. Existing CNN-based methods [6, 55, 103]
achieve remarkable progress. However, their basic unit,
* Corresponding Author.

Dense
Relations

Redundant
Features
MSA

FFN

MSA

FFN

(a) Previous standard Transformer-based method

Compact
Features

Sparse
Relations
ASSA

FRFN

ASSA

FRFN

(b) Our Adaptive Sparse Transformer (AST) model

Figure 1. Workflows comparisons. (a) The standard Transformerbased method incorporates all available tokens into multihead
self-attention (MSA) calculation, and the feed-forward network
(FFN) to handle redundant features. (b) The proposed Adaptive Sparse Transformer (AST) includes an adaptive sparse selfattention (ASSA) block to filter out noisy interactions from irrelevant tokens, and a feature refinement feed-forward network
(FRFN) to reduce the redundancy hidden in channels.

convolution, possesses a restricted receptive field and is less
effective when modeling long-range dependencies. While
recent Transformer-based [73] architecture addresses this
limitation by incorporating the self-attention mechanism to
explore global correlations, it suffers from high computational complexity in practical applications.
Despite attempts to design efficient attention mechanisms [37, 82, 100] to tackle the computational challenge,
roadblocks persist for two reasons: 1) Standard Transformers [37, 100] adopt dense attention relations to aggregate
features, which will inadvertently introduce noisy interactions in irrelevant regions as shown in Fig. 1. 2) Redundant
information [77, 113] within densely aggregated feature

2952

