This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FFF: Fixing Flawed Foundations in contrastive pre-training results in very
strong Vision-Language models
Adrian Bulat1,2
1

Yassine Ouali1

Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,3

Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK 2 Technical University of Ias, i, Romania
3
Queen Mary University of London, UK

Abstract
Despite noise and caption quality having been acknowledged as important factors impacting vision-language contrastive pre-training, in this paper, we show that the full
potential of improving the training process by addressing
such issues is yet to be realized. Specifically, we firstly
study and analyze two issues affecting training: incorrect
assignment of negative pairs, and low caption quality and
diversity. Then, we devise effective solutions for addressing both problems, which essentially require training with
multiple true positive pairs. Finally, we propose training
with sigmoid loss to address such a requirement. We show
very large gains over the current state-of-the-art for both
image recognition (∼ +6% on average over 11 datasets)
and image retrieval (∼ +19% on Flickr30k and ∼ +15%
on MSCOCO).

1. Introduction
Large-scale contrastive image-text pre-training has emerged
as the prevalent method for vision-language representation
learning [14, 21, 27, 29, 38, 51, 52]. The majority of
datasets employed for pre-training are web-collected [4, 10,
34, 40–43, 45]. They offer a varied data distribution and
are sufficiently large to effectively train high-performing
vision-language models. However, since the raw captions
for each image are typically extracted from associated tags
or descriptions, they often exhibit low quality, being noisy
and suboptimal for training purposes [21, 27]. Although
some attempts to fix such issues have been already described, to some extent, in literature (e.g. ALIP [50],
BLIP [27]), in this work, we show that the full potential of
improving the quality of the training process is far from being fully realized. Specifically, by studying and addressing
specific issues related to noise and low data quality, in this
work, we show that our improved vision-language training
pipeline can achieve massive gains over the current stateof-the-art methods for both image recognition (∼ +6% on

Figure 1. Our approach, FFF, achieves state-of-the-art accuracy
across multiple datasets, largely outperforming prior methods.

average over 11 datasets) and image retrieval (∼ +19% on
Flickr30k [53] and ∼ +15% on MSCOCO [30]).
The first issue we study is related to noise impacting contrastive learning: near-duplicate samples which are incorrectly treated as negative pairs. Even within a batch, it is not
uncommon to find images and/or captions that are semantically similar or even identical. Since standard contrastive
learning assumes one positive pair, this significantly hinders
the training process and the quality of the trained models.
The second issue we study is related to low caption quality and diversity. Captions can be short and lacking detail,
noisy, or even entirely irrelevant to the image. Moreover,
since the mapping process between image and text is oneto-many, more than one caption is needed to provide an approximate description of the image.
To fix issue one, we propose an algorithm that mines new
positive pairs based on image-text, image-image, and texttext similarities, aiming to decrease the number of false negatives in the training data arising due to semantically similar
images and/or captions.

14172

