This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transferable Structural Sparse Adversarial Attack Via Exact Group
Sparsity Training
Di Ming, Peng Ren, Yunlong Wang, Xin Feng*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chongqing University of Technology
Chongqing, China
diming@cqut.edu.cn, misterr 2019@163.com, ylwang@cqut.edu.cn, xfeng@cqut.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in various computer vision tasks, including image classification [12, 17, 35, 38], object detection
[13, 19, 21, 32, 39] and semantic segmentation [2, 16, 34].
These high-precision DNNs are crucial to systems requiring robust security, such as autonomous vehicle [20] and fa* Corresponding Author: Xin Feng

Clean
EGS-TSSA(Ours)

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to highly
transferable adversarial attacks. Especially, many studies
have shown that sparse attacks pose a significant threat to
DNNs on account of their exceptional imperceptibility. Current sparse attack methods mostly limit only the magnitude
and number of perturbations while generally overlooking
the location of the perturbations, resulting in decreased performances on attack transferability. A subset of studies indicates that perturbations existing in the significant regions
with rich classification-relevant features are more effective.
Leveraging this insight, we introduce the structural sparsity
constraint in the framework of generative models to limit the
perturbation positions. To ensure that the perturbations are
generated towards classification-relevant regions, we propose an exact group sparsity training method to learn pixellevel and group-level sparsity. For purpose of improving
the effectiveness of sparse training, we further put forward
masked quantization network and multi-stage optimization
algorithm in the training process. Utilizing CNNs as surrogate models, extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method has higher transferability in image classification attack compared to state-of-the-art methods at approximately
same sparsity levels. In cross-model ViT, object detection,
and semantic segmentation attack tasks, we also achieve a
better attack success rate. Code is available at https:
//github.com/MisterRpeng/EGS-TSSA.

TSAA

Abstract

(a) Inception-V3

(b) ResNet50

Figure 1. Distribution of sparse perturbations for various methods.
This figure highlights our method’s structural sparse perturbations.
Unlike the dispersed distribution seen in TSAA [14], our method
EGS-TSSA effectively concentrates sparse perturbations crafted
by different threat models into classification-relevant regions.

cial recognition [44], where errors in classification can lead
to significant consequences. However, introducing carefully designed imperceptible perturbations to benign images, known as adversarial examples (AEs), can easily induce prediction errors in these systems [9, 37]. These AEs
are especially threatening due to their transferability, meaning adversarial perturbations can deceive not only surrogate
models (white-box attack) but can also affect target models never encountered during the attack (black-box attack),
revealing a fundamental vulnerability in DNNs [42].
Most current adversarial attack methods employ the ℓp
norm paradigm to constrain the perturbation generation.
For instance, studies [7, 9, 18, 22, 23, 26, 27, 37, 46, 47]
commonly utilize ℓ∞ or ℓ2 constraints, resulting in dense
perturbations. In contrast, sparse adversarial attacks [3, 5,
8, 14, 24, 29, 45, 49] target a limited number of pixels and
yet achieve high success rates. However, a key limitation
of many sparse attack techniques is their low transferabil-

24696

