This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Adaptive Spatial Coherent Correlations for Speech-Preserving Facial
Expression Manipulation
Tianshui Chen

Jianman Lin

Zhijing Yang*

tianshuichen@gmail.com

linjianmancjx@gmail.com

yzhj@gdut.edu.cn

Chunmei Qing

Liang Lin

qchm@scut.edu.cn

linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Speech-preserving facial expression manipulation
(SPFEM) aims to modify facial emotions while meticulously maintaining the mouth animation associated with
spoken content. Current works depend on inaccessible
paired training samples for the person, where two aligned
frames exhibit the same speech content yet differ in emotional expression, limiting the SPFEM applications in
real-world scenarios. In this work, we discover that speakers who convey the same content with different emotions
exhibit highly correlated local facial animations, providing
valuable supervision for SPFEM. To capitalize on this
insight, we propose a novel adaptive spatial coherent
correlation learning (ASCCL) algorithm, which models
the aforementioned correlation as an explicit metric and
integrates the metric to supervise manipulating facial
expression and meanwhile better preserving the facial
animation of spoken contents. To this end, it first learns
a spatial coherent correlation metric, ensuring the visual
disparities of adjacent local regions of the image belonging
to one emotion are similar to those of the corresponding
counterpart of the image belonging to another emotion.
Recognizing that visual disparities are not uniform across
all regions, we have also crafted a disparity-aware
adaptive strategy that prioritizes regions that present
greater challenges. During SPFEM model training, we
construct the adaptive spatial coherent correlation metric
between corresponding local regions of the input and
output images as addition loss to supervise the generation
* Zhijing Yang is the corresponding author. Tianshui Chen, Jianman Lin, and Zhijing Yang are with Guangdong University of Technology. Chunmei Qing is with South China University of Technology. Liang Lin is with Sun Yat-Sen University. This work was
supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) under Grant No. 62206060, in Part by Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2022A1515011555, 2023A1515012568,
2023A1515012561), Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Human
Digital Twin (2022B1212010004), and in part by Guangzhou Basic and
Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant No. SL2022A04J01626.

Reference

Source

NED

ASCCL

Figure 1. Several examples are generated by the current advanced
NED with and without the proposed ASCCL algorithm. Incorporating the ASCCL can better manipulate the expressions and
meanwhile preserve mouth shapes.

process. We conduct extensive experiments on variant
datasets, and the results demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed ASCCL algorithm. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/jianmanlincjx/ASCCL

1. Introduction
Speech-preserving
facial
expression
manipulation
(SPFEM), which aims to manipulate facial emotions
while preserving the mouth animations in static images
or dynamic videos, can enhance human expressiveness
and thus benefit variant applications including virtual
avatars and film & television production. For example, it
requires lots of effects and repeated remakes to capture
an expected actor’s emotions in a movie & shooting. In
contrast, a robust SPFEM system can easily modify the
facial emotions to achieve comparable performance in the
post-production stage and thus is urgently expected.
Current SPFEM literature either predominantly previous
face reenactment algorithms [10, 28] or harnesses decou-

7267

