This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructing Hands in 3D with Transformers
Georgios Pavlakos1 , Dandan Shan2 , Ilija Radosavovic3 , Angjoo Kanazawa3 , David Fouhey4 , Jitendra Malik3
1
UT Austin, 2 University of Michigan, 3 UC Berkeley, 4 New York University

Figure 1. Monocular 3D hand mesh reconstruction. We propose HaMeR, a fully transformer-based approach for Hand Mesh Recovery.
HaMeR achieves consistent improvements upon the state-of-the-art for 3D hand reconstruction. We can faithfully reconstruct hands in a
wide variety of scenarios, including captures from different viewpoints (third person or egocentric), under occlusion, hands that interact
with objects or other hands, hands with different skin tones, with gloves, from art paintings or mechanical hands. We encourage the reader
to watch our reconstructions in the Supplemental Video to appreciate the temporal stability.

Abstract
We present an approach that can reconstruct hands in
3D from monocular input. Our approach for Hand Mesh
Recovery, HaMeR, follows a fully transformer-based architecture and can analyze hands with significantly increased
accuracy and robustness compared to previous work. The
key to HaMeR’s success lies in scaling up both the data
used for training and the capacity of the deep network for
hand reconstruction. For training data, we combine multiple datasets that contain 2D or 3D hand annotations. For
the deep model, we use a large scale Vision Transformer
architecture. Our final model consistently outperforms the
previous baselines on popular 3D hand pose benchmarks.
To further evaluate the effect of our design in non-controlled
This work was done while Georgios Pavlakos was at UC Berkeley.

settings, we annotate existing in-the-wild datasets with 2D
hand keypoint annotations. On this newly collected dataset
of annotations, HInt, we demonstrate significant improvements over existing baselines. We will make our code, data
and models publicly available upon publication. We make
our code, data and models available on the project website:
https://geopavlakos.github.io/hamer/.
“It is because of his being armed with hands
that man is the most intelligent animal.”
Anaxagoras

1. Introduction
Consider the images of hands interacting with the world in
Figure 1. These interactions are happening in 3D, so to interpret them, we also need a system that can automatically
perceive hands in 3D from visual input.

9826

