This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Event-RGBD Neural SLAM
Jie Yin3
Qizhi Chen2
Delin Qu1,2 * Chi Yan2,5 * Dong Wang2
Dan Xu5
Yiting Zhang2
Bin Zhao2,4† Xuelong Li2
1
2
3
Fudan University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
5
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Hong Kong University of Sciences and Technology
RGB and Event Capture

Abstract
Implicit neural SLAM has achieved remarkable progress
recently. Nevertheless, existing methods face significant
challenges in non-ideal scenarios, such as motion blur or
lighting variation, which often leads to issues like convergence failures, localization drifts, and distorted mapping.
To address these challenges, we propose EN-SLAM, the
first event-RGBD implicit neural SLAM framework, which
effectively leverages the high rate and high dynamic range
advantages of event data for tracking and mapping. Specifically, EN-SLAM proposes a differentiable CRF (Camera
Response Function) rendering technique to generate distinct RGB and event camera data via a shared radiance
field, which is optimized by learning a unified implicit representation with the captured event and RGBD supervision. Moreover, based on the temporal difference property of events, we propose a temporal aggregating optimization strategy for the event joint tracking and global bundle
adjustment, capitalizing on the consecutive difference constraints of events, significantly enhancing tracking accuracy
and robustness. Finally, we construct the simulated dataset
DEV-Indoors and real captured dataset DEV-Reals containing 6 scenes, 17 sequences with practical motion blur
and lighting changes for evaluations. Experimental results
show that our method outperforms the SOTA methods in
both tracking ATE and mapping ACC with a real-time 17
FPS in various challenging environments. Project page:
https://delinqu.github.io/EN-SLAM.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is an essential problem in computer vision and robotics, widely applied in tasks such as virtual and augmented reality [8],
robot navigation [18] and autonomous driving [3] over last
decades. Exploration in extreme environments [10, 31, 41]
∗ Authors contributed equally: dlqu22@m.fudan.edu.cn
† Corresponding author

Low Light or Blur Environments

Implicit scene representation

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed implicit event-RGBD neural
SLAM system EN-SLAM under non-ideal environments. The dynamic range of RGB sensors is relatively low and suffers from motion blur. Instead, event cameras show great potential in non-ideal
environments due to their high dynamic range and low latency advantages. Our method samples rays from two independent RGBD
and event cameras to jointly train a single implicit neural field with
both modalities. This hybrid shared mechanism provides a natural
fusion approach, avoiding alignment issues. It also leverages the
advantages of both modalities, resulting in dense, more robust, and
higher-quality reconstruction results.

remains challenging for visual SLAM (vSLAM) systems
due to the lack of visual features caused by motion blur and
lighting variation in diverse environments [42, 59, 68].
As a novel representation for myriad of signals, Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [35] has innovated great progress
in SLAM recently, demonstrating significant improvements
in map memory consumption, hole filling, and mapping
quality [23, 49, 52, 58, 67, 71]. While the existing NeRFbased neural vSLAM methods address the limitations of
traditional SLAM frameworks [11, 36, 37, 50, 62] in accurate dense 3D map reconstruction, they are primarily
designed for well-lit scenes and always fail in practical
SLAM scenarios with motion blur [40, 66] and lighting
variation [32, 48]. These methods produce unsatisfying
results under non-ideal environments [58] because of the
following limitations: 1) View-inconsistency: When the
camera encounters rapid velocity variation in Fig. 2 (2nd),
the scene may exhibit discontinuous blur, leading to view-

19584

