This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Stitchable Task Adaptation
Haoyu He

Zizheng Pan

Jing Liu

Jianfei Cai

Bohan Zhuang†

ZIP Lab, Monash University, Australia

Abstract
The paradigm of pre-training and fine-tuning has laid
the foundation for deploying deep learning models. However, most fine-tuning methods are designed to meet a specific resource budget. Recently, considering diverse deployment scenarios with various resource budgets, SN-Net [51]
is introduced to quickly obtain numerous new networks
(stitches) from the pre-trained models (anchors) in a model
family via model stitching. Although promising, SN-Net
confronts new challenges when adapting it to new target
domains, including huge memory and storage requirements
and a long and sub-optimal multistage adaptation process. In this work, we present a novel framework, Efficient
Stitchable Task Adaptation (ESTA), to efficiently produce a
palette of fine-tuned models that adhere to diverse resource
constraints. Specifically, we first tailor parameter-efficient
fine-tuning to share low-rank updates among the stitches
while maintaining independent bias terms. In this way, we
largely reduce fine-tuning memory burdens and mitigate the
interference among stitches that arises in task adaptation.
Furthermore, we streamline a simple yet effective one-stage
deployment pipeline, which estimates the important stitches
to deploy with training-time gradient statistics. By assigning higher sampling probabilities to important stitches, we
also get a boosted Pareto frontier. Extensive experiments on
25 downstream visual recognition tasks demonstrate that
our ESTA is capable of generating stitches with smooth
accuracy-efficiency trade-offs and surpasses the direct SNNet adaptation by remarkable margins with significantly
lower training time and fewer trainable parameters. Furthermore, we demonstrate the flexibility and scalability of
our ESTA framework by stitching LLMs from LLaMA family, obtaining chatbot stitches of assorted sizes1 .

1. Introduction
The paradigm of pre-training and fine-tuning has underpinned modern applications in both vision and lan† Corresponding author. E-mail: bohan.zhuang@gmail.com
1 Source code will be released at https : / / github . com /
ziplab/Stitched_LLaMA.

guage. With off-the-shelf models pre-trained on largescale datasets, the de-facto choice is vanilla full fine-tuning,
which tunes all the model parameters with the downstream data. To reduce memory footprint and avoid overfitting, an emerging trend is to tune a small proportion
of the model parameters while freezing the majority ones
with Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) [27, 28, 31].
However, both full fine-tuning and PEFT target an exclusive
specific resource budget for each downstream task, while in
reality, we often need to deploy multiple models simultaneously to meet various resource demands. This makes us
ponder: What is an effective and efficient way to obtain a
palette of fine-tuned models meeting different resource constraints?
A natural approach is to compress a well-trained large
model into numerous smaller ones [11, 21, 29, 36]. However, the computational cost grows linearly with the number
of deployment scenarios. Following the once-for-all network [8, 20], a few works first pre-train a weight-sharing
over-parameterized supernet, then adapt the supernet to the
downstream tasks. Although promising, training supernets
at scale with large datasets requires prohibitive computational resources, e.g., thousands of GPU training hours,
which is practically infeasible.
On the other hand, there are many open-source large
models [5, 23, 64] from communities such as HuggingFace [72] that are pre-trained on large-scale datasets and
ready to be downloaded. Inspired by the success of model
stitching [4, 12, 38], recently, Stitchable Neural Networks
(SN-Net) [51] has been proposed to stitch pre-trained models (anchors) of the same family to quickly obtain a set of
candidate new networks (stitches) with different accuracyefficiency trade-offs of a wide FLOPs range. However, the
scope of SN-Net is limited to the pre-training classification
task on the same source domain [56]. When directly adapting the standard approach of SN-Net to a target domain,
it faces new challenges. Specifically, the straightforward
way to employ SN-Net in task adaptation typically requires
three stages: first adapting anchors individually to the target domain, followed by stitching the adapted anchors, and
finally evaluating all stitches to find and deploy the ones
on the Pareto Frontier. Such a three-stage adaptation pro-

28555

