This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-SceneDreamer: Text-Driven 3D-Consistent Scene Generation
Songchun Zhang1 , Yibo Zhang2 , Quan Zheng4 , Rui Ma2 , Wei Hua3
∗
Hujun Bao1 , Weiwei Xu1 , Changqing Zou1,3
Zhejiang University 2 Jilin University 3 Zhejiang Lab
4
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Triplane Feature
Scene Description

NeRF
MLP

“Aerial drone shot of a mountain range in the
style of cinematic video, dynamic movement”
3D Representation

Input

Update

Previous Manner

1

Aerial drone shot of a mountain range in the style of cinematic
video, shallow depth of field, subject in focus, dynamic movement

Render

Ours

Arbitrary 6DOF Trajectory
2D Outputs

(b) Observation

(a) Task Definition

Figure 1. Text-Driven 3D Scene Generation from text prompts. (a) Given a scene description prompt and an arbitrary 6-degree-offreedom (6-DOF) camera trajectory, our approach progressively generates the full 3D scene by continuously synthesizing 2D novel views.
(b) The limitation of mesh representations [12, 16] and the lack of reasonable rectification mechanisms lead to cumulative errors in outdoor
scenes, which are respectively marked with yellow and blue dash line boxes. In contrast, our approach can alleviate the problem by
introducing a progressive generation pipeline.

Abstract
Text-driven 3D scene generation techniques have made
rapid progress in recent years. Their success is mainly attributed to using existing generative models to iteratively
perform image warping and inpainting to generate 3D
scenes. However, these methods heavily rely on the outputs of existing models, leading to error accumulation in
geometry and appearance that prevent the models from being used in various scenarios (e.g., outdoor and unreal scenarios). To address this limitation, we generatively refine
the newly generated local views by querying and aggregating global 3D information, and then progressively generate
the 3D scene. Specifically, we employ a tri-plane featuresbased NeRF as a unified representation of the 3D scene to
constrain global 3D consistency, and propose a generative
refinement network to synthesize new contents with higher
quality by exploiting the natural image prior from 2D diffusion model as well as the global 3D information of the
current scene. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that,
in comparison to previous methods, our approach supports
wide variety of scene generation and arbitrary camera trajectories with improved visual quality and 3D consistency.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the growing need for 3D creation
tools for metaverse applications, attention to 3D scene generation techniques has increased rapidly. Existing tools [11,
44] usually require professional modeling skills and extensive manual labor, which is time-consuming and inefficient.
To facilitate the 3D scene creation and reduce the need for
professional skills, 3D scene generation tools should be intuitive and versatile while ensuring sufficient controllability.
This paper focuses on the specific setting of generating
consistent 3D scenes from the input texts that describe the
3D scenes. This problem is highly challenging from several perspectives, including the limitation of available text3D data pairs and the need for ensuring both semantic and
geometric consistency of the generated scenes. To overcome the limited 3D data issue, recent text-to-3D methods [42, 62] have leveraged the powerful pre-trained textto-image diffusion model [48] as a strong prior to optimize
3D representation. However, their generated scenes often
have relatively simpler geometry and lack 3D consistency,
because 2D prior diffusion models lack the perception of
3D information.
10170

