This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Implicit Morphing of Face Images
Guilherme Schardong1, * Tiago Novello2,∗ Hallison Paz2 Iurii Medvedev1
Luiz Velho2 Nuno Gonçalves1,4
1

Institute of Systems and Robotics, University of Coimbra
2

3

Vinícius da Silva3

Institute of Pure and Applied Mathematics

Tecgraf, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
4

Portuguese Mint and Official Printing Office

Abstract
Face morphing is a problem in computer graphics with
numerous artistic and forensic applications. It is challenging due to variations in pose, lighting, gender, and ethnicity.
This task consists of a warping for feature alignment and a
blending for a seamless transition between the warped images. We propose to leverage coord-based neural networks
to represent such warpings and blendings of face images.
During training, we exploit the smoothness and flexibility of
such networks by combining energy functionals employed
in classical approaches without discretizations. Additionally, our method is time-dependent, allowing a continuous
warping/blending of the images. During morphing inference, we need both direct and inverse transformations of the
time-dependent warping. The first (second) is responsible
for warping the target (source) image into the source (target)
image. Our neural warping stores those maps in a single
network dismissing the need for inverting them. The results
of our experiments indicate that our method is competitive
with both classical and generative models under the lens of
image quality and face-morphing detectors. Aesthetically,
the resulting images present a seamless blending of diverse
faces not yet usual in the literature.

1. Introduction
Image warping is a continuous transformation mapping
points of the image support to points in a second domain.
The process of warping an image has applications ranging
from correcting image distortions caused by lens or sensor
imperfections [9] to creating distortions for artistic/scientific
purposes [5]. Warping finds a special application in creating
image morphings [10], where it is used to align corresponding features. By gradually aligning the image features using
the warping, we obtain a smooth transition between them.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Project page: https://schardong.github.io/ifmorph

We assume the warpings to be parameterized by smooth
maps. Besides obtaining smooth transitions, this allows us
to use its derivatives to constrain the deformation, such as
approximating it as a minimum of a variational problem.
Feature alignment can be specified using landmarks to establish correlations between two images.
In this work, we use coord-based neural networks, which
we call neural warpings, to parameterize image warpings.
This approach enables us to calculate the derivatives in
closed form, eliminating the need for discretization. We
also employ a time parameter, to represent smooth transitions. By incorporating the derivatives into the loss function,
we can regularize the network and easily add constraints by
summing additional terms. To train a neural warping, we
propose a loss function consisting of two main terms. First,
a data constraint ensures that the warping fits the given keypoint correspondences. Second, we regularize the neural
warping using the thin-plate energy to minimize distortions.
We use neural warping to model time-dependent morphings of face images, thus aligning the image features over
time. Afterward, we explore the flexibility of coord-based
neural networks to define three blending techniques. First,
we blend the aligned image warpings in the signal domain
using point-wise interpolation. Second, we propose to blend
the image warpings in the gradient-domain of the signals.
For this, we introduce another neural network to represent
the morphing and train it to satisfy the corresponding variational problem. If the target faces have different semantics,
we cannot adequately blend the warped images in the signal/gradient domain; therefore, we propose a third option:
blending using generative methods. In other words, we
propose to use a generative mixing: we embed the image
warpings in a latent space of some generative model, then
we interpolate the resulting embedding and project it back
to the image space. We present experiments using Diffusion
Auto-encoders (diffAE) [27].
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

7321

