This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Training Efficiency of Diffusion Models via Multi-Stage Framework
and Tailored Multi-Decoder Architecture
Huijie Zhang1 ∗

Yifu Lu1 ∗ Ismail Alkhouri1,2 Saiprasad Ravishankar2,3
Dogyoon Song1 Qing Qu1

1

2

Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, University of Michigan
Department of Computational Mathematics, Science & Engineering, Michigan State University
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Michigan State University

{huijiezh, yifulu, ismailal, dogyoons, qingqu}@umich.edu

ravisha3@msu.edu

Figure 1. Overview of three diffusion model architectures: (a) unified, (b) separate, and (c) our proposed multistage architecture.
Compared with (a) and (b), our approach improves sampling quality, and significantly enhances training efficiency, as indicated by the FID
scores and their corresponding training iterations (d).

Abstract
Diffusion models, emerging as powerful deep generative
tools, excel in various applications. They operate through
a two-steps process: introducing noise into training samples and then employing a model to convert random noise
into new samples (e.g., images). However, their remarkable generative performance is hindered by slow training
and sampling. This is due to the necessity of tracking extensive forward and reverse diffusion trajectories, and employing a large model with numerous parameters across multiple timesteps (i.e., noise levels). To tackle these challenges,
we present a multi-stage framework inspired by our empirical findings. These observations indicate the advantages
of employing distinct parameters tailored to each timestep
while retaining universal parameters shared across all time
steps. Our approach involves segmenting the time interval
into multiple stages where we employ custom multi-decoder
U-net architecture that blends time-dependent models with
a universally shared encoder. Our framework enables the

efficient distribution of computational resources and mitigates inter-stage interference, which substantially improves
training efficiency. Extensive numerical experiments affirm
the effectiveness of our framework, showcasing significant
training and sampling efficiency enhancements on three
state-of-the-art diffusion models, including large-scale latent diffusion models. Furthermore, our ablation studies illustrate the impact of two important components in
our framework: (i) a novel timestep clustering algorithm
for stage division, and (ii) an innovative multi-decoder Unet architecture, seamlessly integrating universal and customized hyperparameters.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models have made remarkable progress
as powerful deep generative modeling tools, showcasing remarkable performance in various applications, ranging from
unconditional image generation [1, 2], conditional image
generation [3, 4], image-to-image translation [5–7], text-toimage generation [8–10], inverse problem solving [11–14],

7372

