This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flexible Depth Completion for Sparse and Varying Point Densities
Jinhyung Park1 Yu-Jhe Li2 Kris Kitani1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Microsoft Research

Distances to Nearest Input Depth Point

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advances in depth completion have focused on densifying depth maps created by projecting 64-line LiDAR
onto the RGB image in the KITTI dataset [14, 49] or by
randomly sampling 500 depth points from a Kinect RGBD
camera in the NYUv2 dataset [44]. While demonstrating
strong performance on dense input regimes, these methods
remain largely untested on sparser depth maps produced by
affordable, few-line LiDAR and by sparse valid points (∼
0.04% pixels) from SfM pipelines [41, 42]. To support various sensors and applications, models must also be evaluated
on more difficult sparse and out-of-distribution settings.
Such sparser regimes pose new challenges. As shown
in Figure 1, while most image pixels are within 5 pixels of
input depth with projected 64-line LiDAR, this distance increases sixfold with cheaper LiDAR sensors. In Figure 2,
we show that prediction error dramatically increases with
larger such pixel distances. Although this deterioration is

1e5

# of Scan Lines

3.0

64 Lines
32 Lines
16 Lines
8 Lines
4 Lines
2 Lines
1 Line

Count of Image Pixels

While recent depth completion methods have achieved
remarkable results filling in relatively dense depth maps
(e.g., projected 64-line LiDAR on KITTI or 500 sampled
points on NYUv2) with RGB guidance, their performance
on very sparse input (e.g., 4-line LiDAR or 32 depth point
measurements) is unverified. These sparser regimes present
new challenges, as a 4-line LiDAR increases the distance
between pixels without depth and their nearest depth point
sixfold from 5 pixels to 30 pixels compared to 64 lines. Observing that existing methods struggle with sparse and variable distribution depth maps, we propose an Affinity-Based
Shift Correction (ASC) module that iteratively aligns depth
predictions to input depth based on predicted affinities between image pixels and depth points. Our framework enables each depth point to adaptively influence and improve
predictions across the image, leading to largely improved
results for fewer-line, fewer-point, and variable sparsity settings. Further, we show improved performance in domain
transfer from KITTI to nuScenes and from random sampling
to irregular point distributions. Our correction module can
easily be added to any depth completion or RGB-only depth
estimation model, notably allowing the latter to perform
both completion and estimation with a single model.

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0 0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Pixel Distance to Nearest Input Depth Point

Figure 1. The distance from each pixel to its nearest depth point is
less than 5 pixels for the 64-line LiDAR most commonly used for
depth completion on KITTI. When switching to a more affordable
and deployable 4-line LiDAR, this distance increases dramatically
to over 30 pixels, posing new difficulties for depth completion.

expected, some methods that perform well for dense input
are comparatively weaker for sparse input. For more reliable real-world deployment and wider applicability, completion models should demonstrate strong performance under a wide range of input conditions.
In this regime, existing methods’ primarily convolutional
processing of depth points is not suitable for input of variable sparsity and distributions [16, 25, 36, 47]. For sparse
depth maps with a larger variance in pixel-to-point distance,
each depth point must contribute to depth predictions for
large, or even global, regions of the image, adapting its region of influence based on the layout of input depth points
and its feature proximity to different locations in the image. Towards this end, we develop a novel depth completion
framework that leverages predicted affinity between image locations and depth points to iteratively improve depth
predictions. Our proposed Affinity-Based Shift Correction
(ASC) module determines the depth error of related regions
and shifts the depth predictions of these groups to align with
input depth points. Coupled with a correction confidence
weighting step, our module substantially improves depth
completion performance.
We extensively benchmark representative models and

21540

