This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A2XP: Towards Private Domain Generalization
Geunhyeok Yu Hyoseok Hwang
Department of Software Convergence, Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea
{geunhyeok, hyoseok}@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become pivotal in
various fields, especially in computer vision, outperforming previous methodologies. A critical challenge in their
deployment is the bias inherent in data across different domains, such as image style and environmental conditions,
leading to domain gaps. This necessitates techniques for
learning general representations from biased training data,
known as domain generalization. This paper presents Attend to eXpert Prompts (A2XP), a novel approach for domain generalization that preserves the privacy and integrity
of the network architecture. A2XP consists of two phases:
Expert Adaptation and Domain Generalization. In the first
phase, prompts for each source domain are optimized to
guide the model towards the optimal direction. In the second phase, two embedder networks are trained to effectively amalgamate these expert prompts, aiming for an optimal output. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that
A2XP achieves state-of-the-art results over existing nonprivate domain generalization methods. The experimental results validate that the proposed approach not only
tackles the domain generalization challenge in DNNs but
also offers a privacy-preserving, efficient solution to the
broader field of computer vision. Code is available at
https://github.com/AIRLABkhu/A2XP.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are recognized as the most
potent models in machine learning. They have achieved
remarkable success in various fields, particularly in computer vision, where they have surpassed previous methodologies. Although DNNs are versatile and universal function approximators, the data they process often carry biases
related to factors such as image style [42], sensor parameters [46], as well as painting styles [23]. These biases create
distinct distributions, known as domains, with inherent gaps
between them. The inability of DNNs to generalize across
these domains necessitates an impractically large amount of
unbiased training data to mitigate the model’s bias. Consequently, this limitation underscores the importance of de-

Experts (pi∈[1,N ] )

Target Domain(DN +1 )

Source Domains (Di∈[1,N ] )

Picture

Art painting

Sketch

Cartoon

Objective Network (N )

Figure 1. Flow diagram of the proposed method A2XP.

veloping techniques that can learn general representations
from biased training data. This challenge, extensively studied in various researches [48, 52], is referred to as domain
generalization.
To address the generalization issue, various research
topics such as domain adaptation [4, 17, 27, 34], metalearning [7, 35, 47], and transfer learning [21, 37, 41] have
been explored. Domain adaptation, which shares similarities with domain generalization, specifically aims to mitigate domain gaps. The primary difference between the
two lies in the visibility of the target domain [52]. In domain adaptation, the target domain is known and the goal
is to adapt a pre-trained network to this specific domain.
This involves learning new knowledge from the target domain while utilizing existing knowledge from source domains [49], a task that is generally more straightforward
than domain generalization. In contrast, domain generalization operates without the need for target domain data, focusing on making the network robust to shift from a source
domain to an unknown target domain. While these two approaches are distinct, the ability of domain adaptation to
understand domain shifts can be beneficial for domain generalization. Our approach is based on this concept. We propose that if a network can effectively map input from any ar-

23544

