This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ImageNet-D: Benchmarking Neural Network Robustness on
Diffusion Synthetic Object
Chengzhi Mao3,4 *
Chenshuang Zhang1 Fei Pan2 Junmo Kim1 * In So Kweon1
1
2
KAIST , University of Michigan, Ann Arbor , McGill University3 , MILA4

Abstract
We establish rigorous benchmarks for visual perception robustness. Synthetic images such as ImageNet-C,
ImageNet-9, and Stylized ImageNet provide specific type
of evaluation over synthetic corruptions, backgrounds, and
textures, yet those robustness benchmarks are restricted
in specified variations and have low synthetic quality. In
this work, we introduce generative model as a data source
for synthesizing hard images that benchmark deep models’ robustness. Leveraging diffusion models, we are able
to generate images with more diversified backgrounds, textures, and materials than any prior work, where we term
this benchmark as ImageNet-D. Experimental results show
that ImageNet-D results in a significant accuracy drop to
a range of vision models, from the standard ResNet visual classifier to the latest foundation models like CLIP and
MiniGPT-4, significantly reducing their accuracy by up to
60%. Our work suggests that diffusion models can be an
effective source to test vision models. The code and dataset
are available at https://github.com/chenshuangzhang/imagenet_d.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in
tasks ranging from image classification [33, 34, 55] to visual question answering [10, 28, 31, 65]. These advances
have inspired the application of neural networks in various
fields, including security and safety-critical systems such as
self-driving cars [27, 32, 42], malware detection [9, 43, 60]
and robots [6, 7, 25]. Due to their wide adaptation, it is
becoming increasingly important to identify the robustness
of neural networks [30, 41] for safety reasons.
To evaluate the robustness of neural networks, ObjectNet [3] collects real-world object images on controlled factors like background with human workers, which is timeconsuming and labor-intensive. To scale up data collection,
synthetic images are proposed as test images [15, 19, 58].
For example, ImageNet-C [19] introduces a set of low-level
* Corresponding author.
Junmo Kim <junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr>,
Chengzhi Mao <chengzhi.mao@mila.quebec>.

Tennis racket

Measuring cup

Mixing/salad bowl

Figure 1. Top predictions from CLIP (ViT-L/14) on ImageNet-D.
We synthesize the images by changing their background, texture
and material. The groundtruth for the images are plunger, spatula, and ladle in order, together with the background (badminton
court), texture (freckled), and material (painted).

common visual corruptions, such as gaussian noise and
blur, to test models’ robustness. ImageNet-9 [58] uses simple cutting and paste technique to create robustness benchmark on object background, yet the images are not realistic.
Stylized-ImageNet [15] generates new images by altering
the textures of ImageNet images, which cannot control the
global factors like background.
In this work, we introduce ImageNet-D, a synthetic test
set generated by diffusion models for object recognition
task. Capitalizing on the capability of pioneering Stable
Diffusion models[48], we show that we can steer diffusion
models with language to create realistic test images that
cause vision models fail. Figure 1 shows three failure cases
of CLIP model on our synthetic ImageNet-D dataset. Since
we rely on language to create images, we can vary the highlevel factors in the images in contrast to the local corruptions and texture in prior work, introducing addition factors
that one can evaluate robustness on.
To enhance sample difficulty of our dataset, we selectively retain images that cause failures in multiple chosen
vision models. Our results show that images triggering errors in chosen models can reliably transfer their challenging
nature to other, previously untested models. This leads to a
notable decrease in accuracy, even in state-of-the-art foundation models like MiniGPT-4 [65] and LLaVa [31], suggesting our dataset reveals common failures in vision models.
Visualizations demonstrate that Imagenet-D signifi-

21752

