This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bi-SSC: Geometric-Semantic Bidirectional Fusion for Camera-based
3D Semantic Scene Completion
Yujie Xue*, Ruihui Li*, Fan Wu†, Zhuo Tang, Kenli Li, Mingxing Duan†
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
{xueyj, liruihui, wufan, ztang, lkl, duanmingxing}@hnu.edu.cn

Only RGB Images As Inputs
bicycle

car

motocycle
truck

Ours
other-veh.
person

bicylist
motorcyclist

VoxFormer-T(CVPR2023)

road

sidewalk

parking

traf.-sign

building
fence

vegetation
trunk

terrain
pole

Figure 1. Given 2D image from the camera, our method is able to predict the complete 3D geometry of occluded objects and scenes.
Clearly, our method excels not only in ﬁnely reconstructing the visible region, but also achieves better completion and segmentation of
invisible and shaded areas, such as roads and poles in shaded areas, trees in shaded areas, and ﬁne-grained proﬁles of cars overlaps.
VoxFormer-T [25] also uses stereo depth performance for comparison, and the comparison beneﬁts are marked with boxes.

Abstract
Camera-based Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) is to
infer the full geometry of objects and scenes from only 2D
images. The task is particularly challenging for those invisible areas, due to the inherent occlusions and lighting
ambiguity. Existing works ignore the information missing
or ambiguous in those shaded and occluded areas, resulting in distorted geometric prediction. To address this issue,
we propose a novel method, Bi-SSC, bidirectional geometric semantic fusion for camera-based 3D semantic scene
completion. The key insight is to use the neighboring structure of objects in the image and the spatial differences from
different perspectives to compensate for the lack of information in occluded areas. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a spatial
sensory fusion module with multiple association attention
to improve semantic correlation in geometric distributions.
This module works within single view and across stereo
views to achieve global spatial consistency. Experimental
results demonstrate that Bi-SSC outperforms state-of-theart camera-based methods on SemanticKITTI, particularly
excelling in those invisible and shaded areas.
*

Equal contributed.

†

Corresponding authors.

1. Introduction
When faced with real-world objects of arbitrary shapes
and inﬁnite categories, the perception of the 3D environment is crucial for autonomous driving systems [11, 39]. It
directly affects downstream tasks such as motion prediction
and semantic map construction. However, constructing accurate and complete 3D information of the real world is notoriously difﬁcult, since factors such as viewpoint occlusion
or sparse noise.
To tackle these difﬁculties, 3D semantic scene completion (SSC) [41] is introduced, which formulates the problem as predicting the geometry and semantics of a scene
through prior information. Subsequently, some excellent
methods for realizing SSC with 3D information as input
have been proposed [5, 6, 21, 46, 50, 61]. While LIDAR
sensors offer relatively accurate depth measurement, cameras, despite being more cost-effective, can provide abundant visual information about the scene. The camera-based
methods are emerging as an exciting alternative to LIDAR.
This trend can be evidenced by MonoScene [3], which
earliest approach that relied on monocular RGB images
to infer 3D voxelized semantic scenes. However, it exposes the vulnerability of 2d-3d transformation, which is
20124

