This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rich Human Feedback for Text-to-Image Generation
Youwei Liang* †1 , Junfeng He* ‡2 , Gang Li* ‡2 , Peizhao Li†5 , Arseniy Klimovskiy2 , Nicholas Carolan2 ,
Jiao Sun†§3 , Jordi Pont-Tuset2 , Sarah Young2 , Feng Yang2 , Junjie Ke2 , Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham2 ,
Katherine M. Collins†4 , Yiwen Luo2 , Yang Li2 , Kai J Kohlhoff2 , Deepak Ramachandran2 , and Vidhya
Navalpakkam2
1

University of California, San Diego
2
Google Research
3
University of Southern California
4
University of Cambridge
5
Brandeis University

Abstract
Recent Text-to-Image (T2I) generation models such as
Stable Diffusion and Imagen have made significant progress
in generating high-resolution images based on text descriptions. However, many generated images still suffer from
issues such as artifacts/implausibility, misalignment with
text descriptions, and low aesthetic quality. Inspired by the
success of Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF) for large language models, prior works collected
human-provided scores as feedback on generated images
and trained a reward model to improve the T2I generation.
In this paper, we enrich the feedback signal by (i) marking
image regions that are implausible or misaligned with the
text, and (ii) annotating which words in the text prompt are
misrepresented or missing on the image. We collect such
rich human feedback on 18K generated images (RichHF18K) and train a multimodal transformer to predict the rich
feedback automatically. We show that the predicted rich
human feedback can be leveraged to improve image generation, for example, by selecting high-quality training data
to finetune and improve the generative models, or by creating masks with predicted heatmaps to inpaint the problematic regions. Notably, the improvements generalize to
models (Muse) beyond those used to generate the images
on which human feedback data were collected (Stable Diffusion variants). The RichHF-18K data set will be released
* Co-first authors, equal technical contribution
† The work was done during an internship at Google.

Email: youwei@ucsd.edu
‡ Corresponding authors, equal leading contribution.
Email: {junfenghe,leebird}@google.com
§ Currently affiliated with Google Gemini Team

in our GitHub repository: https://github.com/googleresearch/google-research/tree/master/richhf 18k.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) generation models [12, 17, 41, 42, 56,
58, 59] are rapidly becoming a key to content creation in
various domains, including entertainment, art, design, and
advertising, and are also being generalized to image editing [4, 27, 44, 50], video generation [23, 35, 53], among
many other applications. Despite significant recent advances, the outputs still usually suffer from issues such
as artifacts/implausibility, misalignment with text descriptions, and low aesthetic quality [30, 52, 54]. For example,
in the Pick-a-Pic dataset [30], which mainly consists of images generated by Stable Diffusion model variants , many
images (e.g. Fig. 1) contain distorted human/animal bodies
(e.g. human hands with more than five fingers), distorted
objects and implausibility issues such as a floating lamp.
Our human evaluation experiments find that only ∼10% of
the generated images in the dataset are free of artifacts and
implausibility. Similarly, text-image misalignment issues
are common too, e.g., the prompt is “a man jumping into a
river” but the generated image shows the man standing.
Existing automatic evaluation metrics for generated images, however, including the well-known IS [43] and
FID [20], are computed over distributions of images and
may not reflect nuances in individual images. Recent research has collected human preferences/ratings to evaluate
the quality of generated images and trained evaluation models to predict those ratings [30, 52, 54], notably ImageRe-

19401

