This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaceChain-SuDe: Building Derived Class to Inherit Category Attributes for
One-shot Subject-Driven Generation
Pengchong Qiao1,2 * Lei Shang2 * Chang Liu3† Baigui Sun2 Xiangyang Ji3 Jie Chen1,4
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China 2 Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
pcqiao@stu.pku.edu.cn

{sl172005, baigui.sbg}@alibaba-inc.com

{liuchang2022, xyji}@tsinghua.edu.cn

chenj@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, subject-driven generation has garnered significant interest due to its ability to personalize text-to-image
generation. Typical works focus on learning the new subject’s private attributes. However, an important fact has not
been taken seriously that a subject is not an isolated new
concept but should be a specialization of a certain category
in the pre-trained model. This results in the subject failing to comprehensively inherit the attributes in its category,
causing poor attribute-related generations. In this paper,
motivated by object-oriented programming, we model the
subject as a derived class whose base class is its semantic category. This modeling enables the subject to inherit
public attributes from its category while learning its private
attributes from the user-provided example. Specifically, we
propose a plug-and-play method, Subject-Derived regularization (SuDe). It constructs the base-derived class modeling by constraining the subject-driven generated images
to semantically belong to the subject’s category. Extensive
experiments under three baselines and two backbones on
various subjects show that our SuDe enables imaginative
attribute-related generations while maintaining subject fidelity. For the codes, please refer to FaceChain.

1. Introduction
Recently, with the fast development of text-to-image diffusion models [21, 26, 29, 32], people can easily use text
prompts to generate high-quality, photorealistic, and imaginative images. This gives people an outlook on AI painting
in various fields such as game design, film shooting, etc.
Among them, subject-driven generation is an interesting
application that aims at customizing generation for a specific subject. For example, something that interests you like
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) The subject is a golden retriever ‘Spike’, and the
baseline is DreamBooth [30]. The baseline’s failure is because the
example image cannot provide the needed attributes like ‘running’.
Our method tackles it by inheriting these attributes from the ‘Dog’
category to ‘Spike’. (b) We build ‘Spike’ as a derived class of the
base class ‘Dog’. In this paper, we record the general properties
of the base class from the pre-trained model as public attributes,
while subject-specific properties as private attributes. The part
marked with a red wavy line is the ‘Inherit’ syntax in C++ [37].

pets, pendants, anime characters, etc. These subjects are

7215

