This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCINeRF: Neural Radiance Fields from a Snapshot Compressive Image
Yunhao Li1,2

Xiaodong Wang1,2
Ping Wang1,2
Xin Yuan2
1
2
Zhejiang University
Westlake University

Peidong Liu2†

{liyunhao, wangxiaodong, wangping, xyuan, liupeidong}@westlake.edu.cn

Figure 1. Given a single snapshot compressed image, our method is able to recover the underlying 3D scene representation. Leveraging
the strong novel-view image synthesis capabilities of NeRF, we can render multi-view consistent images in high quality from the single
measurement.

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the potential of Snapshot Compressive Imaging (SCI) technique for recovering the underlying 3D scene representation from a single temporal compressed image. SCI is a cost-effective method that enables
the recording of high-dimensional data, such as hyperspectral or temporal information, into a single image using lowcost 2D imaging sensors. To achieve this, a series of specially designed 2D masks are usually employed, which not
only reduces storage requirements but also offers potential
privacy protection. Inspired by this, to take one step further,
our approach builds upon the powerful 3D scene representation capabilities of neural radiance fields (NeRF). Specifically, we formulate the physical imaging process of SCI
as part of the training of NeRF, allowing us to exploit its
impressive performance in capturing complex scene structures. To assess the effectiveness of our method, we conduct extensive evaluations using both synthetic data and
real data captured by our SCI system. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our proposed approach surpasses the state-of-the-art methods in terms of image reconstruction and novel view image synthesis. Moreover,
our method also exhibits the ability to restore high framerate multi-view consistent images by leveraging SCI and
the rendering capabilities of NeRF. The code is available
at https://github.com/WU-CVGL/SCINeRF.

† Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Conventional high-speed imaging systems often face
challenges such as high hardware cost and storage requirement. Drawing inspiration from Compressed Sensing (CS)
[5,8], video Snapshot Compressive Imaging (SCI) [50] system has emerged to address these limitations. A conventional video SCI system usually contains a hardware encoder and a software decoder. The hardware encoder employs a series of specially designed 2D masks to modulate the incoming photons across exposure time into a single compressed image. It enriches the low-cost cameras
the ability to capture high-speed scenes, which further reduces the storage requirement. The whole encoding process
can also be achieved via software implementation on precaptured images, which can reduce the storage/transmission
requirement and offer additional privacy protection. On the
other hand, the software decoder restores the high framerate images using the compressed measurement and corresponding binary masks.
In recent years, several image reconstruction algorithms
have been proposed for SCI, which range from the modelbased methods [18, 20, 49] to deep-learning based methods
[6, 7, 21, 30, 38, 39]. These algorithms can reconstruct encoded images or video frames with relatively high quality.
However, these methods usually do not consider the underlying 3D scene structure to ensure multi-view consistency
and can only recover images corresponding to the applied
encoding masks. To address these challenges, we propose
SCINeRF which recovers the underlying 3D scene representation from a single compressed image. High frame-rate

10542

