This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fully Exploiting Every Real Sample: SuperPixel Sample Gradient Model
Stealing
Yunlong Zhao1

Xiaoheng Deng1 * Yijing Liu2 Xinjun Pei1 Jiazhi Xia1
1
Central South University 2 Zhejiang University

Wei Chen2

{zhaoyl741, dxh, pei xinjun, xiajiazhi}@csu.edu.cn,{liuyj86, chenvis}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Model stealing (MS) involves querying and observing the
output of a machine learning model to steal its capabilities.
The quality of queried data is crucial, yet obtaining a large
amount of real data for MS is often challenging. Recent
works have reduced reliance on real data by using generative models. However, when high-dimensional query data
is required, these methods are impractical due to the high
costs of querying and the risk of model collapse. In this
work, we propose using sample gradients (SG) to enhance
the utility of each real sample, as SG provides crucial guidance on the decision boundaries of the victim model. However, utilizing SG in the model stealing scenario faces two
challenges: 1. Pixel-level gradient estimation requires extensive query volume and is susceptible to defenses. 2. The
estimation of sample gradients has a significant variance.
This paper proposes Superpixel Sample Gradient stealing
(SPSG) for model stealing under the constraint of limited
real samples. With the basic idea of imitating the victim
model’s low-variance patch-level gradients instead of pixellevel gradients, SPSG achieves efficient sample gradient estimation through two steps. First, we perform patch-wise
perturbations on query images to estimate the average gradient in different regions of the image. Then, we filter the
gradients through a threshold strategy to reduce variance.
Exhaustive experiments demonstrate that, with the same
number of real samples, SPSG achieves accuracy, agreements, and adversarial success rate significantly surpassing
the current state-of-the-art MS methods. Codes are available at https://github.com/zyl123456aB/SPSG attack.

1. Introduction
Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS), enhances efficiency in both work and daily life [17, 30, 32, 53]. These invaluable MLaaS models have become targets for malicious
users to steal. Model Stealing (MS) [3, 4, 27, 28, 33, 40, 44–
* Corresponding author is Xiaoheng Deng

46, 48, 51, 52] involves constructing a proxy model similar
to the victim model by acquiring query results of input samples. Beyond the direct utilization of the proxy model, malicious users can also generate a series of attacks based on the
proxy model and transfer them to the victim model, including membership inference attacks [36], adversarial attacks
[54], and model inversion attacks [11], etc.
The basic paradigm of MS is to construct a sample attack set and train a proxy model through the samples in the
attack set and the corresponding query results of the victim model. Data-free MS is based on generative networks
and uses noise to synthesize artificial images for the training of the proxy model. Although data-free MS claims that
real samples are not needed, in practical applications that
require high-dimension samples, data-free MS still has the
inevitable real sample demand. As shown in Table 1, on
the one hand, high-dimensional inputs would significantly
increase the query volume for data-free MS. For color images of 224x224 pixels, the query volume for data-free MS
could reach tens of millions. On the other hand, due to
the inherent risk of model collapse in GANs [14], training proxy models with data-free MS is prone to failure. By
giving data-free MS a small amount (10k to 20k) of real
samples related to the domain of the victim model as image
priors, data-free MS can reduce the query cost and model
collapse risk and improve the stealing effect. However, acquiring high-quality real samples that meet specific MLaaS
requirements is challenging. Different MLaaS have varying
requirements for input images, and blurred input images can
distort MLaaS query results. Privacy and copyright protections further complicate the acquisition of high-quality real
samples. Additionally, even with a plethora of real samples, the marginal benefit of each real sample for improving
the proxy model diminishes as the cardinality of real samples increases. Therefore, expensive real samples should be
fully utilized.
To make full use of each real sample, our idea is to obtain
more information about the model from real samples. However, for black-box models, it is challenging to obtain other
types of information to train proxy models. For example, all

24316

