This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

F3 Loc: Fusion and Filtering for Floorplan Localization
Changan Chen1,∗
1
∗

ETH Zürich

Rui Wang2
2

Christoph Vogel2

Marc Pollefeys1,2

Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Lab Zürich

Work done during his internship at Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Lab Zürich
Project Page : https://felix-ch.github.io/f3loc-page/

Figure 1. Floorplan localization. We propose a novel probabilistic model for localization within a floorplan consisting of a data-driven
observation (a,b) and a temporal filtering module (c). Evidence is estimated as a 1D-range image from a single (a) and a few consecutive
RGB images (b). A learned soft selection module combines the output from the complementary cues. The observation likelihood is
integrated over time by an efficient SE2 histogram filter to deliver the pose posterior. Our system achieves rapid and accurate sequential
localization, outperforming the state-of-the-art in recall and localization speed, while operating on consumer hardware.

Abstract
In this paper we propose an efficient data-driven solution to self-localization within a floorplan. Floorplan data
is readily available, long-term persistent and inherently robust to changes in the visual appearance. Our method does
not require retraining per map and location or demand a
large database of images of the area of interest. We propose
a novel probabilistic model consisting of an observation
and a novel temporal filtering module. Operating internally
with an efficient ray-based representation, the observation
module consists of a single and a multiview module to predict horizontal depth from images and fuses their results
to benefit from advantages offered by either methodology.
Our method operates on conventional consumer hardware
and overcomes a common limitation of competing methods [16, 17, 20, 28] that often demand upright images. Our
full system meets real-time requirements, while outperform-

ing the state-of-the-art [20, 28] by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Camera localization is an essential research topic in computer vision. It is key to many AR/VR applications for
head-mounted or handheld mobile devices and is of great
practical interest to the robotics community. Most existing
works localize the camera using a pre-collected database
[40][1][2] or within a pre-built 3D model [24, 34, 37–
39]. However, these representations of the environment are
costly in terms of storage and maintenance. In contrast, indoor environments including most commercial real estate
such as warehouses, offices and apartments already possess
a floorplan. The floorplan is a generic representation for indoor environments that is easily accessible, lightweight, and
preserves long-term scene structure independent of a changing visual appearance, such as the furnishing of the scene. It

18029

