This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-dimension Affinity Distillation for 3D EM Neuron Segmentation
Xiaoyu Liu1 Miaomiao Cai1 Yinda Chen1 Yueyi Zhang1,2 Te Shi2
Ruobing Zhang3,2 Xuejin Chen1,2 Zhiwei Xiong1,2, *
1

MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
2
3

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

Suzhou Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
liuxyu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate 3D neuron segmentation from electron microscopy (EM) volumes is crucial for neuroscience research. However, the complex neuron morphology often
leads to over-merge and over-segmentation results. Recent
advancements utilize 3D CNNs to predict a 3D affinity map
with improved accuracy but suffer from two challenges:
high computational cost and limited input size, especially
for practical deployment for large-scale EM volumes. To
address these challenges, we propose a novel method to
leverage lightweight 2D CNNs for efficient neuron segmentation. Our method employs a 2D Y-shape network to
generate two embedding maps from adjacent 2D sections,
which are then converted into an affinity map by measuring their embedding distance. While the 2D network better
captures pixel dependencies inside sections with larger input sizes, it overlooks inter-section dependencies. To overcome this, we introduce a cross-dimension affinity distillation (CAD) strategy that transfers inter-section dependency
knowledge from a 3D teacher network to the 2D student
network by ensuring consistency between their output affinity maps. Additionally, we design a feature grafting interaction (FGI) module to enhance knowledge transfer by
grafting embedding maps from the 2D student onto those
from the 3D teacher. Extensive experiments on multiple EM
neuron segmentation datasets, including a newly built one
by ourselves, demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance over state-of-the-art methods with only
1/20 inference latency. We release our code and dataset
at https://github.com/liuxy1103/CAD.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of neuron wiring diagrams plays a significant role in unlocking the secret of the brain and in* Corresponding author

Crops

3D Network
(a) Existing methods

2 Sections

2D Network
(b) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of different inference pipelines in the whole
EM volume between existing 3D affinity modeling using a 3D network (a), and our proposed modeling using a 2D network (b).

spiring the next generation of artificial intelligence from
neuroscience research [1, 3, 28, 30]. In recent years, 3D
electron microscopy (EM) has become a pivotal technique
for acquiring images at nanoscale resolution to trace delicate neuronal processes and synapses [11, 19, 40]. However, instance segmentation of neurons from EM volumes
remains challenging due to their complicated morphologies,
ambiguous boundaries, and dense distribution. Moreover,
a single neuron could span the whole 3D volume, which
is much larger than the field of view of existing models.
Therefore, the direct application of existing instance segmentation methods [5, 12, 22, 25, 36] in natural images
often leads to errors like over-merged and over-segmented
neuron instances.
Recently, advanced neuron segmentation approaches [7,
10, 14, 20, 21, 24, 33] based on 3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable progress by predicting a 3D affinity map which can be converted into neuron instances with post-processing algorithms [4, 26, 35].
Although 3D CNNs can effectively capture spatial contexts in 3D and emerge as the leading neuron segmentation

11104

