This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SketchINR: A First Look into Sketches as Implicit Neural Representations
Hmrishav Bandyopadhyay1 Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1 Aneeshan Sain1
Tao Xiang1,2 Timothy Hospedales 3 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
3
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
{h.bandyopadhyay, a.bhunia, p.chowdhury, a.sain, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

GT

Chamfer Distance

Sketch-RNN

Compressed Sketch
Storage (Bytes)
Raster Sketch
tch
Ske
tor
Vec

Recon.

Ours
Sketchy

FS-COCO

Sketch Complexity

(a) Self-Reconstruction

Ours
Sketchy

FS-COCO

Sketch Complexity

(b) Complexity Scaling

Figure 1. SketchINR is an implicit neural representation for sequential vector sketches. It is the first neural representation with sufficient
fidelity to be a drop-in replacement for the raw sketch data (a). The representation is significantly higher fidelity than existing learned
representations such as SketchRNN [28], especially for more complex sketches (b, left). SketchINR also provides state-of-the-art sketch
compression, with a substantially more compact representation than either vector or raster sketches (b, right).

Abstract
We propose SketchINR, to advance the representation
of vector sketches with implicit neural models. A variable length vector sketch is compressed into a latent space
of fixed dimension that implicitly encodes the underlying
shape as a function of time and strokes. The learned function predicts the xy point coordinates in a sketch at each
time and stroke. Despite its simplicity, SketchINR outperforms existing representations at multiple tasks: (i) Encoding an entire sketch dataset into a fixed size latent vector, SketchINR gives 60× and 10× data compression over
raster and vector sketches, respectively. (ii) SketchINR’s
auto-decoder provides a much higher-fidelity representation than other learned vector sketch representations, and
is uniquely able to scale to complex vector sketches such
as FS-COCO. (iii) SketchINR supports parallelisation that
can decode/render ∼100× faster than other learned vector
representations such as SketchRNN. (iv) SketchINR, for the
first time, emulates the human ability to reproduce a sketch
with varying abstraction in terms of number and complexity of strokes. As a first look at implicit sketches, SketchINR’s compact high-fidelity representation will support future work in modelling long and complex sketches.

1. Introduction
The prevalence of touch-screen devices has triggered significant research progress on sketches [4, 6, 8, 51, 57]. Mod-

elling digital sketches has become an important challenge
for learning systems that aim to stimulate human creativity
[17, 27]. Large-scale datasets [24, 28, 53] motivated several downstream applications like image retrieval [15, 61],
image generation [37, 65], image editing [1, 41], and 3D
content creation [5, 8, 38], among others [58, 60].
These applications are underpinned by sketches captured
in raw form either as raster or vector images, and usually encoded into derived representations by ConvNets [15],
splines, and so on. For over a decade, discourse around
what is a “good” representation of human sketches has
persisted [31]. A now substantial body of work has focused on representations for sequential vector sketches that
model both explicit strokes, and their drawing over time
— most famously by the auto-regressive SketchRNN [28],
but also using representations such as parametric curves
[16], Gaussians [2], and Neural ODEs [17]. We introduce
a novel continuous-time representation of sequential vector sketches by taking an implicit neural representation perspective on sketches for the first time.
First, we review the limitations of current sketch representations. The two most popular raw sketch representations are (i) raster sketch – a black and white image of a
line drawing, and (ii) vector sketch – a temporal sequence
of points and strokes. Raster sketch has a large but fixed
storage (e.g., 256 × 256). Its compatibility with ConvNets
[64] made raster sketches popular but they lack the tempo-

12565

