This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoPE-CLIP: Structured Pruning for Efficient Vision-Language Models with
Module-wise Pruning Error Metric
Haokun Lin1,2,4 , Haoli Bai3 , Zhili Liu3 , Lu Hou3 , Muyi Sun2 ,
Linqi Song4,5 , Ying Wei6†, and Zhenan Sun2†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
CRIPAC & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 City University of Hong Kong
5
City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute 6 Nanyang Technological University
haokun.lin@cripac.ia.ac.cn,ying.wei@ntu.edu.sg,znsun@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Vision-language pre-trained models have achieved impressive performance on various downstream tasks. However, their large model sizes hinder their utilization on
platforms with limited computational resources. We find
that directly using smaller pre-trained models and applying magnitude-based pruning on CLIP models leads to inflexibility and inferior performance. Recent efforts for VLP
compression either adopt uni-modal compression metrics
resulting in limited performance or involve costly masksearch processes with learnable masks. In this paper, we
first propose the Module-wise Pruning Error (MoPE) metric, accurately assessing CLIP module importance by performance decline on cross-modal tasks. Using the MoPE
metric, we introduce a unified pruning framework applicable to both pre-training and task-specific fine-tuning compression stages. For pre-training, MoPE-CLIP effectively
leverages knowledge from the teacher model, significantly
reducing pre-training costs while maintaining strong zeroshot capabilities. For fine-tuning, consecutive pruning from
width to depth yields highly competitive task-specific models. Extensive experiments in two stages demonstrate the
effectiveness of the MoPE metric, and MoPE-CLIP outperforms previous state-of-the-art VLP compression methods.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) models have demonstrated strong multi-modal representation learning abilities
[19, 24, 30, 32]. However, their impressive performance
comes at the cost of a large number of parameters, limiting their use on resource-constrained devices. Therefore, it
† Corresponding authors.

is essential to explore compact VLP models for real-world
applications [51, 57]. We identify two compression settings
for different platforms. First, many edge servers lack the
computational power to handle the entire pre-trained model.
We define “pre-training stage compression” to address
this, which involves compressing zero-shot VLP models
and pre-training them on millions of image-text pairs to create compact, general-purpose models. Second, clients, like
mobile phones, often require multiple task-specific models
for various scenarios. To meet this demand, we introduce
“fine-tuning stage compression”. For example, CLIP [44]
excels in cross-modal retrieval tasks, comprising image-totext retrieval (TR) and text-to-image retrieval (IR). Given
the pre-computable and offline storable nature of visual or
textual representations [10, 63], our objective is to compress
vision encoder for TR task and text encoder for IR task.
To reduce inference costs, smaller pre-trained models,
like the various-sized ViT-based CLIP models in [44],
are considered. However, individually pre-training each
model is computationally expensive [8], and the limited
architectural diversity may not meet various deployment
needs. Consequently, we delve into more flexible solutions
that leverage pruning techniques to compress VLP models. Nonetheless, the suboptimal performance of magnitude
pruning on CLIP as shown in Figure 1 raises the challenge
of identifying a more competitive pruning strategy.
Recent VLP pruning methods [51, 57, 59] can be broadly
categorized into two categories. The simplest way involves
applying uni-modal Transformer pruning methods. However, despite the effectiveness of metrics such as magnitude and loss-awareness on single-modality transformers
[16, 17, 36, 39], our experiments have revealed unsatisfactory performance when directly applying them to the multimodal CLIP models. EfficientVLM [57] uses the “every
other” pruning strategy during the pre-training stage, but

27370

