This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-Time Simulated Avatar from Head-Mounted Sensors
Zhengyi Luo1,2

Jinkun Cao2 Rawal Khirodkar1 Alexander Winkler1
Kris Kitani1,2,∗ Weipeng Xu1,∗
1
Reality Labs Research, Meta; 2 Carnegie Mellon University

Jing Huang1

https://zhengyiluo.github.io/SimXR/

Figure 1. Avatar control using SimXR on real world AR/VR headsets. (Left): An indoor kitchen setting using AR headset. SimXR controls the humanoid
using headset pose and visual input from two front-facing cameras. (Right): An office setting using VR headset (Quest 2). Humanoid motion is driven by
the headset pose, two side-facing and two up-facing cameras.

Abstract
We present SimXR, a method for controlling a simulated
avatar from information (headset pose and cameras) obtained from AR / VR headsets. Due to the challenging viewpoint of head-mounted cameras, the human body is often
clipped out of view, making traditional image-based egocentric pose estimation challenging. On the other hand,
headset poses provide valuable information about overall
body motion, but lack fine-grained details about the hands
and feet. To synergize headset poses with cameras, we control a humanoid to track headset movement while analyzing
input images to decide body movement. When body parts
are seen, the movements of hands and feet will be guided by
the images; when unseen, the laws of physics guide the controller to generate plausible motion. We design an end-toend method that does not rely on any intermediate representations and learns to directly map from images and headset
poses to humanoid control signals. To train our method,
we also propose a large-scale synthetic dataset created using camera configurations compatible with a commercially
available VR headset (Quest 2) and show promising results
on real-world captures. To demonstrate the applicability
of our framework, we also test it on an AR headset with a
forward-facing camera.

1. Introduction
From the sensor streams captured by a head-mounted device (AR / VR, or XR headsets), we aim to control a simulated humanoid / avatar to follow the wearer’s global 3D
body pose in real-time, as shown in Fig.1. This could
be applied to animating virtual avatars in mixed reality,
games, and potentially teleoperating humanoid robots [20].
However, the sensor suite of commercially available headmounted devices is rarely designed for full-body pose estimation. Their cameras are often facing forward (e.g.
Aria glasses [50]) or on the side (e.g. Meta Quest [4]) and
are used mainly for Simultaneous Location and Mapping
(SLAM) and hand tracking. Thus, the body is seen from
extreme and distorted viewpoints from these cameras.
These challenges have led to research on vision-based
egocentric pose estimation to create scenarios with more
favorable camera placement (e.g. fisheye cameras directly
pointing downward [5, 52–54, 62, 67]), where more body
parts can be observed. These camera views are often unrealistic and hard to recreate in the real-world: a camera protruding out and facing downward could be out of the budget
or break the aesthetics of the product. As there is no standard for these heterogeneous camera specifications, it is difficult to collect large-scale data. Using synthetic data [5, 52]
∗

571

Equal advising.

