This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JDEC: JPEG Decoding via Enhanced Continuous Cosine Coefficients
Woo Kyoung Han1,2

Sunghoon Im2
1
Korea University

Kyong Hwan Jin1 *
Jaedeok Kim3 *
2
3
DGIST
NVIDIA

{wookyoung0727, kyong jin}@korea.ac.kr, sunghoonim@dgist.ac.kr, jaedeokk@nvidia.com

Abstract
We propose a practical approach to JPEG image decoding, utilizing a local implicit neural representation with
continuous cosine formulation. The JPEG algorithm significantly quantizes discrete cosine transform (DCT) spectra to achieve a high compression rate, inevitably resulting in quality degradation while encoding an image. We
have designed a continuous cosine spectrum estimator to
address the quality degradation issue that restores the distorted spectrum. By leveraging local DCT formulations,
our network has the privilege to exploit dequantization and
upsampling simultaneously. Our proposed model enables
decoding compressed images directly across different quality factors using a single pre-trained model without relying on a conventional JPEG decoder. As a result, our
proposed network achieves state-of-the-art performance in
flexible color image JPEG artifact removal tasks. Our
source code is available at https://github.com/
WooKyoungHan/JDEC.

1. Introduction
Within the dynamic evolution of high-efficiency image
compression, it is notable that JPEG [33] maintains a pivotal position. JPEG, renowned for its compatibility and
standardization, is the most famous image coder-decoder
(CODEC) among conventional lossy compression methods.
Therefore, a high-quality JPEG decoder applies to all existing compressed JPEG files. JPEG reduces file size through
downsampling color components and quantizing the discrete cosine transform (DCT) spectra, which leads to a complicated loss of image information and distortion. Consequently, the design of a high-quality JPEG decoder presents
a dual challenge: 1) the restoration of complex losses from
the JPEG encoder and 2) the modeling of a network that
employs a spectrum as an input and its image as an output.
Many deep neural networks (DNNs) have been proposed as promising solutions for the JPEG artifact removal
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Overall concept of proposed JPEG decoding Instead
of using a conventional JPEG decoder to refine the high-quality
(HQ) image from the low-quality (LQ) image, our JDEC directly
decodes the LQ spectrum by learning a continuous spectrum.

[11, 14, 18, 24, 35–37]. Most existing methods, such as
[11, 24], are dedicated to specific quality factors, providing multiple models to cover JPEG compression. In recent
studies [14, 18], the quality-dedicated problem has been addressed through the utilization of quantization maps [14]
or the estimation of quality factors [18]. The existing artifact removal networks commonly take the decoded image
as input, even though the encoded spectrum contains more
information than the decoded image, according to the data
processing inequality [10]. The property is explained in the
supplement material.
Due to the characteristics of the JPEG algorithm, it is
non-trivial to design a neural network that takes spectra
as inputs [15, 34]. Park et al. [28] proposed a method
of processing spectra to transformers. In the context of
spectral processing, our approach extends beyond proposed
classification networks [15, 28, 34] by leveraging the capabilities of the embedding strategy, paving the way for
more effective decoding. The spectrum conversion aligns
with recent advancements in implicit neural representation (INR), where methods adopting sinusoidal functions
[5, 16, 20, 21, 27, 32] have demonstrated significant advancement across various tasks.
In this paper, we propose an advanced model, the
JPEG Decoder with Enhanced Continuous cosine coefficients (JDEC), for retrieving high-quality images from

2784

