This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Denoising Score for Text-guided Latent Diffusion Image Editing
Hyelin Nam1 , Gihyun Kwon2 , Geon Yeong Park2 , Jong Chul Ye1
Kim Jae Chul Graduate School of AI1 , Dept. of Bio and Brain Engineering2 , KAIST
{hyelin.nam, cyclomon, pky3436, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Text-guided Image Editing results via Contrastive Denoising Score. CDS successfully translates source images with a wellbalanced interplay between maintaining the structural elements of the source image and transforming the content in alignment with the
target text prompt.

Abstract
With the remarkable advent of text-to-image diffusion
models, image editing methods have become more diverse
and continue to evolve. A promising recent approach in
this realm is Delta Denoising Score (DDS) - an image editing technique based on Score Distillation Sampling (SDS)
framework that leverages the rich generative prior of textto-image diffusion models. However, relying solely on the
difference between scoring functions is insufficient for preserving specific structural elements from the original image, a crucial aspect of image editing. To address this,
here we present an embarrassingly simple yet very powerful modification of DDS, called Contrastive Denoising
Score (CDS), for latent diffusion models (LDM). Inspired

by the similarities and differences between DDS and the
contrastive learning for unpaired image-to-image translation(CUT), we introduce a straightforward approach using CUT loss within the DDS framework. Rather than
employing auxiliary networks as in the original CUT approach, we leverage the intermediate features of LDM,
specifically those from the self-attention layers, which possesses rich spatial information. Our approach enables zeroshot image-to-image translation and neural radiance field
(NeRF) editing, achieving structural correspondence between the input and output while maintaining content controllability. Qualitative results and comparisons demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed method. Project
page: https://hyelinnam.github.io/CDS/

9192

