This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perturbing Attention Gives You More Bang for the Buck: Subtle Imaging
Perturbations That Efficiently Fool Customized Diffusion Models
Jingyao Xu1
Siyang Lu1*
1

Yuetong Lu1
Dongdong Wang3

Yandong Li2
Xiang Wei1

Beijing Jiaotong University 2 Google Research 3 University of Central Florida
{jingyaoxu, sylu}@bjtu.edu.cn

Figure 1. With subtle perturbation, CAAT can efficiently and consistently degrade various customized diffusion models. First Line: Existing malicious attackers can use a few images publicly posted by users to generate users’ images using various customized diffusion models.
Second Line: Our CAAT, through subtle perturbations to the images, significantly disrupt the images generated from the customized diffusion models. We exemplify our approach by selecting the prompts “a photo of a person” and “a photo of a person in front of a pyramid”.

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) embark a new era of generative
modeling and offer more opportunities for efficient generating high-quality and realistic data samples. However, their
widespread use has also brought forth new challenges in
model security, which motivates the creation of more effective adversarial attackers on DMs to understand its vulnerability. We propose CAAT, a simple but generic and efficient approach that does not require costly training to effectively fool latent diffusion models (LDMs). The approach
is based on the observation that cross-attention layers exhibits higher sensitivity to gradient change, allowing for
leveraging subtle perturbations on published images to significantly corrupt the generated images. We show that a
subtle perturbation on an image can significantly impact
the cross-attention layers, thus changing the mapping between text and image during the fine-tuning of customized
diffusion models. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
CAAT is compatible with diverse diffusion models and out-

performs baseline attack methods in a more effective (more
noise) and efficient (twice as fast as Anti-DreamBooth and
Mist) manner.

1. Introduction
Diffusion Models (DMs) [11] represent a cutting-edge advancement in the field of generative models, particularly
within the realm of Text-to-Image (T2I) generation. This
strategic breakthrough in generative modeling has gained
recognition for its remarkable efficacy and potency in capturing intricate patterns and nuances. The technique can
effortlessly transform textual descriptions into rich and visually compelling images.
In the effort to make generative modeling with DM more
efficient, the development has led to the creation of multiple variants of DM models, including Textual Inversion [6],
DreamBooth [27], Custom Diffusion [16], and SVDiff [9],
etc. These variants provide users with more customized

24534

