This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BiPer: Binary Neural Networks using a Periodic Function
Edwin Vargas1,† , Claudia V. Correa1 , Carlos Hinojosa2 , Henry Arguello1
1
Universidad Industrial de Santander (UIS); 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
†

edwin.vargas4@correo.uis.edu.co

Abstract
Quantized neural networks employ reduced precision
representations for both weights and activations. This
quantization process significantly reduces the memory requirements and computational complexity of the network.
Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) are the extreme quantization case, representing values with just one bit. Since the
sign function is typically used to map real values to binary
values, smooth approximations are introduced to mimic the
gradients during error backpropagation. Thus, the mismatch between the forward and backward models corrupts
the direction of the gradient causing training inconsistency
problems and performance degradation. In contrast to current BNN approaches, we propose to employ a binary periodic (BiPer) function during binarization. Specifically,
we use a square wave for the forward pass to obtain the
binary values and employ the trigonometric sine function
with the same period of the square wave as a differentiable
surrogate during the backward pass. We demonstrate that
this approach can control the quantization error by using
the frequency of the periodic function and improves network performance. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of BiPer in benchmark datasets and network
architectures, with improvements of up to 1% and 0.69%
with respect to state-of-the-art methods in the classification task over CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, respectively. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.com/
edmav4/BiPer.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have achieved unprecedented results in many high-level tasks, such as classification, segmentation, and detection, with a tremendous concurrent impact in computer vision, natural language processing, information retrieval, and many others [42]. Typically, DNNs rely on full-precision (32 bit) weights and
activation functions. Accurate and precise models, however, become expensive in terms of computation, storage
and number of parameters. For this reason, DNN deployment is usually prohibited for devices with limited re-

sources, such as mobile, hand-held or wearables. Different
approaches to reduce computation requirements include efficient neural network architecture design [20, 22, 40], network pruning [19], knowledge distillation [15], low rank
tensor decomposition [31], hashing [12], and network quantization [33, 37, 47]. Among them, network quantization
has become one of the most promising techniques, aiming at compressing large models usually stored as floatingpoint weights with low bitwidth numbers. Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) are the extreme quantization case,
where weights and activation functions are constrained to
just one bit, i.e., binary values, typically +1 or -1. In contrast to DNNs, BNNs replace heavy matrix computations
by bit-wise operations, yielding to 32× memory compression, and 58× speed-up on CPUs [36]. Thus, this approach
drastically reduces the computational requirements and accelerates inference, making BNNs particularly appealing
for resource-constrained environments such as edge devices
and mobile applications.
Despite significant advantages for efficient BNN deployment in hardware with limited capabilities, the binarization of full-precision models severely degrades the accuracy performance in high-level tasks such as object detection, classification, segmentation, and others [37]. For instance, in large datasets such as ImageNet, one of the earliest BNN models, the XNOR-Net [36], achieved an accuracy degradation of around 18% compared to the full precision ResNet-18 architecture. Recent efforts have been devoted to close the performance gap of BNN with respect to
their real-valued counterparts. Nonetheless, state-of-the-art
approaches still exhibit accuracy degradations of approximately 8% [45].
Binarization of real-valued weights and activations is
generally performed using the sign function during the feedforward procedure. A relevant limitation of the sign function is that its gradient is null everywhere except in zero,
which makes it incompatible with error back-propagation
methods, due to the non-differentiability of binary operations. To overcome this issue, various techniques like the
straight-through estimator (STE) and relaxed training approaches have been adopted [21]. STE essentially substi-

5684

