This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InterHandGen: Two-Hand Interaction Generation
via Cascaded Reverse Diffusion
Jihyun Lee1 Shunsuke Saito2 Giljoo Nam2
1
KAIST 2 Codec Avatars Lab, Meta

Minhyuk Sung1 Tae-Kyun Kim1,3
3
Imperial College London

https://jyunlee.github.io/projects/interhandgen

(a) Generated two-hand interactions.

(b) Generated two-hand-object interactions.

Figure 1. Two-hand synthesis with InterHandGen. We propose InterHandGen, an approach to generate two-hand interactions with or
without an object using a novel cascaded diffusion. To enable high-fidelity and diverse sampling, we decompose the modeling of joint
distribution into the modeling of factored unconditional and conditional single-hand distributions.

Abstract
We present InterHandGen, a novel framework that
learns the generative prior of two-hand interaction. Sampling from our model yields plausible and diverse two-hand
shapes in close interaction with or without an object. Our
prior can be incorporated into any optimization or learning
methods to reduce ambiguity in an ill-posed setup. Our key
observation is that directly modeling the joint distribution
of multiple instances imposes high learning complexity due
to its combinatorial nature. Thus, we propose to decompose the modeling of joint distribution into the modeling
of factored unconditional and conditional single instance
distribution. In particular, we introduce a diffusion model
that learns the single-hand distribution unconditional and
conditional to another hand via conditioning dropout. For
sampling, we combine anti-penetration and classifier-free
guidance to enable plausible generation. Furthermore, we
establish the rigorous evaluation protocol of two-hand synthesis, where our method significantly outperforms baseline
generative models in terms of plausibility and diversity. We
also demonstrate that our diffusion prior can boost the performance of two-hand reconstruction from monocular inthe-wild images, achieving new state-of-the-art accuracy.

1. Introduction
Two-hand interaction is widely involved in our daily lives.
We coordinate our hands closely together when clasping,
praying, stretching, or engaging in social interactions. Modeling and understanding two-hand interactions are thus crucial for applications that require capturing human behaviors, such as augmented or virtual reality (AR/VR) and
human-computer interaction (HCI). Highlighting this importance, numerous research endeavors have been dedicated
to interacting hands reconstruction. With the release of the
large-scale two-hand interaction dataset [41], various methods [23, 31, 32, 34, 40, 41, 53, 55, 69, 72] have been proposed mainly for monocular two-hand reconstruction.
The under-explored part in the current two-hand interaction literature is interacting two-hand generation. Although
there are generative models proposed for other human interaction domains (e.g., hand-object [10, 22, 24, 26, 27, 64] or
two-human [35, 43, 58] interaction), directly adapting them
for two-hand interaction leads to sub-optimal generations.
Compared to hand-object interaction that involves a rigid
object, two hands lead to significantly more complex interactions due to the higher degree of freedom in two articulated hands. Additionally, while human-to-human body interaction is typically constrained on a shared ground plane,

527

