This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DSFLabelling: Boosting 3D Scene Flow Estimation by Pseudo Auto-labelling
Chaokang Jiang1 , Guangming Wang2 , Jiuming Liu3 , Hesheng Wang3 , Zhuang Ma1 ,
Zhenqiang Liu1 , Zhujin Liang1 , Yi Shan1 , Dalong Du1†
1
PhiGent Robotics, 2 University of Cambridge, 3 Shanghai Jiaotong University
ts20060079a31@cumt.edu.cn, gw462@cam.ac.uk, {liujiuming, wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn,
mazhuang097@outlook.com, {zhenqiang.liu, zhujin.liang, yi.shan, dalong.du}@phigent.ai
jiangchaokang.github.io/3DSFLabelling-Page

Abstract
Learning 3D scene flow from LiDAR point clouds
presents significant difficulties, including poor generalization from synthetic datasets to real scenes, scarcity of realworld 3D labels, and poor performance on real sparse LiDAR point clouds. We present a novel approach from the
perspective of auto-labelling, aiming to generate a large
number of 3D scene flow pseudo labels for real-world LiDAR point clouds. Specifically, we employ the assumption
of rigid body motion to simulate potential object-level rigid
movements in autonomous driving scenarios. By updating
different motion attributes for multiple anchor boxes, the
rigid motion decomposition is obtained for the whole scene.
Furthermore, we developed a novel 3D scene flow data augmentation method for global and local motion. By perfectly
synthesizing target point clouds based on augmented motion parameters, we easily obtain lots of 3D scene flow labels in point clouds highly consistent with real scenarios.
On multiple real-world datasets including LiDAR KITTI,
nuScenes, and Argoverse, our method outperforms all previous supervised and unsupervised methods without requiring manual labelling. Impressively, our method achieves
a tenfold reduction in EPE3D metric on the LiDAR KITTI
dataset, reducing it from 0.190m to a mere 0.008m error.

1. Introduction
3D scene flow estimation through deducing per-point
motion filed from consecutive frames of point clouds,
serves a critical role across various applications, encompassing motion prediction [33, 48], anomaly motion detection [15], 3D object detection [8, 16, 50], and dynamic point cloud accumulation [14]. With the advancing of deep learning on point clouds [37, 38], many works
[4, 9, 18, 27, 36, 39, 51] have developed the learning-based
1† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The proposed 3D scene flow pseudo-auto-labelling
framework. Given point clouds and initial bounding boxes, both
global and local motion parameters are iteratively optimized. Diverse motion patterns are augmented by randomly adjusting these
motion parameters, thereby creating a diverse and realistic set of
motion labels for the training of 3D scene flow estimation models.

methods to estimate per-point motion from 3D point clouds.
Some state-of-the-art methods [4, 39, 51] have reduced the
average 3D EndPoint Error (EPE3D) to a few centimetres
on the KITTI Scene Flow dataset (stereoKITTI) [30, 31].
However, due to the scarcity of scene flow labels, these
methods rely heavily on synthetic datasets such as FlyingThings3D (FT3D) [29] for network training.
When evaluated on the stereoKITTI dataset [30, 31],
PV-RAFT [47] demonstrates an average EPE3D of just
0.056m. However, when evaluated on the Argoverse
dataset [3], the EPE3D metric astonishingly exceeds 10m
[24]. Therefore, learning 3D scene flow on synthetic
dataset [29] has a large gap with real-world application.
Jin et al. [18] recently introduce a new synthetic dataset,
GTA-SF, simulating LiDAR scans for autonomous driving. They propose a teacher-student domain adaptation
framework to reduce the gap between synthetic and real
datasets and improve some performance of 3D scene flow
estimation. However, their performance is still poor in

15173

