This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Robust 3D Pose Transfer with Adversarial Learning
Haoyu Chen1 Hao Tang2 Ehsan Adeli3 Guoying Zhao1,3∗
1
CMVS, Finland 2 CMU, USA 3 Stanford University, USA
*Corresponding Author
{chen.haoyu, guoying.zhao}@oulu.fi, bjdxtanghao@gmail.com, eadeli@stanford.edu

Source pose
(mesh)

Identity

Transferred result

Ground truth

Source pose
(adversarial point cloud)

Identity

Transferred result

Ground truth

Source pose
(point cloud with
Gaussian noise)

Identity

Transferred result

Ground truth

Source pose
(raw scan)

Identity

Transferred result

Ground truth

Figure 1. Examples of our 3D pose transfer results on various pose sources, show strong robustness and generalizability. The pose source
includes clean mesh (top left) and point clouds with Gaussian noise (bottom left) from SMPL-NPT dataset [41], the adversarial sample
of point cloud generated by our method (top right), and raw scan (bottom right) from DFAUST dataset [5]. Identity meshes are from the
SMPL-NPT dataset [41] and the FAUST [3] (bottom right) dataset. Our method can achieve promising pose transfer performance even on
the extremely challenging incomplete raw scan (bottom right). See more results and details in the Supplementary Materials.

Abstract
3D pose transfer that aims to transfer the desired pose
to a target mesh is one of the most challenging 3D generation tasks. Previous attempts rely on well-defined parametric human models or skeletal joints as driving pose
sources. However, to obtain those clean pose sources,
cumbersome but necessary pre-processing pipelines are inevitable, hindering implementations of the real-time applications. This work is driven by the intuition that the robustness of the model can be enhanced by introducing adversarial samples into the training, leading to a more invulnerable model to the noisy inputs, which even can be further
extended to directly handling the real-world data like raw
point clouds/scans without intermediate processing. Furthermore, we propose a novel 3D pose Masked Autoencoder
(3D-PoseMAE), a customized MAE that effectively learns
3D extrinsic presentations (i.e., pose). 3D-PoseMAE facilitates learning from the aspect of extrinsic attributes by simultaneously generating adversarial samples that perturb
the model and learning the arbitrary raw noisy poses via a
multi-scale masking strategy. Both qualitative and quantitative studies show that the transferred meshes given by our

network result in much better quality. Besides, we demonstrate the strong generalizability of our method on various
poses, different domains, and even raw scans. Experimental
results also show meaningful insights that the intermediate
adversarial samples generated in the training can successfully attack the existing pose transfer models.

1. Introduction
As a promising and challenging task, 3D pose transfer has
been consistently drawing research attention from the computer vision community [10, 27, 37, 41]. The task aims
at transferring a source pose to a target identity mesh and
keeping the intrinsic attributes (i.e., shape) of the identity
mesh. Aside from pure research interests, transferring desired poses to target 3D models has various potential applications in the film industry, games, AR/VR, etc [8, 11, 12].
To achieve data-driven learning, existing 3D pose transfer methods rely on different prerequisites to the data
sources, which severely limits their further real-world implementations. Firstly, many existing 3D pose transfer
methods [30, 45] cannot directly be generalized to unseen

2295

