This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efﬁcient Meshﬂow and Optical Flow Estimation from Event Cameras
Xinglong Luo1,4 ,* Ao Luo2,4 ,* Zhengning Wang1†, Chunyu Lin3 , Bing Zeng1 , and Shuaicheng Liu1,4†
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
3
4
Southwest Jiaotong University
Beijing Jiaotong University
Megvii Technology
{luoboom@std.,zhengning.wang@,eezeng@,liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn
aoluo@swjtu.edu.cn cylin@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the problem of event-based
meshﬂow estimation, a novel task that involves predicting
a spatially smooth sparse motion ﬁeld from event cameras. To start, we generate a large-scale High-Resolution
Event Meshﬂow (HREM) dataset, which showcases its superiority by encompassing the merits of high resolution at
1280×720, handling dynamic objects and complex motion
patterns, and offering both optical ﬂow and meshﬂow labels. These aspects have not been fully explored in previous works. Besides, we propose Efﬁcient Event-based
MeshFlow (EEMFlow) network, a lightweight model featuring a specially crafted encoder-decoder architecture to
facilitate swift and accurate meshﬂow estimation. Furthermore, we upgrade EEMFlow network to support dense
event optical ﬂow, in which a Conﬁdence-induced Detail
Completion (CDC) module is proposed to preserve sharp
motion boundaries. We conduct comprehensive experiments
to show the exceptional performance and runtime efﬁciency
(39× faster) of our EEMFlow model compared to recent
state-of-the-art ﬂow methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/boomluo02/EEMFlow.

1. Introduction
Meshﬂow, a spatially smooth sparse motion ﬁeld, represents motion vectors exclusively at mesh vertices [28, 49],
which has been widely applied in various vision applications, such as image alignment [29, 30, 34], video stabilization [26, 27, 45] and high dynamic range (HDR) imaging [31, 46]. This motion representation combines the beneﬁts of optical ﬂow and global homography, effectively
reducing redundancy in motion information and computational costs, while also accommodating non-rigid motions
beyond single-plane movements. However, meshﬂow estimation on RGB images often encounter challenges under
scenarios such as low-light and rapid motions. This is due
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding Author.

1.2M

3M-6M

9.8M

38M

EEMFlow
39ൈ faster

Figure 1. Comparison of computational overhead and accuracy metrics.
The x-axis represents inference time, while the y-axis corresponds to the
end-point error. The size of each circle indicates the number of model
parameters. Lower values for all metrics are considered better.

to the loss of ﬁne image texture details and motion blurs.
In contrast, event cameras are well-suited for motion
estimation under such situations [7, 11]. Equipped with
bio-inspired vision sensors, event cameras can generate sequences of events with microsecond accuracy triggered by
changes in log intensity. In particular, when a change is detected in a pixel, the camera returns an event in the form
e = (x, y, t, p) immediately, where x, y stands for the spatial location, t refers to the timestamp in microseconds, and
p is the polarity of the change, either positive or negative.
The advantages of high temporal resolution and high dynamic range make event cameras highly effective for analyzing dynamic scenes.
In this work, we study a new problem that estimates
meshﬂow from event camera data. To start, we create
a large-scale High-Resolution Event Meshﬂow (HREM)
dataset, which contains 20k train and 8k test samples. We
build 100 virtual scenes in Blender to render the dataset,

19198

