This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SNI-SLAM: Semantic Neural Implicit SLAM
Siting Zhu1 ,* Guangming Wang2 ,* Hermann Blum3 , Jiuming Liu1 ,
Liang Song4 , Marc Pollefeys3 , Hesheng Wang1†
1
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of Cambridge
3
ETH Zürich 4 China University of Mining and Technology, China
{zhusiting,liujiuming,wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn
{hermann.blum,marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

gw462@cam.ac.uk

TS21060167P31@cumt.edu.cn

RGB
Appearance Feature

Interaction
&
Collaboration

Fused Appearance Feature

Depth

NeRF

RGB Map
Geometry Feature

Fused Geometry Feature

Semantic Feature

Fused Semantic Feature

Semantic Map

Figure 1. Our SNI-SLAM leverages the correlation of multi-modal features in the environment to conduct semantic SLAM based on
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF). This modeling strategy achieves not only higher accuracy compared with existing NeRF-based SLAM,
but also enables real-time semantic mapping. We propose a feature collaboration method between appearance, geometry, and semantics,
which significantly enhances the feature representation capabilities. Fused Appearance (orange box): Shadowing on the chair caused by
light is eliminated. Fused Geometry (blue box): The inconsistency of the cabinet bottom edge is improved. Fused Semantic (red box):
The distinction between table leg and floor is enhanced.

Abstract
We propose SNI-SLAM, a semantic SLAM system utilizing neural implicit representation, that simultaneously performs accurate semantic mapping, high-quality surface reconstruction, and robust camera tracking. In this system,
we introduce hierarchical semantic representation to allow
multi-level semantic comprehension for top-down structured semantic mapping of the scene. In addition, to fully
utilize the correlation between multiple attributes of the environment, we integrate appearance, geometry and semantic features through cross-attention for feature collaboration. This strategy enables a more multifaceted understanding of the environment, thereby allowing SNI-SLAM to re* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

main robust even when single attribute is defective. Then,
we design an internal fusion-based decoder to obtain semantic, RGB, Truncated Signed Distance Field (TSDF) values from multi-level features for accurate decoding. Furthermore, we propose a feature loss to update the scene
representation at the feature level. Compared with lowlevel losses such as RGB loss and depth loss, our feature loss is capable of guiding the network optimization
on a higher-level. Our SNI-SLAM method demonstrates
superior performance over all recent NeRF-based SLAM
methods in terms of mapping and tracking accuracy on
Replica and ScanNet datasets, while also showing excellent capabilities in accurate semantic segmentation and
real-time semantic mapping. Codes will be available at
https://github.com/IRMVLab/SNI-SLAM.

21167

