This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flow-Guided Online Stereo Rectification for Wide Baseline Stereo
Anush Kumar1

Fahim Mannan1 Omid Hosseini Jafari1 Shile Li1
1
Torc Robotics 2 Princeton University

1. Introduction
Wide baseline stereo methods with cameras separated meters apart have been proposed as a low-cost depth sensing method [5, 40, 41, 49] that allows, with double-digit
megapixel resolutions, even long distance depth measurements beyond 100 meters range. Employed in autonomous
trucks and large construction, farming robots, or UAVs
[23], the mounted cameras experience significant vibrations
which propagate to the stereo sensors leading to large deviations from offline calibration. Therefore, accurate online stereo calibration is essential for the functionality of
these sensor systems as part of the autonomous decision-

Stereo Camera

Stereo Camera

Abstract
Stereo rectification is widely considered “solved” due to
the abundance of traditional approaches to perform rectification. However, autonomous vehicles and robots in-thewild require constant re-calibration due to exposure to various environmental factors, including vibration, and structural stress, when cameras are arranged in a wide-baseline
configuration. Conventional rectification methods fail in
these challenging scenarios: especially for larger vehicles,
such as autonomous freight trucks and semi-trucks, the resulting incorrect rectification severely affects the quality of
downstream tasks that use stereo/multi-view data. To tackle
these challenges, we propose an online rectification approach that operates at real-time rates while achieving high
accuracy. We propose a novel learning-based online calibration approach that utilizes stereo correlation volumes
built from a feature representation obtained from crossimage attention. Our model is trained to minimize vertical
optical flow as proxy rectification constraint, and predicts
the relative rotation between the stereo pair. The method is
real-time and even outperforms conventional methods used
for offline calibration, and substantially improves downstream stereo depth, post-rectification. We release two
public datasets (https://light.princeton.edu/online-stereorecification/), a synthetic and experimental wide baseline
dataset, to foster further research.

Felix Heide1, 2

Offline Rectification

Proposed Online Rectification

Offline Rectification

Proposed Online Rectification

[m]

Figure 1. Wide Baseline Stereo Online Calibration. We address
online calibration in wide baseline stereo setups mounted above
the cab of a semi-truck with 2 meters baseline (top). Due to vibrations in a trucking scenario, the offline calibrations can be incorrect during a drive. We overlay rectified stereo pairs (middle) and
the corresponding depth inferred by HITNet [51] (bottom), each
column pair is an individual example. The proposed flow-guided
online calibration allows for accurate stereo depth estimation in
such a wide baseline setup. Please zoom in for details.

making stack, especially for large long-haul vehicles where
the mounting structures for large baselines can stretch and
twist due to temperature and stress gradients. The quality
of the calibration, addressed by the proposed method (see
Fig. 1), is essential to downstream tasks that aim to understand the environment around the vehicle, including stereo
depth estimation, 3D object detection, semantic segmentation, and SLAM.
Since images exist in 2D space, stereo co-planarity enables efficient stereo matching and stereo depth estimation
by nullifying the disparity in one of the axes, thereby reducing the matching search space to 1D. While perfect stereo
co-planarity is difficult to achieve and maintain, stereo rectification aims to project a pair of images onto a common
image plane such that there is no vertical disparity between
corresponding pixels across the images.
Existing calibration and rectification methods typically
rely on keypoint extraction and description methods [12,
53] using hand-crafted [4, 7, 30, 31, 35, 46, 47] and

15375

