This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Misalignment-free Adaptive Feature Alignment for UAVs-based
Multimodal Object Detection
Chen Chen

Jiahao Qi

Xingyue Liu Kangcheng Bin Ruigang Fu Xikun Hu
National University of Defense Technology, China

Ping Zhong*

chenchen21c@nudt.edu.cn, qijiahao1996@nudt.edu.cn, liuxingyue18@nudt.edu.cn,
binkc21@nudt.edu.cn, furuigang08@nudt.edu.cn, xikun@nudt.edu.cn, zhongping@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Visible-infrared (RGB-IR) image fusion has shown great
potentials in object detection based on unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). However, the weakly misalignment problem
between multimodal image pairs limits its performance in
object detection. Most existing methods often ignore the
modality gap and emphasize a strict alignment, resulting in
an upper bound of alignment quality and an increase of implementation costs. To address these challenges, we propose a novel method named Offset-guided Adaptive Feature Alignment (OAFA), which could adaptively adjust the
relative positions between multimodal features. Considering the impact of modality gap on the cross-modality spatial matching, a Cross-modality Spatial Offset Modeling
(CSOM) module is designed to establish a common subspace to estimate the precise feature-level offsets. Then, an
Offset-guided Deformable Alignment and Fusion (ODAF)
module is utilized to implicitly capture optimal fusion positions for detection task rather than conducting a strict
alignment. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that
our method not only achieves state-of-the-art performance
in the UAVs-based object detection task but also shows
strong robustness to the weakly misalignment problem.

1. Introduction
Visible-infrared (RGB-IR) object detection on unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) has attracted extensive attention [2, 27, 39], due to its ability to make full use of
complementary information and achieve robust around-theclock detection. However, the collected RGB-IR images are
typically mismatched in resolutions and field of views owning to disparate imaging principles. Thus, it is challenging to fuse the corresponding information of target between
multimodal images.
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Previous multimodal object detection architectures under weakly misalignment conditions vs. our OAFA. (a) Imagelevel alignment method: executing a pixel-level strict alignment
by explicitly extracting the global deformation fields from multimodal images. (b) Feature-level alignment method: explicitly
estimating feature offsets through multimodal features to achieve
strict feature alignment. It can be further classified into global
and local methods based on whether alignment is exclusively performed on target regions. (c) Our OAFA: the basic global offsets
are estimated by the modality-invariant features to eliminate the
impact of modality gap. Based on this offset, we perform adaptive
feature alignment without strict alignment.

To increase the quality of fusion representations, researchers always apply pre-registration techniques, involving image cropping [43] and affine transformation [47] before the fusing process. Nevertheless, since distinct imaging
time in multimodal sensors and intricate movements in targets, it is difficult, or even impossible, to achieve precise
UAVs image alignment [29]. It inevitably leads to local
inconsistencies in multimodal spatial distribution, named
the weakly misalignment problem [41], resulting in a mismatch of the multimodal target features in corresponding
positions [40]. Since the detection task is sensitive to spatial
locations, the weakly misalignment problem would lead to
significant performance degradation. Several studies have
been carried out to deal with this issue by accomplishing

26836

