This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAMM: TriAdapter Multi-Modal Learning for 3D Shape Understanding
Zhihao Zhang1∗ Shengcao Cao2 * Yu-Xiong Wang2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
1
2
zh1142@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{cao44,yxw}@illinois.edu

ModelNet40 Zero-Shot Acc (%)

80

ULIP

OpenShape

TAMM (Ours)

70

Point
Clouds

Rendered
Images

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
P+I

P+T

Matching
w/o CIA

a gray box with
four screws on it

a bedside table
with a lamp

Matching
w/ CIA

a desk with
drawers on it

a bed with white
sheet and a lamp

IAA

dress hat

mallet

TAA

lampshade

postbox

Dual

mushroom

mailbox

P+I+T

Figure 1. Our TriAdapter Multi-Modal Learning (TAMM) significantly enhances 3D shape understanding. Left: When aligning
features of 3D point clouds (P) with 2D images (I) and/or text (T), prior methods (e.g., ULIP [45] and OpenShape [23]) under-utilize the
image modality, due to the overlooked or unsolved image domain gap. TAMM better exploits the image modality and brings more gains
when learning from both image and text data. The results are produced by pre-training Point-BERT [47] on ShapeNet [3]. Middle: Our
CLIP Image Adapter (CIA) re-aligns the images rendered from 3D shapes with the text descriptions. The rendered images are inaccurately matched with text when the image features are directly extracted by CLIP, and CIA can correct the matching. Right: Our Image
Alignment Adapter (IAA) and Text Alignment Adapter (TAA) decouple 3D features with complementary visual and semantic focuses. In
the visualized examples, features from one single adapter are matched with classes whose appearance or semantics resemble the true class;
using both adapters leads to the correct class.

Abstract
The limited scale of current 3D shape datasets hinders the advancements in 3D shape understanding, and
motivates multi-modal learning approaches which transfer learned knowledge from data-abundant 2D image and
language modalities to 3D shapes. However, even though
the image and language representations have been aligned
by cross-modal models like CLIP, we find that the image
modality fails to contribute as much as the language in
existing multi-modal 3D representation learning methods.
This is attributed to the domain shift in the 2D images
and the distinct focus of each modality. To more effectively leverage both modalities in the pre-training, we introduce TriAdapter Multi-Modal Learning (TAMM) – a novel
two-stage learning approach based on three synergistic
adapters. First, our CLIP Image Adapter mitigates the domain gap between 3D-rendered images and natural images,
by adapting the visual representations of CLIP for synthetic
image-text pairs. Subsequently, our Dual Adapters decou-

ple the 3D shape representation space into two complementary sub-spaces: one focusing on visual attributes and
the other for semantic understanding, which ensure a more
comprehensive and effective multi-modal pre-training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that TAMM consistently
enhances 3D representations for a wide range of 3D encoder architectures, pre-training datasets, and downstream
tasks. Notably, we boost the zero-shot classification accuracy on Objaverse-LVIS from 46.8% to 50.7%, and improve the 5-way 10-shot linear probing classification accuracy on ModelNet40 from 96.1% to 99.0%. Project page:
https://alanzhangcs.github.io/tamm-page.

1. Introduction
Despite the recent success of 3D shape understanding [16,
19, 24, 42, 47, 51, 56], the limited scale of existing 3D shape
datasets hinders the learning of more robust and generalizable 3D representations. Due to the significant human labor and expertise required in collecting and annotating 3D

* Equal contribution.

21413

