This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffPortrait3D: Controllable Diffusion for Zero-Shot Portrait View Synthesis
Yuming Gu1,2 , Hongyi Xu2 , You Xie2 , Guoxian Song2 , Yichun Shi2 ,
Di Chang1,2 ,Jing Yang1 , Linjie Luo2
1
University of Southern California, 2 ByteDance Inc.
https://freedomgu.github.io/DiffPortrait3D
{yuminggu,dichang,jyang010}@usc.edu
{hongyixu,you.xie,guoxian.song,yichun.shi,linjie.luo}@bytedance.com

Abstract
We present DiffPortrait3D, a conditional diffusion model
that is capable of synthesizing 3D-consistent photo-realistic
novel views from as few as a single in-the-wild portrait.
Specifically, given a single RGB input, we aim to synthesize plausible but consistent facial details rendered from
novel camera views with retained both identity and facial
expression. In lieu of time-consuming optimization and finetuning, our zero-shot method generalizes well to arbitrary
face portraits with unposed camera views, extreme facial
expressions, and diverse artistic depictions. At its core,
we leverage the generative prior of 2D diffusion models
pre-trained on large-scale image datasets as our rendering backbone, while the denoising is guided with disentangled attentive control of appearance and camera pose. To
achieve this, we first inject the appearance context from the
reference image into the self-attention layers of the frozen
UNets. The rendering view is then manipulated with a novel
conditional control module that interprets the camera pose
by watching a condition image of a crossed subject from
the same view. Furthermore, we insert a trainable crossview attention module to enhance view consistency, which
is further strengthened with a novel 3D-aware noise generation process during inference. We demonstrate state-ofthe-art results both qualitatively and quantitatively on our
challenging in-the-wild and multi-view benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Faithfully reconstructing the 3d appearance of human faces
from a single 2D unconstrained portrait is a long-standing
goal for computer vision, with a wide range of downstream
applications in visual effects, digital avatars, 3D animation,
and many others. In this work, we challenge ourselves to
synthesize high-fidelity consistent novel views from as few
as a single portrait, with high resemblance to the inputs

reference

novel view synthesis

Figure 1. Given a single portrait as reference (left), DiffPortrait3D
is adept at producing high-fidelity and 3d-consistent novel view
synthesis (right). Notably, without any finetuning, DiffPortrait3D
is universally effective across a diverse range of facial portraits,
encompassing, but not limited to, faces with exaggerated expressions, wide camera views, and artistic depictions.

in both individual appearance, expression and background
content. Notably to the best of our knowledge, we are the
first zero-shot novel portrait synthesis work that supports
versatile facial appearances and backgrounds, exaggerated
expressions, wide views, and a plethora of artist styles.
Long-range portrait view synthesis from sparse inputs
requires a generative prior to hallucinating plausible scene
features that are unobserved in the inputs. Recently, 3D
aware generative adversarial network (GAN) [2, 5, 6, 11,
16, 35, 42, 53, 54] demonstrated striking quality and multi-

10456

