This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cloud-Device Collaborative Learning for Multimodal Large Language Models
Guanqun Wang1∗

Jiaming Liu1∗ Chenxuan Li1∗ Yuan Zhang1 Junpeng Ma1 Xinyu Wei1 Kevin Zhang1
Maurice Chong1 Renrui Zhang2 Yijiang Liu3 Shanghang Zhang1†
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Peking University 2 Shanghai AI Lab 3 Nanjing University
Device

Cloud
Uplink

Uncertainty-guided token sampling

Smaller
MLLM
AKD
Larger
MLLM

Text

How is the young red-haired girl feeling?

Text & Image

A: happy B: depressed C: angry D: sad
** ANSWER. A**

CD-CCA

Collaborative Training

Compressed
MLLM

Downlink

Dynamic weight update compression

Image
Multimodal Inputs

CD-CCA

Collaborative Optimization

A: happy

Figure 1. Cloud-Device Collaborative Continual Adaptation framework (CD-CCA). Our CD-CCA, specifically designed for MLLMs,
embodies a cloud-device collaborative paradigm. It is adept at receiving various modalities and executing multimodal comprehension tasks.
As illustrated on the left side of the figure, our approach facilitates collaborative learning between device and cloud, enabling the update
on the device-side deployed MLLM to adapt to dynamically changing scenarios. On the right side, an application instance of CD-CCA is
depicted, demonstrating its capability to achieve accurate multimodal comprehension in the face of evolving scenarios at the device.

Abstract
The burgeoning field of Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) has exhibited remarkable performance in
diverse tasks such as captioning, commonsense reasoning,
and visual scene understanding. However, the deployment
of these large-scale MLLMs on client devices is hindered by
their extensive model parameters, leading to a notable decline in generalization capabilities when these models are
compressed for device deployment. Addressing this challenge, we introduce a Cloud-Device Collaborative Continual Adaptation framework, designed to enhance the performance of compressed, device-deployed MLLMs by leveraging the robust capabilities of cloud-based, larger-scale
MLLMs. Our framework is structured into three key components: a device-to-cloud uplink for efficient data transmission, cloud-based knowledge adaptation, and an optimized
cloud-to-device downlink for model deployment. In the uplink phase, we employ an Uncertainty-guided Token Sampling (UTS) strategy to effectively filter out-of-distribution
tokens, thereby reducing transmission costs and improving training efficiency. On the cloud side, we propose
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author E-mail: shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Adapter-based Knowledge Distillation (AKD) method to
transfer refined knowledge from large-scale to compressed,
pocket-size MLLMs. Furthermore, we propose a Dynamic
Weight update Compression (DWC) strategy for the downlink, which adaptively selects and quantizes updated weight
parameters, enhancing transmission efficiency and reducing the representational disparity between cloud and device models. Extensive experiments on several multimodal
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
framework over prior Knowledge Distillation and devicecloud collaboration methods. Notably, we also validate the
feasibility of our approach to real-world experiments.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed a proliferation of Large
Language Models (LLMs) and Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs), with models like GPT4 [1] demonstrating exceptional performance across various tasks, including visual question answering (VQA) and commonsense reasoning. These MLLMs, such as Flamingo [2] and
BLIP-2 [3], empower LLMs with the capability to comprehend and reason about visual scenes. Due to their large
amount of parameters, MLLMs are commonly deployed on

12646

