This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OVER-NAV: Elevating Iterative Vision-and-Language Navigation with
Open-Vocabulary Detection and StructurEd Representation
Ganlong Zhao1,2 Guanbin Li2,3 * Weikai Chen4 Yizhou Yu1∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Sun Yat-sen University
3
GuangDong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
4
Digital Content Technology Center, Tencent Games
zhaogl@connect.hku.hk, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, chenwk891@gmail.com, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Recent advances in Iterative Vision-and-Language Navigation (IVLN) introduce a more meaningful and practical
paradigm of VLN by maintaining the agent’s memory across
tours of scenes. Although the long-term memory aligns better with the persistent nature of the VLN task, it poses more
challenges on how to utilize the highly unstructured navigation memory with extremely sparse supervision. Towards
this end, we propose OVER-NAV, which aims to go over and
beyond the current arts of IVLN techniques. In particular,
we propose to incorporate LLMs and open-vocabulary detectors to distill key information and establish correspondence between multi-modal signals. Such a mechanism introduces reliable cross-modal supervision and enables onthe-fly generalization to unseen scenes without the need of
extra annotation and re-training. To fully exploit the interpreted navigation data, we further introduce a structured
representation, coded Omnigraph, to effectively integrate
multi-modal information along the tour. Accompanied with
a novel omnigraph fusion mechanism, OVER-NAV is able to
extract the most relevant knowledge from omnigraph for a
more accurate navigating action. In addition, OVER-NAV
seamlessly supports both discrete and continuous environments under a unified framework. We demonstrate the superiority of OVER-NAV in extensive experiments.

Episode 2: Go straight
through the kitchen. Wait
near the table and chairs.

Turn left and exit the
room. Cross the hall to
the sitting room. Turn left
and enter the bedroom
on your left. Wait near
the bed.

CloseVocabulary:

Ours

Viewpoint

Ground Truth Path

Oracle Goal Path

Oracle Start Path

Navigation Path

bed/kitchen: Close/Open Set Keyword

Annotate objects

Train Seg Models

Build Maps

chair, table, cushion, cabinet,
shelving, sink, dresser, plant, bed,
sofa, counter, fireplace

e.g., RedNet

Segmentation Map
(Fixed Class Num)

Open-Vocabulary
Detection

Flexible and VariantLength Keyword Map

Extra Module
in VLN Agent

Reuse Instruction
Processing Module

Figure 1. Top: Example of a two-episode tour. The agent first
navigates the environment following the instruction of episode 1
(Yellow). Then the agent is directed to the ground truth goal as
Oracle Goal phase (Red). Later the agent travels to the start point
of episode 2 in the Oracle Start phase (Blue). Finally, the agent
navigates the environment following the next instruction (Yellow).
Bottom: Comparison between previous methods and ours. Closevocabulary methods require extra annotation and training efforts
to provide segmentation results in navigation, and the agent is limited to a close set of categories building segmentation maps. Our
method proposed an open-vocabulary-based omnigraph which is
more flexible for various keywords and circumstances.

1. Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) [1] aims to build
intelligent agents that can follow natural language instructions to navigate in the unseen environments. However,
existing VLN benchmarks eliminate the agent’s memory
* Corresponding authors are Guanbin Li and Yizhou Yu. This work was
supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NO. 62322608), in part by the CAAI-MindSpore Open Fund, developed
on OpenI Community.

upon the start of every episode, failing to leverage the visual observations and the iteratively built maps collected by
the physical robots. Recent work on Iterative Vision-andLanguage Navigation (IVLN) [25] introduces a more meaningful and practical paradigm that orders the episodic tasks
in VLN as tours and allows the agents to utilize memory to
achieve better navigation performance.
We demonstrate a typical procedure of an IVLN task in

16296

