This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Koala: Key frame-conditioned long video-LLM
Reuben Tan1

Ximeng Sun1 Ping Hu2 Jui-hsien Wang3 Hanieh Deilamsalehy3
Bryan A. Plummer1 Bryan Russell3 Kate Saenko1
1
2
Boston University, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 3 Adobe Research
{rxtan, sunxm, pinghu, bplum, saenko}@bu.edu, {juiwang, deilamsa, brussell}@adobe.com
https://cs-people.bu.edu/rxtan/projects/Koala
Inputs

Koala (ours) - attention visualizations

Long video (3 minutes)

T = 45s

T = 90s

T = 135s

T = 180s

Multiple-choice question and answers:
?

Based on the actions in the video, determine the overarching goal of
the individual's actions, and identify key steps they took to achieve it.

1

Ultimately, the individual's overarching goal and primary focus was
to successfully create a detailed sketch.

2

The individual's overarching goal was to create a notebook cover.

3

Ultimately, the individual's overarching goal was to diligently
create a comprehensive, accurate map.

4

The individual's overarching goal was to create a blueprint.

5

The ultimate objective of the individual was to successfully create a
comprehensive list themselves.

T = 45s

T = 90s

T = 135s

T = 180s

Prediction: 2 The individual's overarching goal was to create a
notebook cover.

Short video-LLM (prior work) - attention visualizations

T = 45s

T = 90s

T = 135s

T = 180s

Prediction: 1 Ultimately, the individual's overarching goal and
primary focus was to successfully create a detailed sketch.

Figure 1. Given a video-Large Language Model that was pretrained on millions of short seconds-long video clips, we propose a lightweight
approach (Koala) to extend its short-term video tokenizer function for understanding and answering questions about minutes-long videos.
We are the first to use sparsely sampled key frames to condition the LLM. As shown, our Koala approach is more effective at focusing
on relevant regions in the input frames than the short vLLMs, allowing it to make more informed predictions based on a more holistic
understanding of the video. These regions help facilitate our model in predicting the correct answer to the question (highlighted in green).

Abstract
Long video question answering is a challenging task
that involves recognizing short-term activities and reasoning about their fine-grained relationships. State-of-the-art
video Large Language Models (vLLMs) hold promise as a
viable solution due to their demonstrated emergent capabilities on new tasks. However, despite being trained on millions of short seconds-long videos, vLLMs are unable to understand minutes-long videos and accurately answer questions about them. To address this limitation, we propose
a lightweight and self-supervised approach, Key frameconditioned long video-LLM (Koala), that introduces learnable spatiotemporal queries to adapt pretrained vLLMs for
generalizing to longer videos. Our approach introduces
two new tokenizers that condition on visual tokens computed from sparse video key frames for understanding short

and long video moments. We train our proposed approach
on HowTo100M and demonstrate its effectiveness on zeroshot long video understanding benchmarks, where it outperforms state-of-the-art large models by 3 - 6% in absolute
accuracy across all tasks. Surprisingly, we also empirically
show that our approach not only helps a pretrained vLLM
to understand long videos but also improves its accuracy on
short-term action recognition.

1. Introduction
Answering questions about minutes-long videos is an inherently challenging task that involves recognizing multiple
actions and how they fit together to form the overall activity. To recognize that the person is making a notebook cover
instead of a sketch in Figure 1, a model must spot key actions (taping, measuring) and objects (paper), and understand how they are related to each other. Instruction-tuned

13581

