This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interpretable Measures of Conceptual Similarity by
Complexity-Constrained Descriptive Auto-Encoding
Alessandro Achille⇤ Greg Ver Steeg⇤ Tian Yu Liu Matthew Trager
Carson Klingenberg Stefano Soatto
AWS AI Labs
Abstract
Quantifying the degree of similarity between images is a
key copyright issue for image-based machine learning. In
legal doctrine however, determining the degree of similarity
between works requires subjective analysis, and fact-finders
(judges and juries) can demonstrate considerable variability in these subjective judgement calls. Images that are
structurally similar can be deemed dissimilar, whereas images of completely different scenes can be deemed similar
enough to support a claim of copying. We seek to define and
compute a notion of ‘conceptual similarity’ among images
that captures high-level relations even among images that
do not share repeated elements or visually similar components. The idea is to use a base multi-modal model to generate ‘explanations’ (captions) of visual data at increasing
levels of complexity. Then, similarity can be measured by
the length of the caption needed to discriminate between
the two images: Two highly dissimilar images can be discriminated early in their description, whereas conceptually
dissimilar ones will need more detail to be distinguished.
We operationalize this definition and show that it correlates
with subjective (averaged human evaluation) assessment,
and beats existing baselines on both image-to-image and
text-to-text similarity benchmarks. Beyond just providing a
number, our method also offers interpretability by pointing
to the specific level of granularity of the description where
the source data are differentiated.

1. Introduction
Consider the two images in Fig. 1. One could say they are
similar: both portray small red Italian cars. Another could
say they are different: One is a sports car in an open space,
the other a tiny city car in an alley. Is there an objective way
of measuring the similarity among images? In some cases,
similarity judgments can be influenced by shared concepts:
in Fig. 2, two images share compelling stylistic and conceptual similarity, but it is difficult to identify specific visual
elements they share. Yet the two were found to be legally

“substantially similar” [37]. Can we define an objective notion of ‘conceptual similarity’ among data?
There have been many attempts at defining an objective
notion of similarity based on the number of bits of information that the two samples share [11, 25, 40], but fundamentally they do not capture concepts (Appendix A), which
are human constructs. Since humans must play a role in
defining similarity among concepts, one way to achieve objectivity is by averaging a large number of human assessments. This is what large-scale neural network models do
[34]. However, contrastive-trained models measure similarity based on how easily the data can be distinguished, and
any two non-identical samples can be distinguished by random features of no conceptual relevance [22].
Rather than focusing on finding the features that best distinguish the two images, we focus on finding the ones that
best describe them. Then, we can measure semantic similarity based on how well descriptions of one fit the other.
If two samples are similar, a short description should apply
equally well to both. If the samples are very different, the
description of one will be a poor fit for the other. The more
complex the description needed to distinguish the images,
the higher their conceptual similarity. The key idea is to focus on optimally describing individual samples, rather than
adversarially discriminating them.
Specifically, referring to Fig. 1, we generate multiple descriptions of each sample in increasing level of complexity,
sorted by their coding length. Then, we measure the difference of the likelihood of each image conditioned on either descriptions as a function of complexity. That traces
a curve that measures distance as a function of complexity.
Any two images can be distinguished by their description
at some point (the more you look, the more differences you
see). Therefore, similarity should always be relative to a description length. However, when a single number is needed
for comparison, we show that the AUC of the distance function is well aligned with human similarity assessments.
Our proposed method, which we call ComplexityConstrained Descriptive Autoencoding, or CC:DAE, is
rooted in the idea of the Kolmogorov Structure Function,

11062

