This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ink Dot-Oriented Differentiable Optimization for Neural Image Halftoning
Bingfeng Zhou
Peking University
zbf@pku.edu.cn

Yadong Mu*
Peking University
myd@pku.edu.cn

Xia

Ostrom.

Floyd

Ours

Hao Jiang
Peking University
jianghao@stu.pku.edu.cn

Figure 1. Illustration of halftones generated by our proposed ink dot-oriented differentiable neural halftoning method and several previous
methods [12, 26, 35]. Images are from the DIV2K dataset [2].

Abstract
Halftoning is a time-honored printing technique that
simulates continuous tones using ink dots (halftone dots).
The resurgence of deep learning has catalyzed the emergence of innovative technologies in the printing industry,
fostering the advancement of data-driven halftoning methods. Nevertheless, current deep learning-based approaches
produce halftones through image-to-image black box transformations, lacking direct control over the movement of individual halftone dots. In this paper, we propose an innovative halftoning method termed “neural dot-controllable
halftoning”. This method allows dot-level image dithering by providing direct control over the motion of each ink
dot. We conceptualize halftoning as the process of sprinkling dots on a canvas. Initially, a specific quantity of dots
are randomly dispersed on the canvas and subsequently
adjusted based on the surrounding grayscale and gradient. To establish differentiable transformations between
* Corresponding Author.

discrete ink dot positions and halftone matrices, we devise
a lightweight dot encoding network to spread dense gradients to sparse dots. Dot control offers several advantages
to our approach, including the capability to regulate the
quantity of halftone dots and enhance specific areas with
artifacts in the generated halftones by adjusting the placement of the dots. Our proposed method exhibits superior
performance than previous approaches in extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments.

1. Introduction
In the late 1800s, pioneers such as William Henry Fox Talbot, Georg Meisenbach, Frederic Ives, and Max Levy [32]
made significant strides in halftone printing techniques,
enabling photographs to be printed on paper using ink.
Halftoning is a technique of replicating the color and shading of continuous tone images by employing ink dots
(halftone dots) of different sizes and frequencies. It remains
a crucial and enduring component in the modern printing

27528

