This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionPoser: Real-time Human Motion Reconstruction From Arbitrary
Sparse Sensors Using Autoregressive Diffusion
Tom Van Wouwe

Seunghwan Lee
Antoine Falisse
Stanford University

Scott Delp

C. Karen Liu

[tvwouwe,lsw9021,afalisse,delp,ckliu38]@stanford.edu

Abstract
Motion capture from a limited number of body-worn sensors, such as inertial measurement units (IMUs) and pressure insoles, has important applications in health, human
performance, and entertainment. Recent work has focused
on accurately reconstructing whole-body motion from a
specific sensor configuration using six IMUs. While a common goal across applications is to use the minimal number of sensors to achieve required accuracy, the optimal
arrangement of the sensors might differ from application
to application. We propose a single diffusion model, DiffusionPoser, which reconstructs human motion in real-time
from an arbitrary combination of sensors, including IMUs
placed at specified locations, and, pressure insoles. Unlike existing methods, our model grants users the flexibility
to determine the number and arrangement of sensors tailored to the specific activity of interest, without the need
for retraining. A novel autoregressive inferencing scheme
ensures real-time motion reconstruction that closely aligns
with measured sensor signals. The generative nature of DiffusionPoser ensures realistic behavior, even for degrees-offreedom not directly measured. Qualitative results can be
found on our website: https://diffusionposer.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Portable and minimally intrusive tools for estimating human motion have important applications in health and human performance as they allow continuous monitoring of
the motions of the body and the forces in the musculoskeletal system [19, 45]. Mobile sensing technologies also have
applications in virtual and augmented reality, and video
games [32,33]. Truly wearable sensors such as inertial measurement units (IMUs) (e.g. [2]), pressure insoles (e.g. [6])
or electromagnetic sensors (e.g. [15]), have an advantage
compared to video-based motion capture, as they are egocentric, do not suffer from occlusion or poor lighting, and
offer an infinite measurement volume. While egocentric

Figure 1. (Left) Examples of live reconstruction using DiffusionPoser. (Right) Subject instrumented with IMUs. We
assume IMUs may be attached at 13 specific locations: pelvis,
thighs, shanks, feet, arms, wrists, torso, head.

video represents an alternative or supplementary modality,
it introduces potential privacy concerns. With IMU sensors
being the cheapest alternative of these mobile sensing technologies, much research has focused on motion reconstruction from these. Configurations with few sensors, i.e. sparse
configurations, are desirable for user convenience and adherence. However, a sparse configuration as opposed to a
dense configuration, does not allow direct measurement of
the full body motion. Besides sparsity, sensor noise is an
important challenge. To tackle the problems of sparsity and
noise in the case of IMUs, both optimization [48] and datadriven [11, 36] methods have been used.
Prior data-driven methods that reconstruct motion from
sparse IMU sensor configurations focused on a specific
number of sensors in a specific configuration [11, 13, 36,
48, 52, 53]. In practice, applications would benefit from a

2513

