This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How to Train Neural Field Representations: A Comprehensive Study
and Benchmark
Samuele Papa1,2 , Riccardo Valperga1 , David Knigge1,2 , Miltiadis Kofinas1 , Phillip Lippe1 ,
Jan-Jakob Sonke2 , Efstratios Gavves1
1
University of Amsterdam, 2 Netherlands Cancer Institute
s.papa@{uva,nki}.nl, {r.valperga, dm.knigge, m.kofinas, p.lippe}@uva.nl,
j.sonke@nki.nl, e.gavves@uva.nl

Abstract
Neural fields (NeFs) have recently emerged as a versatile
method for modeling signals of various modalities, including images, shapes, and scenes. Subsequently, a number
of works have explored the use of NeFs as representations
for downstream tasks, e.g. classifying an image based on
the parameters of a NeF that has been fit to it. However,
the impact of the NeF hyperparameters on their quality as
downstream representation is scarcely understood and remains largely unexplored. This is in part caused by the large
amount of time required to fit datasets of neural fields.
In this work, we propose a JAX-based library1 that leverages parallelization to enable fast optimization of largescale NeF datasets, resulting in a significant speed-up. With
this library, we perform a comprehensive study that investigates the effects of different hyperparameters on fitting
NeFs for downstream tasks. In particular, we explore the
use of a shared initialization, the effects of overtraining, and
the expressiveness of the network architectures used. Our
study provides valuable insights on how to train NeFs and
offers guidance for optimizing their effectiveness in downstream applications. Finally, based on the proposed library
and our analysis, we propose Neural Field Arena, a benchmark consisting of neural field variants of popular vision
datasets, including MNIST, CIFAR, variants of ImageNet,
and ShapeNetv2. Our library and the Neural Field Arena
will be open-sourced to introduce standardized benchmarking and promote further research on neural fields.

1. Introduction
Neural Fields (NeFs) [43] have recently emerged as a versatile method for reconstructing discretely sampled continuous signals, with great success on various modalities from
images [39–41], videos [32], 3D scenes and shapes [27, 28,
1 https://fit-a-nef.github.io/

31, 46], to medical imaging [30, 47], audio [14, 39], and
physical systems [19, 36, 45]. The continuous nature of
coordinate-based models fθ : x 7→ y, x ∈ Rd , y ∈ Rc (e.g.
d = 2 for images and d = 3 for 3D shapes), allows for modeling signals without the limitations in resolution inherent
in discrete representations; their capacity for modeling fine
detail is only limited by the expressivity of the underlying
NeF architecture. Furthermore, some modalities, such as
scenes and shapes, do not have array representations that
can be easily adapted to existing deep learning methods.
Doubling down on their flexibility, a growing body of literature [2, 10, 12, 20, 29] has further proposed to use NeF parameterizations fθ directly as representations of data. They
are used to model images, videos, or shapes not as tensors
but as functions on which to run downstream tasks (e.g.,
classify the function of an image instead of the pixel tensor
of an image). In this setting, the parameters θ of a NeF –
sometimes along with their computational structure– serve
as input for a downstream model.
Despite their promise, NeFs lag behind as image representations, while showing promise for shape datasets [20,
29]. We argue that two challenges contribute to their lack
of performance: a practical one, and a theoretical one.
The practical challenge is that a NeF is a neural network
fit on a single discretely sampled signal, for instance, the
pixels of an image. Fitting a new NeF for every sample in a dataset means training a new neural network from
scratch, thus scaling up to whole datasets –especially large
datasets with high-resolution signals– is prohibitively timeconsuming [10, 12, 29]. The theoretical challenge stems
from the fact that in this setting we treat the parameters of
a neural network as a signal representation, and given our
lack of understanding of how neural networks behave as a
function of their architecture and optimization, we do not
know what makes the parameters of a NeF a good representation for downstream tasks. Moreover, the scaling inefficiencies described above hinder us from forming hypothe-

22616

