This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The STVchrono Dataset: Towards Continuous Change Recognition in Time
Yanjun Sun1,2 ,* Yue Qiu1 ,* Mariia Khan3 , Fumiya Matsuzawa1 , Kenji Iwata1
1
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 2 Keio University,
3
Edith Cowan University
{yanjun.son,qiu.yue,fumi8.matsuzawa,kenji.iwata}@aist.go.jp, mariiak@our.ecu.edu.au

Statistics:
• 50 cities
• 18 spanning years
• 71,900 images
• 1000+ human labeling hours
• 3 tasks
• change recognition
• tendency recognition
• change localization
Continual Change Captioning
(Image Pair)

Change recognition

Image A, 2014-06

Image B, 2017-12

The trees in image A have more leaves than those in
B. A road lamp is shown on the left side of B, but not
on A. The painting of the building on the left side of
image A is different from that in B. A is sunnier than B.

Change-Aware Sequential
Instance Segmentation

Continual Change Captioning
(Image Sequence)

Tendency recognition

Image 1, 2015-10
Image
2015-10

Image 2, 2016-06
Image
2016-06

Image 3, 2017-02
Image
2017-02

Image 4, 2018-07
Image
2018-07

Change localization

Image
2021-06
Image 5,
5, 2021-06

The sunniest sky is in image 4. The cloudiest sky is in image 5. Image 3
has the fewest vehicles. The road fence on the left side of the images is
gradually eroding. The grassland on the left side of image 1 is the
greenest. The road is the oldest in image 3.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed STVchrono dataset.

Abstract
Recognizing continuous changes offers valuable insights
into past historical events, supports current trend analysis,
and facilitates future planning. This knowledge is crucial
for a variety of fields, such as meteorology and agriculture, environmental science, urban planning and construction, tourism, and cultural preservation. Currently available datasets in the field of scene change understanding
primarily concentrate on two main tasks: the detection of
changed regions within a scene and the linguistic description of the change content. Existing datasets focus on recognizing discrete changes, such as adding or deleting an
object from two images, and largely rely on artificially generated images. Consequently, the existing change understanding methods primarily focus on identifying distinct object differences, overlooking the importance of continuous,
gradual changes occurring over extended time intervals.

To address the above issues, we propose a novel benchmark dataset, STVchrono, targeting the localization and
description of long-term continuous changes in real-world
scenes. The dataset consists of 71,900 photographs from
Google Street View API taken over an 18-year span across
50 cities all over the world. Our STVchrono dataset is designed to support real-world continuous change recognition
and description in both image pairs and extended image sequences, while also enabling the segmentation of changed
regions. We conduct experiments to evaluate state-of-theart methods on continuous change description and segmentation, as well as multimodal Large Language Models for
describing changes. Our findings reveal that even the most
advanced methods lag human performance, emphasizing
the need to adapt them to continuously changing real-world
scenarios. We hope that our benchmark dataset will further facilitate the research of temporal change recognition
in a dynamic world. The STVchrono dataset is available at
STVchrono Dataset.

* Equal contribution.

14111

