This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMM: Generative Masked Motion Model
Ekkasit Pinyoanuntapong, Pu Wang, Minwoo Lee
University of North Carolina at Charlotte

Chen Chen
University of Central Florida

{epinyoan, pwang13, Minwoo.Lee}@uncc.edu

chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

the figure walks in a
counterclockwise circle,
stopping at its starting point.

a man puts both
hands in the air

a person walks forward
in a straight line.

a person crawls
forward.

the toon is crouched down on one knee, ...
___Transition___
a person jumps forward
___Transition___
a person balances on their left foot ...
___Transition___
a person reaches forward ...
___Transition___
a man walks in a circle ...
...

a man rises from the ground, walks in a
circle and sits back down on the ground.

(a) Text to Motion

(b) Upper Body Editing

(c) Motion In-betweening

(d) Long Sequence Generation

Figure 1. MMM can generate precise human motions given fine-grained textual descriptions while enabling motion editing applications. Blue frames
represent conditioned motion input and red frames are the generated motion. Motion in-betweening can be performed by filling the gaps between keyframes
or major motion points, conditioned on text or without conditions. Upper body part editing is done by fixing the lower body motion generated by one text
prompt and altering the upper body motion according to another input prompt. An arbitrary long motion sequence can be generated according to a story
(i.e., a sequence of text prompts), where MMM generates the motion for each prompt (red frames), while “hallucinating” the nature and smooth motion
transitions (blue frames) between neighboring prompts (without being explicitly trained on motion transition datasets)

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-motion generation using diffusion and autoregressive models have shown promising results. However, these models often suffer from a trade-off
between real-time performance, high fidelity, and motion
editability. To address this gap, we introduce MMM, a novel
yet simple motion generation paradigm based on Masked
Motion Model. MMM consists of two key components: (1)
a motion tokenizer that transforms 3D human motion into a
sequence of discrete tokens in latent space, and (2) a conditional masked motion transformer that learns to predict
randomly masked motion tokens, conditioned on the precomputed text tokens. By attending to motion and text tokens in all directions, MMM explicitly captures inherent
dependency among motion tokens and semantic mapping
between motion and text tokens. During inference, this allows parallel and iterative decoding of multiple motion tokens that are highly consistent with fine-grained text descriptions, therefore simultaneously achieving high-fidelity
and high-speed motion generation. In addition, MMM has
innate motion editability. By simply placing mask tokens
in the place that needs editing, MMM automatically fills
the gaps while guaranteeing smooth transitions between
editing and non-editing parts. Extensive experiments on

the HumanML3D and KIT-ML datasets demonstrate that
MMM surpasses current leading methods in generating
high-quality motion (evidenced by superior FID scores of
0.08 and 0.429), while offering advanced editing features
such as body-part modification, motion in-betweening, and
the synthesis of long motion sequences. In addition, MMM
is two orders of magnitude faster on a single mid-range
GPU than editable motion diffusion models. Our project
page is available at https://exitudio.github.
io/MMM-page/.

1. Introduction
Text-driven human motion generation has recently become
an emerging research focus due to the semantic richness
and user-friendly nature of natural language descriptions,
with its broad applications in animation, film, VR/AR, and
robotics. However, generating high-fidelity motion that precisely aligns with text descriptors is challenging because
of inherent differences between language and motion data
distributions. To address this challenge, three predominant methods have been proposed, including (1) languagemotion latent space alignment, (2) conditional diffusion
model, and (3) conditional autoregressive model.
In the first method, text descriptions and motion se-

1546

