This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can Language Beat Numerical Regression?
Language-Based Multimodal Trajectory Prediction

1

Inhwan Bae1 , Junoh Lee2 and Hae-Gon Jeon1,2 *
AI Graduate School, 2 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, South Korea
{inhwanbae, juno}@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Language models have demonstrated impressive ability in
context understanding and generative performance. Inspired
by the recent success of language foundation models, in this
paper, we propose LMTraj (Language-based Multimodal
Trajectory predictor), which recasts the trajectory prediction
task into a sort of question-answering problem. Departing
from traditional numerical regression models, which treat
the trajectory coordinate sequence as continuous signals, we
consider them as discrete signals like text prompts. Specially,
we first transform an input space for the trajectory coordinate into the natural language space. Here, the entire timeseries trajectories of pedestrians are converted into a text
prompt, and scene images are described as text information
through image captioning. The transformed numerical and
image data are then wrapped into the question-answering
template for use in a language model. Next, to guide the
language model in understanding and reasoning high-level
knowledge, such as scene context and social relationships
between pedestrians, we introduce an auxiliary multi-task
question and answering. We then train a numerical tokenizer
with the prompt data. We encourage the tokenizer to separate
the integer and decimal parts well, and leverage it to capture
correlations between the consecutive numbers in the language model. Lastly, we train the language model using the
numerical tokenizer and all of the question-answer prompts.
Here, we propose a beam-search-based most-likely prediction and a temperature-based multimodal prediction to implement both deterministic and stochastic inferences. Applying our LMTraj, we show that the language-based model can
be a powerful pedestrian trajectory predictor, and outperforms existing numerical-based predictor methods. Extensive experiments show that our LMTraj can successfully understand social relationships and accurately extrapolate the
multimodal futures on the public pedestrian trajectory prediction benchmark. Code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/inhwanbae/LMTrajectory.
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Traditional vs. Our language-based trajectory prediction, LMTraj. Given each observation data, (a) traditional predictors directly use the numerical values; (b) the proposed method
converts the raw trajectory data to the linguistic prompt, and then
captures reasoning social relations to predict a socially acceptable
future with the question-answering template.

1. Introduction
Forecasting pedestrian trajectories in crowded environments
is essential for path planning, social robots and autonomous
maneuvering systems. The mainstream models used for this
task take the position of pedestrians in world-coordinates
as input, and infer their possible future paths by regressing
a set of coordinate sequences [1, 3, 6, 14, 27, 32, 41, 49,
50, 64, 73, 96, 99, 102, 106, 124, 139]. Capturing social
relations between pedestrians, based on their distance and
motion similarity, has resulted in impressive performance
improvements [73, 99, 115, 116, 139, 140].
Meanwhile, recent advances in language models have
demonstrated their ability to provide context understanding
and conditional generation across a spectrum of tasks [30,
59, 92]. The language models also offer accurate results
when solving mathematical problems [104, 149]. This is
because the language models can provide higher-level connotations [45, 131, 134], and benefit from tokenizers [44]

753

