This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-World Efficient Blind Motion Deblurring via Blur Pixel Discretization
Jae Seok Choi1 Geonseok Seo1 Kinam Kwon1 Jinwoo Shin2 * Hyong-Euk Lee1 *
1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea
2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea

Insoo Kim1,2

Patch,motion부분 그림으로 변경함
Class 2

Abstract
As recent advances in mobile camera technology have
enabled the capability to capture high-resolution images,
such as 4K images, the demand for an efficient deblurring
model handling large motion has increased. In this paper,
we discover that the image residual errors, i.e., blur-sharp
pixel differences, can be grouped into some categories according to their motion blur type and how complex their
neighboring pixels are. Inspired by this, we decompose the
deblurring (regression) task into blur pixel discretization
(pixel-level blur classification) and discrete-to-continuous
conversion (regression with blur class map) tasks. Specifically, we generate the discretized image residual errors by
identifying the blur pixels and then transform them to a continuous form, which is computationally more efficient than
naively solving the original regression problem with continuous values. Here, we found that the discretization result, i.e., blur segmentation map, remarkably exhibits visual
similarity with the image residual errors. As a result, our
efficient model shows comparable performance to state-ofthe-art methods in realistic benchmarks, while our method
is up to 10 times computationally more efficient.

1. Introduction
Motion blur is caused by the camera motion and object
movement within the exposure time. As the long exposure
time is required to ensure the amount of light in low-light
environments, it leads to significant blur degradation, which
is a challenge to overcome. Given blur images, the blind image deblurring procedure aims to reconstruct sharp images.
In earlier years, many researchers have investigated accurate blur kernel estimations [3, 4, 13, 30, 33, 41]. Those
kernel-based methods focus on estimating blur kernels and
then exploiting them in the deconvolution process [12, 16],
resulting in the final sharp images. They mainly train with
synthesized motion blur images that may not hold in practice. In recent years, kernel-free methods have been more
widely studied in motion deblurring tasks [6, 8, 11, 15, 17–
* Corresponding authors

Class 3
Patch

Class 1

②
③

“Discrete"

“Continuous”

Discretized
Image Residual Error

Image
Residual Error

Classes

①

1

2

3

Motion
Blur Image

Blur Pixel Discretization

Discrete-to-Continuous Conversion

Figure 1. Blind motion deblurring via blur pixel discretization.
The image residual error, i.e., blur-sharp pixel differences is estimated by our blur pixel discretization and discrete-to-continuous
conversion, whose result is used to produce final deblurred images.

19, 21, 24–26, 32, 34, 35, 38–40]. They achieve state-ofart performance despite their simplicity where they do not
consider such blur kernels. However, their performance
highly relies on network capacities [8, 21, 35, 38], which
may restrict from practical usage. Some literature introduces self-generated prior information to further improve
deblurring performance, but generating the prior information consumes additional huge computational costs [11, 19].
As recent advances in camera technology have enabled
the capability to capture high-resolution images, such as
4K images, dealing with large motion has become increasingly important. To deploy a deblurring model on
resource-constrained devices (e.g., mobile devices), an efficient model capable of handling large motion is required.
Nevertheless, these models have not been thoroughly explored. In our earlier experiments, we found that the smallscale model suffers from significant performance drops in
the case of large motion scenarios as shown in Table 1. In
fact, the small-scale deblurring model without any prior information may be susceptible to distortions.
In this paper, we rethink the deblurring task by decomposing the original regression problem into blur pixel
discretization and discrete-to-continuous (D2C) conversion
problems to explore an efficient deblurring model for practical usage, as shown in Fig. 1. Our intuition is that we build
a discrete version of the ground truth (GT), namely, a discretized image residual error (e.g., discrete blur-sharp pixel
differences) by identifying the blur pixels and then transform it into a continuous form, which is computationally

25879

