This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sheared Backpropagation for Fine-tuning Foundation Models

1

Zhiyuan Yu1 , Li Shen*, 2 , Liang Ding2 , Xinmei Tian1 , Yixin Chen3 , and Dacheng Tao4
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China; 2 JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China;
3
Washington University in St. Louis, MO, USA; 4 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
yuzhiyuan@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn, chen@cse.wustl.edu
{mathshenli, liangding.liam, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com

Abstract
Fine-tuning is the process of extending the training of
pre-trained models on specific target tasks, thereby significantly enhancing their performance across various applications. However, fine-tuning often demands large memory consumption, posing a challenge for low-memory devices that some previous memory-efficient fine-tuning methods attempted to mitigate by pruning activations for gradient computation, albeit at the cost of significant computational overhead from the pruning processes during training. To address these challenges, we introduce PreBackRazor, a novel activation pruning scheme offering both computational and memory efficiency through a sparsified backpropagation strategy, which judiciously avoids unnecessary
activation pruning and storage and gradient computation.
Before activation pruning, our approach samples a probability of selecting a portion of parameters to freeze, utilizing
a bandit method for updates to prioritize impactful gradients on convergence. During the feed-forward pass, each
model layer adjusts adaptively based on parameter activation status, obviating the need for sparsification and storage of redundant activations for subsequent backpropagation. Benchmarking on fine-tuning foundation models, our
approach maintains baseline accuracy across diverse tasks,
yielding over 20% speedup and around 10% memory reduction. Moreover, integrating with an advanced CUDA kernel
achieves up to 60% speedup without extra memory costs or
accuracy loss, significantly enhancing the efficiency of finetuning foundation models on memory-constrained devices.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, Transformer-based models [50] have achieved
remarkable results in various domains of deep learning [19,
20]. The trend towards scaling up these models for enhanced performance necessitates substantial data and computational resources, often beyond the reach of many
* Corresponding Author

researchers [44]. Consequently, fine-tuning pre-trained
Transformer models, which are a prominent example of
foundation models [5], has become a prevalent strategy.
This approach allows for adapting and continuing the training of these models at reduced costs while retaining high
performance. Despite the advantages, fine-tuning foundation models on low-end devices, such as personal computers with consumer-level GPUs and other edge devices,
presents considerable challenges. These challenges stem
primarily from the limited memory and computational capacity of such devices, restricting the feasible model and
batch sizes during fine-tuning. This limitation often results in prolonged training periods or compromised performance. Our paper aims to address this issue by exploring
efficient methodologies for fine-tuning Transformer models
on consumer-level devices, striving to balance performance
with training efficiency.
One pervasive challenge in fine-tuning models is effectively managing the training pipeline within the confines of limited device memory [41]. Beyond loading
trainable parameters, memory usage in model training includes storing intermediate tensors like gradients and activations. These elements are crucial in backpropagation
and become particularly memory-intensive with large input batch sizes or model scales. Although efficient training techniques, such as low-precision and pruning, have
been proposed to save memory on model parameters and
are widely adopted [23, 31], recent research has shifted focus towards reducing memory consumption of activations,
identified as a primary memory bottleneck [7]. Notably,
since activations are stored solely for backward computation, recent studies on activation reduction [8, 24, 37] have
proposed an asymmetric backpropagation pipeline. This approach maintains a dense forward pass and compresses activations only for gradient computation during backpropagation. Among these, BACK R AZOR by Jiang et al. [24] employs top-k pruning in the forward pass to sparsify activa-

5883

