This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HIMap: HybrId Representation Learning for End-to-end
Vectorized HD Map Construction
Yi Zhou1 , Hui Zhang1 , Jiaqian Yu1 , Yifan Yang1 , Sangil Jung2 , Seung-In Park2 , ByungIn Yoo2 ,
1
Samsung R&D Institute China-Beijing (SRC-B)
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea
{yi0813.zhou, hui123.zhang, jiaqian.yu, yifan.yang}@samsung.com

Intra-element

Abstract
Vectorized High-Definition (HD) map construction requires predictions of the category and point coordinates
of map elements (e.g. road boundary, lane divider, pedestrian crossing, etc.). State-of-the-art methods are mainly
based on point-level representation learning for regressing accurate point coordinates. However, this pipeline has
limitations in obtaining element-level information and handling element-level failures, e.g. erroneous element shape
or entanglement between elements. To tackle the above issues, we propose a simple yet effective HybrId framework
named HIMap to sufficiently learn and interact both pointlevel and element-level information. Concretely, we introduce a hybrid representation called HIQuery to represent
all map elements, and propose a point-element interactor
to interactively extract and encode the hybrid information
of elements, e.g. point position and element shape, into the
HIQuery. Additionally, we present a point-element consistency constraint to enhance the consistency between the
point-level and element-level information. Finally, the output point-element integrated HIQuery can be directly converted into map elements’ class, point coordinates, and
mask. We conduct extensive experiments and consistently
outperform previous methods on both nuScenes and Argoverse2 datasets. Notably, our method achieves 77.8 mAP
on the nuScenes dataset, remarkably superior to previous
SOTAs by 8.3 mAP at least.

1. Introduction
Constructing accurate High-Definition (HD) maps is very
important for the safety of autonomous driving systems [18,
19, 22, 47, 57, 59, 62]. HD maps [28, 32, 39, 44, 58] can
provide comprehensive environmental information, such as
road boundary, lane divider and pedestrian crossing, for
perception [13, 31, 66], prediction [16, 24, 38] and planning [2, 17, 45]. A vectorized HD map consists of multiple
map elements [32], each corresponding to a symbol on the
road, such as a divider line, a pedestrian crossing area etc.

(a) detail

(b) length

Inter-element
(c) direction

(d) entanglement

2

MapTRv2

1

[33]

Ours

GT

ego car

boundary

divider

ped. crossing

Figure 1. Examples of previous failures and our improved
results. Compared with the previous point-level representation
learning pipeline [33], our proposed hybrid representation learning
method generates richer details, more accurate shapes of elements,
and avoids the inter-element entanglement. Best viewed in color.

Each vectorized map element is usually represented as a finite set of discrete points. Vectorized HD map construction
[10, 28, 32, 39, 48] aims at classifying and localizing the
map elements in the Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) space. The reconstruction results contain the class and point coordinates
of elements, cf. Figure 1.
Classic works [32, 33, 39, 61] mainly focus on pointlevel representation learning. VectorMapNet [39] introduces a keypoint representation to represent the outline of map elements and explores a coarse-to-fine twostage framework. MapTR [32] proposes the permutationequivalent modeling of the point set and utilizes a deformable decoder [70] to directly regress point coordinates
of elements. MapTRv2 [33] further incorporates dense supervision on both BEV and perspective views and a oneto-many matching strategy to improve the accuracy. However, such a pipeline limits the model’s capability to learn
element-level information and correlations. As shown in
the first row of Figure 1(a), the corner detail of the road
boundary is missing due to the inaccurate positions of some

15396

