This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KVQ: Kwai Video Quality Assessment for Short-form Videos
Yiting Lu1† , Xin Li1† , Yajing Pei1,2† , Kun Yuan2(B) ,
Qizhi Xie2,3 , Yunpeng Qu2,3 , Ming Sun2 , Chao Zhou2 , Zhibo Chen1(B)
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Kuaishou Technology, 3 Tsinghua University
{luyt31415,lixin666,peiyj}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn
{yuankun03,xieqizhi,quyunpeng,sunming03,zhouchao}@kuaishou.com

Caption Scenario

Person Scenario

Crowd Scenario Food Scenario

Portrait Scenario

(a) Special Effect Video
De-Blur
Before

Stage Scenario

Before

After

De-Noise
Before

Landscape Scenario

Portrait Scenario Person Scenario Person Scenario

(d) Live Video

ROI-Level

Global-Level
After

CG Scenario

(c) Three-Stage Video

(b) Subtitled Video

De-Artifact
After

Night Scenario

Before

(I) Enhancement

After

Before

After

(II) Pre-Processing

Transcode QP30
Before

After

Transcode QP42
Before

After

(III) Transcoding

Figure 1. The two primary challenges of short-form videos: the kaleidoscope content with various creation modes (top) and complicated
distortion arising from sophisticated video processing workflows (bottom). Regions with distortions are indicated by red boxes.

Abstract
Short-form UGC video platforms, like Kwai and TikTok,
have been an emerging and irreplaceable mainstream media form, thriving on user-friendly engagement, and kaleidoscope creation, etc. However, the advancing contentgeneration modes, e.g., special effects, and sophisticated
processing workflows, e.g., de-artifacts, have introduced
significant challenges to recent UGC video quality assessment: (i) the ambiguous contents hinder the identification
of quality-determined regions. (ii) the diverse and complicated hybrid distortions are hard to distinguish. To
tackle the above challenges and assist in the development
of short-form videos, we establish the first large-scale Kwai
short Video database for Quality assessment, termed KVQ,
which comprises 600 user-uploaded short videos and 3600
processed videos through the diverse practical processing
workflows, including pre-processing, transcoding, and enhancement. Among them, the absolute quality score of each
video and partial ranking score among indistinguish samples are provided by a team of professional researchers
† Equal contribution. B Corresponding authors.

specializing in image processing. Based on this database,
we propose the first short-form video quality evaluator,
i.e., KSVQE, which enables the quality evaluator to identify the quality-determined semantics with the content understanding of large vision language models (i.e., CLIP)
and distinguish the distortions with the distortion understanding module. Experimental results have shown the effectiveness of KSVQE on our KVQ database and popular
VQA databases. The project can be found at https:
//lixinustc.github.io/projects/KVQ/.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the significant advancement of
short-form UGC video platforms, where billions of users
have actively engaged in uploading and sharing their usergenerated content (UGC) videos that encompass personal
life, professional skills, and education, etc. Different from
traditional video platforms, such as YouTube, short-form
video platform aims to simplify content creation for users
and enhance the accessibility and conciseness of video content for viewers by limiting the video length, which achieves
great success since their mobile-friendly broadcasting, user-

25963

