This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HAVE-FUN: Human Avatar Reconstruction from
Few-Shot Unconstrained Images
Xingyu Chen1,B * Daiheng Gao4 Shaohui Wang1,5,†
Xiaoguang Han2,3 Baoyuan Wang1,B
2
SSE, CUHKSZ 3 FNii, CUHKSZ 4 Freelancer 5 Tsinghua University
https://seanchenxy.github.io/HaveFunWeb/

Xihe Yang1,2,†*
1

Xiaobing.AI

Few-shot unconstrained images

Canonical avatar reconstruction

Free-pose animation

Figure 1. Given a few images with various viewpoints and articulated poses, our approach can reconstruct an animatable human avatar.

Abstract
As for human avatar reconstruction, contemporary techniques commonly necessitate the acquisition of costly data
and struggle to achieve satisfactory results from a small
number of casual images. In this paper, we investigate this
task from a few-shot unconstrained photo album. The reconstruction of human avatars from such data sources is
challenging because of limited data amount and dynamic
articulated poses. For handling dynamic data, we integrate a skinning mechanism with deep marching tetrahedra (DMTet) to form a drivable tetrahedral representation,
which drives arbitrary mesh topologies generated by the
DMTet for the adaptation of unconstrained images. To effectively mine instructive information from few-shot data,
we devise a two-phase optimization method with few-shot
reference and few-shot guidance. The former focuses on
aligning avatar identity with reference images, while the
latter aims to generate plausible appearances for unseen regions. Overall, our framework, called HaveFun, can under* Equal contribution; B Corresponding author.
† This work was done when Xihe Yang and Shaohui Wang were interns

at Xiaobing.AI, led by Xingyu Chen.

take avatar reconstruction, rendering, and animation. Extensive experiments on our developed benchmarks demonstrate that HaveFun exhibits substantially superior performance in reconstructing the human body and hand.

1. Introduction
Human avatar reconstruction has experienced rapid development in recent years and shown great potential for applications of AR/VR, metaverse, etc [5, 68]. One of the challenges in this field is the data acquisition. Previous works
typically require an expensive setup for multi-view RGB
video [53], textured scan video [63], or multi-view static
images [60]. Recently, there is a tendency to utilize easily accessible data sources for this task, such as monocular
RGB video [74] or image set [75].
This leads to a pivotal question: “Is it possible to leverage a cheaper data source to reconstruct human avatars?”
Intuitively, the cheaper data should be characterized by its
limited quantity and the unconstrained nature of human behaviors it captures. As this paper will demonstrate, the answer leans toward the affirmative, and we refer to such a
data source as few-shot unconstrained images. These data

742

