This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Progressive Multi-Frequency Representation for Image Warping
Jun Xiao⇤,1
1

Zihang Lyu⇤,1

Cong Zhang1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

2

Yakun Ju2

Changjian Shui3

Kin-Man Lam†,1

Nanyang Technological University

3

Vector Institute

{jun.xiao, zihang.lyu, cong-clarence.zhang}@connect.polyu.hk, kin.man.lam@polyu.edu.hk
yakun.ju@ntu.edu.sg, changjian.shui@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
Image warping, a classic task in computer vision, aims
to use geometric transformations to change the appearance
of images. Recent methods learn the resampling kernels
for warping through neural networks to estimate missing
values in irregular grids, which, however, fail to capture
local variations in deformed content and produce images
with distortion and less high-frequency details. To address
this issue, this paper proposes an effective method, namely
MFR, to learn Multi-Frequency Representations from input images for image warping. Specifically, we propose a
progressive filtering network to learn image representations
from different frequency subbands and generate deformable
images in a coarse-to-fine manner. Furthermore, we employ learnable Gabor wavelet filters to improve the model’s
capability to learn local spatial-frequency representations.
Comprehensive experiments, including homography transformation, equirectangular to perspective projection, and
asymmetric image super-resolution, demonstrate that the
proposed MFR significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
image warping methods. Our method also showcases superior generalization to out-of-distribution domains, where
the generated images are equipped with rich details and less
distortion, thereby high visual quality. The source code is
available at https://github.com/junxiao01/MFR.

1. Introduction
Image warping aims to change the appearance of images
by performing geometric transformations, which involves
changing the positions of image pixels to new positions in
a predefined coordinate systems. As a basic technique in
computer vision, image warping has become an indispensable component in numerous vision tasks, such as facial manipulation [11, 46], image registration [12, 20, 31], image
⇤ These authors contributed equally to this work
† The corresponding author

Warped Image

SRWarp [38]

LTEW [21]

MFR (Ours)

GT

Figure 1. Illustration of local image patches generated by SRWarp
[41], LTEW [22], and our proposed MFR.

synthesis [1, 52], etc., substantially affecting their overall
performance.
Traditional image warping methods usually apply an inverse transformation function to deform images and depend
on interpolation techniques, such as bicubic interpolation,
to estimate the missing values in irregular grids. However, previous studies [9, 30, 36, 41] have revealed that
these interpolation-based methods often introduce undesirable jagging and blurry artifacts, leading to image quality
degradation. Recent works [22, 41] have formulated image warping as a generalized image super-resolution (SR)
problem with varying scaling factors in the spatial domain.
This is equivalent to stretching local image regions with
different scaling factors in different directions. To generate deformable image content, Son et al. [41] employed a
pretrained SR model for feature extraction and introduced
adaptive warping layers to model the resampling kernel.
On the other hand, Lee et al. [22] treated image representation in a continuous space and utilized the coordinate-based
MLP model to synthesize content in irregular grids. Nevertheless, we observe that these methods encounter challenges
in captured local variations in the deformable images, and
their generated images are often distorted and lack highfrequency details, as demonstrated in Fig. 1. Furthermore,
these methods exhibit poor generalization performance in
out-of-distribution data, i.e., scaling factors and geometric
transformation not included in the training dataset, significantly limiting their real-world applications. Consequently,
there is still substantial potential for improvement in image
warping.

2995

