This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Visual Recognition with Hyperbolical Visual Hierarchy Mapping
Hyeongjun Kwon1 Jinhyun Jang1 Jin Kim1 Kwonyoung Kim1 Kwanghoon Sohn1,2 *
1
Yonsei University, 2 Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)
{kwonjunn01, jr000192, kimjin928, kyk12, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr,

Abstract

EuclideanSpace
Space
Euclidean

Visual scenes are naturally organized in a hierarchy, where
a coarse semantic is recursively comprised of several fine
details. Exploring such a visual hierarchy is crucial to
recognize the complex relations of visual elements, leading
to a comprehensive scene understanding. In this paper,
we propose a Visual Hierarchy Mapper (Hi-Mapper), a
novel approach for enhancing the structured understanding
of the pre-trained Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). HiMapper investigates the hierarchical organization of
the visual scene by 1) pre-defining a hierarchy tree
through the encapsulation of probability densities; and
2) learning the hierarchical relations in hyperbolic
space with a novel hierarchical contrastive loss. The
pre-defined hierarchy tree recursively interacts with
the visual features of the pre-trained DNNs through
hierarchy decomposition and encoding procedures, thereby
effectively identifying the visual hierarchy and enhancing
the recognition of an entire scene. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that Hi-Mapper significantly enhances the
representation capability of DNNs, leading to an improved
performance on various tasks, including image classification
and dense prediction tasks. The code is available at
https://github.com/kwonjunn01/Hi-Mapper.

1. Introduction

Visual-semantic
Hi-Mapper
Hierarchy
Mapper
Hyperbolic
HyperbolicSpace
Space

(a)

(b)

VHM
Figure 1. (a) A visual scene
can be decomposed into a hierarchical

structure based on the semantics of each visual element. (b)
Euclidean space is suboptimal in representing the hierarchical
structure due to its flat nature. The relational distance is inaccurately
captured, being unaware of the semantic similarity of visual
elements (Red line). Hi-Mapper maps the hierarchical elements
in hyperbolic space, which effectively preserves their semantic
VHM relations and distances due to its constant negative curvature.

Recognizing and representing the visual scene of any content
is the fundamental pursuit of the computer vision field [1–
4]. In particular, understanding what constitutes a scene
and how each element is comprised of plays a key role in
various visual recognition tasks such as image retrieval [1, 2],
human-object interaction [3, 5], and dense prediction [6, 7].
This goes beyond merely learning discriminative feature
representations, as it requires to reason about the fine details
as well as their associations to comprehend the structured
nature of the complex visual scene.
* Corresponding author.

This research was supported by the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP)
(NRF2021R1A2C2006703).

Embedding in

hyperbolic
Over the decades,
thespace
development of deep neural
networks (DNNs) has contributed towards advances
in representing the complex visual scene.
Notably,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
capturing fine details through the local convolutional
filters while Vision Transformer (ViT) [8] has enabled
coarse context modeling with multi-head self-attention
mechanisms. Owing to their different desirable properties,
hybrid architectures [9–12] and multi-scale variants of
ViTs [13–15] have been extensively explored to capitalize on
the complementary features of CNNs and ViTs. Subsequent
works [16, 17] have further imposed interaction between
multi-scale image patches to facilitate information exchange
between fine details and coarse semantics.

17364

