This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Laplacian-guided Entropy Model in Neural Codec with Blur-dissipated Synthesis
Atefeh Khoshkhahtinat, Ali Zafari, Piyush M. Mehta, Nasser M. Nasrabadi
West Virginia University, WV, USA
{ak00043,az00004}@mix.wvu.edu,{piyush.mehta,nasser.nasrabadi}@mail.wvu.edu

While replacing Gaussian decoders with a conditional
diffusion model enhances the perceptual quality of reconstructions in neural image compression, their lack of inductive bias for image data restricts their ability to achieve
state-of-the-art perceptual levels. To address this limitation, we adopt a non-isotropic diffusion model at the decoder side. This model imposes an inductive bias aimed
at distinguishing between frequency contents, thereby facilitating the generation of high-quality images. Moreover,
our framework is equipped with a novel entropy model
that accurately models the probability distribution of latent representation by exploiting spatio-channel correlations in latent space, while accelerating the entropy decoding step. This channel-wise entropy model leverages
both local and global spatial contexts within each channel
chunk. The global spatial context is built upon the Transformer, which is specifically designed for image compression tasks. The designed Transformer employs a Laplacianshaped positional encoding, the learnable parameters of
which are adaptively adjusted for each channel cluster.
Our experiments demonstrate that our proposed framework yields better perceptual quality compared to cuttingedge generative-based codecs, and the proposed entropy
model contributes to notable bitrate savings. The code
is available at https://github.com/Atefeh-Khoshtinat/Blurdissipated-compression.

1. Introduction
Image compression is a crucial tack in image processing
which aims to decrease the amount of data required for storing or transmitting without significant loss of visual content. Recently, learning-based image compression methods
[13, 25, 42, 45] have demonstrated the potential to surpass
classical hand-engineered codecs in terms of rate-distortion
performance. Learned image compression commonly comprises three steps: transformation, quantization, and lossless entropy coding, which resemble the components found
in the traditional transform coding paradigm [44].

Encoder

Abstract

Input Image

Q

AD

AE
Entropy
Model

Reconstructed Image

Decoder

U-Net

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed neural codec. The quantized
semantic latent variable ŷ is utilized by a diffusion-based decoder
to generate realistically reconstructed image.

Neural image compression methods are typically trained
with two primary objectives: minimizing distortion between the original input image and its reconstructed version
and reducing the bitrate for efficient data transmission or
storage [38]. However, solely optimizing for rate-distortion
may lead to blurry reconstructions. To address this issue, various generative-based codecs [4, 11, 28, 42] have
emerged, aiming to generate reconstructions that are not
only faithful to the original data but also visually realistic
to human observers.[28] introduced HiFiC, an image compression network based on GANs that aims to achieve a balance between fidelity and perceptual quality. The network
demonstrated substantial advantages for human observers,
surpassing BPG even when using half the bits. However,
HiFiC faces challenges due to the instability of GAN training and necessitates various design adjustments. Inspired
by the achievements of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (DDPMs)[17] in generative modeling, authors in
[42] replaced the Gaussian decoder of VAEs with a conditional diffusion model to mitigate the issue of blurriness
in decoded images. Despite the impressive performance of
diffusion-based network, its diffusion and denoising processes do not explicitly incorporate the inductive biases inherent to natural images. The imposing inductive biases,

3045

