This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

URHand: Universal Relightable Hands
Zhaoxi Chen1,2∗ Gyeongsik Moon1 Kaiwen Guo1 Chen Cao1 Stanislav Pidhorskyi1
Tomas Simon1 Rohan Joshi1 Yuan Dong1 Yichen Xu1 Bernardo Pires1
He Wen1 Lucas Evans1 Bo Peng1 Julia Buffalini1 Autumn Trimble1
Kevyn McPhail1 Melissa Schoeller1 Shoou-I Yu1 Javier Romero1
Michael Zollhöfer1 Yaser Sheikh1 Ziwei Liu2B Shunsuke Saito1B
1
2
Codec Avatars Lab, Meta
Nanyang Technological University
https://frozenburning.github.io/projects/urhand

Light-stage Data

High-fidelity
Universal Prior

Generalize to Novel Views, Poses, Identities, and Illuminations

Quick Personalization
from a Phone Scan

Figure 1. URHand (a.k.a. Your Hand). Our model is a high-fidelity Universal prior for Relightable Hands built upon light-stage data. It
generalizes to novel viewpoints, poses, identities, and illuminations, which enables quick personalization from a phone scan.

Abstract
Existing photorealistic relightable hand models require
extensive identity-specific observations in different views,
poses, and illuminations, and face challenges in generalizing to natural illuminations and novel identities. To bridge
this gap, we present URHand, the first universal relightable
hand model that generalizes across viewpoints, poses, illuminations, and identities. Our model allows few-shot personalization using images captured with a mobile phone,
and is ready to be photorealistically rendered under novel
illuminations. To simplify the personalization process while
retaining photorealism, we build a powerful universal relightable prior based on neural relighting from multi-view
images of hands captured in a light stage with hundreds of
identities. The key challenge is scaling the cross-identity
training while maintaining personalized fidelity and sharp
details without compromising generalization under natural
illuminations. To this end, we propose a spatially varying linear lighting model as the neural renderer that takes
physics-inspired shading as input feature. By removing
non-linear activations and bias, our specifically designed
lighting model explicitly keeps the linearity of light transport. This enables single-stage training from light-stage
∗ This work was done during an internship at Meta
B Corresponding authors

data while generalizing to real-time rendering under arbitrary continuous illuminations across diverse identities.
In addition, we introduce the joint learning of a physically
based model and our neural relighting model, which further improves fidelity and generalization. Extensive experiments show that our approach achieves superior performance over existing methods in terms of both quality and
generalizability. We also demonstrate quick personalization
of URHand from a short phone scan of an unseen identity.

1. Introduction
We engage our hands for various tasks throughout the day,
and they consistently remain within our field of view. This
constant visibility of our hands makes them one of the most
frequently seen parts of our body, playing a central role in
self-embodiment. To seamlessly reproduce this experience
for games or social telepresence, an ideal hand representation in a digital medium is photorealistic, personalized, and
importantly, relightable for coherent appearance in any environment. Our objective is to enable the quick creation
of such a hand model for any individual given lightweight
input such as a phone scan, without going through an expensive capture process in a production studio (Figure 1).
Approaches to build a photorealistic relightable hand

119

