This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MuRF: Multi-Baseline Radiance Fields
Haofei Xu1,2

Anpei Chen1,2 Yuedong Chen3 Christos Sakaridis1 Yulun Zhang4
Marc Pollefeys1,5 Andreas Geiger2,† Fisher Yu1,†
1
ETH Zurich 2 University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center 3 Monash University
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Microsoft † Joint last author

Abstract

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis from sparse input views is a critical and practical problem in computer vision and graphics. However, typical optimization-based Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) [1, 2, 4, 18] cannot cope well with sparse
views, and additional regularizations [19, 29, 33] are usually required to better constrain the optimization process.
In this paper, we aim at learning feed-forward NeRF
models [3, 32, 38] that are able to perform feed-forward
inference on new unseen data, without requiring per-scene
optimization. Moreover, inductive biases could be acquired
from data and better results can potentially be attained.
To achieve this, existing sparse view methods can be
broadly classified into methods that take small baseline images as input and methods that focus on large baseline settings. However, none of the existing methods works well
across different baselines (see Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b). In par-

AttnRend
MuRF

30

21

PSNR

PSNR

24

We present Multi-Baseline Radiance Fields (MuRF), a
general feed-forward approach to solving sparse view synthesis under multiple different baseline settings (small and
large baselines, and different number of input views). To
render a target novel view, we discretize the 3D space into
planes parallel to the target image plane, and accordingly
construct a target view frustum volume. Such a target volume representation is spatially aligned with the target view,
which effectively aggregates relevant information from the
input views for high-quality rendering. It also facilitates
subsequent radiance field regression with a convolutional
network thanks to its axis-aligned nature. The 3D context
modeled by the convolutional network enables our method
to synthesis sharper scene structures than prior works. Our
MuRF achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple different baseline settings and diverse scenarios ranging
from simple objects (DTU) to complex indoor and outdoor
scenes (RealEstate10K and LLFF). We also show promising zero-shot generalization abilities on the Mip-NeRF 360
dataset, demonstrating the general applicability of MuRF.

32

ENeRF
MuRF

27

18
15
12

28
26
24
22

9
1

2

4

8

Camera baseline

16

32

20

1

2

4

8

16

32

Camera baseline

64

128

(a) MuRF outperforms previous state- (b) MuRF outperforms previous state-ofof-the-art small baseline method ENeRF. the-art large baseline method AttnRend.
The larger baseline, the larger perfor- The smaller baseline, the larger performance gap.
mance gap.

MuRF

Novel views

2-view small baseline

MuRF

2-view large baseline

Novel views

Figure 1. MuRF supports multiple different baseline settings.
Previous methods are specifically designed for either small (e.g.,
ENeRF [16]) or large (e.g., AttnRend1 [8]) baselines. However, no
existing method performs well on both (see Table 1).

ticular, small baseline methods [3, 5, 6, 15–17, 32] rely
heavily on feature matching to extract relevant information
from input views and suffer significantly when there is insufficient image overlap or occlusion occurs. In contrast,
large baseline methods [8, 24] are mostly data-driven, and
often discard matching cues. Instead, they resort to largescale datasets and generic architectures (e.g., Transformers [7, 30]) to learn geometric inductive biases implicitly.
However, due to their correspondence-unaware and datadriven nature, even state-of-the-art methods [8, 24] tend to
produce blurry renderings and their generalization ability is
still limited, as we show in Fig. 3 and Table 6.
Our goal is to address sparse view synthesis under both
1 We name the previously unnamed method of Du et al. [8] as AttnRend,
according its GitHub repository name.

20041

