This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlashEval: Towards Fast and Accurate Evaluation of
Text-to-image Diffusion Generative Models
Lin Zhao2∗ , Tianchen Zhao12 *, Zinan Lin3 , Xuefei Ning1† , Guohao Dai24 , Huazhong Yang1 , Yu Wang1†
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Infinigence-AI, 3 Microsoft Research, 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{lllzz0309zz,suozhang1998,linzinan1995,foxdoraame}@gmail.com

daiguohao@sjtu.edu.cn

{yanghz, yu-wang}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Applications that
Requires Repeated Evaluations

Abstract
In recent years, there has been significant progress in the
development of text-to-image generative models. Evaluating
the quality of the generative models is one essential step in
the development process. Unfortunately, the evaluation process could consume a significant amount of computational
resources, making the required periodic evaluation of model
performance (e.g., monitoring training progress) impractical. Therefore, we seek to improve the evaluation efficiency
by selecting the representative subset of the text-image
dataset. We systematically investigate the design choices,
including the selection criteria (textural features or imagebased metrics) and the selection granularity (prompt-level or
set-level). We find that the insights from prior work on subset
selection for training data do not generalize to this problem,
and we propose FlashEval, an iterative search algorithm
tailored to evaluation data selection. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of FlashEval on ranking diffusion models with
various configurations, including architectures, quantization
levels, and sampler schedules on COCO and DiffusionDB
datasets. Our searched 50-item subset could achieve comparable evaluation quality to the randomly sampled 500-item
subset for COCO annotations on unseen models, achieving
a 10x evaluation speedup. We release the condensed subset
of these commonly used datasets to help facilitate diffusion
algorithm design and evaluation, and open-source FlashEval as a tool for condensing future datasets, accessible at
https://github.com/thu-nics/FlashEval.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models could generate high-fidelity images
based on textual descriptions (referred to as prompts) and
achieve substantial research interest [23, 27, 28, 39]. Researchers have designed a range of techniques aimed at en* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors: Xuefei Ning and Yu Wang.

SD-V1.2

Better Evaluation
Quality-Speed Trade-off
Acceptable Eval. Cost

SD-V1.5

SD-V2.1

&

50

10

10

DDIM

PNDM

DPMSolver

(1) Model & Schedule Selection

(2) Weight Tuning

Eval Quality
0.87

Good Eval. Quality

FlashEval (Ours)

(Kendall’s Tau)

Random Sample
(Current)

(3) Design Choices

FlashEval: Search Subset

Large Dataset
(40K)

Condense
dataset

Representative
Subet (10-100)
Eval Cost
(Subset Size)

Bad Eval. Quality

Good Eval. Quality

Acceptable Eval. Cost

Excessive Eval. Cost

Figure 1. The Motivation and Effectiveness of FlashEval. Left:
Applications and the search method. Right: The excessive evaluation cost and how FlashEval improves the evaluation speed-quality
trade-off (evaluation quality is represented by the ranking correlation of a variety of diffusion models w.r.t subset size on COCO).

Compac

Different se
Same pru

Conv11
80%

Decoup
pruni
of 2 bra

hancing these models from various angles. Some algorithm
design applications often necessitate a large number of iterative evaluations, such as: (1) Model & Schedule Selection:
The quality of image generation exhibits varying trends over
different timesteps for different models and solvers. Consequently, evaluations and comparisons are needed to strike
a balance between generation quality and computational
cost. (2) Weight Tuning: In the process of training and
fine-tuning the model, evaluating the performance of current
parameters is required for refining the training strategy. (3)
Design Choices: The iterative testing of multiple design
options, such as layer-wise pruning rates, layer-wise mixed
precision configurations, and other hyperparameter choices.
To evaluate the diffusion model, prior research [15,21,37]
points out that the denoising loss does not necessarily reflect the generation quality. Therefore, existing evaluation schemes estimate the image quality (e.g., FID [14],
IS [30], ImageReward [39]) over text annotations of existing
text-image datasets [20, 36] or manually-designed textual
dataset [16] (we refer them as “test prompts”). However, as

16122

Conv11
80%

(a) Without
Compactor

