This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EvDiG: Event-guided Direct and Global Components Separation
Xinyu Zhou1
1
2

Peiqi Duan2,3

Boyu Li2,3

Chu Zhou1

Chao Xu1

Boxin Shi∗2,3

National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University

Multi-frames and patterns (MF-p)

Multi-frames and shadow (MF-s)
or

Nie et al. Nayer et al. Nayer et al.

{zhouxiny, duanqi0001, liboyu, zhou chu, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn

+

time

Single-frame and events (Ours)
e

(a) Illustration of our method

Reference

Reference

Original image

PSNR:23.85, SSIM:0.78

PSNR:22.39, SSIM:0.74

PSNR:21.32, SSIM:0.84

PSNR:21.61, SSIM:0.88

Ours

Single-frame (SF)

xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn

(b) Different input types

PSNR:31.86, SSIM:0.92

PSNR:31.61, SSIM:0.93

Direct illumination

Global illumination

Methods

Time

MF-p

833 ms

MF-s

1000 ms

SF

33 ms

Ours

33 ms

The collection time
of input data

(c) Comparison of qualitative results and data collection time

Figure 1. (a) We achieve the separation of direct and global illumination components of a scene by introducing a hybrid system comprising
an RGB camera and an event camera. The RGB camera captures an original scene image, while the event camera records rapid illumination
changes induced by the shadow of a line occluder sweeping over the scene. We propose EvDiG to combine the two signals for achieving
effective and efﬁcient separation. (b) Classiﬁcation of the input data requirements of existing methods. (c) The results of the corresponding
representative methods (Nayer et al. [25], Nie et al. [26]) and their data collection time (We collect 30 f ps videos and input 25/30/1/1
frames into MF-p/MF-s/SF/ours methods respectively, events are collected during the interframe period).

Abstract
Separating the direct and global components of a scene
aids in shape recovery and basic material understanding.
Conventional methods capture multiple frames under high
frequency illumination patterns or shadows, requiring the
scene to keep stationary during the image acquisition process. Single-frame methods simplify the capture procedure
but yield lower-quality separation results. In this paper,
we leverage the event camera to facilitate the separation of
direct and global components, enabling video-rate separation of high quality. In detail, we adopt an event camera to
record rapid illumination changes caused by the shadow of
a line occluder sweeping over the scene, and reconstruct the
coarse separation results through event accumulation. We
then design a network to resolve the noise in the coarse separation results and restore color information. A real-world
dataset is collected using a hybrid camera system for network training and evaluation. Experimental results show
superior performance over state-of-the-art methods.
∗ Corresponding author

1. Introduction
When a scene is illuminated by a light source, the radiance
of each point is a cumulative result of both direct and global
components. The direct component signiﬁes the light that
travels straight from the source, reﬂecting just once before
reaching the observer. Light also interacts intricately with
the environment, resulting in phenomena like interreﬂections, scattering, and diffusion. These phenomena make up
what is known as global illumination.
The separation of direct and global components is a
crucial process that can provide material properties of
the scene and reveal information about complex shapematerial-lighting interactions. For example, eliminating the
effect of global illumination can improve shape recovery
techniques like photometric stereo [39] and structured light
scanning [5]. These techniques predominantly assume direct or low-frequency light transport and do not account for
global illumination effects.
How to separate direct and global components accurately
is a lasting and challenging problem. The direct components travel the shortest distance among all light paths that

9612

