This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Aware Encoder Control for Deep Video Compression
Xingtong Ge1,2 †*
Jixiang Luo2
Xinjie Zhang3
Tongda Xu4
Guo Lu5
Dailan He6
Jing Geng1†‡
Yan Wang4
Jun Zhang3
Hongwei Qin2
1
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
SenseTime Research
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
5
Shanghai Jiaotong University 6 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Codec

Abstract

One-to-one Codecs

𝒙

Prior research on deep video compression (DVC) for
machine tasks typically necessitates training a unique codec
for each specific task, mandating a dedicated decoder per
task. In contrast, traditional video codecs employ a flexible encoder controller, enabling the adaptation of a single codec to different tasks through mechanisms like mode
prediction. Drawing inspiration from this, we introduce an
innovative encoder controller for deep video compression
for machines. This controller features a mode prediction
and a Group of Pictures (GoP) selection module. Our approach centralizes control at the encoding stage, allowing
for adaptable encoder adjustments across different tasks,
such as detection and tracking, while maintaining compatibility with a standard pre-trained DVC decoder. Empirical evidence demonstrates that our method is applicable across multiple tasks with various existing pre-trained
DVCs. Moreover, extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method outperforms previous DVC by about 25% bitrate for different tasks, with only one pre-trained decoder.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, video analysis techniques have proliferated across a variety of fields, including smart cities,
autonomous vehicles, and traffic surveillance. For these applications, videos are often compressed before being transmitted to cloud-based systems for further machine vision
analyses, such as object detection and tracking. However, current video compression techniques, which range
from traditional codecs [2, 33, 42] to recent learning-based
codecs [14, 18, 24, 25, 29], primarily cater to the human vi* Work was done when Xingtong Ge interned at SenseTime Research
† xingtong.ge@gmail.com
‡ Corresponding author, janegeng@bit.edu.cn

𝒙

𝒙𝟏 Task 𝑻𝟏

Human Viewing

(a)

𝒙𝟏 Task 𝑻𝟏

Controlling

𝒙

𝒙𝟐 Task 𝑻𝟐

𝒙𝟐 Task 𝑻𝟐

𝒙
Controlling

Fixed Decoder
(b)

𝒙𝟑 Task 𝑻𝟑

𝒙𝟑 Task 𝑻𝟑
(c)

Figure 1. (a) Mainstream video codec that serves the human viewing. (b) Our controlled video codecs for machine vision with fixed
decoder. (c) Other video codec for machine vison with one-to-one
encoders and decoders.

sual system, as shown in Fig. 1(a). This specificity leads to
inefficiencies, as machine vision tasks typically focus on selective semantic details and regions within the video frames,
rather than the whole frames.
To tackle this problem, recent studies [1, 4, 11–13, 20,
38, 40, 44, 47] have explored scalable compression for multiple tasks through different layers in image and video coding. They propose a base layer dedicated to machine vision, with an enhancement layer containing additional information for human vision. Additionally, the latest work
[36] has tried to compress semantic features at the encoder
side, which serve as side information to supplement decoded images with more semantic details for machine vision at lower bitrates. Despite these advances, these methods require individually customized codecs when applied
to different downstream tasks, as the “One-to-one Codecs”
shown in Fig. 1(c). In contrast, traditional codecs can control the encoding process for different objectives, like PSNR
and SSIM optimization, using a single decoder. Inspired by
this feature, in this paper, we focus on how to use one
pre-trained DVC-decoder to support both human and
multiple machine vision tasks.
In both residual [14, 15, 24] and conditional [18, 19, 29]
DVC series, the encoded bitstreams predominantly comprise two parts: motion and residual/contextual informa-

26036

