This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Multitask Dense Predictor via Binarization
Yuzhang Shang1 , Dan Xu2 , Gaowen Liu3 , Ramana Rao Kompella3 , Yan Yan1,†
1
Illinois Institute of Technology, 2 HKUST, 3 Cisco Research
yzshawn@outlook.com, danxu@cse.ust.hk, {gaoliu, rkompell}@cisco.com, yyan34@iit.edu

Abstract
Multi-task learning for dense prediction has emerged as
a pivotal area in computer vision, enabling simultaneous
processing of diverse yet interrelated pixel-wise prediction
tasks. However, the substantial computational demands of
state-of-the-art (SoTA) models often limit their widespread
deployment. This paper addresses this challenge by introducing network binarization to compress resource-intensive
multi-task dense predictors. Specifically, our goal is to
significantly accelerate multi-task dense prediction models via Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) while maintaining and even improving model performance at the same
time. To reach this goal, we propose a Binary Multitask Dense Predictor, Bi-MTPD, and several variants of
Bi-MTPD, in which a multi-task dense predictor is constructed via specified binarized modules. Our systematical analysis of this predictor reveals that performance drop
from binarization is primarily caused by severe information degradation. To address this issue, we introduce a
deep information bottleneck layer that enforces representations for downstream tasks satisfying Gaussian distribution in forward propagation. Moreover, we introduce a
knowledge distillation mechanism to correct the direction
of information flow in backward propagation. Intriguingly,
one variant of Bi-MTPD outperforms full-precision (FP)
multi-task dense prediction SoTAs, ARTC [2] (CNN-based)
and InvPT [50] (ViT-Based). This result indicates that
Bi-MTPD is not merely a naive trade-off between performance and efficiency, but is rather a benefit of the redundant information flow thanks to the multi-task architecture.
Code is available at BiMTDP.

1. Introduction
There is a growing trend in the computer vision community
where dense prediction tasks are processed in a multi-task
learning manner, such as semantic segmentation, monocular depth estimation, and human parsing [28, 46, 47, 49].
† Corresponding author

Dense
Estimation

Semantic
Segmentation

Bi-MTPD-F

Binarized
Task Head

Binarized
Backbone Block

Binarized
Cross-talk

Bi-MTPD-C
(CNN-Based)

Bi-MTPD-C
(ViT-Based)

Figure 1. (Left) A conceptual illustration of binary dense predictions in a multi-task manner. In contrast to approaching a series
of relevant tasks individually, the multitask model benefits from
information supplementation among different tasks via cross-talk
structures, but the cumbersome cross-talk modules also add additional computational burden. (Right) Performance summary on
NYUD-v2. X-axis and Y-axis denote the performance on depth
estimation (lower is better) and segmentation (higher is better), respectively. Size of dots denotes FLOPs. ATRC [2] and InvPT [50]
are previous CNN-based and ViT-based SoTAs, respectively.

Benefited from the information supplementation mechanism via cross-talk structures in the multi-task models, the
overall performance for the series of dense prediction tasks
has been greatly improved [17] (see Fig. 1). However, the
computational demands of State-of-the-Art (SoTA) multitask dense prediction models, which process multiple complex pixel-wise tasks concurrently, are substantial. This
high computational requirement limits their application in
resource-constrained environments like autonomous driving, robotics, and virtual reality. Our goal is to optimize
these heavy SoTA models for edge devices, balancing speed
with performance.
Several strategies for neural network compression have
been explored, including pruning [12], network quantization [15, 37, 40] and knowledge distillation [14]. Notably,
network binarization, a form of quantization, minimizes
weights and activations to ±1, enabling the replacement of
computationally intensive inner-product operations in fullprecision networks with more efficient xnor-bitcount operations in Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) [15]. Binarization
theoretically reduces memory costs by 32× and increases
inference speed by 64×, making BNNs suitable for edgedevice.

15899

