This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QUADify: Extracting Meshes with Pixel-level Details and Materials from Images
Maximilian Frühauf1,2 Hayko Riemenschneider2 Markus Gross1,2 Christopher Schroers2
1
ETH Zürich 2 DisneyResearch|Studios
{max.fruehauf, hayko, gross, christopher.schroers}@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Despite exciting progress in automatic 3D reconstruction from images, excessive and irregular triangular faces
in the resulting meshes still constitute a significant challenge when it comes to adoption in practical artist workflows. Therefore, we propose a method to extract regular
quad-dominant meshes from posed images. More specifically, we generate a high-quality 3D model through decomposition into an easily editable quad-dominant mesh
with pixel-level details such as displacement, materials, and
lighting. To enable end-to-end learning of shape and quad
topology, we QUADify a neural implicit representation using our novel differentiable re-meshing objective. Distinct from previous work, our method exploits artifact-free
Catmull-Clark subdivision combined with vertex displacement to extract pixel-level details linked to the base geometry. Finally, we apply differentiable rendering techniques
for material and lighting decomposition to optimize for image reconstruction. Our experiments show the benefits of
end-to-end re-meshing and that our method yields stateof-the-art geometric accuracy while providing lightweight
meshes with displacements and textures that are directly
compatible with professional renderers and game engines.

1. Introduction
Creating 3D content for entertainment platforms is both
time-consuming and entails technical and artistic skills. Industry and academia have recently been working on automatic 3D content creation to reduce production costs and allow artists to prioritize creativity. Photogrammetry [42, 49],
is a classical solution for converting multiple images of a
real-world object into a 3D model. This multi-step process
typically consists of stages such as multi-view stereo, feature extraction & matching, geometric extraction, texture
parametrization, material baking, and de-lighting [45, 46].
Each stage has conflicting optimization objectives, introducing cumulative errors. As a result, artists spend a significant amount of time manually cleaning up these 3D scans
for production use.

Our editable mesh &
subdiv. displacement

Our fine details &
decomposed materials

Nvdiffrec [35]

Figure 1. Our end-to-end learning uses re-meshing, subdivision, and displacement to produce a regular quad-dominant mesh,
which is aligned to the surface features with pixel-level details.

In this work, we frame the task as an inverse rendering
problem and end-to-end optimize for the surface, material,
and lighting parameters which best reconstruct the captured
images. While recent differentiable rendering approaches
can effectively reconstruct objects, they combine geometry,
material, and lighting into one neural network [26, 33, 55].
Disentangling these surface parameters has been proposed
on implicit surfaces [3, 4, 60], but surface extraction usually relies on iso-surfacing techniques like Marching Cubes
(MC) [29, 38], resulting in geometric inconsistencies, particularly at coarser resolutions. Working directly on triangles meshes [20, 35] is promising, but these meshes can
contain "sliver" triangles, which create artifacts if the mesh
deforms during animation and simulation.
Quad re-meshing aims to extract superior meshes by optimizing for regular topology aligned to a triangle mesh [2,
21, 22]. However, this can introduce inaccuracies when
approximating the input mesh based on surface heuristics
alone. Importantly, these quad meshes can be subdivided
without introducing artifacts using Catmull-Clark subdivision [9, 17] and offer advantages in texturing and mesh editing. Existing techniques are however non-differentiable,
preventing the correction of re-meshing errors by tweaking
the input surface.

4661

