This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiSR-NeRF: Diffusion-Guided View-Consistent Super-Resolution NeRF
Jie Long Lee
Chen Li
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
ljielong@comp.nus.edu.sg, lichen@u.nus.edu, gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We present DiSR-NeRF, a diffusion-guided framework
for view-consistent super-resolution (SR) NeRF. Unlike
prior works, we circumvent the requirement for highresolution (HR) reference images by leveraging existing
powerful 2D super-resolution models. Nonetheless, independent SR 2D images are often inconsistent across different views. We thus propose Iterative 3D Synchronization
(I3DS) to mitigate the inconsistency problem via the inherent multi-view consistency property of NeRF. Specifically,
our I3DS alternates between upscaling low-resolution (LR)
rendered images with diffusion models, and updating the
underlying 3D representation with standard NeRF training.
We further introduce Renoised Score Distillation (RSD), a
novel score-distillation objective for 2D image resolution.
Our RSD combines features from ancestral sampling and
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) to generate sharp images
that are also LR-consistent. Qualitative and quantitative results on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
that our DiSR-NeRF can achieve better results on NeRF
super-resolution compared with existing works. Code and
video results available at the project website1 .

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is a long-standing problem in computer vision with significant real-world applications. Recently, neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have emerged as a
powerful representation, achieving state-of-the-art performance in novel view synthesis. Since the pioneering work
on NeRFs by [28], many follow up works have explored
the improvement of NeRF’s speed [4, 7, 31, 42], fidelity
[1, 2, 49], scale [26, 43], robustness [6, 21, 55], and generalizability [3, 16, 19, 46, 52, 53, 56]. However, one important aspect of NeRFs that has not been well explored is
super-resolution. In real-world scenarios, imaging devices
may be limited in resolution (i.e., drones, CCTVs, etc.)
and consequently high-resolution multi-view images may
1 https://github.com/leejielong/DiSR-NeRF

Figure 1. Our DiSR-NeRF distils super resolution priors from a
2D diffusion upscaler to generate high quality details from low
resolution NeRFs.

be unavailable. With low-resolution inputs, NeRF struggles to represent the high-quality details of the underlying
3D scenes. In this work, we tackle the task of NeRF superresolution, which aims to learn high-resolution implicit representation of 3D scenes from only low-resolution images.
One possible direction is to design a generative 3D superresolution model, which however, requires large datasets of
high-resolution multi-view images for training. Collecting
such large-scale, high-resolution multi-view data is laborintensive and requires expensive equipment to obtain accurate scans. On the other hand, large 2D high-resolution image datasets such as LAION-5B [38] are publicly available
and have been used to train powerful 2D super-resolution
models. We thus propose to leverage knowledge from the
2D super-resolution models to circumvent the requirements
for HR images.
Naively upscaling individual LR training images with
2D super-resolution methods produces SR images that may
not be consistent across views. A NeRF trained on such images produces blurred details as SR details may not agree

20561

