This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-level Expert Knowledge and Aggregate Discriminative Attention for
Radiology Report Generation
Shenshen Bu, Taiji Li, Yuedong Yang,* Zhiming Dai *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
{bushsh, litj5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {yangyd25, daizhim}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic radiology report generation can provide substantial advantages to clinical physicians by effectively reducing their workload and improving efficiency. Despite
the promising potential of current methods, challenges persist in effectively extracting and preventing degradation of
prominent features, as well as enhancing attention on pivotal regions. In this paper, we propose an Instance-level
Expert Knowledge and Aggregate Discriminative Attention
framework (EKAGen1 ) for radiology report generation. We
convert expert reports into an embedding space and generate comprehensive representations for each disease, which
serve as Preliminary Knowledge Support (PKS). To prevent
feature disruption, we select the representations in the embedding space with the smallest distances to PKS as Rectified Knowledge Support (RKS). Then, EKAGen diagnoses
the diseases and retrieves knowledge from RKS, creating
Instance-level Expert Knowledge (IEK) for each query image, boosting generation. Additionally, we introduce Aggregate Discriminative Attention Map (ADM), which uses
weak supervision to create maps of discriminative regions
that highlight pivotal regions. For training, we propose a
Global Information Self-Distillation (GID) strategy, using
an iteratively optimized model to distill global knowledge
into EKAGen. Extensive experiments and analyses on IU
X-Ray and MIMIC-CXR datasets demonstrate that EKAGen
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Radiology reports play a crucial role in the medical diagnosis and treatment process. However, interpreting radiology image can be extremely time-consuming, even for experienced radiologists. Hence, the automatic report generation [25, 29, 44, 47, 55] has emerged as a prominent
research area within the medical imaging community. In
* Corresponding authors.
1 https://github.com/hnjzbss/EKAGen

(a)Vanilla Knowledge
Embedding
Expert Reports
Ove rlying sof t tissue lim its assessment. The re is
mild c ardiomegaly. The mediastinal a nd hilar
contour s a re unremarkable. The re is no
pneumothorax or large pleural eff usion. The re
may be a small left pleur al effusion. The lungs are
well-expa nded. Mild increased patc hy opacity at
the right lung base, new since the prior study ma y
reflect ear ly aspiration or pneumonia.

Knowledge BERT/Graph, etc.,
Base
Network

LGM Embedding
Network

Feature Degradation
Error Representation

Expert Knowledge Embedding
Accurate Representation

(b)Our Knowledge
Embedding
Expert Reports
Ove rlying sof t tissue lim its assessment. The re is
mild c ardiomegaly. The mediastinal a nd hilar
contour s a re unremarkable. The re is no
pneumothorax or large pleural eff usion. The re
may be a small left pleur al effusion. The lungs are
well-expa nded. Mild increased patc hy opacity at
the right lung base, new since the prior study ma y
reflect ear ly aspiration or pneumonia.

Knowledge LGM Embedding
Base
Network

...

Preliminary Knowledge Support
Rectified Knowledge Support

LGM Embedding
Network

...

Feature Degradation by Operation

Accurate Representation

Figure 1. (a) displays the feature degradation caused by the distinction between vanilla methods’ prior knowledge and LGM’s
embedding networks. (b) demonstrates our method that unifies the
embedding network to prevent feature degradation and generates
instance-level expert knowledge based on diseases.

recent years, significant strides have been made in the automatic generation of radiology reports, benefiting from the
development of image captioning [2, 7, 14, 16, 21].
In addition to the inherent challenges of natural image
captioning, radiology report generation suffers three additional bottlenecks [27, 31, 47]. Firstly, radiology images often lack discriminative features, which results in
a scarcity of reference information for the report generation models. Secondly, abnormal lesions in medical images
may not always have obvious appearances, making them
challenging even for experienced radiologists to identify.
Thirdly, there is significant data deviation in these datasets
due to the rarity of certain diseases, making it challenging
to collect positive samples. In recent years, several methods, including the template retrieval structure [8, 31], memory driven network [5, 6], and knowledge aware module
[27, 34, 49], were developed to address these challenges and
have shown promising results in report generation. For instance, R2GenCMN [6] leveraged a shared memory to capture the alignment between images and texts. GSKET [49]
proposed a multi-head attention mechanism that enhances

14194

