This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EventEgo3D: 3D Human Motion Capture from Egocentric Event Streams
Christen Millerdurai1,2
Hiroyasu Akada1
Jian Wang1
Diogo Luvizon1
Christian Theobalt1
Vladislav Golyanik1
1
2
MPI for Informatics, SIC
Saarland University, SIC

Figure 1. EventEgo3D is the first approach for real-time 3D human pose estimation from egocentric event streams: (a) A photograph of
our new head-mounted device (HDM) with a custom-designed egocentric fisheye event camera (top) and visualisations of our synthetically
rendered dataset and a real dataset recorded with the HDM (bottom); (b) Real-time demo achieving the pose update rate of 140Hz; (c)
Visualisation of real event streams (top) and the corresponding 3D human poses from a third person perspective estimated by our approach.

Abstract
Monocular egocentric 3D human motion capture is
a challenging and actively researched problem. Existing methods use synchronously operating visual sensors
(e.g. RGB cameras) and often fail under low lighting and
fast motions, which can be restricting in many applications
involving head-mounted devices. In response to the existing limitations, this paper 1) introduces a new problem,
i.e. 3D human motion capture from an egocentric monocular event camera with a fisheye lens, and 2) proposes
the first approach to it called EventEgo3D (EE3D). Event
streams have high temporal resolution and provide reliable
cues for 3D human motion capture under high-speed human motions and rapidly changing illumination. The proposed EE3D framework is specifically tailored for learning with event streams in the LNES representation, enabling
high 3D reconstruction accuracy. We also design a prototype of a mobile head-mounted device with an event camera and record a real dataset with event observations and

the ground-truth 3D human poses (in addition to the synthetic dataset). Our EE3D demonstrates robustness and superior 3D accuracy compared to existing solutions across
various challenging experiments while supporting real-time
3D pose update rates of 140Hz.1

1. Introduction
Head-mounted devices (HMD) have a high potential to become the next mobile and pervasive computing platform in
human society that could enable many applications in education, driving or personal assistance systems, gaming, and
many others. HMDs enable increased flexibility and allow
users to move freely and explore the environments they live
and work in. Consequently, egocentric 3D human pose estimation became an active research field during the last few
years, with several works focusing on recovering 3D human
poses from down-facing fisheye RGB cameras installed on
an HMD [1, 14, 15, 25, 31–34, 37, 43].
1 https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/EventEgo3D/

1186

