This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Selective Hourglass Mapping for Universal Image Restoration Based on
Diffusion Model
Dian Zheng1 Xiao-Ming Wu1 Shuzhou Yang2 Jian Zhang2 Jian-Fang Hu1 Wei-Shi Zheng1,3 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{zhengd35, wuxm65}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract

Existing Universal Models (Multi-Partite Mapping)

Universal image restoration is a practical and potential computer vision task for real-world applications. The
main challenge of this task is handling the different degradation distributions at once. Existing methods mainly utilize
task-specific conditions (e.g., prompt) to guide the model to
learn different distributions separately, named multi-partite
mapping. However, it is not suitable for universal model
learning as it ignores the shared information between different tasks. In this work, we propose an advanced selective hourglass mapping strategy based on diffusion model,
termed DiffUIR. Two novel considerations make our DiffUIR non-trivial. Firstly, we equip the model with strong
condition guidance to obtain accurate generation direction
of diffusion model (selective). More importantly, DiffUIR
integrates a flexible shared distribution term (SDT) into the
diffusion algorithm elegantly and naturally, which gradually maps different distributions into a shared one. In
the reverse process, combined with SDT and strong condition guidance, DiffUIR iteratively guides the shared distribution to the task-specific distribution with high image
quality (hourglass). Without bells and whistles, by only
modifying the mapping strategy, we achieve state-of-theart performance on five image restoration tasks, 22 benchmarks in the universal setting and zero-shot generalization
setting. Surprisingly, by only using a lightweight model
(only 0.89M), we could achieve outstanding performance.
The source code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/iSEE-Laboratory/DiffUIR

1. Introduction
Universal image restoration aims to handle different image
restoration tasks on a single model, which has a wide range
* Corresponding author

light rain snow fog blur

...
...

light

..

snow

..

Generic
Decoder

blur

...
...

...
...

Large-scale Model

...
...

Task-specific Prompt

Task-specific Encoder

Ours (Selective Hourglass Mapping)

.
..

Share

Selection

Generic
Model

...
...

Impure Gaussian Shared Distribution

Figure 1. An illustration of existing universal image restoration
methods compared with our DiffUIR, existing methods mainly design task-specific modules to handle different distributions, which
force the generic model (tangerine module) to learn different distributions at once, termed multi-partite mapping. In contrast, the
proposed DiffUIR maps the different distributions to one shared
distribution (i.e., note that it is not the pure Gaussian distribution)
while maintaining strong condition guidance. In this way, DiffUIR
enables the generic model to only learn one shared distribution
and guides the shared distribution to a task-specific distribution,
termed selective hourglass mapping. Zoom in for best view.

of applications in real-world robotics navigation [3] and autonomous driving [4].
The main challenge of handling different image restoration tasks by a single model is learning various distributions
simultaneously. Existing universal image restoration methods [24, 31, 33, 40, 57] mainly utilize the multi-encoder
architecture or prompt the large-scale models as shown in
Fig. 1. In this way, according to [63], they will learn
separate mappings in one model by guiding the model to
learn different distributions separately when meeting specific conditions (i.e., multi-partite mapping). Despite the

25445

