This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MirageRoom: 3D Scene Segmentation with 2D Pre-trained Models
by Mirage Projection
Haowen Sun, Yueqi Duan*, Juncheng Yan, Yifan Liu, Jiwen Lu
Tsinghua University

Abstract
Nowadays, leveraging 2D images and pre-trained models to guide 3D point cloud feature representation has
shown a remarkable potential to boost the performance of
3D fundamental models. While some works rely on additional data such as 2D real-world images and their corresponding camera poses, recent studies target at using point
cloud exclusively by designing 3D-to-2D projection. However, in the indoor scene scenario, existing 3D-to-2D projection strategies suffer from severe occlusions and incoherence, which fail to contain sufficient information for finegrained point cloud segmentation task. In this paper, we argue that the crux of the matter resides in the basic premise
of existing projection strategies that the medium is homogeneous, thereby projection rays propagate along straight
lines and behind objects are occluded by front ones. Inspired by the phenomenon of mirage where the occluded
objects are exposed by distorted light rays due to heterogeneous medium refraction rate, we propose MirageRoom by
designing parametric mirage projection with heterogeneous
medium to obtain series of projected images with various
distorted degrees. We further develop a masked reprojection module across 2D and 3D latent space to bridge the
gap between pre-trained 2D backbone and 3D point-wise
features. Both quantitative and qualitative experimental results on S3DIS and ScanNet V2 demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. 1

1. Introduction
Understanding indoor scene-level point clouds has become
a fundamental and crucial task for various applications, including robotics [30], augmented reality [1] and virtual reality [43]. Abundant methods [14, 20, 32, 33, 38, 45, 50]
have investigated point cloud architectures to fully explore
the potential of interactions between points. While these
methods have achieved outstanding performance in various
scene understanding tasks, a major bottleneck that hinders
* Corresponding author.
1 Code will be available here.

Straight-line Projection

z

Homogeneous
Medium


0.0

Projection
plane

x

0.5

y
Mirage Projection

Heterogeneous
Medium

z

1.0

Projection
plane

x

1.5

y
Figure 1. Comparison of straight-line projection under homogeneous medium and our mirage projection under heterogeneous
medium. In straight-line projection, rays propagate along straight
lines and objects behind are occluded (red and blue stars). In contrast, our mirage projection adopts a parameter κ to modify the distribution of medium where projection rays are distorted, thereby
previously occluded points can be exposed. With series of κ, we
can increase the occupancy of points in projection images. Best
viewed in color.

the researchers from moving forward is the lack of highquality annotated 3D scene data. Compared to 2D image
datasets [10], the scale of real-world datasets for 3D indoor
point cloud understanding is much smaller [3, 9]. Thus,
taking advantage from vast 2D image data and models to
guide 3D tasks has become a direct and trending approach
to compensate the lack of 3D data.
Recently, many studies have explored methods for understanding 3D point cloud based on 2D images and models. Some prevailing approaches aim to combine both 2D
and 3D architectures based on additional data, such as
high-quality real-world 2D images and their accurate corresponding camera poses [8, 16, 17, 41], which pose high

20237

