This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimAC: A Simple Anti-Customization Method for Protecting Face Privacy
against Text-to-Image Synthesis of Diffusion Models
Feifei Wang1,2, *, Zhentao Tan2,1 , Tianyi Wei1 , Yue Wu2 , Qidong Huang1,†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Alibaba Cloud
{wangfeifei@, tzt@, bestwty@, hqd0037@}mail.ustc.edu.cn

Protected Portrait Images

Abstract
Despite the success of diffusion-based customization
methods on visual content creation, increasing concerns
have been raised about such techniques from both privacy
and political perspectives. To tackle this issue, several
anti-customization methods have been proposed in very recent months, predominantly grounded in adversarial attacks. Unfortunately, most of these methods adopt straightforward designs, such as end-to-end optimization with a focus on adversarially maximizing the original training loss,
thereby neglecting nuanced internal properties intrinsic to
the diffusion model, and even leading to ineffective optimization in some diffusion time steps. In this paper, we
strive to bridge this gap by undertaking a comprehensive
exploration of these inherent properties, to boost the performance of current anti-customization approaches. Two
aspects of properties are investigated: 1) We examine the
relationship between time step selection and the model’s
perception in the frequency domain of images and find that
lower time steps can give much more contributions to adversarial noises. This inspires us to propose an adaptive
greedy search for optimal time steps that seamlessly integrates with existing anti-customization methods. 2) We
scrutinize the roles of features at different layers during
denoising and devise a sophisticated feature-based optimization framework for anti-customization. Experiments
on facial benchmarks demonstrate that our approach significantly increases identity disruption, thereby protecting
user privacy and copyright. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/somuchtome/SimAC.

1. Introduction
Latent Diffusion model (LDM) [12, 31, 32] has been recently proven as a strong paradigm for photorealistic visual
content generation. The emergence of open-source Stable
* Work done during an internship in Alibaba Cloud.
† Corresponding author.

matthew.wy@alibaba-inc.com

“a dslr portrait of sks person”

Vanilla
Anti-DreamBooth

Anti-DreamBooth
+SimAC

Figure 1. Comparison between Anti-DreamBooth before and after
adding SimAC. Our method further boosts its ability to de-identity.

Diffusion encourages users to explore creative possibilities
with LDMs. Users only need to provide several images representing the same subject along with a rare identifier to
customize their diffusion models [7, 13, 22, 28]. After finetuning the model or optimizing the text embedding of rare
identifiers, it can flexibly generate high-quality images containing the specified object.
The convenience of customizing large-scale text-toimage models also allows the malicious users to generate
forgery images that violate the truth. Some of them may
use such technique to steal others’ painting styles and generate new painting content without permission. While some
of them may collect one’s portrait photos that are published
on the social platform, and generate fake images of this person through customization. In other words, the lawbreakers
can easily produce fake news that contains celebrity photos
[2], greatly misleading the public. The infringement poses
threats to user privacy and intellectual property. Hence, it is
essential to devise effective countermeasures to safeguard
users against such malicious usage.

12047

