This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learn from View Correlation: An Anchor Enhancement Strategy for Multi-view
Clustering
Suyuan Liu1 , Ke Liang1 , Zhibin Dong1 , Siwei Wang2 , Xihong Yang1 , Sihang Zhou1 , En Zhu1 , Xinwang Liu1 *
1
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, China
{suyuanliu,xinwangliu,enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn

90

Abstract

k-means

Directly sample

Random sample

Proposed

80

1. Introduction
Large-scale scenarios have always been a hot concern
with the data explosion in our real world. Among these
scenarios, large-scale multi-view clustering (MVC) has also
drawn increasing attention in recent years[2, 4, 8, 18, 35].
In general, large-scale MVC methods can be categorized
into two types, i.e., matrix factorization-based methods and
anchor-based methods. The former methods [11, 24, 41, 50]
aim to generate a low-dimensional representation for further
clustering by decomposing the original data, thereby avoiding the computational costs of similarity matrix construc-

70

ACC (%)

In recent years, anchor-based methods have achieved
promising progress in multi-view clustering. The performances of these methods are significantly affected by the
quality of the anchors. However, the anchors generated by
previous works solely rely on single-view information, ignoring the correlation among different views. In particular, we observe that similar patterns are more likely to exist between similar views so such correlation information
can be leveraged to enhance the quality of the anchors,
which is also omitted. To this end, we propose a novel
plug-and-play anchor enhancement strategy through view
correlation for multi-view clustering. Specifically, we construct a view graph based on aligned initial anchor graphs
to explore inter-view correlations. By learning from view
correlation, we enhance the anchors of the current view
using the relationships between anchors and samples on
neighboring views, thereby narrowing the spatial distribution of anchors on similar views. Experimental results on
seven datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
method over other existing methods. Furthermore, extensive comparative experiments validate the effectiveness of
the proposed anchor enhancement module when applied to
various anchor-based methods.

60
50
40
30

LMVSC

FMCNOF

UDBGL

FMVACC

Figure 1. An example illustration of clustering results affected
by initial anchors. The first two methods keep the anchors fixed,
while the latter two methods update the anchors through iterationoptimization. Their clustering performances are influenced to
varying degrees by different anchor generation approaches.

tion. However, their efficiency usually decreases along with
increasing dimension, thus constraining their scalability[10,
36]. Inspired by prototype learning [16, 48], anchors are
introduced into MVC to reduce the scope for clustering
from n to m, which denotes the number of samples and anchors, respectively. Specifically, anchor-based MVC methods [13, 27, 45] construct an anchor graph (n × m) rather
than a similarity matrix (n × n). It will alleviate the aforementioned computation and scalability problems.
Anchor-based MVC methods typically consist of three
procedures, including (1) anchor generation, (2) anchor
graph construction, and (3) clustering. Early attempts usually generate anchors at first, which are fixed during constructing anchor graphs[31, 32, 47]. For example, SFMC
[19] selects anchors by iterative sampling based on feature
similarity. Besides, LMVSC [14] regards cluster centers
generated by k-means of each view as the anchors. However, these methods are sensitive to the initial anchors (See
Fig. 1), where the anchor selection is primitive and sometimes results in compromised performance.
To address the above issues, researchers make efforts on
anchor optimization to guarantee better quality anchors[17,

26151

