This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do You Remember? Dense Video Captioning with Cross-Modal
Memory Retrieval
Minkuk Kim1 , Hyeon Bae Kim1 , Jinyoung Moon2 , Jinwoo Choi1,* , Seong Tae Kim1, *
1
Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea
2
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Republic of Korea

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the increasing demand for video understanding and
multimodal analysis, the field of video captioning is growing rapidly. The task of conventional video captioning involves generating precise descriptions for trimmed video
segments and several studies show successful results [7, 12,
21, 22, 24, 26, 27, 32, 36, 40–42]. However, it faces considerable challenges when applied to dense video captioning.
Dense video captioning aims to localize important event
segments (i.e., to find event boundaries) from untrimmed
videos and describe the event segment (i.e., what happens
in the event) with natural language. For achieving highperformance dense video captioning, it is important to prop* Corresponding authors.

A weight lifting tutorial is given.


There has been significant attention to the research on
dense video captioning, which aims to automatically localize and caption all events within untrimmed video. Several studies introduce methods by designing dense video
captioning as a multitasking problem of event localization
and event captioning to consider inter-task relations. However, addressing both tasks using only visual input is challenging due to the lack of semantic content. In this study,
we address this by proposing a novel framework inspired
by the cognitive information processing of humans. Our
model utilizes external memory to incorporate prior knowledge. The memory retrieval method is proposed with crossmodal video-to-text matching. To effectively incorporate
retrieved text features, the versatile encoder and the decoder with visual and textual cross-attention modules are
designed. Comparative experiments have been conducted
to show the effectiveness of the proposed method on ActivityNet Captions and YouCook2 datasets. Experimental
results show promising performance of our model without extensive pretraining from a large video dataset. Our
code is available at https://github.com/ailabkyunghee/CM2_DVC.

Memory Bank
Query

People are dancing on the grass.

Selected

Retrieval

He is carving a pumpkin.
A light is on inside the
carved pumpkin.

time

Input Video

Model

The man is carving a pumpkin.

The man connects a light
inside a pumpkin and plug
it.

Prediction

Figure 1. Conceptual figure of the proposed cross-modal memorybased dense video captioning (CM2 ). Our method can search for
relevant clues from an external memory bank to provide precise
descriptions and localization for untrimmed video.

erly model inter-task interactions between event localization and caption generation.
Recent studies in vision and language learning have
shown impressive results in cross-modal correlation tasks
[19, 28, 34]. However, connecting natural language and
video is still challenging due to the difficulties in modeling spatiotemporal information [13]. Video-and-language
learning requires complex model architectures, specialized
training protocols, and large computational costs [8]. Even
dense video captioning requires connecting untrimmed
videos and natural language to localize events and describe
them [17, 46, 48].
This study is motivated by the observation of how humans recognize and describe scenes. Humans are capable of
identifying important events and describing them by recalling relevant memories based on cues they have observed. In
cognitive information processing, this processing is called
cued recall [1, 33]. By recalling relevant memories, humans
can describe the scenes with human-understandable natural
language.

13894

