This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP-BEVFormer: Enhancing Multi-View Image-Based BEV Detector with
Ground Truth Flow
Chenbin Pan1 * Burhaneddin Yaman2 Senem Velipasalar1 Liu Ren2
1
Syracuse University
2
Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{cpan14, svelipas}@syr.edu, {burhaneddin.yaman,liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract
Autonomous driving stands as a pivotal domain in computer vision, shaping the future of transportation. Within
this paradigm, the backbone of the system plays a crucial
role in interpreting the complex environment. However, a
notable challenge has been the loss of clear supervision
when it comes to Bird’s Eye View elements. To address
this limitation, we introduce CLIP-BEVFormer, a novel approach that leverages the power of contrastive learning
techniques to enhance the multi-view image-derived BEV
backbones with ground truth information flow. We conduct
extensive experiments on the challenging nuScenes dataset
and showcase significant and consistent improvements over
the SOTA. Specifically, CLIP-BEVFormer achieves an impressive 8.5% and 9.2% enhancement in terms of NDS and
mAP, respectively, over the previous best BEV model on the
3D object detection task.

1. Introduction
Autonomous Driving Systems (ADS) have witnessed rapid
advancements, revolutionizing the landscape of transportation [6, 9, 12, 13, 15, 17–19]. The current state-of-the-art vision based ADS approaches heavily rely on Bird’s Eye View
(BEV) representations extracted from multi-view images to
perceive and understand the surrounding environment. The
BEV detector, which acts as the backbone of ADS, transforms multi-view images into a top-down view representation known as the BEV feature map [11, 16, 20, 21, 32].
The effectiveness of the BEV detector significantly influences the success of perception tasks in autonomous driving, underscoring its pivotal role in enhancing the system’s
situational awareness [13, 15, 16].
However, in current BEV models such as BEVFormer
[16], the BEV encoding process and its information embedding quality are ensured by decoding specific 3D ob* Work done while interned at Bosch Research North America.

ject information through a transformer decoder [16]. This
dependency on the decoder’s capability lacks a compelling
force to align the produced BEV with the ground truth BEV.
Additionally, decoding is executed using a set of initialized
queries [4, 16]. In particular, through cross-attention and
self-attention mechanisms [25], the final informed queries
align with ground-truth instances through a matching algorithm [4]. The decoding process resembles a black box and
lacks interpretability, leaving uncertainty about which query
corresponds to predicting which ground truth instance before decoding. Hence, there is a lack of a ground-truth perspective on the decoding process, such as how each ground
truth instance interacts with others and the BEV feature map
in the real scenarios.
In order to address the aforementioned limitations, we
introduce CLIP-BEVFormer framework, which is composed of Ground Truth BEV (GT-BEV) module and Ground
Truth Query Interaction (GT-QI) module.
In the absence of supervision on the BEV in previous
models, the representation of object classes and boundaries is not guaranteed to align with the expressive nature of the ground truth BEV. This limitation imposes constraints on the perception capabilities of the model, leading to a reduced discriminative capacity. Hence, we introduce the GT-BEV module, a crucial component of our
CLIP-BEVFormer framework, to enhance the quality of
BEV generation. GT-BEV employs a ground-truth information flow (GT-flow) guidance during the BEV encoding
phase. In particular, we implement a contrastive learning
technique, as presented in CLIP [23], to align the produced
BEV with the ground truth BEV, ensuring explicit arrangement of BEV elements based on their class label, location,
and boundary. This explicit element arrangement, guided
by ground truth information, serves to enhance the perceptual abilities of the model, allowing for improved detection
and differentiation of various objects on the BEV map.
The intricate interactions among ground truth instances
on the BEV map have remained unexplored by previous
models. The recovery of ground truth information from

15216

