This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synthesize, Diagnose, and Optimize: Towards Fine-Grained
Vision-Language Understanding
Wujian Peng1,2 Sicheng Xie1,2 Zuyao You1,2 Shiyi Lan3 Zuxuan Wu1,2†
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
NVIDIA
Abstract

Vision language models (VLM) have demonstrated remarkable performance across various downstream tasks.
However, understanding fine-grained visual-linguistic concepts, such as attributes and inter-object relationships, remains a significant challenge. While several benchmarks
aim to evaluate VLMs in finer granularity, their primary focus remains on the linguistic aspect, neglecting the visual
dimension. Here, we highlight the importance of evaluating
VLMs from both a textual and visual perspective. We introduce a progressive pipeline to synthesize images that vary in
a specific attribute while ensuring consistency in all other
aspects. Utilizing this data engine, we carefully design a
benchmark, SPEC, to diagnose the comprehension of object
size, position, existence, and count. Subsequently, we conduct a thorough evaluation of four leading VLMs on SPEC.
Surprisingly, their performance is close to random guess,
revealing significant limitations. With this in mind, we propose a simple yet effective approach to optimize VLMs in
fine-grained understanding, achieving significant improvements on SPEC without compromising the zero-shot performance. Results on two additional fine-grained benchmarks
also show consistent improvements, further validating the
transferability of our approach. Code and data are available at https://github.com/wjpoom/SPEC.

1. Introduction
Vision and Language Foundation Models (VLMs) pretrained on large-scale image-text data [13, 17, 23, 29, 41]
have consistently demonstrated impressive performance
across a wide range of well-established evaluating tasks,
i.e. image classification [5], image captioning [1, 18], visual question answering [3] and cross-modal image-text retrieval [18, 38]. Their remarkable performance is gradually convincing the community that these currently avail† Corresponding author.

query image

candidate texts
one dog

two dogs

three dogs

0.22
0.09

0.34
0.11

0.44

0.80

(a) Image to Text Matching

candidate images
query text
three dogs
0.05

0.48

0.28
0.01

0.24

0.94

(b) Text to Image Matching

Figure 1. We conduct a symmetrical assessment of VLMs in
fine-grained comprehension, considering both linguistic and visual perspectives. The bars in
and
represent the image-text
matching scores for CLIP [23] and our method, respectively. It is
evident that CLIP struggles with tasks related to quantity comprehension, whereas our method significantly enhances the model in
understanding fine-grained details.

able VLMs are almost robust and powerful enough to be
transferred to a broad spectrum of downstream tasks, either
through finetuning or even in a zero-shot manner.
However, recent research has shattered this captivating illusion, revealing that even state-of-the-art VLMs [17,
23, 29, 41] exhibit significant limitations in understanding
visual-linguistic concepts that require fine-grained compositional reasoning, especially in tasks involving object attributes or inter-object relationships [21, 31, 33, 40, 43].
This raises a crucial question: to what extent and in what
aspects are VLMs excelling or struggling? To answer
this, previous effort evaluates fine-grained capabilities of
VLMs through the image-to-text matching task, as shown
in Fig. 1(a). This involves providing a query image and
retrieving the matching text from a set of confusing candi-

13279

