This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Portrait4D: Learning One-Shot 4D Head Avatar Synthesis using Synthetic Data
Yu Deng

Duomin Wang

Xiaohang Ren Xingyu Chen
Xiaobing.AI

Baoyuan Wang

https://yudeng.github.io/Portrait4D/

Input

Recon.

+ Neck Pose

+ Expression

Novel View

Figure 1. Our method generates a photorealistic 4D head avatar via a feed-forward process of a monocular image. It allows head reenactment given another driving image, with full motion control of face, mouth, eyes, and neck, as well as foreground-background separation.

Abstract
Existing one-shot 4D head synthesis methods usually
learn from monocular videos with the aid of 3DMM reconstruction, yet the latter is evenly challenging which restricts them from reasonable 4D head synthesis. We present
a method to learn one-shot 4D head synthesis via largescale synthetic data. The key is to first learn a part-wise
4D generative model from monocular images via adversarial learning, to synthesize multi-view images of diverse
identities and full motions as training data; then leverage
a transformer-based animatable triplane reconstructor to
learn 4D head reconstruction using the synthetic data. A
novel learning strategy is enforced to enhance the generalizability to real images by disentangling the learning process of 3D reconstruction and reenactment. Experiments
demonstrate our superiority over the prior art.

1. Introduction
Animating a portrait image for photorealistic video synthesis (i.e., one-shot head avatar synthesis) is a crucial task in
computer vision and graphics, which can benefit diverse applications like video conferencing, live streaming, and Virtual Reality. Compared to various approaches based on 2D
generative models [9, 20, 53, 64, 77, 80], animatable 3D
head (i.e., 4D head) synthesis yields better 3D consistency
during view changes, thus more favorable in scenarios that
require large head pose variation and free-view rendering.
Nevertheless, reconstructing an animatable 3D head
from a single image is highly challenging, and there lack of
large-scale 3D data to directly learn a deep model to tackle
it. Consequently, previous methods [35, 39, 43, 74, 79] resort to monocular videos and leverage differentiable renderers for training with image-level weak supervisions. Since
this process is highly ill-posed, monocular 3DMM recon-

7119

