This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FAR: Flexible, Accurate and Robust 6DoF Relative Camera Pose Estimation
Chris Rockwell1
Nilesh Kulkarni1
Linyi Jin1
Jeong Joon Park1
Justin Johnson1
David F. Fouhey2
1
University of Michigan
New York University2
Rot. Error vs. Rot. Mag.

1. Introduction
Relative camera pose estimation is a fundamental problem
in computer vision [23], with applications in augmented reality [27, 35, 40], robotics [48, 65, 78], and autonomous
driving [9, 22]. One recent line of work learns to estimate
correspondences then solve for pose [18, 41, 49, 63, 67],
often offering sub-degree errors. Unfortunately, this framework tends to struggle when faced with large view change
(Figure 1, left), and additionally cannot recover scale because it produces the Fundamental or Essential matrix. Another line of work learns to estimate pose directly [5, 10, 39,
60, 72], which is not as precise, but can be more robust and
produces translation scale (Figure 1, left and right).
The proposed method builds upon both communities to
produce a general method that is no worse than either of the
options and often better than both. Critically, it leverages
learned correspondence predictions as input, and combines
learned pose estimation with a solver to estimate 6DoF
pose. For this task, we purposefully select the Transformer,

80
60

Tr. Error vs. Rot. Mag.

Corr. + Solver + Scale
Learning-Based
FAR

Translation Error (m)

Estimating relative camera poses between images has
been a central problem in computer vision. Methods that
find correspondences and solve for the fundamental matrix offer high precision in most cases. Conversely, methods predicting pose directly using neural networks are more
robust to limited overlap and can infer absolute translation scale, but at the expense of reduced precision. We
show how to combine the best of both methods; our approach yields results that are both precise and robust, while
also accurately inferring translation scales. At the heart
of our model lies a Transformer that (1) learns to balance
between solved and learned pose estimations, and (2) provides a prior to guide a solver. A comprehensive analysis supports our design choices and demonstrates that our
method adapts flexibly to various feature extractors and
correspondence estimators, showing state-of-the-art performance in 6DoF pose estimation on Matterport3D, InteriorNet, StreetLearn, and Map-free Relocalization. Project
page: https://crockwell.github.io/far/

Rotation Error (°)

Abstract

3
2

40

1

20
00

50

100

150

0

50

Rotation Magnitude (°)

100

150

0

Figure 1. Precise and Robust 6DoF Pose Estimation. Correspondence Estimation + Solver methods (here LoFTR [67],
RANSAC [21]) produce precise outputs for moderate rotations,
but are not robust to large rotations (left), and cannot produce
translation scale. Learning-based methods (here LoFTR with 8Point ViT [60] head) produce scale (right) and are more robust,
but lack precision (left). FAR leverages both for precise and robust prediction, including scale.

which can handle dense features or correspondences as input. Put succinctly, the method is Flexible: agnostic to correspondence and feature backbone; Accurate: matches the
precision of correspondence-based methods; and Robust:
builds upon the resilience of learned pose methods.
FAR enables learning-based and solver-based methods
to improve each other. Learned predictions are more robust than solver output, and are therefore used as a prior to
bias the solver. Improved solver output, which tends to be
more precise than learned output when it succeeds, is then
combined with Transformer predictions to form final output. Predictions are combined via a weighting predicted by
the Transformer, meaning the Transformer can learn to rely
more upon either method depending on their effectiveness.
Figure 2 analyzes FAR in practice, measuring error as
a function of the number of good input correspondences.
With many correspondences, the solver is highly accurate,
leaving little room for improvement from the prior. As the
number of correspondences drop, solver performance degrades, but this can be alleviated meaningfully using the
learned prior. The learned weighting also contributes to
robustness, and is plotted on the right: the Transformer
primarily uses solver output if there are many correspondences, and more heavily uses the regressor when there

19854

