This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DuPL: Dual Student with Trustworthy Progressive Learning for Robust
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation

1

Yuanchen Wu1 , Xichen Ye1 , Kequan Yang1 , Jide Li1 , Xiaoqiang Li1 *
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, China.
{yuanchenwu,yexichen0930,kqyang,iavtvai,xqli}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, One-stage Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) with image-level labels has gained increasing interest due to simplification over its cumbersome
multi-stage counterpart. Limited by the inherent ambiguity
of Class Activation Map (CAM), we observe that one-stage
pipelines often encounter confirmation bias caused by incorrect CAM pseudo-labels, impairing their final segmentation performance. Although recent works discard many unreliable pseudo-labels to implicitly alleviate this issue, they
fail to exploit sufficient supervision for their models. To this
end, we propose a dual student framework with trustworthy progressive learning (DuPL). Specifically, we propose
a dual student network with a discrepancy loss to yield diverse CAMs for each sub-net. The two sub-nets generate
supervision for each other, mitigating the confirmation bias
caused by learning their own incorrect pseudo-labels. In
this process, we progressively introduce more trustworthy
pseudo-labels to be involved in the supervision through dynamic threshold adjustment with an adaptive noise filtering
strategy. Moreover, we believe that every pixel, even discarded from supervision due to its unreliability, is important for WSSS. Thus, we develop consistency regularization
on these discarded regions, providing supervision of every
pixel. Experiment results demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed DuPL over the recent state-of-the-art alternatives
on PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO datasets. Code is
available at https://github.com/Wu0409/DuPL .

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) aims at
using weak supervision, such as image-level labels [13, 42],
scribbles [28, 41], and bounding boxes [22, 32], to alleviate the reliance on pixel-level annotations for segmentation.
Among these annotation forms, using image-level labels is
the most rewarding yet challenging way, as it only provides
* Corresponding author.

Ours

Figure 1. CAM pseudo-labels (train) vs. segmentation performance (val) on PASCAL VOC 2012. DuPL outperforms stateof-the-art one-stage competitors and achieves comparable performance with multi-stage methods in terms of CAM pseudo-labels
and final segmentation performance. † denotes using ImageNet21k pretrained parameters.

the presence of certain classes without offering any localization information. In this paper, we also focus on semantic
segmentation using image-level labels.
Prevalent works typically follow a multi-stage pipeline
[18], i.e., pseudo-label generation, refinement, and segmentation training. First, the pixel-level pseudo-labels are derived from Class Activation Map (CAM) through classification [46]. Since CAM tends to identify the discriminative semantic regions and fails to distinguish co-occurring
objects, the pseudo-labels often suffer from the CAM ambiguity. Thus, they are then refined by training a refinement
network [1, 2]. Finally, the refined pseudo-labels are used
to train a segmentation model in a fully supervised manner.
Recently, to simplify the multi-stage process, many studies
proposed one-stage solutions that simultaneously produce
pseudo-labels and learn a segmentation head [3, 39, 40].
Despite their enhanced training efficiency, the performance
still lags behind their multi-stage counterparts.
One important yet overlooked reason is the confirmation bias of CAM, stemming from the concurrent process
of CAM pseudo-label generation and segmentation supervision. For the one-stage pipeline, the segmentation train-

3534

