This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Distant 3D Object Detection Using 2D Box Supervision
Zetong Yang1 * Zhiding Yu2† Chris Choy2 Renhao Wang3 ∗ Anima Anandkumar4 ∗ Jose M. Alvarez2
1

CUHK

2

3

NVIDIA

UC Berkeley

2D Box
Input

4

Caltech

3D Box
Output

LR3D

miss

68m

miss

71m

DID-M3D

LR3D (Ours)

Figure 1. Upper: Without 3D annotations beyond 40m, LR3D enables the predictions of 3D boxes for extremely distant objects over
200m (right, in green) based on the inputs of image and 2D box (left). Lower: Existing methods fail to detect 3D objects beyond the 3D
supervision range, e.g., 40m for this case. With LR3D, these remote missing objects are well detected.

Abstract
Improving the detection of distant 3d objects is an important yet challenging task. For camera-based 3D perception,
the annotation of 3d bounding relies heavily on LiDAR for
accurate depth information. As such, the distance of annotation is often limited due to the sparsity of LiDAR points on
distant objects, which hampers the capability of existing detectors for long-range scenarios. We address this challenge
by considering only 2D box supervision for distant objects
since they are easy to annotate. We propose LR3D, a framework that learns to recover the missing depth of distant objects. LR3D adopts an implicit projection head to learn the
generation of mapping between 2D boxes and depth using
the 3D supervision on close objects. This mapping allows
the depth estimation of distant objects conditioned on their
2D boxes, making long-range 3D detection with 2D supervision feasible. Experiments show that without distant 3D
annotations, LR3D allows camera-based methods to detect
distant objects (over 200m) with comparable accuracy to
full 3D supervision. Our framework is general, and could
widely benefit 3D detection methods to a large extent.
* Work done during internship / affiliation with NVIDIA.
† Corresponding author: zhidingy@nvidia.com

1. Introduction
Camera-based 3D object detection [1–7] is an important
task in autonomous driving aiming to localize and classify
objects in 3D space with monocular or multi-view image
input. Detecting distant objects with camera input is both
important and challenging. On one hand, the ability to detect objects at distance is needed for planning, especially
for highway scenarios. According to [8], at 60 miles/hour,
the typical stopping distance for a vehicle is 73 meters and
it grows significantly under harsh road conditions such as
having wet surface [9–11]. On the other hand, the detection range of camera-based methods depends heavily on the
distance range of 3D annotations. For example, these methods work well within the distance range with abundant 3D
annotations (e.g., ∼70 meters on KITTI [12] and nuScenes
[13]), but often fail beyond this range where 3D annotations
are missing. This indicates the importance to improve distant 3D object detection with longer 3D annotation range.
Though of great importance, increasing the range of 3D
annotation is not easy. One main challenge is the sparsity of
LiDAR points at longer distances. LiDAR is typically the
main reference for axial depth information in 3D annotation. For distant objects with few or even no LiDAR points,

14853

