This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Bayesian Approach to OOD Robustness in Image Classification
Prakhar Kaushik
Johns Hopkins University

Adam Kortylewski
University of Freiburg

Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University

pkaushi1@jh.edu

akortyle@mpi-inf.mpg.de

ayuille1@jh.edu

Abstract
An important and unsolved problem in computer vision is to ensure that the algorithms are robust to changes
in image domains. We address this problem in the scenario where we only have access to images from the target domains. Motivated by the challenges of the OODCV [45] benchmark where we encounter real world Outof-Domain (OOD) nuisances and occlusion, we introduce
a novel Bayesian approach to OOD robustness for object
classification. Our work extends Compositional Neural
Networks (CompNets), which have been shown to be robust to occlusion but degrade badly when tested on OOD
data. We exploit the fact that CompNets contain a generative head defined over feature vectors represented by von
Mises-Fisher (vMF) kernels, which correspond roughly to
object parts, and can be learned without supervision. We
obverse that some vMF kernels are similar between different domains, while others are not. This enables us to learn a
transitional dictionary of vMF kernels that are intermediate
between the source and target domains and train the generative model on this dictionary using the annotations on the
source domain, followed by iterative refinement. This approach, termed Unsupervised Generative Transition (UGT),
performs very well in OOD scenarios even when occlusion
is present. UGT is evaluated on different OOD benchmarks
including the OOD-CV dataset, several popular datasets
(e.g., ImageNet-C [9]), artificial image corruptions (including adding occluders), and synthetic-to-real domain transfer, and does well in all scenarios.

1. Introduction
In recent years, machine learning algorithms have been extremely successful for tasks like object classification when
evaluated on benchmarked datasets like ImageNet. But
these successes require that the training and test data (or
This work has been supported by Army Research Laboratory award
W911NF2320008 and ONR with N00014-21-1-2812. A Kortylewski acknowledges support via his Emmy Noether Research Group funded by the
German Science Foundation (DFG) under Grant No. 468670075.

the source domain and the target domain data) be identically and independently distributed (IID) from some underlying source. However, in practice, it is important to ensure that the algorithms generalize to data that differ from
the training data. For example, in real-world applications,
an algorithm for car detection may encounter cars with unusual shapes and textures (Fig. 3), which did not occur in
the training set.
Existing OOD methods [9–12, 28] have shown success
in dealing with robustness issues when evaluated on early
robustness datasets, such as Imagenet-C [9], ImagenetR [11], and Imagenet-A [12], where the domain differences
are due to synthetic corruptions, adversarial images, rendered images, and similar factors [45]. But these algorithms performed less well on a newer benchmark, OODCV [45], which focuses on systematic analysis of real-world
nuisances, e.g. changes in texture, 3D pose, weather, shape,
and context. From a related perspective, OOD-CV studies the causal factors that result in the domain gap [4]. In
addition, previous works have rarely been evaluated for robustness to occlusion, an important OOD robustness metric.
In this work, we address OOD robustness on OOD-CV,
and related datasets, focusing on real-world domain differences and occlusion. We build on a class of Bayesian neural models called Compositional Neural Networks (CompNets), as they have been shown to be robust to partial occlusion [20, 21, 36, 42]. This is achieved by replacing the
discriminative head of a CNN with a generative model of
the feature vectors based on the objects’ spatial geometry.
However, CompNets are fully supervised and are not robust to OOD nuisances. In this work, we develop an unsupervised approach, Unsupervised Generative Transition
(UGT), which generalizes CompNets to OOD scenarios.
UGT relies on intuition that in OOD scenarios, the appearance of object parts is highly variable (due to changes
like texture or weather), while the spatial geometry of objects is often fairly similar between domains. We analyze
CompNets and modify them to take advantage of the intuition mentioned above. By introducing a transitional dictionary of von Mises-Fisher [17] kernels (Fig. 1), which
shares the properties of both domains, we can intuitively

22988

