This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SoundingActions: Learning How Actions Sound from Narrated Egocentric Videos
Changan Chen1

Kumar Ashutosh1,2 Rohit Girdhar2
1
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
We propose a novel self-supervised embedding to learn
how actions sound from narrated in-the-wild egocentric
videos. Whereas existing methods rely on curated data
with known audio-visual correspondence, our multimodal
contrastive-consensus coding (MC3) embedding reinforces
the associations between audio, language, and vision when
all modality pairs agree, while diminishing those associations when any one pair does not. We show our approach
can successfully discover how the long tail of human actions sound from egocentric video, outperforming an array
of recent multimodal embedding techniques on two datasets
(Ego4D and EPIC-Sounds) and multiple cross-modal tasks.

1. Introduction
Human activity often produces sounds. Closing a door, chopping vegetables, typing on a keyboard, talking with a friend—
our interactions with the objects and people around us generate audio that reveals our physical behaviors. These sounds
can be strongly associated with the subjects of our activity
and how we perform it. For example, opening a water bottle
sounds different than opening a cabinet; chopping sweet
potatoes sounds different than chopping onions; chopping
onions sounds different than mincing onions (the same object). Understanding the link between sounds and actions is
valuable for a number of applications, such as multimodal activity recognition, cross-modal retrieval, content generation,
or forecasting the physical effects of a person’s actions.
How should AI learn about sounding actions? Existing work typically curates annotated datasets for supervised
learning [9, 22, 28, 45], taking care to select events or actions
that have associated sounds (e.g., lawnmowing, chopping),
while others deliberately collect videos of object collisions
(e.g., striking objects with a drumstick [43] or crashing into
them with a robot [10, 17]), or develop physics-based simulations [16]. On the one hand, these approaches are appealing
for their ability to focus on meaningful audio-visual correspondences. On the other hand, their curated nature risks
limiting the scope of sounding actions that can be learned.

David Harwath1
2
FAIR, Meta

Kristen Grauman1,2

Action: C moves a
metal cutting machine
with hands.
Does the action sound?

Action: C digs the
soil with a hoe.
Does the action sound?

Figure 1. We aim to distinguish sounds that are directly caused
by human actions (bottom) from those that are not (top). Given
egocentric training videos with language descriptions of the camera
wearer’s (“C") current action, we learn an embedding where the
audio and visual features of any given clip are best aligned only
when both are also consistent with the language. This allows
discerning clips where the audio and vision may be correlated (e.g.,
the cutting machine running making loud noise in top row) versus
those where the sounds are driven by human action (digging in
bottom row)—importantly, without language at inference time.

Instead, we aim to learn how human actions sound from
narrated in-the-wild egocentric videos. See Figure 1. Given
a pool of videos of everyday human activity, the goal is to
learn a cross-modal representation where sounding actions
cluster together based on how they look and sound. By sampling the videos freely, we can broaden the scope to discover
the breadth of sounding actions without having to rely on a
closed, pre-defined set of action categories. In particular, by
focusing on unscripted egocentric video from wearable cameras in daily-life settings [11, 26], we aim to include subtle
and long-tail scenarios unavailable in curated datasets, such
as sounds of keys jangling when unlocking a door, scissors
snipping when cutting the dog’s fur, or fingernails scratching on one’s own arm. Egocentric video is a particularly
attractive source here because 1) human interaction sounds
are more audible in near-field egocentric recordings and 2)
passively captured long-form ego-video simply covers more
1
27252

