This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SlowFormer: Adversarial Attack on Compute and Energy Consumption of
Efficient Vision Transformers
K L Navaneet ∗1

Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani ∗1
1
University of California, Davis

Abstract
Recently, there has been a lot of progress in reducing
the computation of deep models at inference time. These
methods can reduce both the computational needs and power
usage of deep models. Some of these approaches adaptively
scale the compute based on the input instance. We show that
such models can be vulnerable to a universal adversarial
patch attack, where the attacker optimizes for a patch that
when pasted on any image, can increase the compute and
power consumption of the model. We run experiments with
three different efficient vision transformer methods showing
that in some cases, the attacker can increase the computation
to the maximum possible level by simply pasting a patch
that occupies only 8% of the image area. We also show
that a standard adversarial training defense method can
reduce some of the attack’s success. We believe adaptive
efficient methods will be necessary in the future to lower
the power usage of expensive deep models, so we hope our
paper encourages the community to study the robustness of
these methods and develop better defense methods for the
proposed attack. Code is available at:
https://github.com/UCDvision/SlowFormer

1. Introduction
The field of deep learning has recently made significant
progress in improving model efficiency for inference. Two
broad categories of methods can be distinguished: 1) those
that reduce computation regardless of input, and 2) those that
reduce the computation depending on the input (adaptively).
Most methods, such as weight pruning or model quantization, belong to the first category which reduces computation
by a constant factor regardless of the input. However, in
many applications, the complexity of the perception task
may differ depending on the input. For example, when a
self-driving car is driving between lanes in an empty street,
* Equal contribution
† Work done while he was an undergraduate student at UC Davis.

Essam Sleiman ∗12† Hamed Pirsiavash1
2
Harvard University

the perception may be simpler and require less computation when compared to driving in a busy city street scene.
Interestingly, in some applications, simple scenes such as
highway driving may account for the majority of the time.
Therefore, we believe that adaptive computation reduction
will become an increasingly important research area in the future, especially when non-adaptive methods reach the lower
bound of computation.
We argue that reduction of compute usually reduces
power usage, which is crucial, particularly in mobile devices that run on battery, e.g., AR/VR headsets, humanoid
robots, and drones. For instance, increasing the size of the
battery for a drone may lead to a drastic reduction in its range
due to the increased battery weight. This is important since
the improvement in battery technology is much slower than
compute technology. For instance, the battery capacity from
iPhone [1] (1st generation) in 2007 to iPhone 15 Pro Max in
2023 improved from 5.18 watt-hour to 17.32 watt-hour (less
than 4 times) while the compute has increased by a much
larger factor. As an example, a delivery robot like Starship
uses a 1,200Wh battery and can run for 12 hours [2], so it
uses almost 100 watts for compute and mobility. Hence, an
adversary increasing the power consumption of the perception unit by 20 watts, will reduce the battery life by almost
20%, which can be significant. Note that 20 watts increase in
power is realistic assuming that it uses two NVIDIA Jetson
Xavier NX cards (almost 20 watts each).
Key idea: Assuming that a perception method is reducing the computation adaptively with the input, an adversary
can attack the model by modifying the input to increase the
computation and power consumption. Our goal is to design
a universal adversarial patch that when pasted on any input
image, it will increase the computation of the model leading
to increased power consumption. We believe this is an important vulnerability, particularly for safety-critical mobile
systems that run on battery.
Please note that in this paper, we do not experiment with
real hardware to measure the power consumption. Instead,
we report the change in FLOPs of the inference time assuming that the power consumption is positively correlated with
the number of FLOPs, as studied in [73].

24786

