This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Bidirectional Displacement for Semi-Supervised Medical Image
Segmentation
Hanyang Chi1
Jian Pang1
Bingfeng Zhang1 * Weifeng Liu1
1
China University of Petroleum (East China)
{chihanyang, jianpang}@s.upc.edu.cn, {bingfeng.zhang, liuwf}@upc.edu.cn

Sample A

Abstract
Consistency learning is a central strategy to tackle unlabeled data in semi-supervised medical image segmentation
(SSMIS), which enforces the model to produce consistent
predictions under the perturbation. However, most current
approaches solely focus on utilizing a specific single perturbation, which can only cope with limited cases, while
employing multiple perturbations simultaneously is hard to
guarantee the quality of consistency learning. In this paper,
we propose an Adaptive Bidirectional Displacement (ABD)
approach to solve the above challenge. Specifically, we first
design a bidirectional patch displacement based on reliable
prediction confidence for unlabeled data to generate new
samples, which can effectively suppress uncontrollable regions and still retain the influence of input perturbations.
Meanwhile, to enforce the model to learn the potentially
uncontrollable content, a bidirectional displacement operation with inverse confidence is proposed for the labeled
images, which generates samples with more unreliable information to facilitate model learning. Extensive experiments show that ABD achieves new state-of-the-art performances for SSMIS, significantly improving different baselines. Source code is available at https://github.com/chyupc/ABD.

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation derives from computer tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which is
crucial for various clinical applications [34, 45]. Obtaining
a large medical dataset with precise annotation to train segmentation models is challenging, as reliable annotations can
only be provided by experts, which constrains the development of medical image segmentation algorithms and poses
substantial challenges for further research and implementation [31, 43]. To mitigate the burden of manual annotation
and address these challenges, semi-supervised medical im* Corresponding author.

(a)

Sample B

Network Perturbation

Input Perturbation

(b)
Network Perturbation

Input Perturbation

(c)

ABD
Network Perturbation
Prediction

Label

Prediction

Label

Figure 1. Illustration of prediction results. (a) Using only network
perturbation; (b) Combining network perturbation with input perturbation; (c) Incorporating ABD on top of the two perturbations.
Using a single perturbation has limitations while using multiple
perturbations makes it uncontrollable. Introducing ABD greatly
alleviates the issue and allows the model to perform significantly
better. The white dashed boxes highlight the regions with wrong
predictions.

age segmentation (SSMIS) [2, 28, 35, 42] is emerging as
a practical approach to encourage segmentation models to
learn from readily available unlabelled data in conjunction
with limited labeled examples.
Most recent approaches in SSMIS employ consistency
learning [9, 11, 15, 44] to make the decision boundary of
the learned model located within the low-density boundary [12]. By ensuring consistent features or predictions
under diverse perturbations, this strategy becomes one of
the most effective solutions for learning from unlabelled
data. According to the perturbation differences, consistency
learning approaches can be divided into three categories:
1) Input perturbations, which mainly produce different inputs to the same model [5, 29, 41], e.g., weak and strong
data augmentation for the given image. 2) Feature perturbations [17, 25, 47], which mainly include feature noise,
feature dropout, and context masking. 3) Network perturbations [8, 13], which focus on using different network archi-

4070

