This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FC-GNN: Recovering Reliable and Accurate Correspondences
from Interferences
Haobo Xu1,2*
1

Jun Zhou1,2*

Hua Yang1,2

†

Renjie Pan1,2

Cunyan Li1,2

Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai Key Lab of Digital Media Processing and Transmission

Abstract
Finding correspondences between images is essential for
many computer vision tasks and sparse matching pipelines
have been popular for decades. However, matching noise
within and between images, along with inconsistent keypoint detection, frequently degrades the matching performance. We review these problems and thus propose: 1) a
novel and unified Filtering and Calibrating (FC) approach
that jointly rejects outliers and optimizes inliers, and 2)
leveraging both the matching context and the underlying
image texture to remove matching uncertainties. Under the
guidance of the above innovations, we construct Filtering
and Calibrating Graph Neural Network (FC-GNN), which
follows the FC approach to recover reliable and accurate
correspondences from various interferences. FC-GNN conducts an effectively combined inference of contextual and
local information through careful embedding and multiple
information aggregations, predicting confidence scores and
calibration offsets for the input correspondences to jointly
filter out outliers and improve pixel-level matching accuracy. Moreover, we exploit the local coherence of matches
to perform inference on local graphs, thereby reducing computational complexity. Overall, FC-GNN operates at lightning speed and can greatly boost the performance of diverse
matching pipelines across various tasks, showcasing the immense potential of such approaches to become standard and
pivotal components of image matching. Code is avaiable at
https://github.com/xuy123456/fcgnn.

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences between images is a critical component of various computer vision tasks [9, 19, 51].A typical sparse matching pipeline usually detects and describes
keypoints first, then performs matching and rejects the outliers. Despite numerous efforts to establish reliable and
* equal contribution
† corresponding author

Filtering
Calibrating

Query points
Queried points

Outlier points
Accurate queried points

Figure 1. Joint filtering and calibrating. FC-GNN divides the
optimization of correspondence set into two parts, namely 1) filtering out correspondences with large errors and 2) utilizing calibration offsets to correct the remaining correspondences. Such approch ensures the reliability of the correspondence set and greatly
improves the pixel-level matching accuracy.

accurate correspondences, various factors continue to pose
significant challenges.
Matching noise within and between images is a critical factor that can impair matching performance. Simple
matching methods, such as nearest neighbor (NN) search,
relying solely on the performance of descriptors, are easy
to be disturbed and often not reliable. To address this issue,
some methods [4, 48, 49] are proposed to filter out outliers
in correspondence sets or predict element weights to guide
geometric estimation. While helpful in noisy matches, these
methods cannot change the intrinsic quality of individual
elements within the set, and thus still heavily rely on the
quality of the initial matches. To overcome this limitation,
some methods [5, 36, 39] try to build a reliable matching set
starting from keypoints and descriptors, utilizing attentionbased graph neural networks to jointly find correspondences
and reject non-matchable points. The attention-based in-

25213

