This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Multi-Object Tracking with Path Consistency
Zijia Lu,* Bing Shuai†, Yanbei Chen, Zhenlin Xu, Davide Modolo
AWS AI Labs
lu.zij@northeastern.edu,

{bshuai,yanbec,xzhenlin,dmodolo}@amazon.com

intermediate frames

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel concept of path consistency to learn robust object matching without using manual
object identity supervision. Our key idea is that, to track a
object through frames, we can obtain multiple different association results from a model by varying the frames it can
observe, i.e., skipping frames in observation. As the differences in observations do not alter the identities of objects,
the obtained association results should be consistent. Based
on this rationale, we generate multiple observation paths,
each specifying a different set of frames to be skipped, and
formulate the Path Consistency Loss that enforces the association results are consistent across different observation
paths. We use the proposed loss to train our object matching
model with only self-supervision. By extensive experiments
on three tracking datasets (MOT17, PersonPath22, KITTI),
we demonstrate that our method outperforms existing unsupervised methods with consistent margins on various evaluation metrics, and even achieves performance close to supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is the task of identifying and
tracking all object instances present in a video. It benefits a
wide spectrum of applications, such as monitoring vehicle
traffic, wildlife activity, pedestrians, etc. While there have
been several advanced supervised methods developed for
MOT [5, 8, 29, 33, 34, 46, 52, 55, 58], the overall advancement in MOT is slower compared to other vision tasks,
mostly due to the prohibitively expensive cost of acquiring
high-quality object identities annotations for MOT training.
As of today, MOT17 [31], a dataset of 14 videos, remains
one of the most widely used datasets in MOT.
To overcome this problem, some recent works [1, 16, 21,
22, 24, 30] started shifting their interest on unsupervised
learning for MOT. These approaches leverage off-the-shelf
object detectors to localize all the object instances in each
* Currently at Northeastern University. Work conducted during an internship with AWS AI Labs.
† Corresponding author.

end frame

Path 1

start frame
Path 2

Path 3


























Figure 1. We propose a novel concept of path consistency for selfsupervised MOT. We define a observation path for an object as a
temporal list of observed frames from the start to end frame. As
such, for the same object, we can generate multiple paths by skipping intermediate frames. As different observations of the same
object does not alter its identity, the association results should be
consistent across different paths.

frame of a video and then learn the temporal object association across frames in an unsupervised manner. Multiple works [16, 21, 22] propose to learn the object associations by creating pseudo-tracklets to estimate object IDs.
However, they are vulnerable to the noises in tracklets, especially when the groundtruth tracklet of an object is incorrectly broken into several pseudo-tracklets, each being
given a different object ID from the others. To avoid relying on pseudo-labels, other works [24, 30] explore selfsupervision with temporal consistency objective, by tracking objects from the current frame to a future frame then
back to the current frame while requiring each object is
associated back to itself. However, these works only consider future frames in very short temporal distances (e.g., 12 frames) where objects lack substantial appearance difference, thus limiting the quality of their object embeddings.
Meanwhile, UNS [1] leverages a motion model and an appearance model to create cross-supervision between their
tracking outputs, yet it also only considers matching objects
among adjacent frames.
In fact, the ability of robust object matching over long

19016

