This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discriminability-Driven Channel Selection for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Yue Yuan
Shandong University

Rundong He*
Shandong University

Yicong Dong
Shandong University

yuanyueyy@mail.sdu.edu.cn

rundong he@mail.sdu.edu.cn

yicong dong@mail.sdu.edu.cn

Zhongyi Han
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology

Yilong Yin*
Shandong University

zhongyi.han@kaust.edu.sa

ylyin@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is essential for deploying machine learning models in open-world environments. Activation-based methods are a key approach in
OOD detection, working to mitigate overconfident predictions of OOD data. These techniques rectifying anomalous activations, enhancing the distinguishability between
in-distribution (ID) data and OOD data. However, they assume by default that every channel is necessary for OOD
detection, and rectify anomalous activations in each channel. Empirical evidence has shown that there is a significant
difference among various channels in OOD detection, and
discarding some channels can greatly enhance the performance of OOD detection. Based on this insight, we propose Discriminability-Driven Channel Selection (DDCS),
which leverages an adaptive channel selection by estimating the discriminative score of each channel to boost OOD
detection. The discriminative score takes inter-class similarity and inter-class variance of training data into account. However, the estimation of discriminative score
itself is susceptible to anomalous activations. To better
estimate score, we pre-rectify anomalous activations for
each channel mildly. The experimental results show that
DDCS achieves state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR and
ImageNet-1K benchmarks. Moreover, DDCS can generalize to different backbones and OOD scores.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are effective when the training and
test sets share the same labels. However, in real-world applications, these models often encounter out-of-distribution
(OOD) data, which includes labels not present in the training set’s label space [11]. Existing models tend to misclas* Corresponding authors.

(a) FPR95 on each channel

(b) AUROC on each channel

Figure 1. OOD detection performance across different channels.
We randomly select 8 channels from the penultimate layer of
Densenet-101 on the CIFAR-10 benchmark and evaluate the OOD
detection performance using FPR95 and AUROC.

sify OOD data as in-distribution (ID), leading to poor performance of OOD detection. To address this, researchers
have introduced the OOD detection task, focusing on identifying whether a sample is ID or OOD. This task has gained
significant attention in both academic and industrial sectors
due to its critical role in various high-security applications,
such as autonomous driving [2], medical diagnostics [29],
and network intrusion detection [6].
OOD detection methods are generally classified into two
main types: density-based[19, 31, 43] and classificationbased[22, 33]. Density-based methods, although comprehensive, are often complex and time-consuming, often resulting in performance that is inferior to classification-based
methods[36]. This paper primarily examines classificationbased methods, which are subdivided into training-time and
test-time approaches. Training-time methods[8, 13, 41]
necessitate model retraining, whereas test-time methods
do not, thus eliminating training costs and preserving the
model’s multi-classification performance. Test-time methods are further categorized into six types: confidencebased [11, 25, 26], feature-based [34, 51], distancebased [22, 33], gradient-based [16], pruning-based methods [1, 37], and activation-based [1, 38, 44, 53]. The first
five types do not account for abnormal activations in hidden
layers, which can lead to overconfidence in OOD data pre-

26171

