This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Look-Up Table Compression for Efficient Image Restoration
Yinglong Li
Jiacheng Li
Zhiwei Xiong*
University of Science and Technology of China
{yllee, jclee}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

31.5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image restoration, such as super-resolution, denoising, deblocking, and deblurring, aims at reconstructing highquality (HQ) images with rich high-frequency details from
low-quality (LQ) degraded observations. In recent years,
with the rapid development of deep learning, methods based
on deep neural networks (DNN) [2, 13, 19, 22, 29, 50, 51]
have made impressive progress in image restoration. Nevertheless, these methods often require high computational
costs or dedicated computing devices, e.g., GPUs and
TPUs. Such an excessive computational requirement lim* Corresponding author.

31.3

−𝟖𝟖. 𝟑%

SPF-LUT

31.1
30.9

PSNR (dB)

Look-Up Table (LUT) has recently gained increasing attention for restoring High-Quality (HQ) images from LowQuality (LQ) observations, thanks to its high computational
efficiency achieved through a “space for time” strategy of
caching learned LQ-HQ pairs. However, incorporating
multiple LUTs for improved performance comes at the cost
of a rapidly growing storage size, which is ultimately restricted by the allocatable on-device cache size. In this
work, we propose a novel LUT compression framework to
achieve a better trade-off between storage size and performance for LUT-based image restoration models. Based on
the observation that most cached LQ image patches are distributed along the diagonal of a LUT, we devise a DiagonalFirst Compression (DFC) framework, where diagonal LQHQ pairs are preserved and carefully re-indexed to maintain the representation capacity, while non-diagonal pairs
are aggressively subsampled to save storage. Extensive experiments on representative image restoration tasks demonstrate that our DFC framework significantly reduces the
storage size of LUT-based models (including our new design) while maintaining their performance. For instance,
DFC saves up to 90% of storage at a negligible performance drop for ×4 super-resolution. The source code is
available on GitHub: https://github.com/leenas233/DFC.

zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

−𝟗𝟎. 𝟎%

30.7

MuLUT

30.5
30.3

w/o DFC

30.1

w/ DFC

−𝟗𝟎. 𝟎%

29.9

L2 cache size

SR-LUT

L3 cache size

29.7
29.5
0

2

4

6

8
10
12
Storage Size (MB)

14

16

18

20

Figure 1. Performance-storage trade-off for ×4 super-resolution
on the Set5 dataset [3]. Our proposed DFC effectively compresses
the storage size of the LUT-based models with a high compression
ratio while maintaining performance. The orange dotted line and
blue dotted line indicate the L2 cache and L3 cache sizes of a
Qualcomm Snapdragon 888 Plus chip respectively.

its the usage of DNN-based methods on edge devices with
limited resources, such as smartphones and televisions.
Recently, Look-Up Table (LUT) has gained increasing attention for image restoration thanks to its high computational efficiency achieved through a “space for time”
strategy of caching learned LQ-HQ pairs. Based on this
strategy, Jo and Kim [21] propose SR-LUT, where LQHQ pairs are cached into a LUT by traversing all possible low-resolution (LR) inputs and pre-computing the corresponding high-resolution (HR) outputs of a trained DNN
for super-resolution. Then, the HR prediction is retrieved
from the LUT by querying the LR input at the inference
phase. This way, the huge computational overhead of DNN
is replaced by the storage size of the saved LUT, and the
inference time is effectively reduced. Most recently, MuLUT [26] and SPLUT [32] propose to adopt multiple LUTs
in a cascaded structure, showing a scaling law of obtaining better performance with more LUTs. In this paper,
we design a new structure based on multiple LUTs, named
SPF-LUT, extending the scaling law. Nevertheless, as more
LUTs are used, the required storage grows rapidly, which is
ultimately restricted by the allocatable on-device cache size.
As shown in Fig. 1, advanced methods based on multiple

26016

