This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BT-Adapter: Video Conversation is Feasible Without Video Instruction Tuning
Ruyang Liu ∗1,3♢
1

Chen Li ∗2

Yixiao Ge 2

Thomas H. Li1

Ying Shan 2

Ge Li

1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2

Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG

{ruyang@stu,geli@ece,thomas@}.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The recent progress in Large Language Models (LLM)
has spurred various advancements in image-language conversation agents, while how to build a proficient videobased dialogue system is still under exploration. Considering the extensive scale of LLM and visual backbone, minimal GPU memory is left for facilitating effective temporal
modeling, which is crucial for comprehending and providing feedback on videos. To this end, we propose Branching Temporal Adapter (BT-Adapter), a novel method for extending image-language pretrained models into the video
domain. Specifically, BT-Adapter serves as a plug-anduse temporal modeling branch alongside the pretrained visual encoder, which is tuned while keeping the backbone
frozen. Just pretrained once, BT-Adapter can be seamlessly
integrated into all image conversation models using this
version of CLIP, enabling video conversations without the
need for video instructions. Besides, we develop a unique
asymmetric token masking strategy inside the branch with
tailor-made training tasks for BT-Adapter, facilitating faster
convergence and better results. Thanks to BT-Adapter, we
are able to empower existing multimodal dialogue models
with strong video understanding capabilities without incurring excessive GPU costs. Without bells and whistles, BTAdapter achieves (1) state-of-the-art zero-shot results on
various video tasks using thousands of fewer GPU hours.
(2) better performance than current video chatbots without
any video instruction tuning. (3) state-of-the-art results of
video chatting using video instruction tuning, outperforming previous SOTAs by a large margin. The code has been
available at https://github.com/farewellthree/BT-Adapter.

1. Introduction
Since the past year, Large Language Model (LLM) chatbots
[25, 34, 37, 45] have emerged as one of the most remarkable advancements within the AI community. Excitingly,
Corresponding Author

3

Peng Cheng Laboratory

{palchenli,yixiaoge,yingsshan}@tencent.com

the LLM-driven AI assistants have showcased impressive
abilities in comprehension, reasoning, and engaging in conversations. The success of text-only dialogue systems has
also sparked the development of image-language conversation agents [7, 9, 19, 50]. These agents combine pretrained
image models with LLMs, followed by instruction tuning,
to create a fusion of visual and textual understanding for
enhanced conversation capabilities.
In comparison to images, videos offer a more comprehensive representation of how humans perceive and interpret the world. Nevertheless, constructing a video-centric
dialogue system is a more complex endeavor compared to
the image-based one. Firstly, a typically multimodal agent,
comprising LLM, a pretrained image encoder (usually CLIP
[29]), and additional learnable modules, is already demanding in terms of GPU memory. The incorporation of video
dialogue introduces even higher costs, as multiple frames
need to be fed as inputs. Secondly, a pretrained encoder as
potent and knowledge-enriched as CLIP is currently lacking in the realm of videos, leading to inferior visual understanding. Lastly, gathering video-text instruction data of
comparable scale, quality, and diversity to images poses a
significant challenge. Rather than building the video agent
from scratch, an alternative and promising strategy involves
adapting existing pretrained image-centric dialogue models
to the video domain [16, 22, 23, 47], which can leverage the
abundant knowledge embedded within image models.
Expanding pretrained image models to the video domain
is an extensively explored area. The crux of the matter lies
in enhancing the capability of 2D models to model temporal dynamics [3, 5, 35]. However, implementing effective
temporal modeling within image dialogue models presents
notable challenges, primarily due to the trade-off between
efficiency and effectiveness in CLIP-based temporal modeling techniques. Methods with strong temporal modeling capabilities, e.g., joint-ST modeling [3, 17, 38, 40] and
interpolate-style modeling [24, 26], often necessitate finetuning of the entire visual encoder, thereby exacerbating
the already significant GPU memory consumption of video
♢ Work done during internship at ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

* equal contribution

13658

