This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FakeInversion: Learning to Detect Images from Unseen
Text-to-Image Models by Inverting Stable Diffusion
George Cazenavette1 *
1

Avneesh Sud2

Thomas Leung2
2

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Ben Usman2

Google Research

fake-inversion.github.io
FakeInversion – New GenAI Detector
Input Image

Inverted Noise Map

SD v1.5
Inversion

Reconstruction

Training Set

SynRIS – New Evaluation Protocol

Fake Images: Stable Diffusion

Fake Images from DALL·E 3, Imagen, etc.

Real Images: LAION

Real Images with matching themes and styles from Internet

SD v1.5
Denoising

Real vs Fake
Detector

new synthetic
synthetic image
image detector
detector that uses two additional input signals derived from a fixed pre-trained Stable
Figure 1. (left) We propose a new
Diffusion [45]: an inverted latent noise map and the reconstructed input image. (middle) Our detector is trained using fake images generated
state-of-the-art generalization
generalization performance
performance in detecting unseen text-to-image
using Stable Diffusion and real LAION images. It achieves state-of-the-art
generators. (right) To ensure that the performance evaluation does not favor detectors that are biased towards particular themes or styles,
new thematically
thematically and
and stylistically
stylistically aligned
aligned evaluation
evaluation benchmark
benchmark – we measure detector’s ability to discriminate fake images
we introduce a new
(e.g. DALL·E 3, Imagen) from real images with matching content and style found on the Internet using reverse image search (RIS).

Abstract
Due to the high potential for abuse of GenAI systems, the
task of detecting synthetic images has recently become of
great interest to the research community. Unfortunately, existing image-space detectors quickly become obsolete as new
high-fidelity text-to-image models are developed at blinding
speed. In this work, we propose a new synthetic image detector that uses features obtained by inverting an open-source
pre-trained Stable Diffusion model. We show that these inversion features enable our detector to generalize well to unseen
generators of high visual fidelity (e.g., DALL·E 3) even when
the detector is trained only on lower fidelity fake images
generated via Stable Diffusion. This detector achieves new
state-of-the-art across multiple training and evaluation setups. Moreover, we introduce a new challenging evaluation
protocol that uses reverse image search to mitigate stylistic
and thematic biases in the detector evaluation. We show that
the resulting evaluation scores align well with detectors’ inthe-wild performance, and release these datasets as public
benchmarks for future research.

* Work done during an internship at Google Research.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in text-to-image modeling have made it
easier than ever to generate harmful or misrepresentative
content at scale. Moreover, new versions of most photorealistic commercial models are being continuously updated and
released behind closed APIs, making it harder to keep fake
image detectors up to date. In this work, we make significant
strides towards building a GenAI detector that can reliably
identify images from unseen photorealistic text-to-image
models. Specifically, we propose a model that can be trained
using fake images only from Stable Diffusion (SD) [45] and
reliably detect images generated by recent open (Kandinsky [51], Wüerstchen [39], PixArt-α [16], etc.) and closedsource text-to-image models (Imagen [46], Midjourney [2],
DALL·E 3 [12], etc.) of significantly higher visual fidelity.
Existing methods [17, 37, 54] focus primarily on detecting traces left by convolutional generators in a way that is robust to re-compression, resizing and other in-the-wild transformations. While these methods worked well for GANs and
early diffusion models, we show that they, unfortunately, fail
to generalize well to current photorealistic generative models,
even when re-trained using better data. Recent diffusion detectors that rely on CLIP embeddings [37] or inversions [55]

10759

