This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Model Stealing Defense with Noise Transition Matrix
Dong-Dong Wu1 , Chilin Fu2 , Weichang Wu2 , Wenwen Xia2
Xiaolu Zhang2 , Jun Zhou2* , Min-Ling Zhang1*
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Ant Group
{dongdongwu,zhangml}@seu.edu.cn,{chilin.fcl, jiuyue.wwc, wenzhen.xww}@antgroup.com
{yueyin.zxl, jun.zhoujun}@antfin.com

Abstract
With the escalating complexity and investment cost of
training deep neural networks, safeguarding them from unauthorized usage and intellectual property theft has become
imperative. Especially the rampant misuse of prediction
APIs to replicate models without access to the original data
or architecture poses grave security threats. Diverse defense
strategies have emerged to address these vulnerabilities, yet
these defenses either incur heavy inference overheads or
assume idealized attack scenarios. To address these challenges, we revisit the utilization of noise transition matrix as
an efficient perturbation technique, which injects noise into
predicted posteriors in a linear manner and integrates seamlessly into existing systems with minimal overhead, for model
stealing defense. Provably, with such perturbed posteriors,
the attacker’s cloning process degrades into learning from
noisy data. Toward optimizing the noise transition matrix,
we proposed a novel bi-level optimization training framework, which performs fidelity on the victim model while the
surrogate model adversarially. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate that our method effectively thwarts
model stealing attacks and achieves minimal utility tradeoffs, outperforming existing state-of-the-art defenses.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models, especially deep neural networks (DNNs), have attained human-level capabilities across
various domains, such as pattern recognition tasks [24, 27]
and generation tasks [2, 52], becoming indispensable in facilitating convenience for society [53]. With the burgeoning
of ML application scenarios and the proliferation of data,
training large and sophisticated models and making them
publicly accessible has become a new profit trend for compa* Corresponding author.
This work is done when Dong-Dong Wu works as an intern at Ant Group.

nies. However, considering the steep costs of tuning models,
directly divulging model parameters potentially engenders
no returns on investment and even adverse societal impacts
from malicious use. To alleviate those concerns, prediction
APIs have emerged as an alternative by enabling black-box
inferences through querying. This allows models to provide
services without exposing the underlying parameters and
details, and has been harnessed in Machine Learning as a
Service (MLaaS) platforms (e.g., Amazon AWS, Microsoft
Azure, Google Cloud).
Unfortunately, recent research has demonstrated that prediction APIs are still vulnerable to intellectual property theft
through model stealing attacks [39, 51, 54, 62]. Despite not
exposing model details, attackers can query the APIs using
carefully-crafted samples or surrogate samples to obtain responded predictions. Through this, they can then train a
clone model on the gathered query-response pairs to replicate the victim model’s functionality with high accuracy and
fidelity, without needing to access the original training data
or model architecture [22, 39]. Such a clone model poses
the following security threats: (a) acquiring a functionally
similar copy of the victim model, illegally circumventing
the expensive process of manual data curation and undermining the intellectual property of MLaaS; (b) extracting
confidential data through membership inference attacks [47],
model inversion attack [6] and property inference attack [7];
(c) conducting adversarial attacks [31, 33, 35, 36, 49, 55] by
creating malicious examples based on the white-box substitute model [42].
To address such vulnerabilities, considerable researches
[3, 5, 9, 17, 29, 50, 64] have focused on thwarting model
stealing attacks. These defenses can be categorized into three
strategies: detection, perturbation, and post-hoc verification.
Detection-based defenses [19, 20, 23, 23] are predicated on
the idea that malicious queries exhibit aberrant statistical distributions compared to normal queries. If a query sequence
appears anomalous, the defender may discard the requests
or corrupt the outputs. However, if an attacker carefully con-

24305

