This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Overcoming Generic Knowledge Loss with Selective Parameter Update
Wenxuan Zhang* Paul Janson1,2† Rahaf Aljundi3 Mohamed Elhoseiny1
1
KAUST 2 Concordia University 3 Toyota Motor Europe
Abstract
Foundation models encompass an extensive knowledge
base and offer remarkable transferability. However, this
knowledge becomes outdated or insufficient over time. The
challenge lies in continuously updating foundation models to
accommodate novel information while retaining their original capabilities. Leveraging the fact that foundation models
have initial knowledge on various tasks and domains, we propose a novel approach that, instead of updating all parameters equally, localizes the updates to a sparse set of parameters relevant to the task being learned. We strike a balance
between efficiency and new task performance, while maintaining the transferability and generalizability of foundation
models. We extensively evaluate our method on foundational
vision-language models with a diverse spectrum of continual
learning tasks. Our method achieves improvements on the
accuracy of the newly learned tasks up to 7% while preserving the pretraining knowledge with a negligible decrease of
0.9% on a representative control set accuracy. Code is available here: https://github.com/wx-zhang/spu

1. Introduction
Recent machine learning models trained on a broad dataset
have shown remarkable success in both natural language processing tasks [46] and computer vision tasks [1, 48]. These
models can directly solve a wide range of tasks, such as recognizing common objects and answering common questions,
thus are dubbed as foundation models [7]. What is captured
by these models covering various domains and tasks can
be referred to as generic knowledge. Despite this, foundation models could still perform poorly on specific tasks.
For instance, Xiang et al. [63] found ChatGPT limited in
embodied tasks, while CLIP [48] is shown struggling in recognizing fine-grained classes like cars from different brands.
Therefore, it is crucial to integrate newly revealed data with
pre-trained foundation models and expand their knowledge
base. As one common solution, finetuning foundation mod* Email: wenxuan.zhang@kaust.edu.sa
† Work done during internship at KAUST

Figure 1. We propose SPU algorithm. We first localize our update
to the first layer of MLP blocks, and then select a sparse set of
parameters specialized to the new task to update.

els on new data would usually result in a good performance
on the new task if done carefully. This will turn the foundation model into a specific model for a specific task, and
would risk losing the existing capabilities of the model or the
generic knowledge it has acquired through long phases of
pre-training. The effect of deteriorating the model’s previous
knowledge upon new learning is a typical phenomenon of
neural networks, referred to as catastrophic forgetting [41].
Continual learning research has been exploring the problem of accumulating knowledge without forgetting [47] over
the past years and has provided valuable techniques. However, most existing works consider this process starting from
a randomly initialized model [17, 18]. Recently, with the success of large pre-trained models [53, 61], many works have
considered continual learning starting from a pre-trained
model [59, 60]. Nevertheless, the emphasis lies mostly on
the learning and forgetting behavior of the newly acquired
knowledge, in the upcoming task sequence, often side-lining
the pre-trained knowledge. Generic knowledge embedded
in large models provides bases for strong performance in
various domains and quick transfer to different tasks; when
continuously finetuning a large pre-trained model on newly
received tasks with no regard to preserving its pre-existing

24046

