This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blind Image Quality Assessment Based on Geometric Order Learning
Nyeong-Ho Shin
Korea University

Seon-Ho Lee
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

nhshin@mcl.korea.ac.kr

seonholee@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A novel approach to blind image quality assessment,
called quality comparison network (QCN), is proposed in
this paper, which sorts the feature vectors of input images
according to their quality scores in an embedding space.
QCN employs comparison transformers (CTs) and score
pivots, which act as the centroids of feature vectors of
similar-quality images. Each CT updates the score pivots
and the feature vectors of input images based on their ordered correlation. To this end, we adopt four loss functions. Then, we estimate the quality score of a test image
by searching the nearest score pivot to its feature vector in
the embedding space. Extensive experiments show that the
proposed QCN algorithm yields excellent image quality assessment performances on various datasets. Furthermore,
QCN achieves great performances in cross-dataset evaluation, demonstrating its superb generalization capability.
The source codes are available at https://github.
com/nhshin-mcl8/QCN .

0

100

Score

Score pivot

Feature vector

Score pivots

CT
10.03

85.36

CT

69.34

53.09
Images

CT
QCN

Embedding space

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed QCN algorithm. The color of
an image boundary represents the quality score of the image. The
CT modules sequentially updates the feature vectors of multiple
images. To guide this update process, we use score pivots, which
act as the centroids of the feature vectors of similar-quality images.
As the update goes on in the CT modules, the images and the score
pivots are sorted according to their quality scores in the embedding
space. We estimate the quality score of a test image by ﬁnding the
nearest score pivot to its feature vector.

1. Introduction
Image quality assessment (IQA) aims to estimate the human
perceptual quality of an image. It can be divided into two
categories: full-reference IQA and blind IQA (BIQA). In
full-reference IQA, we estimate the quality of an image by
comparing it with its pristine version, referred to as the reference image. On the other hand, in BIQA, we do not use
the reference image. In real-world problems, generally, references are unavailable. Hence, the demand for BIQA has
increased in various applications, including image restoration [17], compression [16], and super-resolution [21].
Recently, many deep learning techniques have been
developed for BIQA, achieving promising performances.
Some of them focus on the structural aspect of a deep network for regressing the quality score of an image [11, 30,
37], while others explore the data aspect of deep learning
and attempt to pre-train networks using a large amount of
data specialized for BIQA [22, 27, 39]. These techniques
[11, 22, 27, 30, 37, 39], however, do not explicitly use score

relations between images, such as ordering relationship and
score difference. Such relations can provide useful cues for
the score estimation. Thus, Golestaneh et al. [7] and Zhang
et al. [38] exploit the relative rank information between images to train a network, but they use the score relations in
the training phase only.
A novel approach to BIQA is proposed in this paper,
which assesses image quality reliably by exploiting both ordering relationships and score differences between images.
To this end, we construct an embedding space, in which
the direction and distance between the embedded vectors
of two images represent the ordering relationship and score
difference between the two images, respectively. The basic concept of this geometric representation learning, called
geometric order learning (GOL) [14], has been proposed
recently for rank estimation tasks, including facial age estimation and historical image classiﬁcation. However, GOL
may provide poor results for BIQA since it is designed for

12799

