This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MatFuse: Controllable Material Generation with Diffusion Models
Giuseppe Vecchio*

Renato Sortino*

giuseppe.vecchio@phd.unict.it

Simone Palazzo

Concetto Spampinato

renato.sortino@phd.unict.it

University of Catania

Figure 1. Sample scenes textured using materials generated with MatFuse. For each of the three scenes we show the materials used
and the final rendering.

Abstract
Creating high-quality materials in computer graphics
is a challenging and time-consuming task, which requires
great expertise. To simplify this process, we introduce
MatFuse, a unified approach that harnesses the generative power of diffusion models for creation and editing
of 3D materials. Our method integrates multiple sources
of conditioning, including color palettes, sketches, text,
and pictures, enhancing creative possibilities and granting
fine-grained control over material synthesis. Additionally,
MatFuse enables map-level material editing capabilities
through latent manipulation by means of a multi-encoder
compression model which learns a disentangled latent representation for each map. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of MatFuse under multiple conditioning settings and explore the potential of material editing. Finally, we assess
the quality of the generated materials both quantitatively
in terms of CLIP-IQA and FID scores and qualitatively by
conducting a user study.
Source code for training MatFuse and supplemental materials are publicly available at https://gvecchio.com/
matfuse.

* Both authors contributed equally to this research.

1. Introduction
Materials are central in computer graphics, playing a pivotal role in achieving high-quality, realistic digital imagery.
As the computational power of professional and consumer
hardware has increased, high-quality CGI has experienced
a growing demand, fueled by the expanding field of application of 3D models, from game engines to architectural and industrial prototyping and simulation [38, 44, 49].
However, the creation of high-quality materials remains a
challenging and time-consuming process, which requires
complex tools and high expertise. Following the promising results achieved by Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [13] for the generation of natural images, several
works have successfully employed adversarial training to
generate high-quality materials [18, 19, 23, 54]. These approaches, however, provide a limited degree of control over
material synthesis. Additionally, GANs are generally hard
to train, due to the inherent instability of their adversarial
training, leading to mode collapse and limited variability.
Recently, diffusion models (DMs) have set a new stateof-the-art in image generation [9, 22, 39], overcoming the
training limitations of GANs. Furthermore, diffusion models can be easily conditioned during the “denoising” process, with global or local conditions, respectively controlling the overall appearance of the image (e.g., text prompt),
or specific regions of the output image (e.g., sketches). Recent approaches like Composer [24], propose to combine
multiple sources of conditioning, both global and local, by

4429

