This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Motion Function
Yue Gao

Jiahao Li

Lei Chu

Yan Lu

Microsoft Research
{yuegao, li.jiahao, leichu, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in video modeling extensively rely
on optical flow to represent the relationships across frames,
but this approach often lacks efficiency and fails to model
the probability of the intrinsic motion of objects. In addition, conventional encoder-decoder frameworks in video
processing focus on modeling the correlation in the encoder,
leading to limited generative capabilities and redundant intermediate representations. To address these challenges,
this paper proposes a novel Implicit Motion Function (IMF)
method. Our approach utilizes a low-dimensional latent
token as the implicit representation, along with the use of
cross-attention, to implicitly model the correlation between
frames. This enables the implicit modeling of temporal correlations and understanding of object motions. Our method
not only improves sparsity and efficiency in representation
but also explores the generative capabilities of the decoder
by integrating correlation modeling within it. The IMF
framework facilitates video editing and other generative
tasks by allowing the direct manipulation of latent tokens.
We validate the effectiveness of IMF through extensive experiments on multiple video tasks, demonstrating superior
performance in terms of reconstructed video quality, compression efficiency and generation ability.

Reference frame

Dense optical flow

Schematic latent space

Current frame

TPSMM [81]

IMF

Reference frame

Dense optical flow

Schematic latent space

Current frame

PECHead [11]

IMF

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed an upsurge in the field of video
modeling [44], processing [45, 62], compression [31, 38],
prediction [19, 20], and generation [11, 64, 66]. A fundamental element in these diverse tasks is the use of optical flow, which encapsulates the relationship between consecutive frames. Existing approaches often employ readily available optical flow estimation models, such as RAFT
[61], to facilitate this process. However, the definition
of optical flow has inherent limitations. It lacks sparsity,
capturing only the positional change of pixels, and fails
to model the probabilistic aspects of object movements,
thereby not comprehending the intrinsic motion and semantics of objects. Furthermore, the non-editability of explicit

Figure 1. IMF represents the motion in latent space and model
the correlation implicitly. In the diagram, the blue shapes represent tokens from the reference frame, while the pink shapes represent tokens from the current frame. Tokens that are unmatched
in the reference frame, indicating new content, are depicted with
pink polygons. Successfully matched tokens, such as changes of
the head pose or the magnification of flower, are indicated with
green arrows. Compared to explicit methods PECHead [11] and
TPSMM [81], our IMF faithfully reconstructs the current frame.

optical flow presents significant challenges in video generation tasks. This stems from its rigid structure, which lim-

19278

