This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NC-SDF: Enhancing Indoor Scene Reconstruction Using Neural SDFs with
View-Dependent Normal Compensation
Ziyi Chen1 Xiaolong Wu2 Yu Zhang1 *
1
Zhejiang University 2 Amap Alibaba

Abstract
State-of-the-art neural implicit surface representations
have achieved impressive results in indoor scene reconstruction by incorporating monocular geometric priors as
additional supervision. However, we have observed that
multi-view inconsistency between such priors poses a challenge for high-quality reconstructions. In response, we
present NC-SDF, a neural signed distance field (SDF)
3D reconstruction framework with view-dependent normal compensation (NC). Specifically, we integrate viewdependent biases in monocular normal priors into the neural implicit representation of the scene. By adaptively learning and correcting the biases, our NC-SDF effectively mitigates the adverse impact of inconsistent supervision, enhancing both the global consistency and local details in the
reconstructions. To further refine the details, we introduce
an informative pixel sampling strategy to pay more attention to intricate geometry with higher information content.
Additionally, we design a hybrid geometry modeling approach to improve the neural implicit representation. Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
that NC-SDF outperforms existing approaches in terms of
reconstruction quality.

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction from multi-view images is a longterm challenge in computer vision, with applications across
various domains such as virtual reality, robotics, and autonomous driving. Multi-view stereo (MVS) techniques
[4, 6, 19, 23, 36, 48] recover depth maps for each view
by matching features between adjacent views, subsequently
fusing the depth maps to reconstruct 3D geometry. Their reconstructions tend to be noisy, especially in texture-less areas. Some data-driven methods [7, 13, 28, 39, 41] alleviate
this limitation by directly predicting a truncated signed distance field (TSDF) from multi-view images. However, they
necessitate expensive 3D supervision and produce over* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison between baseline and NC-SDF. Stateof-the-art neural implicit surface representations produce suboptimal reconstructions with noisy or missing surfaces, primarily due
to multi-view inconsistency between monocular geometric priors.
Our NC-SDF introduces a view-dependent normal compensation
model to adaptively learn and correct biases in normal priors. This
approach enables the recovery of intricate geometric details while
ensuring smoothness in texture-less areas within reconstructions.

smooth results.
Recently, impressive progress has been made in neural implicit surface reconstruction combined with volume
rendering techniques. They utilize multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to parameterize implicit shape representations, such as occupancy [29] or signed distance fields
(SDFs) [45, 50]. Though these methods excel in capturing
continuous and smooth surfaces, they face challenges when
dealing with indoor scenes containing large texture-less regions. The primary reason is that multi-view photometric
consistency fails to provide sufficient constraints in such regions, such as walls and floors.
Recent advancements have mitigated this problem by incorporating additional priors for supervision, including sensor depths [3, 30, 35, 43, 54, 56], semantic priors [16],
depth priors from MVS methods [22, 34, 47] and monocular geometric priors [11, 44, 52, 55]. Among these works,
[44, 52] have produced state-of-the-art results by utilizing
geometric cues from monocular geometry estimation networks [12, 32, 33, 46, 51]. However, their performance is

5155

