This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking Segmentation Models with Mask-Preserved Attribute Editing
Zijin Yin1

Kongming Liang1∗ Bing Li2 Zhanyu Ma1 Jun Guo 1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology

1

2

{yinzijin2017, liangkongming, mazhanyu, guojun}@bupt.edu.cn

Original

Color

Material

Pattern

Style

multicolor, red …

wood, metal, paper …

striped, dotted…

sketch, snowy…

bing.li@kaust.edu.sa
mIoU drop ↓

violet

Color

pink
multi
wood
stone

Material

metal
paper
dotted

Pattern

striped
snowy

Style

paint
sketch
10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

Figure 1. The illustration of the motivation of our work. Left: Our mask-preserved attribute editing pipeline generates testing images with
various attribute changes for evaluating the robustness of segmentation methods to attribute variations. Right: The average performance
drop of segmentation models on our generated data, shows the sensitivity to different types of attribute variations.

Abstract
When deploying segmentation models in practice, it is
critical to evaluate their behaviors in varied and complex
scenes. Different from the previous evaluation paradigms
only in consideration of global attribute variations (e.g. adverse weather), we investigate both local and global attribute variations for robustness evaluation. To achieve this,
we construct a mask-preserved attribute editing pipeline to
edit visual attributes of real images with precise control of
structural information. Therefore, the original segmentation labels can be reused for the edited images. Using our
pipeline, we construct a benchmark covering both object
and image attributes (e.g. color, material, pattern, style).
We evaluate a broad variety of semantic segmentation models, spanning from conventional close-set models to recent
open-vocabulary large models on their robustness to different types of variations. We find that both local and global
attribute variations affect segmentation performances, and
the sensitivity of models diverges across different variation
types. We argue that local attributes have the same importance as global attributes, and should be considered in
∗ Corresponding author.

the robustness evaluation of segmentation models. Code:
https://github.com/PRIS-CV/Pascal-EA.

1. Introduction
In the last few years, deep-learning-based image segmentation models have witnessed remarkable progress in addressing complex visual scenes, enabling ubiquitous applications ranging from autonomous driving [18] to medical
image analysis [44]. In order to ensure their reliability and
robustness in real-world scenarios, it is desirable to evaluate
them in varied and complex scenes in advance.
As to varied real-world scenarios, segmentation methods are required to be robust to various shifts in terms of
local attribute variations (e.g. object color, material, pattern) and global attribute changes (e.g. image style). For
example, a train can be painted with different colors and
patterns, and a boat is composed of various materials (see
Figure 1). Moreover, segmentation methods may encounter
images with global attribute changes such as variations in
weather conditions and image styles in the real world. Nevertheless, the problem is: “How sensitive are existing segmentation models to local and global attribute changes?”

22509

