This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Animate Anyone: Consistent and Controllable Image-to-Video Synthesis for
Character Animation
Li Hu
Institute for Intelligent Computing, Alibaba Group
hooks.hl@alibaba-inc.com
https://humanaigc.github.io/animate-anyone/

Figure 1. Consistent and controllable character animation results given reference image (the leftmost image in each group) . Our approach
is capable of animating arbitrary characters, generating clear and temporally stable video results while maintaining consistency with the
appearance details of the reference character.

Abstract
Character Animation aims to generating character
videos from still images through driving signals. Currently, diffusion models have become the mainstream in visual generation research, owing to their robust generative
capabilities. However, challenges persist in the realm of
image-to-video, especially in character animation, where
temporally maintaining consistency with detailed information from character remains a formidable problem. In this
paper, we leverage the power of diffusion models and propose a novel framework tailored for character animation.
To preserve consistency of intricate appearance features
from reference image, we design ReferenceNet to merge detail features via spatial attention. To ensure controllability and continuity, we introduce an efficient pose guider
to direct character’s movements and employ an effective
temporal modeling approach to ensure smooth inter-frame
transitions between video frames. By expanding the train-

ing data, our approach can animate arbitrary characters,
yielding superior results in character animation compared
to other image-to-video methods. Furthermore, we evaluate our method on image animation benchmarks, achieving
state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Character Animation is a task to animate source character images into realistic videos according to desired posture
sequences, which has many potential applications such as
online retail, entertainment videos, artistic creation and virtual character. Beginning with the advent of GANs[1, 11,
22], numerous studies have delved into the realms of image
animation and pose transfer[7, 33, 37–39, 57, 61, 64]. However, the generated images or videos still exhibit issues such
as local distortion, blurred details, semantic inconsistency,
and temporal instability, which impede the widespread application of these methods.

8153

