This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FACT: Frame-Action Cross-Attention Temporal Modeling for
Efficient Action Segmentation
Zijia Lu
Northeastern Univeristy

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

lu.zij@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We study supervised action segmentation, whose goal is
to predict framewise action labels of a video. To capture temporal dependencies over long horizons, prior works either
improve framewise features with transformer or refine framewise predictions with learned action features. However, they
are computationally costly and ignore that frame and action
features contain complimentary information, which can be
leveraged to enhance both features and improve temporal
modeling. Therefore, we propose an efficient Frame-Action
Cross-attention Temporal modeling (FACT) framework that
performs temporal modeling with frame and action features
in parallel and leverage this parallelism to achieve iterative
bidirectional information transfer between the features and
refine them. FACT network contains (i) a frame branch to
learn frame-level information with convolutions and frame
features, (ii) an action branch to learn action-level dependencies with transformers and action tokens and (iii) crossattentions to allow communication between the two branches.
We also propose a new matching loss to ensure each action token uniquely encodes an action segment, thus better captures
its semantics. Thanks to our architecture, we can also leverage textual transcripts of videos to help action segmentation.
We evaluate FACT on four video datasets (two egocentric and
two third-person) for action segmentation with and without
transcripts, showing that it significantly improves the stateof-the-art accuracy while enjoys lower computational cost
(3 times faster) than existing transformer-based methods.1

1. Introduction
Automatic understanding of human actions in videos is crucial for many applications, such as assistive technologies
[13, 31, 51], healthcare, robotics and security. Many realworld applications, however, require understanding of long
and untrimmed videos, which has motivated a large body of
recent research on action segmentation [1, 7, 16, 22, 24, 37,
40, 55, 56, 61, 62]. The goal of action segmentation is to
1 Code available at github.com/ZijiaLewisLu/CVPR2024-FACT.

Prediction

Prediction

Prediction

…
Convolution
or
Transformer

Action Stage
Frame Feature

Action
Branch

CrossAttn

Frame
Branch

Frame Stage
Video Frames

Video Frames

(a) Frame-Based
Method

(b) Two-Stage
Method

…

Action Tokens

Frames

(c) Our FACT
Method

Figure 1. Different Action Segmentation Models.

assign a label for every video frame, hence partition a long
video into non-overlapping action segments.
Prior Works. Existing action segmentation methods can
be divided into two main categories. The first group of
methods uses a frame-based approach by learning temporal relations among frames and refining the feature representations and predictions using a multi-stage mechanism
[16, 24, 37, 55, 61], see Figure 1 (a). In particular, MSTCN
[16], MSTCN++ [37] and [24, 55] employ dilated temporal
convolutions. However, they have difficulty in capturing
long-range temporal dependencies and suffer from oversegmentation. To mitigate these issues, ASFormer [61], DiffAct
[40] and [3, 5, 59] use transformers. However, given the
high complexity of attention in transformers, they resort to
windowed temporal attention, which still limits their ability
for long-range temporal modeling.
To address the drawbacks of frame-based approaches,
the second group of methods, such as MuCon [56], HARF
[1], UVAST [7] and RTK [25] adopt a two-stage framework
to learn action features and relations, which captures longrange temporal information. They compute frame features in
the first stage, followed by constructing action features and
predictions in the second stage, see Figure 1(b). However,
they only fuse the outputs of two stages by merging their
predictions. Given that action features capture high-level
action dependencies and frame features capture low-level
details, their complimentary information should be exploited

18175

