This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Camera Triplets for Efficient and Accurate Structure-from-Motion
Lalit Manam and Venu Madhav Govindu
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru - 560012, INDIA
{lalitmanam,venug}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
In Structure-from-Motion (SfM), the underlying viewgraphs of unordered image collections generally have a
highly redundant set of edges that can be sparsified for
efficiency without significant loss of reconstruction quality. Often, there are also false edges due to incorrect image retrieval and repeated structures (symmetries) that give
rise to ghosting and superimposed reconstruction artifacts.
We present a unified method to simultaneously sparsify the
viewgraph and remove false edges. We propose a scoring
mechanism based on camera triplets that identifies edge
redundancy as well as false edges. Our edge selection is
formulated as an optimization problem which can be provably solved using a simple thresholding scheme. This results in a highly efficient algorithm which can be incorporated as a pre-processing step into any SfM pipeline, making it practically usable. We demonstrate the utility of our
method on generic and ambiguous datasets that cover the
range of small, medium and large-scale datasets, all with
different statistical properties. Sparsification of generic
datasets using our method significantly reduces reconstruction time while maintaining the accuracy of the reconstructions as well as removing ghosting artifacts. For ambiguous
datasets, our method removes false edges, thereby avoiding
incorrect superimposed reconstructions.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [13] has been a long-studied
problem in computer vision. It aims to reconstruct a 3D
structure and estimate camera motions given images of a
scene. The first step in SfM is to identify the pairs of images
that capture the same part of the scene. For unordered
image collections, especially for large-scale datasets, image
retrieval techniques [1, 14, 23, 31, 32] are used where
each image is assigned with a descriptor and then matched
with other images. The relationships between the pairs
of images can be represented as a graph (also called a
viewgraph in the SfM literature), with nodes representing

cameras and edges representing an overlap of the scene in
the images captured by the two cameras, implying that their
relative geometry can be recovered. This graph is further
processed to extract keypoints in the images, which are
then matched with keypoints in other images based on the
connectivity of the graph [2, 7, 8, 25, 27, 34, 35, 44, 50].
Subsequently, the relative motion for every edge is obtained
by estimating epipolar geometry [13] using inlier keypoint
matches. We refer to such matches as epipolar inliers. The
obtained graph in this fashion is used by either incremental [36, 39, 40, 48] or global methods [9–11, 42] to get a
3D reconstruction of the scene along with camera motions.
The underlying viewgraphs obtained from unordered
image collections generally contain a redundant set of
images (equivalently nodes) since popular views of the
scene are captured more frequently [41]. As a consequence,
a large number of pairs of images (equivalently edges) are
identified to capture the same part of the scene, resulting in
a highly redundant set of edges in the viewgraphs [16]. We
refer to the datasets with the above-mentioned properties
as generic datasets. Many methods [15, 16, 37, 38, 41]
have been proposed to sparsify the viewgraphs while maintaining the accuracy of the reconstructions by considering
only the nodes and edges which are distinguished to be
important.
When scenes contain repeated structures leading to
different symmetries [26], a significant number of false
edges occur between the cameras viewing repeated structures. This is because such images look similar and, thus,
are identified as belonging to the same part of the scene,
even if they capture physically different parts of the scene.
The presence of such false edges leads to superimposed
reconstructions. We refer to these datasets as ambiguous
datasets. Methods based on viewgraph properties and
loop consistency checks in the viewgraphs [3, 4, 17–
19, 21, 33, 37, 38, 45, 46, 49, 51, 52] have been proposed
to tackle false edges.

4959

