This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LaMPilot: An Open Benchmark Dataset for Autonomous Driving with
Language Model Programs
Yunsheng Ma1 *, Can Cui1 *, Xu Cao2 *, Wenqian Ye3 , Peiran Liu1 , Juanwu Lu1 ,
Amr Abdelraouf4 , Rohit Gupta4 , Kyungtae Han4 , Aniket Bera1 , James M. Rehg2 , Ziran Wang1
1
Purdue University 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
University of Virginia 4 InfoTech Labs, Toyota Motor North America
{yunsheng, ziran}@purdue.edu

Autonomous driving (AD) has made significant strides
in recent years. However, existing frameworks struggle to
interpret and execute spontaneous user instructions, such as
“overtake the car ahead.” Large Language Models (LLMs)
have demonstrated impressive reasoning capabilities showing potential to bridge this gap. In this paper, we present
LaMPilot, a novel framework that integrates LLMs into
AD systems, enabling them to follow user instructions by
generating code that leverages established functional primitives. We also introduce LaMPilot-Bench, the first benchmark dataset specifically designed to quantitatively evaluate the efficacy of language model programs in AD. Adopting the LaMPilot framework, we conduct extensive experiments to assess the performance of off-the-shelf LLMs
on LaMPilot-Bench. Our results demonstrate the potential of LLMs in handling diverse driving scenarios and
following user instructions in driving. To facilitate further research in this area, we release our code and data at
GitHub.com/PurdueDigitalTwin/LaMPilot.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving (AD) has witnessed remarkable
progress in recent years, with an increasing number of commercial autonomous vehicles (AVs) being deployed on public roads [30]. State-of-the-art AD systems can be broadly
classified into two categories: 1) a modular approach, where
standalone models are developed for perception, prediction,
and planning independently [15], and 2) an end-to-end approach that directly maps sensor data to control signals via
a single neural network [16, 18, 38]. Despite significant
breakthroughs, both approaches struggle to handle arbitrary
user commands effectively, such as “overtake the car in
front of me.”
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in language comprehension and reasoning [42, 61], showing potential to improve the safety, ex* Equal Contribution

plainability, and user-friendliness of AVs. Utilizing LLMs
to solve AV-related tasks is gaining momentum [9, 13, 24,
60, 65]. However, the integration of LLMs into existing AD
frameworks presents several challenges. Firstly, there is a
lack of well-established paradigms for incorporating LLMs
into the decision-making process of AVs. Secondly, there
is a shortage of benchmarks designed to evaluate and compare the performance of LLM-based agents in the context
of driving.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel framework called LaMPilot. Inspired by Code as Policy [25],
which utilizes code LLMs to write robot policy code,
LaMPilot employs Language Model Programs (LMPs) as
the action space instead of low-level vehicle control signals. We equip LLMs with APIs that cover various functional primitives, enabling them to connect natural language
instructions to executable driving plans through code generation.
We also introduce LaMPilot-Bench, the first benchmark
for evaluating LMPs in AD. The primary objective for
agents operating within LaMPilot-Bench is to accomplish
assigned tasks safely and efficiently. LaMPilot-Bench incorporates an interactive simulator and evaluator, featuring
programmatic scoring mechanisms to assess policy performance. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We propose LaMPilot, a novel framework that integrates
LLMs into autonomous driving systems, enhancing their
ability to interpret and follow user commands.
• We introduce LaMPilot-Bench, the first benchmark
dataset designed to evaluate the performance of LLMpowered agents in autonomous driving. Each scenario in
LaMPilot-Bench consists of a task described in natural
language, along with a simulated environment for comprehensive evaluation.
• Adopting the LaMPilot framework, we conduct extensive
experiments to assess the performance of off-the-shelf
15141

