This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous Pose for Monocular Cameras in Neural Implicit Representation
Qi Ma1,2 Danda Pani Paudel2 Ajad Chhatkuli1 Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 2 INSAIT, Sofia University

Abstract
In this paper, we showcase the effectiveness of optimizing
monocular camera poses as a continuous function of time.
The camera poses are represented using an implicit neural
function which maps the given time to the corresponding
camera pose. The mapped camera poses are then used for
the downstream tasks where joint camera pose optimization
is also required. While doing so, the network parameters –
that implicitly represent camera poses – are optimized. We
exploit the proposed method in four diverse experimental
settings, namely, (1) NeRF from noisy poses; (2) NeRF from
asynchronous Events; (3) Visual Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (vSLAM); and (4) vSLAM with IMUs. In all
four settings, the proposed method performs significantly
better than the compared baselines and the state-of-the-art
methods. Additionally, using the assumption of continuous
motion, changes in pose may actually live in a manifold that
has lower than 6 degrees of freedom (DOF) is realized. We
call this low DOF motion representation as the intrinsic motion and use the approach in vSLAM settings, showing impressive camera tracking performance. We release our code
at: https://github.com/qimaqi/Continuous-Pose-in-NeRF.

so, existing techniques choose to optimize a discrete set of
SE(3) parameters, ignoring the inter-frame continuity of
camera poses. This choice can be primarily attributed to the
otherwise difficulty in optimization.
While handling high-frequency IMUs or asynchronous
events in common practice, pose optimization at every measurement time is avoided, for computational reasons. Instead, the measurements between two arbitrarily chosen
keyframes are accumulated before utilizing them. Then the
poses are optimized only for those keyframes. We argue that
this raises three major concerns: (i) inaccurate accumulation of intermediate measurements; (ii) loss of fine-grained
motion details; (iii) lack of the continuous motion prior.
In order to address these concerns, we represent and optimize the pose of a moving camera as a continuous function
of time. Unlike classical state estimation method [2, 12, 35]
which models continuous pose with Gaussian Process or
B-spline, our neural pose function can be easily optimized
jointly with other task-specific implicit neural representation (INR) [30, 32, 39]. More precisely, for translation
v ∈ R3 and rotation R(q) ∈ SO(3) parameterized by
quaternions q ∈ R4 with ||q|| = 1, the continuous pose
of the monocular camera is given by,
  [\mathsf {q}; \mathsf {v}] = f_\theta (t), 

1. Introduction
The concept of motion, the change of position and orientation of an object in its surroundings, is fundamentally continuous in nature. This continuity is evident in the ways
we achieve, perceive and measure motion, with velocity
and acceleration being the most common measures for both
linear and angular motion. This idea of continuity is also
true for the 3D poses of navigating cameras. Often the
camera motion needs to be estimated from its measurements – also known as the camera localization problem.
In most common settings, the inputs are RGB-only frames,
depth frames, asynchronous event streams, or a combination thereof. In some cases, these measurements are augmented by Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) outputs, which
measure a change in pose directly. In all those settings,
the camera motion is estimated via some optimization technique that searches SE(3) pose parameters. While doing

(1)

where fθ (.) is the contineous neural function parameterized
by θ that maps the time t ∈ R to the pose in SE(3). While
being simple, this representation has numerous benefits including ease of optimization and its cosmopolitan applicability. Some example applications are illustrated in Figure 1. In the following, we further discuss how our simple
approach addresses the previously raised concerns.
No error due to measurement accumulation: High frequency or asynchronous measurements can be utilized directly without accumulation, integral, or rounding. We infer the camera pose precisely at the measurement time. For
example, in the case of an event camera, each asynchronous
event’s pose is inferred precisely at the event time. Similarly, in the case of IMUs, no motion integration before supervision is required. These abilities protect our approach
against error injection due to any form of accumulation.
15291

