This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Density-Adaptive Model Based on Motif Matrix
for Multi-Agent Trajectory Prediction
Di Wen1,2 Haoran Xu1,2 Zhaocheng He1,2,3, * Zhe Wu2,∗ Guang Tan1,2 Peixi Peng2,4
1
2
4
Sun Yat-sen University
PengCheng Laboratory
Peking University
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Transportation System
{wend25,xuhr9}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wuzh02@pcl.ac.cn,
{hezhch,tanguang}@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
pxpeng@pku.edu.cn.

Abstract
Multi-agent trajectory prediction is essential in autonomous driving, risk avoidance, and traffic flow control.
However, the heterogeneous traffic density on interactions,
which caused by physical laws, social norms and so on,
is often overlooked in existing methods. When the density
varies, the number of agents involved in interactions and
the corresponding interaction probability change dynamically. To tackle this issue, we propose a new method, called
Density-Adaptive Model based on Motif Matrix for MultiAgent Trajectory Prediction (DAMM), to gain insights into
multi-agent systems. Here we leverage the motif matrix to
represent dynamic connectivity in a higher-order pattern,
and distill the interaction information from the perspectives
of the spatial and the temporal dimensions. Specifically, in
spatial dimension, we utilize multi-scale feature fusion to
adaptively select the optimal range of neighbors participating in interactions for each time slot. In temporal dimension, we extract the temporal interaction features and adapt
a pyramidal pooling layer to generate the interaction probability for each agent. Experimental results demonstrate
that our approach surpasses state-of-the-art methods on autonomous driving dataset.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent trajectory prediction is becoming increasingly
attractive not only in academia but also in industry [18], particularly for automatic system [57], safety planning [63] and
traffic flow control [28]. Existing methods [12, 19, 24, 34,
43, 57] often neglect the influence of varying traffic density on interactions between a target agent and its neighbors. They often treat all vehicles (agents) in the same scene
equally, leading to the lack of adaptability. More exactly, it
* Joint Corresponding Authors.

(a) High density

(b) Low density

Figure 1. The impact of heterogeneous traffic density in HighDensity (1a) and Low-Density (1b) scenes. Here the star represents the target agent, the circles depict the selection ranges of
neighbors and the numbers in the flags indicate agent ID. This
highlights the significant influence of agent density on their interaction behaviors. Importantly, the range and interaction probability vary as the density changes across different time steps and
among distinct agents.

lacks of multi-scale neighbor selection and dynamic interaction analysis. Specifically, they do not adaptively choose
participating neighbors and assume a constant interaction
probability between the target agent and its neighbors.
To demonstrate the impact of heterogeneous traffic density and the necessity of density-adaptive method, we provide a visualization in Figure 1. When selecting multiscale neighbors spatially, in high-density scenarios (Figure
1a), agents cluster closely due to space limitations, leading
to fewer occurrences of interaction behaviors such as lane
changes and overtaking maneuvers. Consequently, a small
neighbor range (yellow circles) is used to model interactions with the target agent (red star). In contrast, a broader
range is utilized in low-density situations (Figure 1b). For
dynamic interaction probability in temporal dimension subsequent to neighbors selection, the interaction probabilities
of neighbors (green flags with numbers) are unequal, and
these probabilities may change in the subsequent moment
due to variations in neighbors’ velocity, position and other
factors. For example, ID.1 has a higher probability to interact with the target agent than ID.3, yet the interaction

14822

