This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Re-Embedding: Towards Foundation Model-Level Performance in
Computational Pathology
Wenhao Tang1† Fengtao Zhou2† Sheng Huang1 * Xiang Zhu1 Yi Zhang1 Bo Liu3
1
Chongqing University 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Walmart Global Tech
{whtang, huangsheng, zhangyii}@cqu.edu.cn, zhuxiang@stu.cqu.edu.cn
fzhouaf@connect.ust.hk, kfliubo@gmail.com

Abstract
Multiple instance learning (MIL) is the most widely used
framework in computational pathology, encompassing subtyping, diagnosis, prognosis, and more. However, the existing MIL paradigm typically requires an offline instance
feature extractor, such as a pre-trained ResNet or a foundation model. This approach lacks the capability for feature fine-tuning within the specific downstream tasks, limiting its adaptability and performance. To address this issue,
we propose a Re-embedded Regional Transformer (R2 T)
for re-embedding the instance features online, which captures fine-grained local features and establishes connections across different regions. Unlike existing works that
focus on pre-training powerful feature extractor or designing sophisticated instance aggregator, R2 T is tailored to
re-embed instance features online. It serves as a portable
module that can seamlessly integrate into mainstream MIL
models. Extensive experimental results on common computational pathology tasks validate that: 1) feature reembedding improves the performance of MIL models based
on ResNet-50 features to the level of foundation model features, and further enhances the performance of foundation model features; 2) the R2 T can introduce more significant performance improvements to various MIL models; 3)
R2 T-MIL, as an R2 T-enhanced AB-MIL, outperforms other
latest methods by a large margin. The code is available
at: https://github.com/DearCaat/RRT-MIL.

1. Introduction
Computational pathology [6, 7, 25] is an interdisciplinary
field that combines pathology, image analysis, and computer science to develop and apply computational methods for the analysis and interpretation of pathological im* Corresponding Author.
† Equal Contribution.

WSI

Offline
Feature Extraction

Classification

MIL Model
Feature Aggregator
Classifier

Instance Features

(a) Conventional Multiple Instance Learning Paradigm
WSI

Offline
Feature Extraction

Online Feature
Re‐embedding

Classification

MIL Model
Feature Aggregator
Classifier

Instance Features

Re‐embedded Features

(b) Proposed MIL Paradigm with Instance Feature Re‐embedding

Figure 1. Top: The conventional MIL paradigm lacks fine-tuning
of the offline embedded instance features. Bottom: The proposed
MIL paradigm that introduces instance feature re-embedding to
provide more discriminative features for the MIL model.

ages (also known as whole slide images, WSIs). This
field utilizes advanced algorithms, machine learning, and
artificial intelligence techniques to assist pathologists in
tasks like sub-typing [12], diagnosis [16, 41], prognosis [32, 39], and more. However, the process of pixel-level
labeling in ultra-high resolution WSIs is time-consuming
and labor-intensive, posing challenges for traditional deep
learning methods that rely on pixel-level labels in computational pathology. To address this challenge, multiple instance learning (MIL) approaches have been employed to
treat WSI analysis as a weakly supervised learning problem [19, 30]. MIL divides each WSI (referred to as a bag)
into numerous image patches or instances. Previous MILbased methods mainly follow a three-step process: 1) instance feature extraction, 2) instance feature aggregation,
and 3) bag prediction. However, most previous works focus
on the last two steps, where the extracted offline instance
features are utilized to make bag-level predictions.
Despite achieving “clinical-grade” performance on numerous computational pathology tasks [4, 41], the conventional MIL paradigm faces a significant design challenge
due to the large number of instances involved. The holis-

11343

