This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VRP-SAM: SAM with Visual Reference Prompt
Shan Zhang4 ,
Xinyu Zhang2 ,
Qiang Chen2
Yanpeng Sun1,2∗ ,
Jiahui Chen2,3 ,*
Gang Zhang2 ,
Errui Ding2 ,
Jingdong Wang2 ,
Zechao Li1†
1

2

Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
3
4
Baidu VIS,
Beihang University,
Australian National University
{yanpeng sun, zechao.li}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

In recent, the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [13] has
emerged as a foundational visual model for image segmentation. Trained on an extensive datasets comprising billions of labels, SAM has demonstrated remarkable versatility in the realm of universal segmentation. What sets SAM
apart is its human-interactive design, allowing segmentation based on user-provided prompts, be they in the form of
* equal contribution
† Corresponding author.

Positive point
Negative point

Visual reference

1. Introduction

Point & box

In this paper, we propose a novel Visual Reference
Prompt (VRP) encoder that empowers the Segment Anything Model (SAM) to utilize annotated reference images
as prompts for segmentation, creating the VRP-SAM model.
In essence, VRP-SAM can utilize annotated reference images to comprehend specific objects and perform segmentation of specific objects in target image. It is note that
the VRP encoder can support a variety of annotation formats for reference images, including point, box, scribble,
and mask. VRP-SAM achieves a breakthrough within the
SAM framework by extending its versatility and applicability while preserving SAM’s inherent strengths, thus enhancing user-friendliness. To enhance the generalization ability of VRP-SAM, the VRP encoder adopts a meta-learning
strategy. To validate the effectiveness of VRP-SAM, we conducted extensive empirical studies on the Pascal and COCO
datasets. Remarkably, VRP-SAM achieved state-of-the-art
performance in visual reference segmentation with minimal learnable parameters. Furthermore, VRP-SAM demonstrates strong generalization capabilities, allowing it to perform segmentation of unseen objects and enabling crossdomain segmentation. The source code and models will be
available at https://github.com/syp2ysy/VRPSAM

Bounding box

Prompts

Image-1

Image-2

Image-3

Figure 1. Comparison of SAM’s built-in Point and Box prompt
modes with Visual Reference Prompt when handling numerous
images. The prompts are all provided by users.

points, bounding boxes, or coarse masks. This distinctive
feature positions SAM as a robust tool that can be adaptable to various tasks and requirements [12, 48].
However, the existing prompt formats of SAM present
significant challenges in practical applications, especially
when dealing with complex scenes and numerous images.
As shown in Figure 2(a), SAM relies on user-provided
prompts (points, boxes, coarse mask) to segment objects in
the target image, demanding users to possess a comprehensive understanding of the target objects. In real-world applications, especially in complex scenarios, the level of user
familiarity with the target objects can significantly impact
the effectiveness of providing specific prompts. Furthermore, variations in the position, size, and quantity of target objects across different images require custom prompts
for each image. As illustrated in Figure 1 with the aim
of segmenting ’bicycles’, users need to customize different
prompts for each image, significantly impacting efficiency
of SAM. Therefore, we propose integrating visual reference
prompts to overcome these limitations and enhance adaptability of SAM.
Visual reference prompts is annotated reference images
that delineate the objects users expect to segment. As shown
in Figure 1, by simply providing a visual reference prompt

23565

