This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAP: A Dynamic Adversarial Patch for Evading Person Detectors
Amira Guesmi1 , Ruitian Ding2 , Muhammad Abdullah Hanif1 , Ihsen Alouani3,4 , Muhammad Shafique1
1
eBrain Lab, New York University (NYU) Abu Dhabi, UAE
2
NYU Tandon School of Engineering, USA
3
IEMN, CNRS-8520, INSA Hauts-de-France, France
4
CSIT, Queen’s University Belfast, UK

Abstract
Patch-based adversarial attacks were proven to
compromise the robustness and reliability of computer
vision systems. However, their conspicuous and easily
detectable nature challenge their practicality in real-world
setting. To address this, recent work has proposed using
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to generate
naturalistic patches that may not attract human attention.
However, such approaches suffer from a limited latent
space making it challenging to produce a patch that
is efficient, stealthy, and robust to multiple real-world
transformations. This paper introduces a novel approach
that produces a Dynamic Adversarial Patch (DAP)
designed to overcome these limitations. DAP maintains a
naturalistic appearance while optimizing attack efficiency
and robustness to real-world transformations.
The
approach involves redefining the optimization problem and
introducing a novel objective function that incorporates
a similarity metric to guide the patch’s creation. Unlike
GAN-based techniques, the DAP directly modifies pixel
values within the patch, providing increased flexibility and
adaptability to multiple transformations. Furthermore,
most clothing-based physical attacks assume static
objects and ignore the possible transformations caused by
non-rigid deformation due to changes in a person’s pose.
To address this limitation, a ‘Creases Transformation’ (CT)
block is introduced, enhancing the patch’s resilience to
a variety of real-world distortions. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms
state-of-the-art attacks, achieving a success rate of up to
82.28% in the digital world when targeting the YOLOv7
detector and 65% in the physical world when targeting
YOLOv3tiny detector deployed in edge-based smart
cameras.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated
remarkable performance for various real-world applications

With DAP-based T-Shirt

Without Patch

With NAP-based T-Shirt

Without Patch

Figure 1. Illustration of different Adversarial T-shirts against
Yolo detector. DAP-based t-shirt (ours) is still effective in the
presence of non-rigid deformations compared to the GAN-based
t-shirt (NAP) [13].

and are now commonly used in safety-critical and
security-sensitive domains such as video surveillance
[5, 23, 31], self-driving cars [1], and healthcare [24].
However, studies have shown that DNNs are vulnerable
to adversarial perturbations [6, 18, 25, 26].
These
adversarial examples can manifest physically and be
deployed in real-world scenarios, presenting significant
security and safety concerns.
There are two types of attack settings: digital attacks
and physical attacks. In digital attacks [6, 11], attackers
introduce adversarial noise to the digital input image,
optimized to be undetectable by human eyes while
monitoring the noise budget constraint in the generation
process. In contrast, in physical attacks [9, 12, 16], the
attacker designs patches that are printable in the physical
world and deploys them in the scene captured by the

24595

