This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Align and Aggregate: Compositional Reasoning with Video Alignment and
Answer Aggregation for Video Question-Answering
Zhaohe Liao1 *
1

Jiangtong Li2 *

Li Niu1†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

{zhaoheliao, ustcnewly, zhang-lq}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the recent progress made in Video QuestionAnswering (VideoQA), these methods typically function as
black-boxes, making it difficult to understand their reasoning processes and perform consistent compositional reasoning. To address these challenges, we propose a modelagnostic Video Alignment and Answer Aggregation (VA3 )
framework, which is capable of enhancing both compositional consistency and accuracy of existing VidQA methods
by integrating video aligner and answer aggregator modules. The video aligner hierarchically selects the relevant
video clips based on the question, while the answer aggregator deduces the answer to the question based on its
sub-questions, with compositional consistency ensured by
the information flow along question decomposition graph
and the contrastive learning strategy. We evaluate our
framework on three settings of the AGQA-Decomp dataset
with three baseline methods, and propose new metrics to
measure the compositional consistency of VidQA methods
more comprehensively. Moreover, we propose a large language model (LLM) based automatic question decomposition pipeline to apply our framework to any VidQA dataset.
We extend MSVD and NExT-QA datasets with it to evaluate
our VA3 framework on broader scenarios. Extensive experiments show that our framework improves both compositional consistency and accuracy of existing methods, leading to more interpretable real-world VidQA models.

1. Introduction
Video Question-Answering (VidQA) has emerged as a popular research topic in recent years, with potential applications in interactive artificial intelligence and recognition science. With the development of representing video, question
* These two authors contributed equally to this work.
† The corresponding authors.

Liqing Zhang1†
Tongji University

jiangtongli@tongji.edu.cn

and their alignment, numerous works [6, 14, 21, 23, 34, 35,
49] have achieved considerable success in both open-ended
VidQA [22, 53] and multi-choice VidQA [22, 30, 48].
However, existing VidQA methods often function as
black-box models, making it difficult to understand the reasoning process behind their predictions and leading to inconsistent compositional reasoning. For example, in Figure 1, HQGA [49] can answer the question “Is a phone the
first object that the person is touching after taking a picture?” as “Yes”. However, HQGA can neither clearly identify the video clips that contain “touch a phone” or “take a
picture” nor predict all the sub-questions correctly. Therefore, the lack of reasoning transparency can lead to poor
compositional consistency, which reveals limited compositional reasoning ability, and further limits the accuracy of
VidQA models, particularly on questions that involve temporal relations and multiple visual clues [12].
To tackle this issue, we introduce the Video Alignment and Answer Aggregation (VA3 ) framework, which
addresses these challenges by improving their compositional consistency and accuracy. This framework is modelagnostic and can be applied to various VidQA methods,
such as memory-based [9, 14], graph-based [6, 17, 24, 37,
38, 44, 46], and hierarchy-based [7, 18, 29, 39, 40, 49, 50]
methods. In detail, our VA3 framework includes two additional modules, the video aligner and answer aggregator. The video aligner hierarchically aligns the question
with the video clips from the object-level, appearance-level
to motion-level. The answer aggregator takes the questions from the same Question Decomposition Graph (QDG)
as input and deduces their answers based on their videoquestion joint representation. To the enhance compositional
consistency, we further explore a contrastive learning strategy on the edge type of QDG. Overall, the VA3 framework
improves both compositional consistency and accuracy of
existing VidQA methods, provides a more transparent compositional reasoning process, and further leads to more interpretable VidQA models in real-world applications.

13395

