This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stratified Avatar Generation from Sparse Observations
Han Feng1∗,⋆

Wenchao Ma2∗
1

(a) Sparse Observation

Quankai Gao3

Xianwei Zheng1

Nan Xue1,4†,⋆

Huijuan Xu2

2
Wuhan University
Pennsylvania State University
3
4
University of Southern California
Ant Group
Project website: https://fhan235.github.io/SAGENet/

(b) Disentangled Body

(c) Upper-Body Recon.

(d) Lower-Body Recon.

(e) Full-Body Recon.

Figure 1. Stratified avatar generation from sparse observations. Given the sensory sparse observation of the body motion: 6-DoF
poses of the head and hand marked by RGB axes in (a), our method leverages a disentangled body representation in (b) to reconstruct the
upper-body conditioned on the sparse observation in (c), and lower-body conditioned on the upper-body reconstruction in (d) to accomplish
the full-body reconstruction in (e).

Abstract
Estimating 3D full-body avatars from AR/VR devices is
essential for creating immersive experiences in AR/VR applications. This task is challenging due to the limited input from Head Mounted Devices, which capture only sparse
observations from the head and hands. Predicting the fullbody avatars, particularly the lower body, from these sparse
observations presents significant difficulties. In this paper,
we are inspired by the inherent property of the kinematic
tree defined in the Skinned Multi-Person Linear (SMPL)
model, where the upper body and lower body share only
one common ancestor node, bringing the potential of decoupled reconstruction. We propose a stratified approach to
decouple the conventional full-body avatar reconstruction
pipeline into two stages, with the reconstruction of the upper body first and a subsequent reconstruction of the lower
body conditioned on the previous stage. To implement this
straightforward idea, we leverage the latent diffusion model
as a powerful probabilistic generator, and train it to follow the latent distribution of decoupled motions explored by
a VQ-VAE encoder-decoder model. Extensive experiments
on AMASS mocap dataset demonstrate our state-of-the-art
performance in the reconstruction of full-body motions.
⋆ indicates the School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
* indicates equal contributions.
† Corresponding author: xuenan@ieee.org

1. Introduction
Generating 3D full-body avatars from observations of Head
Mounted Devices (HMDs) is crucial for enhancing immersive AR/VR experiences. HMDs primarily track the head
and hands, while leaving the rest of the body unmonitored.
This limited motion tracking poses a challenging scenario
for accurately reconstructing full-body 3D avatars, particularly in representing the lower body. The high degree
of freedom in body movements compounds this difficulty,
making the task of reasoning human motion from such
sparse observations significantly complex.
Tremendous efforts have been made to obtain more
tracking signals by adding sensors at Pelvis [5, 10, 33] or
both Pelvis and Legs [16, 19, 45, 49, 50]. While these approaches provide more data points for avatar construction,
they can diminish the user’s experience. Wearing extra devices can be cumbersome, potentially interfering with the
user’s comfort and immersion in the virtual environment.
This trade-off highlights the need for innovative solutions
that can deliver detailed body tracking without compromising the user’s comfort and immersion in AR/VR settings.
Accordingly, we are interested in the problem of generating 3D full-body avatars from sparse observations of HMDs
that track the motion of the head and two hands, by developing a neural solution that learns the distribution of full-body
poses given the sparse observations as the input condition.

153

