This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnyDoor: Zero-shot Object-level Image Customization
Xi Chen1

Lianghua Huang2
1

Yu Liu2

Yujun Shen3

The University of Hong Kong

2

Deli Zhao2

Alibaba Group

3

Hengshuang Zhao1∗

Ant Group

Multi-subject Composition

Shape
Editing

Object
Swapping

Figure 1. Fantastic applications of our proposed AnyDoor without any parameter tuning. Our model allows users to customize an image
by placing an object at specific locations, with optional shape controls (top row). It can be extended to handle multiple objects (middle
row) and also supports seamlessly editing the shape of the object or swapping objects within real scenes (bottom row).

Abstract
This work presents AnyDoor, a diffusion-based image generator with the power to teleport target objects
to new scenes at user-specified locations with desired
shapes. Instead of tuning parameters for each object,
our model is trained only once and effortlessly generalizes to diverse object-scene combinations at the inference
stage. Such a challenging zero-shot setting requires an
adequate characterization of a certain object. To this end,
we complement the commonly used identity feature with

detail features, which are carefully designed to maintain
appearance details yet allow versatile local variations (e.g.,
lighting, orientation, posture, etc.), supporting the object in
favorably blending with different surroundings. We further
propose to borrow knowledge from video datasets, where
we can observe various forms (i.e., along the time axis) of
a single object, leading to stronger model generalizability
and robustness. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of our approach over existing alternatives as
well as its great potential in real-world applications, such
as virtual try-on, shape editing, and object swapping. Code
is released at github.com/ali-vilab/AnyDoor.

*Corresponding author.

6593

