This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeneAvatar: Generic Expression-Aware Volumetric Head Avatar Editing
from a Single Image
Chong Bao1∗§ Yinda Zhang2 * Yuan Li1 * Xiyu Zhang1 Bangbang Yang4
Hujun Bao1 Marc Pollefeys3 Guofeng Zhang1 Zhaopeng Cui1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Google 3 ETH Zürich 4 ByteDance
+ NeBShape

+ INSTA

+ Next3D

Nose--, Face++
next3d_deform_ep0000_0004_rgb.png

Ears++, Eyebrows++
02372_edit.png

Eyes++, Face--0077.png

Text Prompt

Original View

Blush Painting
2D Editing

“Clown”

Edited Novel View

Original View

2D/Text Editing

“Young”

“Disney”

Edited Novel View

Hair, Eyes, Eyebrows Makeup

Original View

2D Editing

Edited Novel View

Figure 1. We propose a generic approach to edit 3D avatars in various volumetric representations (NeRFBlendShape [16], INSTA [76],
Next3D [50]) from a single perspective using 2D editing methods with drag-style, text-prompt and pattern painting. Our editing results are
consistent across multiple facial expression and camera viewpoints.

Abstract
Recently, we have witnessed the explosive growth of
various volumetric representations in modeling animatable
head avatars. However, due to the diversity of frameworks,
there is no practical method to support high-level applications like 3D head avatar editing across different representations. In this paper, we propose a generic avatar editing
approach that can be universally applied to various 3DMMdriving volumetric head avatars. To achieve this goal, we
design a novel expression-aware modification generative
model, which enables lift 2D editing from a single image to
a consistent 3D modification field. To ensure the effectiveness of the generative modification process, we develop several techniques, including an expression-dependent modification distillation scheme to draw knowledge from the
large-scale head avatar model and 2D facial texture editing
tools, implicit latent space guidance to enhance model convergence, and a segmentation-based loss reweight strategy
for fine-grained texture inversion. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method delivers high-quality and consistent results across multiple expression and viewpoints.
Project page: https://zju3dv.github.io/geneavatar/.

1. Introduction
Recently various volumetric representations [3, 4, 15, 16,
57, 68, 69, 76] have achieved remarkable success in reconstructing personalized, animatable, and photorealistic
head avatars using implicit [15, 16, 57, 68, 69] or explicit [3, 4, 76] conditioning of 3D Morphable Models
* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors.
§ The work was partially done when visiting ETHZ.

(3DMM) [6]. A popular demand, once with a created avatar
model, is to edit the avatar, e.g., for face shape, facial
makeup, or apply artistic effects, for the downstream applications, e.g., in virtual/augmented reality.
Ideally, the desired editing functionality on the animatable avatar should have the following properties. (1) Adaptable: The editing method should be applicable across various volumetric avatar representations. This is particularly
valuable in light of the growing diversity of avatar frameworks [16, 50, 76]. (2) User-friendly: The editing should
be user-friendly and intuitive. Preferably, the editing of geometry and texture of the 3D avatar could be accomplished
on a single-perspective rendered image. (3) Faithful: The
editing results should be consistent across various facial expression and camera viewpoints. (4) Flexible: Both intensive editing (e.g., global appearance transfer following style
prompts) and delicate local editing (e.g., dragging to enlarge
eyes or ears) should be supported as illustrated in Fig. 1.
However, 3D-aware avatar editing is still underexplored
in both geometry and texture. One plausible way is to perform 3D editing via animatable 3D GAN [50, 52, 54], but
the editing results may not be consistently reflected when
expression and camera viewpoint change. Alternatively, the
editing can be done on the generated 2D video using 2D
personalized StyleGAN [28]; however, the identity shift is
often observed. Some face-swapping methods [11, 12, 42]
are capable of substituting the face in a video with another
face derived from a reference image or video; however, they
do not support texture editing and local geometry editing.
To this end, we propose GeneAvatar – a generic approach to support fine-grained 3D editing in various volumetric avatar representations from a single perspective by

8952

