This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UFineBench: Towards Text-based Person Retrieval with Ultra-fine Granularity
Jialong Zuo1,2 * Hanyu Zhou1 Ying Nie2 Feng Zhang1 Tianyu Guo2 Nong Sang1
Yunhe Wang2† Changxin Gao1†
1
National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Existing text-based person retrieval datasets often have
relatively coarse-grained text annotations. This hinders the
model to comprehend the fine-grained semantics of query
texts in real scenarios. To address this problem, we contribute a new benchmark named UFineBench for text-based
person retrieval with ultra-fine granularity.
Firstly, we construct a new dataset named UFine6926.
We collect a large number of person images and manually
annotate each image with two detailed textual descriptions,
averaging 80.8 words each. The average word count is
three to four times that of the previous datasets. In addition
of standard in-domain evaluation, we also propose a special evaluation paradigm more representative of real scenarios. It contains a new evaluation set with cross domains,
cross textual granularity and cross textual styles, named
UFine3C, and a new evaluation metric for accurately measuring retrieval ability, named mean Similarity Distribution
(mSD). Moreover, we propose CFAM, a more efficient algorithm especially designed for text-based person retrieval
with ultra fine-grained texts. It achieves fine granularity
mining by adopting a shared cross-modal granularity decoder and hard negative match mechanism.
With standard in-domain evaluation, CFAM establishes
competitive performance across various datasets, especially on our ultra fine-grained UFine6926. Furthermore,
by evaluating on UFine3C, we demonstrate that training on
our UFine6926 significantly improves generalization to real
scenarios compared with other coarse-grained datasets.
The dataset and code will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/Zplusdragon/UFineBench.

1. Introduction
Existing text-based person retrieval benchmarks [6, 17, 54],
even if claimed to be fine-grained, often have coarse* Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
† Corresponding Authors: Changxin Gao (cgao@hust.edu.cn), Yunhe

Wang (yunhe.wang@huawei.com).
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China No.62176097. We gratefully acknowledge the support of MindSpore, CANN and Ascend AI Processor used for this research.

grained text annotations in practice. This makes them degenerated into attribute-based retrieval [5, 8, 31, 40] due
to the provided coarse-grained descriptions to some extent. Considering this, we propose a benchmark named
UFineBench for text-based person retrieval with ultra-fine
granularity, which is more in line with real scenarios.
Our work is motivated by three main aspects. As the first
aspect, existing datasets [6, 17, 54] suffer from a common
issue that the text is not fine-grained enough to effectively
apply to real scenarios. Specifically, as shown in Figure 1
(a), they almost only briefly describe the common appearance of persons, and lack further specific descriptions of
the unique appearance. This can easily lead to the model
only being able to identify typical attribute characteristics
and cannot understand the fine-grained semantics of complex query texts in real scenarios. Meanwhile, as shown in
Figure 1 (b), they suffer from the ambiguity of one identitybinding text corresponding to multiple different identities,
hindering the model from accurately understanding how
texts and images match during training. The detailed explanations can be found in Section 3.1.
As the second aspect, existing standard evaluation
sets [6, 17, 54] all have fixed domain, fixed textual granularity and fixed textual styles. However, in real scenarios, there are usually three common features. 1) Extensive
time and location coverage of surveillance videos, leading
to substantial domain variations within the image gallery; 2)
Inconsistency of granularity within the query texts, resulting from the variability in the actual information available
for the person being searched; 3) The language expression
of each describer has an unique style, even when conveying
the same meaning. However, existing evaluation sets with
fixed settings are inadequate for effectively assessing the
model’s performance in real scenarios with these features.
As the third aspect, existing evaluation metrics [12, 17]
are not accurate enough to measure the retrieval ability.
Given a text query, all images in the gallery are ranked according to their similarities with the query. The commonly
used rank-k metric is calculated according to whether any
image of the corresponding person is retrieved among the
top k images. However, this calculation method of discretiz-

22010

