This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decompose-and-Compose: A Compositional Approach to Mitigating Spurious
Correlation
Fahimeh Hosseini Noohdani

Parsa Hosseini∗

Aryan Yazdan Parast∗

fhosseini@ce.sharif.edu

parsa.hosseini@sharif.edu

arian.yazdanparast@sharif.edu

Hamidreza Yaghoubi Araghi

Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah

hamidreza.yaghoubiaraghi@sharif.edu

soleymani@sharif.edu

Sharif University of Technology
Tehran, Iran

Abstract
While standard Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
training is proven effective for image classification on
in-distribution data, it fails to perform well on out-ofdistribution samples. One of the main sources of distribution shift for image classification is the compositional nature of images. Specifically, in addition to the main object
or component(s) determining the label, some other image
components usually exist, which may lead to the shift of input distribution between train and test environments. More
importantly, these components may have spurious correlations with the label. To address this issue, we propose
Decompose-and-Compose (DaC), which improves robustness to correlation shift by a compositional approach based
on combining elements of images. Based on our observations, models trained with ERM usually highly attend to
either the causal components or the components having a
high spurious correlation with the label (especially in datapoints on which models have a high confidence). In fact,
according to the amount of spurious correlation and the
easiness of classification based on the causal or non-causal
components, the model usually attends to one of these more
(on samples with high confidence). Following this, we first
try to identify the causal components of images using class
activation maps of models trained with ERM. Afterwards,
we intervene on images by combining them and retraining
the model on the augmented data, including the counterfactual ones. This work proposes a group-balancing method
by intervening on images without requiring group labels or
information regarding the spurious features during training. The method has an overall better worst group accuracy
compared to previous methods with the same amount of su* Equal contribution.

pervision on the group labels in correlation shift. Our code
is available at https://github.com/fhn98/DaC.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks are capable of superhuman performance, they still fail when faced with out-of-distribution
(OOD) data [2, 4, 24]. Studies have shown that these
models tend to make their predictions according to simple features that have a high correlation with the label, although these correlations are unstable across data distributions [2, 24, 29]. Relying on these spurious correlations
instead of the stable ones causes the model to overfit on the
training data and fail on OOD samples, for which those previous correlations do not hold.
To tackle this challenge, methods based on invariant
learning focus on learning representations that can be used
to make invariant predictions across different environments,
to make the trained model more robust to distribution
shifts [1, 2, 9, 23].
Another line of work approaches this problem by balancing minority/majority groups of data [6, 8, 25] to remove spurious correlation. Among these works, [8] proposes DFR, which retrains the last layer of a model previously trained by ERM, with group-balanced data to make it
robust to spurious correlation. Nonetheless, DFR requires
group labels. On the other hand, methods like [13, 17, 20]
try to learn a robust model by upweighting samples that are
less likely to contain spurious attributes, without access to
group labels during training. Relying on the assumption
that datapoints on which the model has a high loss are most
probably from minority groups, most of these methods aim
to place more emphasis on these samples. However, in these
samples, the obscure core object may be the source of high

27662

