This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty Visualization via Low-Dimensional Posterior Projections
Omer Yair, Elias Nehme & Tomer Michaeli
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
omeryair@gmail.com, seliasne@gmail.com, tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Point estimation

Abstract

Distorted image

In ill-posed inverse problems, it is commonly desirable
to obtain insight into the full spectrum of plausible solutions, rather than extracting only a single reconstruction. Information about the plausible solutions and their
likelihoods is encoded in the posterior distribution. However, for high-dimensional data, this distribution is challenging to visualize. In this work, we introduce a new
approach for estimating and visualizing posteriors by employing energy-based models (EBMs) over low-dimensional
subspaces. Specifically, we train a conditional EBM that
receives an input measurement and a set of directions that
span some low-dimensional subspace of solutions, and outputs the probability density function of the posterior within
that space. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
across a diverse range of datasets and image restoration
problems, showcasing its strength in uncertainty quantification and visualization. As we show, our method outperforms a baseline that projects samples from a diffusionbased posterior sampler, while being orders of magnitude
faster. Furthermore, it is more accurate than a baseline
that assumes a Gaussian posterior. Code is available at
https://github.com/yairomer/PPDE

1. Introduction
Interpreting and communicating prediction uncertainty
plays a key role in advancing trustworthy models that could
assist decision-makers. In the context of imaging, many
practical problems are ill-posed, so that a range of plausible explanations exist for any given input. In such cases, it
is beneficial to provide the user with tools to efficiently explore and visualize the set of all admissible solutions. This
is especially crucial in safety-critical domains such as scientific and medical image analysis [9, 15, 44, 47], where
mistaken predictions could influence human life.
The information about the plausible solutions and their
likelihoods is fully encoded in the posterior distribution.
However, high-dimensional posteriors are hard to estimate

MMSE

Posterior's Principal Components
PC1

Variations along PC1 direction

PC2

Variations along PC2 direction

Projected Posterior Distribution

Figure 1. Informed uncertainty visualization. Point estimation
methods receive a distorted image and output only a single solution, e.g., the MMSE estimator (top). NPPC [41] complements MMSE estimators with input-adaptive uncertainty directions (principal components of the posterior) without modeling
output likelihood (middle). Our method (bottom) learns the inputadaptive projected posterior distribution, facilitating a likelihoodinformed uncertainty visualization.

and practically impossible to visualize. One way to visualize uncertainty is to settle with generating samples from
the posterior [5, 10, 26, 29, 32, 43, 49, 50, 59, 64]. However, navigating many samples per input is highly inefficient and often an impractical way of communicating uncertainty [12]. Indeed, in complex domains and high lev-

11041

