This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Framework for Human-centric Point Cloud Video Understanding
Yiteng Xu1 , Kecheng Ye1 , Xiao Han1 , Yiming Ren1 , Xinge Zhu2 , Yuexin Ma1, *
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xuyt2023,mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

global-level
geometry

Text

Human-centric Point Cloud Video Understanding (PVU)
is an emerging field focused on extracting and interpreting human-related features from sequences of human point
clouds, further advancing downstream human-centric tasks
and applications. Previous works usually focus on tackling one specific task and rely on huge labeled data, which
has poor generalization capability. Considering that human has specific characteristics, including the structural
semantics of human body and the dynamics of human motions, we propose a unified framework to make full use of
the prior knowledge and explore the inherent features in
the data itself for generalized human-centric point cloud
video understanding. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
various human-related tasks, including action recognition
and 3D pose estimation. All datasets and code will be released soon.

1. Introduction
Human-centric point cloud video understanding (PVU) is
a burgeoning field focused on discerning, interpreting, and
quantifying human-related information within sequences of
human point clouds. This area has witnessed a surge in attention in recent years, particularly applied in LiDAR captured large-scale unconstrained scenarios [5, 11, 33, 34].
Its significance lies in its critical role in facilitating various
downstream tasks, including human action recognition [33],
3D pose estimation [4], motion capture [13, 24], etc. These
advancements hold the potential to further drive progress
in real-world applications, such as intelligent surveillance,
assistive robots, human-robot collaboration, etc.
Current methods [13, 24, 33] usually rely on extensive labeled data for supervision and employ generic point
* Corresponding author.
This work was supported by NSFC
(No.62206173), Shanghai Sailing Program (No.22YF1428700), MoE Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Human-Machine Collaboration
(ShanghaiTech University), Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Humancentered Artificial Intelligence (ShangHAI), Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging.

part-level
semantics

Action Recognition
Bend-Over

Sports

Fitness

Sit

Pull_Push

Carry

3D Pose Estimation

point-level
motion flow

Figure 1. UniPVU-Human extracts human-related prior knowledge at global level, part level, and point level to facilitate subsequent geometric and dynamic representation learning, finally
cater to a range of downstream human-centric tasks, such as action recognition, 3D pose estimation, etc.

cloud-based feature extraction backbones [10, 17, 21, 22].
Nevertheless, obtaining the necessary data and annotations
for 4D human-centric point cloud videos proves to be a
challenging and expensive endeavor. Furthermore, fully supervised techniques tend to exhibit overfitting issues when
applied to specific datasets or tasks, resulting in limited generalization capabilities. Additionally, the existing feature
extraction networks are ill-suited for human-centric data,
as they fail to account for human-specific characteristics.
Hence, within the domain of human-centric PVU, the significance of self-supervised learning becomes evident in enhancing algorithmic generalization. Simultaneously, the development of a human-specific feature extractor that uses
prior human-related knowledge holds great promise in bolstering the effectiveness of methods for downstream tasks.
Actually, self-supervised learning [31, 39] for PVU has
made great progress. Some approaches [26–28] leverage
contrastive learning techniques to capture essential spatiotemporal features within dynamic point clouds. Nevertheless, due to the inherent challenges posed by irregular point distributions stemming from varying capture distances, occlusions, and noise, the construction of high-

1155

