This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coherence As Texture – Passive Textureless 3D Reconstruction by
Self-interference
Wei-Yu Chen1 *, Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan1 , Anat Levin2 , Matthew O’Toole1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Abstract
Passive depth estimation based on stereo or defocus relies on the presence of the texture on an object to resolve its
depth. Hence, recovering the depth of a textureless object—
for example, a large white wall—is not just hard but perhaps
even impossible. Or is it? We show that spatial coherence,
a property of natural light sources, can be used to resolve
the depth of a scene point even when it is textureless. Our
approach relies on the idea that natural light scattered off
a scene point is locally coherent with itself, while incoherent with the light scattered from other surface points; we
use this insight to design an optical setup that uses selfinterference as a texture feature for estimating depth. Our
lab prototype is capable of resolving depths of textureless
objects in sunlight as well as indoor lights.

1. Introduction
Shape recovery is a problem of fundamental importance in
computer vision, where the goal is to recover a 3D description of a scene from one or more images. In passive settings,
shape information can be recovered from disparity [13],
shading [23, 24], focus [7], defocus [16], motion [15], or
even polarization [19, 22]. All of these approaches, however, rely on making certain assumptions about the scene,
limiting the generality of each approach.
Consider, for example, the scenario shown in Figure 1(b), where a camera measures a textureless surface
with a uniform albedo and lit by an unknown white light
source. At first glance, the 3D reconstruction problem appears to be underconstrained. It has been widely accepted
that it is impossible to passively reconstruct the depth of
such a textureless plane through stereo imaging or depth
from (de)focus; irrespective of the viewing angle and focus
settings of the camera, the captured images will always be
uniform in brightness, providing no visual information that
can be used for 3D reconstruction.
So when is it possible to see the shape of a textureless
* Corresponding author: wyharveychen@gmail.com

(a)

y

y
2mm

x

(b)

(c)

z

(d)

Figure 1. Passive 3D reconstruction of a textureless plane under white, incoherent illumination. (a) A photo of the capture
setup. A tilted plane target (enlarged in the inset) lies in front of
the scanning lens of our setup. (b) Front view of the target. Within
the sensor area, it is a uniform, textureless plane target. (c) Depth
estimation with our approach, resolving the desired tilt. Note that
we can measure the explicit depth, which can not be recovered by
other passive methods that only measure normals. (d) A side view
of the reconstructed target reveals it is a tilted plane.

object, under unknown illumination? The classic aperture
problem [14] tells us that correspondences cannot be found
for textureless objects and hence, disparity across viewpoints is unobservable. Shape from shading [23, 24] and
shape from polarization [19, 22] permit the recovery of the
normal of a textureless plane, but not its depth. Sundaram
et al. [20] conclude that the depth of a textureless plane can
be reconstructed, but only if the plane is heavily tilted with
respect to the camera viewpoint. To overcome the lack of
texture, numerous works apply active imaging approaches
such as structured light [2] or time-of-flight cameras [5, 8].
Kotwal et al. [10] have demonstrated that OCT based depth
acquisition can be implemented under sunlight without coherent laser illumination, yet their approach is not fully passive because it uses optics to control and direct the sunlight

25058

