This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Why Not Use Your Textbook? Knowledge-Enhanced Procedure Planning of
Instructional Videos
Kumaranage Ravindu Yasas Nagasinghe1
Martin Renqiang Min2
1

Honglu Zhou2

Daniel Harari4

Malitha Gunawardhana1,3

Muhammad Haris Khan1
2

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, NEC Laboratories, USA,
3

University of Auckland, 4 Weizmann Institute of Science

ravindu.nagasinghe@mbzuai.ac.ae, muhammad.haris@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the capability of an agent to
construct a logical sequence of action steps, thereby assembling a strategic procedural plan. This plan is crucial for navigating from an initial visual observation to
a target visual outcome, as depicted in real-life instructional videos. Existing works have attained partial success by extensively leveraging various sources of information available in the datasets, such as heavy intermediate visual observations, procedural names, or natural language step-by-step instructions, for features or supervision signals. However, the task remains formidable due to
the implicit causal constraints in the sequencing of steps
and the variability inherent in multiple feasible plans. To
tackle these intricacies that previous efforts have overlooked, we propose to enhance the agent’s capabilities by
infusing it with procedural knowledge. This knowledge,
sourced from training procedure plans and structured as a
directed weighted graph, equips the agent to better navigate the complexities of step sequencing and its potential variations. We coin our approach KEPP, a novel
Knowledge-Enhanced Procedure Planning system, which
harnesses a probabilistic procedural knowledge graph extracted from training data, effectively acting as a comprehensive textbook for the training domain. Experimental
evaluations across three widely-used datasets under settings of varying complexity reveal that KEPP attains superior, state-of-the-art results while requiring only minimal supervision. Code and trained model are available at
https://github.com/Ravindu-Yasas-Nagasinghe/KEPP

1. Introduction
The evolution of the internet has precipitated an unprecedented influx of video content, serving as a vital educational resource for myriad learners. Individuals frequently

Figure 1. Expert trajectories [7] of the ‘Make Jello Shots’ task
from the CrossTask dataset [63]. Heavier color indicates more
frequently visited path. This depicts the complexities of the procedure planning task, arising from the subtle causal links in step sequencing (e.g., steps like ‘stir mixture’ or ‘pour mixture’ typically
occur after adding individual ingredients), the varied probabilities
of transitioning between steps, and the diversity in plans viable
for a given starting point and an intended outcome. Motivated by
these nuanced challenges, we propose Knowledge-Enhanced Procedure Planning (KEPP) with the use of a probabilistic procedure
knowledge graph to capture and represent these intricacies

leverage platforms such as YouTube to acquire new skills,
ranging from culinary arts to automobile maintenance [34].
While these instructional videos benefit the development of
intelligent agents in mastering long-horizon tasks, the challenge extends beyond merely interpreting visuals. It requires high-level reasoning and planning to effectively assist in complex, real-life scenarios [13].
Procedure Planning in Instructional Videos demands an
agent to produce a sequence of actionable steps, thereby
crafting a procedure plan that facilitates the transition from
an initial visual observation of the physical world towards
achieving a desired goal state [7, 9, 50, 53, 54, 59]. The task
acts as a precursor to an envisioned future scenario in which
an agent like a robot provides on-the-spot support, such as

18816

