This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Gap Embeddings for Generative Dataset Augmentation
Yinong Oliver Wang*

Younjoon Chung*
Chen Henry Wu
Carnegie Mellon University

Fernando De la Torre

{yinongwa, younjooc, chenwu2, ftorre}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The performance of deep learning models is intrinsically
tied to the quality, volume, and relevance of their training
data. Gathering ample data for production scenarios often demands significant time and resources. Among various
strategies, data augmentation circumvents exhaustive data
collection by generating new data points from existing ones.
However, traditional augmentation techniques can be less
effective amidst a shift in training and testing distributions.
This paper explores the potential of synthetic data by
leveraging large pre-trained models for data augmentation, especially when confronted with distribution shifts. Although recent advancements in generative models have enabled several prior works in cross-distribution data generation, they require model fine-tuning and a complex setup.
To bypass these shortcomings, we introduce Domain Gap
Embeddings (DoGE), a plug-and-play semantic data augmentation framework in a cross-distribution few-shot setting. Our method extracts disparities between source and
desired data distributions in a latent form, and subsequently
steers a generative process to supplement the training set
with endless diverse synthetic samples. Our evaluations,
conducted on a subpopulation shift and three domain adaptation scenarios under a few-shot paradigm, reveal that our
versatile method improves performance across tasks without needing hands-on intervention or intricate fine-tuning.
DoGE paves the way to effortlessly generate realistic, controllable synthetic datasets following the test distributions,
bolstering real-world efficacy for downstream task models.

1. Introduction
The swift progression of computer vision in the past decade
can be attributed to improved deep learning algorithms
for large-scale training, increased computing power, and
the availability of vast datasets such as ImageNet [15]
and LAION-5B [66]. While such internet-scale real-world
datasets allow to train general vision models, they are not
tailored to application scenarios with specific data distribu* Equal contribution.
† Source code available at https://domain-gap-embeddings.github.io/.

Domain
Gap
Extractor

(b) Few-Shot Target Data

(c) Domain Gap Embedding

(a) Source
Dataset

Generation
Pipeline

❆

(d) Augmented Dataset

Figure 1. Overview. In real-world applications, computer vision
models often suffer from discrepancies between training and testing data distributions. To alleviate this problem, we propose a
novel dataset augmentation method to complement the training
dataset with synthetic images. Given (a) a source dataset (e.g.,
real photos), and (b) a few samples from a target distribution (e.g.,
paintings), we extract the distribution differences into (c) Domain
Gap Embeddings, which enables generating (d) augmented synthetic data to enhance the model performance.

tions, i.e., the cross-distribution adaptation, which can lead
to serious concerns in reliability [41, 63]. This issue often
requires costly data collection where models operate.
Among various solutions to this issue, data augmentation has been explored to alleviate such extensive data collection. However, images generated with traditional data
augmentation through flipping, gamma adjustments, noise,
or more sophisticated methods [14, 81] often fail to align
the augmented data with shifted test distributions. Although
there are cross-domain augmentation techniques [43, 44],
these strategies are task-specific and not easily transferable
to other problems. Besides these data-centric efforts, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is an active field of research for such problems from the model aspect (e.g., [32]).
Our approach distinguishes itself from the above by its ability to produce endless data with much more variability and
the need for much fewer samples (i.e., few-shot).
To mitigate the distribution discrepancy issues, synthetic

28684

