This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Empirical Study of Scaling Law for Scene Text Recognition
Miao Rang∗

Zhenni Bi* Chuanjian Liu Yunhe Wang† Kai Han†
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{rangmiao1,bizhenni,liuchuanjian,
yunhe.wang,kai.han}@huawei.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) technologies are pivotal in extracting textual content from images, including
scanned documents and photographs. However, this paper
narrows its focus to the text recognition phase, specifically
to Scene Text Recognition (STR). STR stands out in the
OCR field due to its complexity and the unique challenges
it presents, such as variable illumination, occlusion, distortion, and viewing angles. These factors pose significant
challenges in text identification compared to recognizing
text in scanned documents. As a rapidly evolving field of
research, STR offers substantial opportunities for technological advancements and innovation. Given this context,
our study aims to specifically explore the scaling laws that
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author.

97

CLIP4STR-B*
P-B*

P-S*
ABINet

96
Average Word Accuracy[%]

The laws of model size, data volume, computation and
model performance have been extensively studied in the
field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). However, the
scaling laws in Scene Text Recognition (STR) have not yet
been investigated. To address this, we conducted comprehensive studies that involved examining the correlations between performance and the scale of models, data volume
and computation in the field of text recognition. Conclusively, the study demonstrates smooth power laws between
performance and model size, as well as training data volume, when other influencing factors are held constant. Additionally, we have constructed a large-scale dataset called
REBU-Syn, which comprises 6 M real samples and 18 M
synthetic samples. Based on the disclosed scaling law and
new dataset, we successfully trained a scene text recognition model, achieving a new state-of-the-art on 6 common
test benchmarks with top-1 average accuracy of 97.42%.
The models and dataset are publicly available at large-ocrmodel.github.io.

CLIP4STR-B
P-B

P-S

CLIP4STR-L*
CLIP4STR-L

MAERec

95
P-Ti

94

MaskOCR-L
MaskOCR-B

TrOCR-L

93
TrOCR-B
92
91

parseq
parseq*
CLIP4STR
CLIP4STR*
TrOCR

SRN
0

100

200
300
Parameters(M)

MaskOCR
SRN
ABINet
MAERec
400

500

Figure 1. Mean word accuracy vs Parameters on the 6 common
test benchmarks. P-Ti, P-S and P-B refer to PARSeq-Ti, PARSeqS and PARSeq-B, respectively. * indicates training with REBUSyn.

are applicable to STR. By delving into the study of scaling
laws, our primary objective is to gain a deeper understanding of how adjustments in system parameters impact the
performance of STR. This investigation holds the potential
to unveil new avenues for improvement in this challenging
domain.
With the introduction of large-scale models in deep
learning, an increasing number of academics are focusing
on the potential and growth trends of these models, hoping that they will contribute to the development and design of future models. In the field of NLP [4, 8], numerous experiments have been carried out to investigate scaling model laws [14, 18, 24, 72]. The results show that the
larger the volume of data fed into the neural network, the
better its performance. Therefore, large language models
trained on vast amounts of data have dominated the field
of NLP. However, in the STR domain, research predominantly focuses on enhancing model performance using fixed

15619

