This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learned Scanpaths Aid Blind Panoramic Video Quality Assessment
Kanglong Fan1 , Wen Wen1 , Mu Li2 ,* Yifan Peng3 , and Kede Ma1
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
The University of Hong Kong
{kanglofan2-c,wwen29-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, limuhit@gmail.com
evanpeng@hku.hk, kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk
https://github.com/kalofan/AutoScanpathQA

Abstract

Assessing
𝑞𝑁
Assessing Pattern

...

QA
QA

𝑞ො1

...

...

...

...

Scanpath
Generator

...

End-to-End Optimization

...

...

Viewing Pattern

...

* Corresponding author.

...

The rapid advancement of multimedia technologies has
marked the beginning of a new era characterized by the
proliferation of panoramic videos [20]. Such type of digital data offers an immersive and interactive viewing experience that is transforming the way we consume multimedia. Therefore, assessing and ensuring the visual quality
of panoramic videos is increasingly important, as it shapes
the users’ viewing experience and the triumph of any product or service based on panoramic videos [40]. Unlike their
planar counterparts, panoramic videos provide a 360◦ broad
view with a spherical data structure, which poses significant
computational challenges for panoramic video quality assessment (PVQA). Moreover, the diverse and uncertain user

𝑞1

...

...

1. Introduction

......

...

Panoramic videos have the advantage of providing an
immersive and interactive viewing experience. Nevertheless, their spherical nature gives rise to various and uncertain user viewing behaviors, which poses significant challenges for panoramic video quality assessment (PVQA).
In this work, we propose an end-to-end optimized, blind
PVQA method with explicit modeling of user viewing patterns through visual scanpaths. Our method consists of
two modules: a scanpath generator and a quality assessor.
The scanpath generator is initially trained to predict future
scanpaths by minimizing their expected code length and
then jointly optimized with the quality assessor for quality
prediction. Our blind PVQA method enables direct quality
assessment of panoramic images by treating them as videos
composed of identical frames. Experiments on three public
panoramic image and video quality datasets, encompassing
both synthetic and authentic distortions, validate the superiority of our blind PVQA model over existing methods.

Assessing

...

𝑞ො𝑁

Figure 1. Analogy between human subjects and our end-to-end
optimized method for panoramic video quality assessment.

viewing behaviors (in the form of visual scanpaths) induced
by the spherical structure further complicate the quality prediction process. Addressing these challenges requires novel
PVQA models that take into account both the spherical data
structure as well as user viewing patterns.
In the quality assessment of panoramic images and
videos, three approaches are commonly employed: sphereto-plane projection onto a 2D plane, rectilinear projection
onto multiple viewports, and direct processing using spherical operations. According to the Theorema Egregium by
Gauss, all sphere-to-plane map projections [32, 35, 41] are
impeded by non-uniform sampling and geometric distortions, which may bias subsequent planar quality prediction. While spherical operators give a better account for the
panoramic data structure, they are generally computationally prohibitive and, more importantly, may not faithfully
reflect user viewing patterns [4, 39, 40]. To overcome these
computational difficulties, several methods seek to sample
and process rectilinear viewports [7, 14, 27, 29, 36, 37].
Of particular interest are scanpath-based methods, which
sample, along visual scanpaths [23, 24], sequences of rectilinear viewports at discrete time instances. This sampling
process turns panoramic images and videos into moving-

2599

