This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G3 -LQ: Marrying Hyperbolic Alignment with Explicit Semantic-Geometric
Modeling for 3D Visual Grounding
Yuan Wang1,2 Yali Li1,2 Shengjin Wang1,2‡
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), China
‡
wy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Corresponding Author
1

Scene Understanding

Object Understanding

Spatial Relationship

Relative Distance

Intricate References

the chair is to the right of one chair,
and to the left of another. the
window is behind the chair.

the cart is a beige color and has 3
baskets. it is the furthest cart to the
right and is pushed into the corner.

there is a rainbow colored circle chair
with a black and white pillow on it. it is
sitting behind a black fuzzy rug and
there is a stack of blankets next to it.

Ground Truth

EDA

Our approach

Spatial Relationship

Relative Distance

Geometric Attribute

the chair sets at a table and between
a wall and a desk. the chair is gray
and has a curved backside.

Geometric Attribute

Intricate References

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed G3 -LQ method on the ScanRefer benchmark. The versatile scene-level and object-level understanding
properties empower G3 -LQ to comprehend spatial relationship, relative distance, geometric attribute as well as intricate references.

Abstract
Grounding referred objects in 3D scenes is a burgeoning vision-language task pivotal for propelling Embodied
AI, as it endeavors to connect the 3D physical world with
free-form descriptions. Compared to the 2D counterparts,
challenges posed by the variability of 3D visual grounding
remain relatively unsolved in existing studies: 1) the underlying geometric and complex spatial relationships in 3D
scene. 2) the inherent complexity of 3D grounded language.
3) the inconsistencies between text and geometric features.
To tackle these issues, we propose G3 -LQ, a DEtection
TRansformer-based model tailored for 3D visual grounding
task. G3 -LQ explicitly models Geometric-aware visual representations and Generates fine-Grained Language-guided
object Queries in an overarching framework, which comprises two dedicated modules. Specifically, the Position
Adaptive Geometric Exploring (PAGE) unearths underlying information of 3D objects in the geometric details
and spatial relationships perspectives. The Fine-grained
Language-guided Query Selection (Flan-QS) delves into
syntactic structure of texts and generates object queries that
exhibit higher relevance towards fine-grained text features.
Finally, a pioneering Poincaré Semantic Alignment (PSA)
loss establishes semantic-geometry consistencies by mod-

eling non-linear vision-text feature mappings and aligning
them on a hyperbolic prototype—Poincaré ball. Extensive
experiments verify the superiority of our G3 -LQ method,
trumping the state-of-the-arts by a considerable margin.

1. Introduction
Grounding 3D physical realm with natural languages has
propelled to the forefront in advancing Embodied AI [10,
18, 35], an ability that empowers agents to comprehend human instructions in real-world contexts. 3D Visual Grounding (3D VG) [6, 31, 43, 48] has garnered substantial attention as a crucial cross-modal 3D perception task in defacto
applications, e.g., assistive robots, AR/VR, and metaverse.
Compared with extensive explorations of 2D counterpart [20, 28, 29, 49], 3D VG poses prominent challenge
known as “Semantic-Geometric Coupling”. As shown in
Fig. 1, we offer distinctive glimpse into it: 1) Intricate geometric details and spatial relations. 3D scenes encounter
multiple objects with intricate layout, multi-level occlusion,
and multifaceted spatial relation. 2) Heightened flexibility
and complexity of descriptions. Free-form utterances with
complex syntax convey precise spatial information, intricate
references, and detailed relational terms. 3) Inconsistency of
the semantic-geometric features. A single semantic concep-

13917

