This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evaluating Transferability in Retrieval Tasks: An Approach Using MMD and
Kernel Methods
Mengyu Dai1 * Amir Hossein Raffiee2 Aashish Jain2
1
Microsoft 2 Salesforce

Abstract
Retrieval tasks play central roles in real-world machine
learning systems such as search engine, recommender system, and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG). Achieving
decent performance in these tasks often requires fine-tuning
various pretrained models on specific datasets and selecting the best candidate, a process that can be both time and
resource consuming. To tackle the problem, we introduce a
novel and efficient method, called RetMMD, that leverages
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) and kernel methods to
assess the transferability of pretrained models in retrieval
tasks. RetMMD is calculated on pretrained model and target dataset without any fine-tuning involved. Specifically,
given some query, we quantify the distribution discrepancy
between relevant and irrelevant document embeddings, by
estimating the similarities within their mappings in the finetuned embedding space through kernel method. This discrepancy is averaged over multiple queries, taking into account
the distribution characteristics of the target dataset. Experiments suggest that the proposed metric calculated on
pretrained models closely aligns with retrieval performance
post fine-tuning. The observation holds across a variety of
datasets, including image, text, and multi-modal domains,
indicating the potential of using MMD and kernel methods for transfer learning evaluation in retrieval scenarios.
In addition, we also design a way of evaluating dataset
transferability for retrieval tasks, with experimental results
demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Developing transfer learning evaluation metrics for retrieval
tasks is of great importance in machine learning and information retrieval. Reliable metrics enable assessing the effectiveness of transfer learning models in retrieval-based applications, such as search engines, recommendation systems,
and Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) with Large
Language Models (LLMs) [1, 24, 39, 53]. For example, in* Partial work done at Salesforce.

Joshua Correa2

tegrating retrieval mechanisms into LLMs allows them to access and leverage external knowledge sources, significantly
enhancing their ability to provide accurate, up-to-date and
contextually relevant responses. In these contexts, the goal is
often to retrieve the most relevant items from a large dataset
given a specific query or user profile. A well-designed transfer learning evaluation metric can help assess whether the
learned representations from a pretrained model are effectively capturing the underlying semantics of the data and
improving retrieval performance. Additionally, such a metric can facilitate comparison between different models or
different fine-tuning strategies, thus guiding researchers and
practitioners in model selection and further optimization.
Existing transfer learning evaluation metrics primarily
focus on classification tasks [3, 37, 40, 50, 54]. Although
classification and retrieval tasks are often used together and
can be treated as complementary tasks, there exists fundamental differences between them. For instance, classification
assigns data items to predefined categories or classes, while
retrieval is the process of searching relevant information
from a collection of items, often using similarity measures
calculated from their embeddings. Another distinguishing
factor is the asymmetric distribution of item embeddings
in retrieval tasks. This asymmetric distribution can often
result in a complex and nuanced performance landscape for
retrieval models. Furthermore, the discrepancy between distributions of relevant and irrelevant documents in retrieval
tasks is often dependent on the specific query. This means
that any transfer learning evaluation metric must take into
account this query-dependent variability to provide an accurate measure of model performance. In addition, one also
needs to take account into the importance of each examined
query, to be able to provide less biased predictions regarding
overall retrieval performance in downstream tasks.
Given these unique challenges, we propose a method designed specifically to assess model transferability in retrieval
tasks. Our approach utilizes the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [15] to quantify the discrepancy between distributions of relevant and irrelevant document embeddings
in embedding spaces. We employ a kernel-based method to
estimate these discrepancies, which are then averaged over

22390

