This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Theory of Joint Light and Heat Transport for Lambertian Scenes
Mani Ramanagopal, Sriram Narayanan, Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan, and Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{manikans, snochurn, saswin, srinivas}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We present a novel theory that establishes the relationship between light transport in visible and thermal infrared,
and heat transport in solids. We show that heat generated
due to light absorption can be estimated by modeling heat
transport using a thermal camera. For situations where
heat conduction is negligible, we analytically solve the heat
transport equation to derive a simple expression relating
the change in thermal image intensity to the absorbed light
intensity and heat capacity of the material. Next, we prove
that intrinsic image decomposition for Lambertian scenes
becomes a well-posed problem if one has access to the absorbed light. Our theory generalizes to arbitrary shapes
and unstructured illumination. Our theory is based on applying energy conservation principle at each pixel independently. We validate our theory using real-world experiments on diffuse objects made of different materials that exhibit both direct and global components (inter-reflections)
of light transport under unknown complex lighting.

1. Introduction
Printed on paper, this text appears black because the ink
does not reflect much light. So what happens to the light
striking the ink? It gets absorbed and converted into heat,
thereby disappearing from the visible light transport system.
Starting from the early works in 1970s [3, 20, 23, 27, 31,
35], decades of research[6, 18, 33] have attempted to separate surface reflectance and shading from images by modeling shapes[30], illuminations [8] and their interactions [13].
However, in the general case, decomposing light transport
is fundamentally an ill-posed problem, thus requiring handcrafted [23] or learned priors[1, 2, 4, 9]. But what if we can
somehow observe the light lost to absorption?
Analogous to light transport, heat transport models the
generation and flow of heat through a medium and its exchange with the surrounding [5, 34]. In the heat transport
system, the heat generated due to light absorption is no different from any other type of heat generation. While heat
itself cannot be seen, all objects radiate infrared light based

Visible Image

Temperature rise at t=0.1s

Temperature rise at t=3s

Experiment Setup

Albedo

Shading

Figure 1. The visible image (brightened for visualization) captures
the reflected light, which is the product of albedo and shading at
that pixel. The absorbed light gets converted into heat and raises
the temperature, which can be observed using a co-located thermal
camera. The illumination is turned on at t = 0. The temperature
rise at t = 0.1s and t = 3s are shown using turbo colormap. Our
novel theory establishes the relationship between light and heat
transport and provides an analytical solution to compute albedo
and shading for complex shapes and unknown illumination.

on their surface temperature, and that can be measured using a thermal camera [34]. By modeling heat transport, we
make the first attempt to estimate the intensity of light absorbed by an object, thus establishing the connection between light and heat transport.
We develop a novel theory that proves having access to
absorbed light turns single view intrinsic image decomposition into a pixel-wise well-posed problem, even for arbitrary shape and illumination. Our key insight is that all the
complexities of the reflected light transport are also present
in the absorbed light, in the same functional form but simply scaled by the complement of the albedo. Consider the
color chart seen in Fig. 1. The amount of irradiance due to
the line light is approximately equal for the black and white
patches. While the visible image records a low intensity for
the black patch, the corresponding increase in intensity in
the thermal images is high, and vice versa. Leveraging the

11924

