This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Regional Clues in CLIP for Zero-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Yi Zhang1* Meng-Hao Guo2 Miao Wang1 Shi-Min Hu2
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

Abstract
dog

CLIP has demonstrated marked progress in visual recognition due to its powerful pre-training on large-scale imagetext pairs. However, it still remains a critical challenge:
how to transfer image-level knowledge into pixel-level understanding tasks such as semantic segmentation. In this
paper, to solve the mentioned challenge, we analyze the
gap between the capability of the CLIP model and the
requirement of the zero-shot semantic segmentation task.
Based on our analysis and observations, we propose a novel
method for zero-shot semantic segmentation, dubbed CLIPRC (CLIP with Regional Clues), bringing two main insights. On the one hand, a region-level bridge is necessary
to provide fine-grained semantics. On the other hand, overfitting should be mitigated during the training stage. Benefiting from the above discoveries, CLIP-RC achieves stateof-the-art performance on various zero-shot semantic segmentation benchmarks, including PASCAL VOC, PASCAL
Context, and COCO-Stuff 164K. Code will be available at
https://github.com/Jittor/JSeg.

1. Introduction
As a foundation task in computer vision, semantic segmentation [4, 8, 11–13, 26, 36, 40, 44, 50, 51] aims to assign
each pixel with a semantic class. Limited by technical methods and labeling costs, traditional segmenters can only process scenarios with a limited number of classes. In other
words, it can only handle the seen classes in the training set.
When it comes to unseen classes, traditional methods seem
powerless. However, in practical situations, encountering
classes that are not previously seen is unavoidable, which
brings challenges to the segmenter. To solve this problem,
researchers propose a new research paradigm, called zeroshot semantic segmentation (ZS3) [1, 2, 43], which requires
the model trained on seen classes to generalize well to unseen classes. In this paper, we focus on the ZS3 settings.
The rapid development of ZS3 tasks benefits from the
* Work conducted during an internship at Tsinghua University.

cat
cow
Image-Level Classification

Region-Level
Bridge

Pixel-Level
Classification

Figure 1. By employing a region-level bridge, the CLIP-RC extends zero-shot capabilities from the image level to the pixel level,
thus bridging the gap between image-level recognition and pixellevel semantic segmentation.

progress of the foundation models, especially the CLIP [34]
model. The CLIP model is trained on large-scale imagetext pairs and shows powerful zero-shot image recognition
capability, which is the foundation of ZS3 tasks. In addition to the capability for zero-shot recognition, the ability
to localize at the pixel level is also crucial for accomplishing the ZS3 tasks which is an attribute that CLIP lacks.
In order to make up for the shortcomings of CLIP in localization, researchers have proposed two streams of approaches: one-stage methods [47, 55] and two-stage methods [7, 14, 33, 46, 52].
Two-stage methods, first, generate initial mask proposals using class-agnostic mask generators. Then, it provides
them with semantic information by using the CLIP model.
Due to the introduction of an additional class-agnostic segmentation model, these methods have a heavy computation
cost. In this paper, we focus on the one-stage methods.
One-stage approaches avoid extra computing overhead and
finetune the CLIP model for ZS3 directly. There are two
critical factors during the fine-tuning process. Firstly, transferring image-level understanding features to pixel-level understanding features are the key to finishing the segmentation task. Secondly, during the fine-tuning process, models
will tend to only recognize the classes they see in the tuning process (a.k.a., catastrophic forgetting), which will undermine the model’s zero-shot recognition capability. The
differences highlighted above are the gaps between the capabilities of the CLIP model and the requirements of ZS3
tasks. Aiming to bridge the above gaps, we present a new
method CLIP-RC.
CLIP-RC is motivated by an important observation. As

3270

