This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PostureHMR: Posture Transformation for 3D Human Mesh Recovery
Yu-Pei Song1,2 , Xiao Wu1,2 ,* Zhaoquan Yuan1,2 , Jian-Jun Qiao1,2 , Qiang Peng1,2
1
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China
2
Engineering Research Center of Sustainable Urban Intelligent Transportation, China
yupei-song@my.swjtu.edu.cn, {wuxiaohk, zqyuan, qpeng}@swjtu.edu.cn, qjjai56@gmail.com

Posture Reverse Process

Abstract
Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) aims to estimate the 3D
human body from 2D images, which is a challenging task
due to inherent ambiguities in translating 2D observations
to 3D space. A novel approach called PostureHMR is proposed to leverage a multi-step diffusion-style process, which
converts this task into a posture transformation from an
SMPL T-pose mesh to the target mesh. To inject the learning
process of posture transformation with the physical structure of the human body model, a kinematics-based forward
process is proposed to interpolate the intermediate state
with pose and shape decomposition. Moreover, a mesh-toposture (M2P) decoder is designed, by combining the input of 3D and 2D mesh constraints estimated from the image to model the posture changes in the reverse process. It
mitigates the difficulties of posture change learning directly
from RGB pixels. To overcome the limitation of pixel-level
misalignment of modeling results with the input image, a
new trimap-based rendering loss is designed to highlight
the areas with poor recognition. Experiments conducted on
three widely used datasets demonstrate that the proposed
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) aims to reconstruct a 3D
human body mesh from a 2D image. This task has diverse
applications, such as virtual reality, human-computer interaction, clothed human reconstruction and posture capture.
With the rise of the metaverse, HMR has become a critical
technology to create digital humans. Unfortunately, HMR
remains a challenging task, due to inherent depth ambiguities, flexible body kinematic structures, diverse visual appearances and ubiquitous part occlusions [18, 20, 42].
Skinned Multi-Person Linear Model (SMPL) [27] is an
influential open-source statistical model of the human body,
enabling realistic 3D human generation and analysis across
* Corresponding author.

2D mesh
recovery

2D mesh
SMPL T-pose

3D mesh
recovery

Input image

Target posture

Kinematics-based Forward Process

Figure 1. The SMPL T-pose model and the estimated 3D target model from the image are progressively updated through PostureHMR. The 2D mesh estimated by the neural network is combined with the SMPL model of the T-pose, which can gradually
transformed to the target posture via a posture reverse process.
The learning labels corresponding to the intermediate steps are accurately obtained through a kinematics-based forward process.

a wide variety of applications. With the success of statistical human models, such as SCAPE [1], SMPL [27] and
SMPL-X [31], body deformations are factored into identitydependent and pose-dependent shape deformations, corresponding to shape and pose parameters in SMPL, respectively. In this paper, they are collectively referred as posture. Pioneer methods [7, 17, 29] regress the vertex positions of the mesh, achieving pixel alignment with the
image. However, the reconstruction performance is adversely affected due to the lack of depth information, which
poses challenges for producing reasonable results from side
views. Recently, HMDiff [11] applies the diffusion model
to the HMR task, which generates the 3D model from Gaussian noises in a multiple iteration way. It has demonstrated promising performance. However, the overall physical structure is destroyed when adding noises to mesh vertices.
To address the limitations of vertex regression methods,
incorporating the SMPL T-pose model as input enables the
integration of prior knowledge related to depth information.
Models utilizing alternative poses may encounter difficulties in preserving accurate structural information at the joint
regions. Due to the substantial disparity between the input
and output, it becomes challenging to precisely reconstruct

9732

