This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Privacy-Preserving Visual Localization Using 3D Ray Clouds

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual localization refers to the task of estimating the
camera pose w.r.t. a known 3D scene given a query image.
It serves a central role for cutting-edge applications involving robotics [18], augmented reality (AR) [3], virtual reality (VR) [6] and simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) [11, 29, 33]. To this date, many visual localization algorithms [27, 37] still utilize sparse 3D point clouds
constructed via structure-from-motion (SfM) [1, 44, 45, 48]
through which the camera pose is estimated from the correspondences between 2D image features and 3D points.
This is commonly solved using a perspective-n-point (PnP)
solver [12, 20, 37] equipped with the random sample con† Corresponding author

Center1
Center2

Energy Landscape 172.66
Cambridge

84.34
11.073.46 11.445.39

Uniform line cloud

PPL

Ray cloud(ours)

(b) Single-image localization speeds

Recovered 3D points

(a) Illustration of ray cloud

200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0

Recovered images

The recent success in revealing scene details from sparse
3D point clouds obtained via structure-from-motion has
raised significant privacy concerns in visual localization.
One prominent approach for mitigating this issue is to lift
3D points to 3D lines thereby reducing the effectiveness of
the scene inversion attacks, but this comes at the cost of increased algorithmic complexity for camera localization due
to weaker geometric constraints induced by line clouds. To
overcome this limitation, we propose a new lifting approach
called “ray cloud”, whereby each lifted 3D line intersects at
one of two predefined locations, depicting omnidirectional
rays from two cameras. This yields two benefits, i) camera localization can now be cast as relative pose estimation between the query image and the calibrated rig of two
perspective cameras which can be efficiently solved using a
variant of the 5-point algorithm, and ii) the ray cloud introduces erroneous estimations for the density-based inversion attack, degrading the quality of scene recovery. Moreover, we explore possible modifications of the inversion attack to better recover scenes from the ray clouds and propose a ray sampling technique to reduce the effectiveness
of the modified attack. Experimental results on two public
datasets show real-time localization speed as well as enhanced privacy-preserving capability over the state-of-theart without overly sacrificing the localization accuracy.

Inference speed [fps]

Heejoon Moon1 Chunghwan Lee2 Je Hyeong Hong1,2†
1
Dept. Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang University 2 Dept. Electronic Engineering, Hanyang University

Ground truth

Uniform line cloud

Paired-Point Lifting (PPL)

Ray cloud (ours)

(c) Comparison of revealed scene geometries and images

Figure 1. Main characteristics of the proposed ray cloud. (a) shows
3D points lifted as 3D rays half of which intersects at center 1 and
the other half intersects at center 2. Estimating the camera pose resembles relative pose estimation with respect to a calibrated rig of
perspective cameras. As shown in (b), this allows real-time singleimage-based localization on two public datasets [22, 55] while preventing scene-revealing attacks [7, 40] as shown in (c).

sensus (RANSAC) meta-algorithm [9, 15, 42] or its deep
network alternative such as differentiable RANSAC [4, 5].
Surprisingly, it was recently shown [8, 10, 13, 30, 40,
57, 58] that a sparse 3D point cloud may contain enough
information to reveal image details of the underlying scene.
Most prominently, Pittaluga et al. [40] demonstrated a cascaded U-Net model [43] can generate high-fidelity images
of the scene just from the 2D projection of sparse 3D points
and their SIFT features [28]. This raised significant privacy
concerns [39, 50] as anyone with access to the 3D point
cloud could potentially search for sensitive details in the
private scene by employing this scene inversion network.
Currently, the mainstream approach for preventing the
aforementioned image inversion attack on the sparse 3D
point cloud is geometric lifting [26, 46, 50], whereby each
3D point is transformed to a 3D line passing through the
original point with aims to conceal the 3D scene geometry
(see Fig. 2).While the earlier approach of randomly drawing
the line direction (also known as the uniform line cloud) was
shown to be susceptible to geometry inversion attack [7],

9773

