This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Forgery-aware Adaptive Transformer for Generalizable Synthetic
Image Detection
Huan Liu1,3 * Zichang Tan2 Chuangchuang Tan1,3 Yunchao Wei1,3 Jingdong Wang2 Yao Zhao1,3†
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University 2 Baidu VIS
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing, China

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the emergence and advancement of generative models, such as GANs [13, 25–27] and
* Work done when H. Liu is a long-term intern at Baidu.
† Corresponding author (E-mail: yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn).

Pre-trained
Image Encoder

Classifier

Real
Fake

Contrastive
Objective

Real
Fake

(a) UniFD

Image

Adaptive
Image Encoder

Text
Prompts

Pre-trained
Text Encoder

Align

In this paper, we study the problem of generalizable synthetic image detection, aiming to detect forgery images from
diverse generative methods, e.g., GANs and diffusion models. Cutting-edge solutions start to explore the benefits of
pre-trained models, and mainly follow the fixed paradigm of
solely training an attached classifier, e.g., combining frozen
CLIP-ViT with a learnable linear layer in UniFD [43].
However, our analysis shows that such a fixed paradigm is
prone to yield detectors with insufficient learning regarding
forgery representations. We attribute the key challenge to
the lack of forgery adaptation, and present a novel forgeryaware adaptive transformer approach, namely FatFormer.
Based on the pre-trained vision-language spaces of CLIP,
FatFormer introduces two core designs for the adaption to
build generalized forgery representations. First, motivated
by the fact that both image and frequency analysis are essential for synthetic image detection, we develop a forgeryaware adapter to adapt image features to discern and integrate local forgery traces within image and frequency domains. Second, we find that considering the contrastive objectives between adapted image features and text prompt
embeddings, a previously overlooked aspect, results in a
nontrivial generalization improvement. Accordingly, we introduce language-guided alignment to supervise the forgery
adaptation with image and text prompts in FatFormer. Experiments show that, by coupling these two designs, our approach tuned on 4-class ProGAN data attains a remarkable
detection performance, achieving an average of 98% accuracy to unseen GANs, and surprisingly generalizes to unseen diffusion models with 95% accuracy.

Image

(b) FatFormer

Figure 1. Comparison with fixed pre-trained paradigm. Here,
we illustrate the overview of UniFD [43] and our FatFormer.
In contrast to training an attached classifier, FatFormer builds a
forgery-aware adaptive transformer by aligning the representations
of image and text prompts via contrastive objectives.

diffusion models [9, 14, 16, 42]. These models enable the
creation of hyper-realistic synthetic images, thus raising the
wide concerns of potential abuse and privacy threats. In
response to such security issues, various forgery detection
[36, 37, 52, 54, 56, 57, 61] and anti-spoofing methods [33–
35] have been developed, e.g., image-based methods [3, 59]
focusing on low-level visual artifacts and frequency-based
methods [12, 45] relying on high-frequency pattern analysis. However, we observe big performance degradation
when applying them to unseen images created by GANs or
more recent diffusion models. How to address this problem
has seen significant interest.
Recent approaches [43, 55] turn to explore the utilization of pre-trained models, following the fixed pre-trained
paradigm of solely training an attached classifier, as shown
in Figure 1 (a). A notable example in this field is the UniFD
proposed by Ojha et al. [43], where a pre-trained CLIP-ViT
[10, 46] is employed to encode images into image features
without learning. Subsequently, a linear layer is tuned as a
classifier to determine the credibility of inputs. At a very
high level, their key to success is the employment of a pretrained model in a frozen state, thus providing a learned universal representation (from the pre-training), yet not explicitly tuned in the current synthetic image detection task. In
this way, such a representation will never be overfitted dur-

10770

