This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IBD-SLAM: Learning Image-Based Depth Fusion for Generalizable SLAM
Minghao Yin1
1

Shangzhe Wu2

The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenging problem of visual SLAM with neural scene representations. Recently,
neural scene representations have shown promise for SLAM
to produce dense 3D scene reconstruction with high quality. However, existing methods require scene-specific optimization, leading to time-consuming mapping processes
for each individual scene. To overcome this limitation, we
propose IBD-SLAM, an Image-Based Depth fusion framework for generalizable SLAM. In particular, we adopt a
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) for scene representation.
Inspired by multi-view image-based rendering, instead of
learning a fixed-grid scene representation, we propose to
learn an image-based depth fusion model that fuses depth
maps of multiple reference views into a xyz-map representation. Once trained, this model can be applied to new,
uncalibrated monocular RGBD videos of unseen scenes,
without the need for retraining, and reconstructs full 3D
scenes efficiently with a light-weight pose optimization procedure. We thoroughly evaluate IBD-SLAM on public visual
SLAM benchmarks, outperforming the previous state-ofthe-art while being 10⇥ faster in the mapping stage. Project
page: https://visual-ai.github.io/ibd-slam.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) refers to
the task of creating a map of an unknown environment while
simultaneously determining the location of the camera or
robot within that environment. Visual SLAM specifically
utilizes visual information (such as images from a camera)
to perform this task. This has been a long-standing problem
in computer vision, and much of the recent effort focuses on
improving the accuracy, robustness, and efficiency. Popular
approaches include feature-based methods [16, 24], direct
methods [11, 28], and, more recently, learning-based methods [10, 44]. In particular, neural fields have emerged as
a powerful representation for producing high-quality dense
3D scene reconstructions, such as NICE-SLAM [53], but
† Corresponding author.

2

Kai Han1†

University of Oxford

such methods often require a lengthy training process and
typically only optimize over a single scene at a time.
In this paper, our goal is to design a learning-base SLAM
framework that can efficiently generalize to arbitrary scenes
unseen during training. In particular, we draw inspiration from a recent work, IBRNet [43], which renders novel
views of a 3D scene through a learned image-based fusion
model that generalizes to arbitrary test scenes. We borrow
this powerful idea and propose a learning-based generalizable SLAM framework, dubbed IBD-SLAM. Unlike IBRNet, which learns to fuse RGB images, we propose to learn
an image-based depth fusion model that directly fuses depth
maps from multiple reference frames using a shared canonical xyz-map representation. Crucially, this depth fusion
model is not specific to one particular scene; it is trained on
a large collection of monocular videos, allowing for zeroshot generalization in novel scenes without retraining.
Specifically, the framework interweaves mapping (i.e.,
scene recovery) and tracking (i.e., camera pose estimation)
steps, similar to typical visual SLAM systems. During each
mapping step, given a current frame, we retrieve a set of
temporal neighboring frames and convert their correspondence depth maps into xyz-maps, given the current estimates of their relative poses. We then task the model to predict the xyz-map of the current frame from these reference
xyz-maps of the neighboring frames, through image-based
rendering. This eliminates the need for scene-dependent
features like the fixed feature grid in NICE-SLAM, allowing the model to generalize to unseen scenes at test time.
During each tracking step, we establish the 2D geometric
correspondences, and optimize the camera poses by minimizing the distances of matches of the 3D coordinates in
the xyz-maps.
After pre-training, our model can be applied to new uncalibrated monocular RGBD videos of unseen scenes at test
time, without the need to retrain the model to get any scenedependent representations, and only needs to run a fast optimization process to obtain the poses, resulting in a strong
generalization capability and a heavily reduced computation overhead.
We thoroughly evaluate our framework on public visual
SLAM benchmarks, including Replica [32], ScanNet [6],

10563

