This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EAGLE: Eigen Aggregation Learning for Object-Centric
Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation
Chanyoung Kim* Woojung Han* Dayun Ju
Yonsei University

Seong Jae Hwang†

{chanyoung, dnwjddl, juda0707, seongjae}@yonsei.ac.kr

Eigen Aggregation Module

Abstract
Semantic segmentation has innately relied on extensive
pixel-level annotated data, leading to the emergence of unsupervised methodologies. Among them, leveraging selfsupervised Vision Transformers for unsupervised semantic
segmentation (USS) has been making steady progress with
expressive deep features. Yet, for semantically segmenting images with complex objects, a predominant challenge
remains: the lack of explicit object-level semantic encoding in patch-level features. This technical limitation often
leads to inadequate segmentation of complex objects with
diverse structures. To address this gap, we present a novel
approach, EAGLE, which emphasizes object-centric representation learning for unsupervised semantic segmentation.
Specifically, we introduce EiCue, a spectral technique providing semantic and structural cues through an eigenbasis
derived from the semantic similarity matrix of deep image
features and color affinity from an image. Further, by incorporating our object-centric contrastive loss with EiCue, we
guide our model to learn object-level representations with
intra- and inter-image object-feature consistency, thereby
enhancing semantic accuracy. Extensive experiments on
COCO-Stuff, Cityscapes, and Potsdam-3 datasets demonstrate the state-of-the-art USS results of EAGLE with accurate and consistent semantic segmentation across complex
scenes.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation plays a pivotal role in modern
vision, fundamentally advancing an array of diverse areas including medical imaging [21, 40], autonomous driving [14, 46], and remote sensing imagery [12, 28]. Nevertheless, its reliance on labeled data, while common across
nearly all vision tasks, is especially problematic due to the
laborious and time-consuming process of pixel-level anno* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Project Page: https://micv-yonsei.github.io/eagle2024/

𝓕

Seg.
Head

Cluster
Head

Proj.
Head
Eigenvectors

EiCue

Input Image
Prototypes

Cluster
Head
ObjNCE Loss

(a) Overview of EAGLE

Seg. Result
Input Image

STEGO

HP

Ours

Label

EiCue

(b) Visualizing EAGLE & Baselines

Figure 1. We introduce EAGLE, Eigen AGgregation LEarning
for object-centric unsupervised semantic segmentation. (a) We
first leverage the aggregated eigenvectors, named EiCue, to obtain the semantic structure knowledge of object segments in an image. Based on both semantic and structural cues from the EiCue,
we compute object-centric contrastive loss to learn object-level semantic representation. (b) A visual comparison between EAGLE
and other methods. Our object-level semantic segmentation results
robustly identify objects with complex semantics (e.g., blanket
with vivid stripe patterns) by exploiting strong semantic structure
cues from EiCue.

tation. In response to this challenge, various studies in semantic segmentation tasks have drifted away from relying
solely on human-labeled annotations by exploring weaklysupervised [1, 23, 26, 39, 48], semi-supervised [2, 27, 37],
and unsupervised semantic segmentation (USS) methodologies [8, 15, 16, 20, 22, 36, 43, 52].
Among these learning schemes, the unsupervised approach of USS clearly stands as the most challenging case.
Specifically, compared to the classical unsupervised segmentation methods (e.g., K-means clustering) which produce segments without explicit semantics, USS additionally

3523

