This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Forecasting of 3D Whole-body Human Poses with Grasping Objects
Jiexin Xie1
Shijie Guo1
Haitao Yan1
Qiongjie Cui2, *
1
Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
htyan20@fudan.edu.cn,

cuiqiongjie@126.com

Abstract

Cross-modal External Interaction Learning
Shape

consolidation

Distance

Traditional Major Joint Prediction

…
…

…

…
consolidation

Historical Whole-body
Sequence

…

In the context of computer vision and human-robot interaction, forecasting 3D human poses is crucial for understanding human behavior and enhancing the predictive
capabilities of intelligent systems. While existing methods
have made significant progress, they often focus on predicting major body joints, overlooking fine-grained gestures
and their interaction with objects. Human hand movements, particularly during object interactions, play a pivotal role and provide more precise expressions of human
poses. This work fills this gap and introduces a novel
paradigm: forecasting 3D whole-body human poses with
a focus on grasping objects. This task involves predicting activities across all joints in the body and hands, encompassing the complexities of internal heterogeneity and
external interactivity. To tackle these challenges, we also
propose a novel approach: C3 HOST, cross-context crossmodal consolidation for 3D whole-body pose forecasting,
effectively handles the complexities of internal heterogeneity and external interactivity. C3 HOST involves distinct
steps, including the heterogeneous content encoding and
alignment, and cross-modal feature learning and interaction. These enable us to predict activities across all body
and hand joints, ensuring high-precision whole-body human pose prediction, even during object grasping. Extensive experiments on two benchmarks demonstrate that our
model significantly enhances the accuracy of whole-body
human motion prediction. The project page is available at
https://sites.google.com/view/c3host.

Cross-context Alignment

Predict Whole-body
Sequence

Figure 1. Previous studies focus solely on predicting the motion of
the main joints of body, neglecting hand actions and environmental
factors. To address this gap, this paper introduces a new task: the
forecasting of 3D whole-body human poses with grasping objects.

methods concentrate on forecast major human body (17 or
25 joints), neglecting the fine-grained gestures and their interaction with objects [24, 33, 34, 43, 46]. For person-toobject interaction, hand activities present the pivotal significance, especially in the context of activities involving object
grasping, e.g., lifting a water bottle. Furthermore, we note
that human hand, in combination with major body activities,
is a more precise expressions of human poses, reflecting the
behaviors of grasping/manipulating objects, instructions for
robots, and human underlying intentions [4, 13, 35, 40, 64].
This work aims to address this meaningful issue, simultaneous predicting activities across all joints in both body
and hands, with a particular emphasis on human grasping
of objects, as shown in Figure 1. For this novel task, the
following aspects need to be solved:
• Internal Heterogeneity: Gestures are governed by the
physical structure of human body; but meanwhile,
these elements involve the heterogeneous motion patterns, including magnitude, motion dynamics, etc.

1. Introduction
Forecasting upcoming 3D human poses, conditioned on
the historical ones, is an essential task in human-robot interaction (HRI) [5, 6, 21, 22, 25, 30, 33, 34, 39, 50, 62, 65].
Although this attractive domain has achieved commendable success, it remains a major limitation, i.e., existing

• External Interactivity: The modalities of human motion and object are distinct, and the human-object interaction undergoes dynamic fluctuations across the various timestamps and human components (sometimes
left hand, sometimes right hand). This intricacies gives
rise to varying physical interactions.

* Corresponding author

1726

