This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Post-training Quantization Calibration through Contrastive Learning
Yuzhang Shang1,2 , Gaowen Liu2 , Ramana Rao Kompella2 , Yan Yan1,†
1
Illinois Institute of Technology, 2 Cisco Research
yzshawn@outlook.com, {gaoliu, rkompell}@cisco.com, yyan34@iit.edu

Abstract
Post-training quantization (PTQ) converts a pre-trained
full-precision (FP) model into a quantized model in a
training-free manner. Determining suitable quantization
parameters, such as scaling factors and zero points, is the
primary strategy for mitigating the impact of quantization
noise (calibration) and restoring the performance of the
quantized models. However, the existing activation calibration methods have never considered information degradation between pre- (FP) and post-quantized activations. In
this study, we introduce a well-defined distributional metric from information theory, mutual information, into PTQ
calibration. We aim to calibrate the quantized activations
by maximizing the mutual information between the pre- and
post-quantized activations. To realize this goal, we establish a contrastive learning (CL) framework for the calibration, where the quantization parameters are optimized
through a self-supervised proxy task. Specifically, by leveraging CL during the PTQ calibration, we can benefit from
pulling the positive pairs of quantized and FP activations
collected from the same input samples, while pushing negative pairs from different samples. Thanks to the ingeniously
designed critic function, we avoid the unwanted but oftenencountered collision solution in CL, especially in calibration scenarios where the amount of calibration data is limited. Additionally, we provide a theoretical guarantee that
minimizing our designed loss is equivalent to maximizing
the desired mutual information. Consequently, the quantized activations retain more information, which ultimately
enhances the performance of the quantized network. Experimental results show that our method can effectively serve
as an add-on module to existing SoTA PTQ methods.

1. Introduction
To meet the growing demand for equipping deep neural
networks in resource-constrained edge devices, researchers
have developed network quantization techniques [9], in
which high-precision parameters and activations are con† Corresponding author

verted into low-precision ones. Quantization methods
fall into two main categories: post-training quantization (PTQ) [19–23, 33] and quantization-aware training
(QAT) [14, 30–33, 43]. QAT involves retraining the model
on the labeled training dataset, a process that can be both
time-consuming and computationally demanding. In contrast, PTQ only necessitates a small number of unlabeled
calibration samples to quantize the pre-trained models,
eliminating the need for retraining. This makes PTQ a practical choice for rapid deployment scenarios.
Existing PTQ methods have shown promising results
in maintaining good prediction accuracy even when using 4-bit or 2-bit quantization. The majority of these topperforming methods owe their success to meticulous quantization parameter selection. Metrics such as Mean Squared
Error (MSE) [5, 19, 40] and cosine distance [41] between
the pre- and post-quantization activations in individual layers or modules are commonly used to find the most suitable
scaling factors for quantization. These methods are typically referred to as quantized activation calibration techniques. However, existing calibration methods have not
taken into account the loss of information during the transition from pre- to post-quantized activation.
In the context of PTQ, we desire the FP and quantized
activations (considered as two random variables) to share
as much information as possible, as quantized activations
are directly derived from their FP counterparts. Mutual information [18] can measure the amount of information that
knowing one of these variables provides about the other.
Therefore, in this study, our focus is on the mutual information between FP and quantized activations. Our goal
is to optimize PTQ calibration process (particularly, learn
the suitable quantization parameters), by maximizing the
mutual information between these two types of activations.
By doing so, we aim to preserve as much of the information from the FP activations as possible in the quantized
activations, thereby minimizing the loss in model performance due to quantization. Our proposed method is termed
“Enhancing PTQ Calibration through Contrastive Learning”, abbreviated as CL-Calib. Specifically, we utilize
contrastive learning (CT) in the PTQ calibration process.
We align positive pairs of quantized and FP activations

15921

