This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked AutoDecoder is Effective Multi-Task Vision Generalist
Han Qiu1 , Jiaxing Huang1 , Peng Gao2 , Lewei Lu3 , Xiaoqin Zhang4 , Shijian Lu1 *
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Sensetime Research
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
2

han023@e.ntu.edu.sg, {Jiaxing.Huang, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg, gaopeng@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Inspired by the success of general-purpose models in
NLP, recent studies attempt to unify different vision tasks in
the same sequence format and employ autoregressive Transformers for sequence prediction. They apply uni-directional
attention to capture sequential dependencies and generate
task sequences recursively. However, such autoregressive
Transformers may not fit vision tasks well, as vision task
sequences usually lack the sequential dependencies typically observed in natural languages. In this work, we design Masked AutoDecoder (MAD), an effective multi-task
vision generalist. MAD consists of two core designs. First,
we develop a parallel decoding framework that introduces
bi-directional attention to capture contextual dependencies
comprehensively and decode vision task sequences in parallel. Second, we design a masked sequence modeling approach that learns rich task contexts by masking and reconstructing task sequences. In this way, MAD handles all the
tasks by a single network branch and a simple cross-entropy
loss with minimal task-specific designs. Extensive experiments demonstrate the great potential of MAD as a new
paradigm for unifying various vision tasks. MAD achieves
superior performance and inference efficiency compared
to autoregressive counterparts while obtaining competitive
accuracy with task-specific models. Code will be released
at https://github.com/hanqiu-hq/MAD.

1. Introduction
Computer vision covers various concepts, such as localization, classification, and description, leading to a wide variety of highly structured outputs in different vision tasks, i.e.,
object detection, instance segmentation, keypoint detection,
image captioning, etc. Following natural language processing (NLP), recent methods [7, 22, 32, 44, 45] attempt to
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The proposed MAD outperforms the state-of-the-art
Pix2SeqV2 [7] significantly in inference time, meanwhile achieves
competitive accuracy across four representative vision tasks. The
Average Performance is averaged over four tasks including object
detection (mAP), instance segmentation (mAP), keypoint detection (mAP), and image captioning (B@4). MAD achieves approximately 100× acceleration in inference time.

unify different vision tasks in an autoregressive sequenceto-sequence framework as illustrated in the upper part of
Fig. 2. They first model different vision tasks in the same
sequence format, such as a sequence of coordinate and class
label tokens for object detection, a sequence of contour coordinate tokens for image segmentation, or a sequence of
descriptive sentences for image captioning. Additionally,
the autoregressive Transformers [4, 34, 35], with its specially designed uni-directional attention to capture sequential dependencies, are employed to recursively predict these
vision task sequences.
Despite the success, the autoregressive approach often
struggles on vision tasks due to two major factors: (1)
The discrepancy between vision and language. Language
task sequences [4, 43] heavily follow sequential dependencies while vision task sequences may not, e.g., the next

14152

