This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TexTile: A Differentiable Metric for Texture Tileability
Carlos Rodriguez-Pardo1
1

Dan Casas1

Elena Garces1,2

Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Spain

SSIM

LPIPS

DISTS

2

Jorge Lopez-Moreno1,2

SEDDI, Spain

BRISQUE

TexTile

Figure 1. Existing perceptual metrics, commonly used to evaluate texture synthesis algorithms, typically fail to account for tileability.
Such weakness is depicted in this figure where, for each column, we show tiled versions of textures with (top) and without (bottom) tiling
artifacts. For each column, we highlight using saturated color dots the preferred image (i.e., higher score) according to different metrics. It
can be seen that there is no correlation across existing methods (i.e., saturated dots distributed over top and bottom rows), while our method
TexTile consistently prefers seamless tiled textures (i.e., saturated green dots on the bottom for all columns).

Abstract
We introduce TexTile, a novel differentiable metric to
quantify the degree upon which a texture image can be concatenated with itself without introducing repeating artifacts
(i.e., the tileability). Existing methods for tileable texture
synthesis focus on general texture quality, but lack explicit
analysis of the intrinsic repeatability properties of a texture. In contrast, our TexTile metric effectively evaluates the
tileable properties of a texture, opening the door to more informed synthesis and analysis of tileable textures. Under the
hood, TexTile is formulated as a binary classifier carefully
built from a large dataset of textures of different styles, semantics, regularities, and human annotations. Key to our
method is a set of architectural modifications to baseline
pre-train image classifiers to overcome their shortcomings
at measuring tileability, along with a custom data augmentation and training regime aimed at increasing robustness
and accuracy. We demonstrate that TexTile can be plugged
into different state-of-the-art texture synthesis methods, including diffusion-based strategies, and generate tileable textures while keeping or even improving the overall texture
quality. Furthermore, we show that TexTile can objectively

evaluate any tileable texture synthesis method, whereas the
current mix of existing metrics produces uncorrelated scores
which heavily hinders progress in the field.

1. Introduction
The appearance of 3D digital objects plays a fundamental
role in the overall realism of a virtual environment. To
create realistic textures, many strategies have been widely
explored, including procedural algorithms [19, 28], scanning [22, 45] and, more recently, text-to-image generative
pipelines [7–9]. Among the different properties that we wish
for the synthesized textures (e.g., photorealism, variety in
detail, high resolution), the ability to seamlessly repeat or
tile itself without noticeable artifacts ––its tileability–– is especially important in the frequent case of applying a texture
to a large surface. For example, when texturing the facade
of a building or a field of grass.
Many methods exist that focus on the specific case of
tileable texture synthesis [1, 11, 36, 45, 48, 53, 54]. This has
been achieved, for example, by manipulating image borders
[36], maximizing stationary image properties [45], or conditioning generative models on structured patterns [74]. How-

4439

