This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Comparing the Decision-Making Mechanisms by Transformers and CNNs
via Explanation Methods
Mingqi Jiang, Saeed Khorram, Li Fuxin
Collaborative Robotics and Intelligent Systems (CoRIS) Institute
Oregon State University
{jiangmi, khorrams, lif}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
In order to gain insights about the decision-making of
different visual recognition backbones, we propose two
methodologies, sub-explanation counting and cross-testing,
that systematically applies deep explanation algorithms on
a dataset-wide basis, and compares the statistics generated
from the amount and nature of the explanations. These
methodologies reveal the difference among networks in
terms of two properties called compositionality and disjunctivism. Transformers and ConvNeXt are found to be more
compositional, in the sense that they jointly consider multiple parts of the image in building their decisions, whereas
traditional CNNs and distilled transformers are less compositional and more disjunctive, which means that they use
multiple diverse but smaller set of parts to achieve a confident prediction. Through further experiments, we pinpointed the choice of normalization to be especially important in the compositionality of a model, in that batch normalization leads to less compositionality while group and
layer normalization lead to more. Finally, we also analyze
the features shared by different backbones and plot a landscape of different models based on their feature-use similarity.

1. Introduction
As attention-based Transformer networks show remarkable
performance in image recognition tasks [5, 7, 9, 14, 38],
understanding and comparing Transformer and convolution
networks (CNNs) at a deeper level become important. Prior
work [3, 17] has illustrated interesting differences between
CNNs and transformers, but many questions have not been
answered. Do transformers have different inner working
mechanisms? Why are some transformers seemingly more
robust than CNNs? Recent work, such as ConvNeXt [15],
utilized design principles in transformer approaches to design a network based on depthwise convolutions and obtained excellent results. Does that indicate that the impor-

tant contributing factor is not the attention itself but those
design principles? If so, which specific design principles
particularly affect the decision-making of networks? Better
answers to those questions would help us to gain more insights into those deep and complicated black-box networks.
In this paper, we propose a novel methodology to examine these questions through deep explanation algorithms.
Explanation algorithms have improved significantly in recent years and can generate accurate explanations that
can be verified through intervention experiments on images [21, 26]. Recent search-based explanation algorithms
can find a comprehensive set of minimally sufficient explanations (MSEs) [30], defined as the minimal set of patches
that, if shown to the network, lead to predictions that are
almost as confident as predictions from the full image. The
comprehensiveness of the set of MSEs produced by the
search algorithm significantly surpasses traditional saliency
maps that can only produce one explanation per image.
While per-image explanation methods have greatly improved, they still do not provide a way to obtain a global
understanding of the behavior of different network architectures. In this paper, we address this by extracting summary statistics from the explanations for each image and
then combining them to obtain dataset-wide statistics. With
this approach, we hope to obtain insights that are no longer
merely anecdotal, but statistically significant and verifiable.
We propose two approaches in this paper. The first is
sub-explanation counting, which investigates how networks
perform on partial evidence by deleting patches from MSEs
and examining the likelihood ratio between the predicted
conditional probability on those subsets of patches and the
full image (Fig. 1 Top-Right). The number of patch conjunctions that have high likelihood ratios indicates a type of
behavior we call compositional, which means that the classification decision is built jointly on multiple local patches,
and removing some of the patches merely lowers the confidence but may not change the classification decision.
We have observed significant differences across architectures regarding compositionality: ConvNeXt and trans-

9546

