This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Low-power, Continuous Remote Behavioral Localization with Event Cameras
Friedhelm Hamann1,5 , Suman Ghosh1 , Ignacio Juárez Martı́nez2 ,
Tom Hart3 , Alex Kacelnik2,5 and Guillermo Gallego1,4,5 .
1
Technische Universität Berlin, 2 Oxford University, 3 Oxford Brookes University,
4
Einstein Center for Digital Future, 5 Science of Intelligence Excellence Cluster.

Abstract
Researchers in natural science need reliable methods for
quantifying animal behavior. Recently, numerous computer
vision methods emerged to automate the process. However, observing wild species at remote locations remains
a challenging task due to difficult lighting conditions and
constraints on power supply and data storage. Event cameras offer unique advantages for battery-dependent remote
monitoring due to their low power consumption and high
dynamic range capabilities. We use this novel sensor to
quantify a behavior in Chinstrap penguins called ecstatic
display. We formulate the problem as a temporal action
detection task, determining the start and end times of the
behavior. For this purpose, we recorded a colony of breeding penguins in Antarctica for several weeks and labeled
event data on 16 nests. The developed method consists of
a generator of candidate time intervals (proposals) and a
classifier of the actions within them. The experiments show
that the event cameras’ natural response to motion is effective for continuous behavior monitoring and detection,
reaching a mean average precision (mAP) of 58% (which
increases to 63% in good weather conditions). The results
also demonstrate the robustness against various lighting
conditions contained in the challenging dataset. The lowpower capabilities of the event camera allow it to record
significantly longer than with a conventional camera. This
work pioneers the use of event cameras for remote wildlife
observation, opening new interdisciplinary opportunities.
https:// tub-rip.github.io/ eventpenguins/

1. Introduction
Quantification of wildlife animal behavior is key to several
disciplines from ecology [1] to conservation [2] and neuroscience [3]. Behavioral studies need to know when, where,
and for how long a particular behavior occurs to understand
it or to draw conclusions about animal relationships [4],
feeding habits [5], welfare [6] or culture [7].
Advances in computer vision have recently led to the

Figure 1. Remote wildlife monitoring using an event camera. Top:
We recorded a colony of breeding Chinstrap penguins in Antarctica using a DAVIS346 camera. Bottom: Penguins show a behavior called “ecstatic display” (ED), visualized here using event data
(positive events in blue, negative events in red). We provide the
dataset with labels (Ground Truth) and investigate methods to determine the start and end times of this behavior (Prediction).

development of various systems (data acquisition and processing) for automated quantification of animal behavior
[3, 8, 9]. It is a challenging topic because: (i) systems
for wildlife monitoring are expected to work under varying lighting and weather conditions (snow, rain, fog), (ii)
long-term observation of animals at remote places puts constraints on power usage and storage of the recording system,
(iii) extracting biologically relevant information from large
amounts of data is difficult and time-consuming, (iv) there
is a lack of curated datasets with ground truth labels for developing robust machine learning systems.
We tackle the problem of quantifying the Ecstatic Display (ED) in Chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica)
during a month of their breeding season in Antarctica. The
ED is a unique behavior where nesting penguins stand up18612

