This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Depth Prompting for Sensor-Agnostic Depth Estimation
Jin-Hwi Park1 , Chanhwi Jeong1 , Junoh Lee2 and Hae-Gon Jeon1,2 *
1
AI Graduate School, 2 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, GIST, South Korea
{jinhwipark,chanhwij,juno}@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Scene depths have been used as one of the key elements
for various visual perception tasks such as 3D object detection [65], action recognition [66], and augmented reality [23, 75], etc. For accurate depth acquisition, there have
been various attempts in the computer vision field. Since
the advances in deep learning, its powerful representational
capacity has been applied to explain scene configurations,
which is feasible even with only single images. Unfortunately, single image depth estimation cannot produce metric
scale 3D depths when camera parameters change and out-ofdistributions on unseen datasets happen [20].
* Corresponding author

RGB

Foundation Model

Init depth

Sparse Depth

Prompt Module

Affinity

Output Depth

Training

RGBD

Zero-shot Inference

C.Former

Apple LiDAR

Intel RealSense

C.Former

SoTA

Apple ARkit

Ours

Dense depth maps have been used as a key element of visual perception tasks. There have been tremendous efforts to
enhance the depth quality, ranging from optimization-based
to learning-based methods. Despite the remarkable progress
for a long time, their applicability in the real world is limited due to systematic measurement biases such as density,
sensing pattern, and scan range. It is well-known that the
biases make it difficult for these methods to achieve their
generalization. We observe that learning a joint representation for input modalities (e.g., images and depth), which
most recent methods adopt, is sensitive to the biases. In this
work, we disentangle those modalities to mitigate the biases with prompt engineering. For this, we design a novel
depth prompt module to allow the desirable feature representation according to new depth distributions from either
sensor types or scene configurations. Our depth prompt can
be embedded into foundation models for monocular depth estimation. Through this embedding process, our method helps
the pretrained model to be free from restraint of depth scan
range and to provide absolute scale depth maps. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method through extensive
evaluations. Source code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/JinhwiPark/DepthPrompting.

nuScenes LiDAR

Figure 1. An overview of our depth prompting for sensor-agnostic
depth estimation. Leveraging a foundation model for monocular
depth estimation, our framework produces a high-fidelity depth
map in metric scale and provides impressive zero/few-shot generality. C.Former indicates CompletionFormer [73]. More details and
examples are reported in Sec. 4.5 and supplementary materials.

Toward depth information easy to acquire in metric scale,
active sensing methods such as LiDAR (Light Detection and
Ranging) [54], ToF (Time of Flight) [30], and structured
light [72] have gained interest as a practical solution. Although the active sensing methods enable real-time scene
depth acquisitions in a single shot, they only provide sparse
measurements. For dense predictions, spatial propagation,
modeling an affinity among input image pixels, is necessary [9, 35, 36, 45, 46, 73]. Note that its affinity map is
constructed based on input images, and is jointly optimized
with fixed depth patterns. Different from real-world scenarios where various types of depth sensors (e.g., Velodyne LiDAR [54], Microsoft Kinect [74], Intel RealSense [27], and
Apple LiDAR sensor [40], etc.) are used, the mainstream of
standard benchmarks [59] for this task is to only use KITTI
dataset [17] captured from a 64-Line LiDAR and random

9859

