This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SurroundSDF: Implicit 3D Scene Understanding Based on Signed Distance Field
Lizhe Liu1⇤

Bohua Wang2⇤§ Hongwei Xie1⇤ Daqi Liu1 Li Liu1 Zhiqiang Tian2
Kuiyuan Yang1 Bing Wang1†
1
2
Xiaomi EV
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Abstract

Vision-centric 3D environment understanding is both vital and challenging for autonomous driving systems. Recently, object-free methods have attracted considerable attention. Such methods perceive the world by predicting
the semantics of discrete voxel grids but fail to construct
continuous and accurate obstacle surfaces. To this end, in
this paper, we propose SurroundSDF to implicitly predict
the signed distance field (SDF) and semantic field for the
continuous perception from surround images. Specifically,
we introduce a query-based approach and utilize SDF constrained by the Eikonal formulation to accurately describe
the surfaces of obstacles. Furthermore, considering the
absence of precise SDF ground truth, we propose a novel
weakly supervised paradigm for SDF, referred to as the
Sandwich Eikonal formulation, which emphasizes applying correct and dense constraints on both sides of the surface, thereby enhancing the perceptual accuracy of the surface. Experiments suggest that our method achieves SOTA
for both occupancy prediction and 3D scene reconstruction
tasks on the nuScenes dataset.

1. Introduction
With the recent advancement of 3D object detection algorithms [10, 11, 16, 18, 21, 24], vision-centric autonomous
driving system become more practicable. Nevertheless, the
persisting challenges related to the long-tail problem and
the coarse depiction of the 3D scene underscore its insufficiency. Consequently, a deeper comprehension of 3D geometry and semantics is needed for safety and reliability.
This paper delves into a novel vision-centric paradigm of
dense and continuous 3D scene understanding.
Current approaches of dense 3D prediction can be classified into two categories, 3D reconstruction and 3D perception. Specifically, 3D reconstruction algorithms [6, 33] generate dense point clouds enriched with semantic informa* Equal Contribution.
§ Work done during an internship at Xiaomi EV.
† Corresponding Author.

a. SIREN

b. LODE

c. Ours

d. Ours with semantic

Figure 1. The scene perspective results from surround images
input. a, b. The result of SIREN and LODE supervision with
camera-only input (the original methods are point cloud-based). c.
Our result. d. Our result with semantics.

tion by projecting depth maps and 2D semantic maps into
3D space. 3D perception methods [3, 12, 17, 25, 35, 41, 46]
predict the occupied status and the semantic of 3D voxel
grids. However, either method proves to be redundant or
can only predict coarse-grained discrete grids.
Instead, we develop a vision-centric framework to describe 3D scenes leveraging neural implicit Signed Distance
Function (SDF) representation, which we refer to as SurroundSDF. Generally, we aim to: (1) Continuously describe the 3D scene by reconstructing smooth surfaces; (2)
Explore the difficulty associated with the utilization of SDF
representation and pose an appropriate training strategy; (3)
Exploit the strong representation to kill two birds with one
stone, addressing 3D semantic segmentation and continuous 3D geometry reconstruction within one framework.
In pursuit of the first and the third objectives, we employ SDF to represent the canonical 3D scene in terms
of distance from the surface. Furthermore, we construct
an implicit field that encompasses both semantics and geometry by exploiting this strong representation. However,
it’s still nontrivial to accomplish the SDF modeling, where
complete surface and normal vectors, which are crucial supervisions, cannot be accurately computed. To this end,
SIREN [34] proposed a weakly supervised implicit per-

21614

