This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DL3DV-10K: A Large-Scale Scene Dataset for Deep Learning-based 3D Vision
Lu Ling1* , Yichen Sheng1* , Zhi Tu1 , Wentian Zhao2 , Cheng Xin3 , Kun Wan 2 ,
Lantao Yu2 , Qianyu Guo1 , Zixun Yu 4 , Yawen Lu1 , Xuanmao Li5 ,
Xingpeng Sun 1 , Rohan Ashok1 , Aniruddha Mukherjee1 , Hao Kang 6 , Xiangrui Kong1 ,
Gang Hua6 , Tianyi Zhang1 , Bedrich Benes1 , Aniket Bera1
1
4

Google Inc. ,

5

Purdue University,

2

Adobe Inc. ,

3

Rutgers University

Huazhong University of Science and Technology,

6

Wormpex AI Research

Figure 1. We introduce DL3DV-10K, a large-scale, scene dataset capturing real-world scenarios. DL3DV-10K contains 10,510 videos
at 4K resolution spanning 65 types of point-of-interest (POI) locations, covering a wide range of everyday areas. With the fine-grained
annotation on scene diversity and complexity, DL3DV-10K enables a comprehensive benchmark for novel view synthesis and supports
learning-based 3D representation techniques in acquiring a universal prior at scale.

Abstract
We have witnessed significant progress in deep learningbased 3D vision, ranging from neural radiance field
(NeRF) based 3D representation learning to applications in
novel view synthesis (NVS). However, existing scene-level
datasets for deep learning-based 3D vision, limited to either synthetic environments or a narrow selection of realworld scenes, are quite insufficient. This insufficiency not
only hinders a comprehensive benchmark of existing methods but also caps what could be explored in deep learningbased 3D analysis. To address this critical gap, we present
DL3DV-10K, a large-scale scene dataset, featuring 51.2
million frames from 10,510 videos captured from 65 types
of point-of-interest (POI) locations, covering both bounded
and unbounded scenes, with different levels of reflection,
transparency, and lighting. We conducted a comprehensive
benchmark of recent NVS methods on DL3DV-10K, which
revealed valuable insights for future research in NVS. In
addition, we have obtained encouraging results in a pilot
∗ Joint first authors.

study to learn generalizable NeRF from DL3DV-10K, which
manifests the necessity of a large-scale scene-level dataset
to forge a path toward a foundation model for learning 3D
representation. Our DL3DV-10K dataset, benchmark results, and models will be publicly accessible.

1. Introduction
The evolution in deep 3D representation learning, driven
by essential datasets, boosts various tasks in 3D vision [6,
14, 26–28, 30, 31]. Notably, the inception of Neural Radiance Fields [20] (NeRF), offering a new approach through
a continuous high-dimensional neural network, revolutionized leaning-based 3D representation and novel view synthesis (NVS). NeRF excels at producing detailed and realistic views, overcoming challenges faced by traditional 3D reconstruction methods and rendering techniques. Additionally, it inspires waves of innovative developments such as
NeRF variants [3, 4, 9, 32, 37, 42] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [16], significantly enhancing experiences in
virtual reality, augmented reality, and advanced simulations.

22160

