This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency-aware Event-based Video Deblurring for Real-World Motion Blur
Taewoo Kim∗
KAIST

Hoonhee Cho∗
KAIST

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST

intelpro@kaist.ac.kr

gnsgnsgml@kaist.ac.kr

kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Blur

Abstract

1. Introduction
Motion blur often occurs due to the abrupt motion of the object and/or the camera during the exposure time of a framebased camera. Motion deblurring aims to restore the latent
sharp frame from blurred frame, which is a highly ill-posed
problem [1, 16, 20]. With the recent development of deep
learning methods [27, 40, 59, 63], considerable progress has
been made in the ﬁeld of motion deblurring. However, it
still fails in cases of substantial motion magnitude.
Event cameras record per-pixel brightness changes with
micro-second-level temporal resolutions. Thanks to their
* The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.

Event
s

Spatial Domains

Time

Video deblurring aims to restore sharp frames from
blurred video clips. Despite notable progress in video deblurring works, it is still a challenging problem because of
the loss of motion information during the duration of the
exposure time. Since event cameras can capture clear motion information asynchronously with high temporal resolution, several works exploit the event camera for deblurring
as they can provide abundant motion information. However, despite these approaches, there were few cases of
actively exploiting the long-range temporal dependency of
videos. To tackle these deﬁciencies, we present an eventbased video deblurring framework by actively utilizing temporal information from videos. To be speciﬁc, we ﬁrst introduce a frequency-based cross-modal feature enhancement
module. Second, we propose event-guided video alignment modules by considering the valuable characteristics
of the event and videos. In addition, we designed a hybrid
camera system to collect the ﬁrst real-world event-based
video deblurring dataset. For the ﬁrst time, we build a
dataset containing synchronized high-resolution real-world
blurred videos and corresponding sharp videos and event
streams. Experimental results validate that our frameworks
signiﬁcantly outperform the state-of-the-art frame-based
and event-based deblurring works in the various datasets.
The project pages are available at https://sites.
google.com/view/fevd-cvpr2024.

Sharp

Frequency Domains

Figure 1. The visualization of blur and sharp videos with event sequences in spatial and frequency domains. We utilize the discrete
fourier transform (DFT) to visualize the frequency spectrum.

high dynamic range and motion blur resilience, event cameras can be effectively utilized in extreme scenarios across
diverse ﬁelds [4, 9, 10, 53]. In particular, event cameras
provide degradation information of blurred frames for motion deblurring. Thus, recent event-based motion deblurring
works [21, 42, 43, 62] utilized the advantages of event cameras to restore the sharp frames from motion blurred ones.
However, there are still unexplored aspects in eventbased deblurring research. In conventional frame-based
video deblurring, temporal information from video has been
actively utilized to improve restoration quality. In contrast, event-based motion deblurring still predominantly focuses on single-image deblurring despite the rich temporal information from event cameras. Although previous
works [21, 43] use a pair of consecutive images for deblurring, there is currently no research actively leveraging the
temporal information in larger continuous video sequences.
In this paper, we ﬁrst explore the potential of rich temporal information of the events for video deblurring. To
effectively leverage the characteristics of both the video

24966

