This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAD-SIGNet: CAD Language Inference from Point Clouds
using Layer-wise Sketch Instance Guided Attention

†

Mohammad Sadil Khan†

Elona Dupont†

Sk Aziz Ali†∗

mdsadilkhan99@gmail.com

elona.dupont@uni.lu

sk aziz.ali@dfki.de

Kseniya Cherenkova‡†

Anis Kacem†

Djamila Aouada†

kseniya.cherenkova@uni.lu

anis.kacem@uni.lu

djamila.aouada@uni.lu

SnT, University of Luxembourg, ∗ German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, ‡ Artec3D

User Controlled Sequence Generation

Full Design History Recovery
CAD-SIGNet
Input point cloud

CAD-SIGNet
Step 2

Step 1

Choose
Sketch Plane

Choose
Sketch

Final
Model

CAD-SIGNet
Input
Input point cloud

User Input

Conditional Auto Completion

Figure 1. Full design history recovery from an input point cloud (top-left) and CAD-SIGNet - user interaction (bottom-left and right).

Abstract
Reverse engineering in the realm of Computer-Aided Design (CAD) has been a longstanding aspiration, though
not yet entirely realized. Its primary aim is to uncover
the CAD process behind a physical object given its 3D
scan. We propose CAD-SIGNet, an end-to-end trainable
and aeto-regressive architecture to recover the design history of a CAD model represented as a sequence of sketchand-extrusion from an input point cloud. Our model learns
CAD visual-language representations by layer-wise crossattention between point cloud and CAD language embedding. In particular, a new Sketch instance Guided Attention
(SGA) module is proposed in order to reconstruct the finegrained details of the sketches. Thanks to its auto-regressive
nature, CAD-SIGNet not only reconstructs a unique full design history of the corresponding CAD model given an input point cloud but also provides multiple plausible design
choices. This allows for an interactive reverse engineering scenario by providing designers with multiple next step
choices along with the design process. Extensive experiments on publicly available CAD datasets showcase the effectiveness of our approach against existing baseline models in two settings, namely, full design history recovery and
conditional auto-completion from point clouds.

1. Introduction
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) has become the de facto
method for designing, drafting, and modeling in various
industries [8, 32]. 3D reverse engineering is the process
of inferring a CAD model given a 3D scan. This procedure requires the expertise of designers and can be timeconsuming [9, 43]. Towards the automation of this procedure, several works focused on decomposing point clouds
into parametric primitives allowing the reconstruction of
the final CAD model [9, 16, 23, 25, 35]. However, CAD
modeling consists of a sequential process where designers
draw 2D sketches (e.g. lines, arcs) and apply CAD operations (e.g. extrusion, chamfer) [42, 43]. Recovering these
intermediate design steps is crucial as it enables the editablity and re-usability of different object parts sharing the
same functionality. For instance, a chair can be composed
of three design steps, legs, seat, and back rest. Retrieving
these steps can allow for editing the legs to be taller, reusing
the back rest in another chair design, etc [19]. Nevertheless,
identifying adequate design steps requires design expertise.
Mohammad Sadil Khan, Elona Dupont, Anis Kacem, and Djamila
Aouada are affiliated to SnT, University of Luxembourg. Sk Aziz Ali is
affiliated to SnT, University of Luxembourg and German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence. Most of the work conducted by Sk Aziz Ali
took place when at SnT, University of Luxembourg. Kseniya Cherenkova
is affiliated to both SnT, University of Luxembourg and Artec3D.

4713

