This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanNorm: Learning Normal Diffusion Model for High-quality and Realistic
3D Human Generation
Xin Huang1†,* , Ruizhi Shao2* , Qi Zhang1 , Hongwen Zhang2 , Ying Feng1 ,
Yebin Liu2 , Qing Wang1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 2 Tsinghua University

Figure 1. Taking text descriptions as input, HumanNorm can generate 3D human models with superior geometric quality and realistic
textures. The 3D human models can be exported as meshes and texture maps, making them suitable for downstream applications.

Abstract
Recent text-to-3D methods employing diffusion models
have made significant advancements in 3D human generation. However, these approaches face challenges due to
the limitations of text-to-image diffusion models, which lack
an understanding of 3D structures. Consequently, these
methods struggle to achieve high-quality human generation, resulting in smooth geometry and cartoon-like appearances. In this paper, we propose HumanNorm, a novel
approach for high-quality and realistic 3D human generation. The main idea is to enhance the model’s 2D perception of 3D geometry by learning a normal-adapted diffusion model and a normal-aligned diffusion model. The
normal-adapted diffusion model can generate high-fidelity
normal maps corresponding to user prompts with viewdependent and body-aware text. The normal-aligned diffusion model learns to generate color images aligned with
† Work done during an internship at Tsinghua University.

* Equal contribution.

the normal maps, thereby transforming physical geometry
details into realistic appearance. Leveraging the proposed
normal diffusion model, we devise a progressive geometry generation strategy and a multi-step Score Distillation
Sampling (SDS) loss to enhance the performance of 3D
human generation. Comprehensive experiments substantiate HumanNorm’s ability to generate 3D humans with intricate geometry and realistic appearances. HumanNorm
outperforms existing text-to-3D methods in both geometry
and texture quality. The project page of HumanNorm is
https://humannorm.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Large-scale generative models have achieved significant
breakthroughs in diverse domains, including motion [42],
audio [1, 26], and 2D image generation [25, 30, 31, 33, 34].
However, the pursuit of high-quality 3D content generation [5, 28, 38, 40] following the success of 2D generation poses a novel and meaningful challenge. Within the

4568

