This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SkySense: A Multi-Modal Remote Sensing Foundation Model Towards Universal
Interpretation for Earth Observation Imagery
Xin Guo1 *, Jiangwei Lao1 *, Bo Dang§2 *,
Yingying Zhang , Lei Yu , Lixiang Ru1 , Liheng Zhong1 , Ziyuan Huang1 , Kang Wu§2 , Dingxiang Hu3,1 ,
Huimei He3,1 , Jian Wang1 , Jingdong Chen1 , Ming Yang1† , Yongjun Zhang2 , Yansheng Li2†
1
Ant Group 2 Wuhan University 3 MYBank
{bangzhu.gx, wenshuo.ljw}@antgroup.com, bodang@whu.edu.cn
1

1

Abstract
Prior studies on Remote Sensing Foundation Model
(RSFM) reveal immense potential towards a generic model
for Earth Observation. Nevertheless, these works primarily focus on a single modality without temporal and geocontext modeling, hampering their capabilities for diverse
tasks. In this study, we present SkySense, a generic billionscale model, pre-trained on a curated multi-modal Remote
Sensing Imagery (RSI) dataset with 21.5 million temporal
sequences. SkySense incorporates a factorized multi-modal
spatiotemporal encoder taking temporal sequences of optical and Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data as input. This
encoder is pre-trained by our proposed Multi-Granularity
Contrastive Learning to learn representations across different modal and spatial granularities. To further enhance the
RSI representations by the geo-context clue, we introduce
Geo-Context Prototype Learning to learn region-aware prototypes upon RSI’s multi-modal spatiotemporal features. To
our best knowledge, SkySense is the largest Multi-Modal
RSFM to date, whose modules can be flexibly combined or
used individually to accommodate various tasks. It demonstrates remarkable generalization capabilities on a thorough evaluation encompassing 16 datasets over 7 tasks,
from single- to multi-modal, static to temporal, and classification to localization. SkySense surpasses 18 recent RSFMs
in all test scenarios. Specifically, it outperforms the latest
models such as GFM, SatLas and Scale-MAE by a large
margin, i.e., 2.76%, 3.67% and 3.61% on average respectively. We will release the pre-trained weights to facilitate
future research and Earth Observation applications.

1. Introduction
Remote Sensing Imagery (RSI) interpretation is crucial in
understanding our common home, the Earth [16, 60], via
* Equally contributing first authors. † Corresponding authors. § Work
done during the internship of the author at Ant Group.

Figure 1. SkySense has achieved superior performance on 16
datasets over 7 distinct tasks compared with 18 state-of-the-art
RSFMs and supports a board range of EO imagery interpretations.

quite diverse tasks [5, 13, 43, 72], e.g. crop monitoring,
natural disaster management, etc. Every task may require
significant dedicated efforts and resources to build a taskspecific model. Recently, Foundation Model emerges as
a pre-trained generic model that excels in a wide range of
downstream tasks [70, 76]. Hence, there is a soaring interest
in exploring a comprehensive Remote Sensing Foundation
Model (RSFM) for many Earth Observation (EO) tasks.
The key question naturally arises: What is essential for
a RSFM? First of all, an ideal RSFM should possess the
ability to perceive multi-modal temporal RSI. EO heavily
relies on multi-modal time series of remote sensing data,
including temporal optical and Synthetic Aperture Radar
(SAR) data. Individual modality offers unique advantages
and complements to each other. For example, optical images provide rich spectral bands and texture details but are
susceptible to weather [77]. In contrast, SAR sensors cap-

27672

