This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EvalCrafter: Benchmarking and Evaluating Large Video Generation Models
Yaofang Liu1,2, * Xiaodong Cun1, * Xuebo Liu3 Xintao Wang1
Yong Zhang1 Haoxin Chen1 Yang Liu4† Tieyong Zeng4 Raymond Chan2† Ying Shan1
1
2
3
Tencent AI Lab
City University of Hong Kong
University of Macau
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Project Page: http://evalcrafter.github.io

Abstract
The vision and language generative models have been
overgrown in recent years. For video generation, various
open-sourced models and public-available services have
been developed to generate high-quality videos. However,
these methods often use a few metrics, e.g., FVD [56] or
IS [45], to evaluate the performance. We argue that it is hard
to judge the large conditional generative models from the
simple metrics since these models are often trained on very
large datasets with multi-aspect abilities. Thus, we propose a
novel framework and pipeline for exhaustively evaluating the
performance of the generated videos. Our approach involves
generating a diverse and comprehensive list of 700 prompts
for text-to-video generation, which is based on an analysis of
real-world user data and generated with the assistance of a
large language model. Then, we evaluate the state-of-the-art
video generative models on our carefully designed benchmark, in terms of visual qualities, content qualities, motion
qualities, and text-video alignment with 17 well-selected objective metrics. To obtain the final leaderboard of the models,
we further fit a series of coefficients to align the objective
metrics to the users’ opinions. Based on the proposed human
alignment method, our final score shows a higher correlation
than simply averaging the metrics, showing the effectiveness
of the proposed evaluation method.

1. Introduction
The charm of the large generative models is sweeping the
world, e.g., the well-known ChatGPT and GPT4 [37] have
shown human-level abilities in several aspects, including
coding, solving math problems, and even visual understanding, which can be used to interact with our human beings
using any knowledge in a conversational way. As for the generative models for visual content creation, Stable Diffusion
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author

Style

Actions

Animal

Human vehicle

plant

E
AL
CRAFTER

Food
Text

Camera motion electronic
landscape Object
weather

Figure 1. We propose EvalCrafter, a comprehensive framework for
benchmarking and evaluating the text-to-video models, including
the well-defined prompt types in grey and the multiple evaluation
aspects in black circles.

(SD) [43] and SDXL [40] play very important roles since
they are the most powerful publicly available models that
can generate high-quality images from any text prompts.
Beyond text-to-image (T2I), taming diffusion model
for video generation has also progressed rapidly. Early
works (Imagen-Viedo [23], Make-A-Video [49]) utilize the
cascaded models for video generation directly. Powered by
the image generation priors in SD, LVDM [21] and MagicVideo [69] have been proposed to train the temporal layers
to efficiently generate videos. Apart from the academic papers, several commercial services also can generate videos
from text or images, e.g., Gen2 [18] and PikaLabs [5]. Although we can not get the technique details of these services,
they are not evaluated and compared with other methods.
However, all current large text-to-video (T2V) models only
use previous GAN-based metrics like FVD [56] for evaluation, which only concerns the distribution matching between
the generated video and the real videos, other than the pairs
between the text prompt and the generated video. Differently,
we argue that a good evaluation method should consider the

22139

