This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Infrared Adversarial Car Stickers
Xiaopei Zhu1 Yuqiu Liu2 Zhanhao Hu3 Jianmin Li4 Xiaolin Hu4,5,6 *
1
School of Integrated Circuits, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Technology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley, California, USA
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
THBI, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
6
Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR), Beijing, China
{zxp18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{liuyuqiu99, zhanhaohu.cs}@gmail.com
{lijianmin, xlhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Infrared physical adversarial examples are of great signiﬁcance for studying the security of infrared AI systems
that are widely used in our lives such as autonomous driving. Previous infrared physical attacks mainly focused on
2D infrared pedestrian detection which may not fully manifest its destructiveness to AI systems. In this work, we
propose a physical attack method against infrared detectors based on 3D modeling, which is applied to a real car.
The goal is to design a set of infrared adversarial stickers to
make cars invisible to infrared detectors at various viewing
angles, distances, and scenes. We build a 3D infrared car
model with real infrared characteristics and propose an infrared adversarial pattern generation method based on 3D
mesh shadow. We propose a 3D control points-based mesh
smoothing algorithm and use a set of smoothness loss functions to enhance the smoothness of adversarial meshes and
facilitate the sticker implementation. Besides, We designed
the aluminum stickers and conducted physical experiments
on two real Mercedes-Benz A200L cars. Our adversarial
stickers hid the cars from Faster RCNN, an object detector,
at various viewing angles, distances, and scenes. The attack
success rate (ASR) was 91.49% for real cars. In comparison, the ASRs of random stickers and no sticker were only
6.21% and 0.66%, respectively. In addition, the ASRs of the
designed stickers against six unseen object detectors such
as YOLOv3 and Deformable DETR were between 73.35%95.80%, showing good transferability of the attack performance across detectors.
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Infrared attack effect on real cars. (a) Visible light view
of real cars. (b) Infrared view of real cars. C: clean car. R: car
with random shape stickers. A: car with adversarial stickers. The
numbers above the bounding boxes are object conﬁdence scores
(%) with 0.6 threshold. Our adversarial stickers hid the car from
Faster RCNN at various viewing angles, distances and scenes. In
comparison, the clean car and the car with random shape stickers
were detected at the same situation.

1. Introduction
It is well known that deep learning models can be misled
by carefully designed perturbations to the input which is
called adversarial example, and the perturbation process is
called adversarial attack. Adversarial attacks can be di-

24284

