This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpatialTracker: Tracking Any 2D Pixels in 3D Space
Yuxi Xiao1,3* Qianqian Wang2* Shangzhan Zhang1,3 Nan Xue3
Sida Peng1 Yujun Shen3 Xiaowei Zhou1†
1

Zhejiang University

2

UC Berkeley

3

Ant Group

Figure 1. Tracking 2D pixels in 3D space. To estimate 2D motion under the occlusion and complex 3D motion, we lift 2D pixels into
3D and perform tracking in the 3D space. Two cases of the estimated 3D and 2D trajectories of a waving butterfly (top) and a group of
swimming dolphins (bottom) are illustrated.

Abstract
Recovering dense and long-range pixel motion in videos
is a challenging problem. Part of the difficulty arises
from the 3D-to-2D projection process, leading to occlusions
and discontinuities in the 2D motion domain. While 2D
motion can be intricate, we posit that the underlying 3D
motion can often be simple and low-dimensional. In this
work, we propose to estimate point trajectories in 3D space
to mitigate the issues caused by image projection. Our
method, named SpatialTracker, lifts 2D pixels to 3D using
monocular depth estimators, represents the 3D content of
each frame efficiently using a triplane representation, and
performs iterative updates using a transformer to estimate
3D trajectories. Tracking in 3D allows us to leverage as∗ The first two authors contributed equally. The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG.
† Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

rigid-as-possible (ARAP) constraints while simultaneously
learning a rigidity embedding that clusters pixels into
different rigid parts. Extensive evaluation shows that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art tracking performance
both qualitatively and quantitatively, particularly in challenging scenarios such as out-of-plane rotation. And our
project page is available at https://henry123-boy.
github.io/SpaTracker/.

1. Introduction
Motion estimation has historically been approached through
two main paradigms: feature tracking [37, 38, 58, 64] and
optical flow [1, 19, 62]. While each type of method enables
numerous applications, neither of them fully captures the
motion in a video: optical flow only produces motion for
adjacent frames, whereas feature tracking only tracks sparse
pixels.
An ideal solution would involve the ability to estimate

20406

