This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Category Agnostic Model for Visual Rearrangment
Yuyi Liu1,2 , Xinhang Song1,2 , Weijie Li1,2 , Xiaohan Wang1 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
{yuyi.liu, xinhang.song, weijie.li, xiaohan.wang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
sqjiang@ict.ac.cn
Scene Change Representation

Abstract

1. Introduction
Rearrangement task remains a practical challenge for embodied agents that assist humans in real life, whose goal
is to bring a given physical environment into the goal state
with a goal specification [2]. In this paper, we focus on a
branch of the general rearrangement task based on ExperienceGoal, i.e., visual rearrangement task[45], which requires an agent to recover the scene configuration after it
was shuffled randomly. Due to the excessive complexity of

pixel

point cloud

label + pos

……

Statue
at
(0.83, 0.92, 0.18)

……

Statue
at
(0.81, 0.92, 0.16)

……

Scene Change Detection (SCD) Sensitivity
Scene Change Matching (SCM) Simplicity

10000-dims

500-dims

1-dim

……

SCD Sensitivity

Observations in Shuffled Environment
SCM Simplicity

This paper presents a novel category agnostic model
for visual rearrangement task, which can help an embodied agent to physically recover the shuffled scene configuration without any category concepts to the goal configuration. Previous methods usually follow a similar architecture, completing the rearrangement task by aligning the
scene changes of the goal and shuffled configuration, according to the semantic scene graphs. However, constructing scene graphs requires the inference of category labels,
which not only causes the accuracy drop of the entire task
but also limits the application in real world scenario. In
this paper, we delve deep into the essence of visual rearrangement task and focus on the two most essential issues, scene change detection and scene change matching.
We utilize the movement and the protrusion of point cloud
to accurately identify the scene changes and match these
changes depending on the similarity of category agnostic
appearance feature. Moreover, to assist the agent to explore
the environment more efficiently and comprehensively, we
propose a closer-aligned-retrace exploration policy, aiming
to observe more details of the scene at a closer distance.
We conduct extensive experiments on AI2THOR Rearrangement Challenge based on RoomR dataset and a new multiroom multi-instance dataset MrMiR collected by us. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

… in Goal Environment
Observations

Trade Off

pixel

point cloud

label + pos

Figure 1. Influence of different scene change representations
on scene change detection sensitivity and scene change matching simplicity. To strike a balance between these two issues, we
select point cloud as our scene change representation.

the state space, the end-to-end deep reinforcement learning
methods previously used for navigation struggle to cover
this task, resulting in performance only marginally above
chance [18, 45]. Recent works demonstrate that the modular methods, such as MaSS [41] and TIDEE [38], effectively reduce the complexity of the rearrangement task by
dividing the task into several modules. These methods use
a pre-trained detector to assign category labels to each object and infer the rearrangement goals through matching the
semantic scene graphs of both the goal and shuffled configuration.
However, the introduction of category information may
not be that necessary as the essential goal of visual rearrangement task is equal to “make it like what it was before”.
Even without the category labels, we can still perform the
task by memorizing the appearance characteristics and the
state information of objects in the scene. Besides, due to the
limited accuracy of the detector, the transition from visual
input to category information will inevitably lead to errors,
which can accumulate and propagate to subsequent modules, thereby causing the accuracy drop of the entire task.
Previous works achieve large gains with ground-truth se-

16457

