This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mudslide: A Universal Nuclear Instance Segmentation Method
Jun Wang
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
junw@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Nuclear instance segmentation has played a critical role
in pathology image analysis. The main challenges arise
from the difficulty in accurately segmenting densely overlapping instances and the high cost of precise mask-level
annotations. Existing fully-supervised nuclear instance
segmentation methods, such as boundary-based methods,
struggle to capture differences between overlapping instances and thus fail in densely distributed blurry regions.
They also face challenges transitioning to point supervision,
where annotations are simple and effective. Inspired by
natural mudslides, we propose a universal method called
Mudslide that uses simple representations to characterize
differences between different instances and can easily be
extended from fully-supervised to point-supervised. Concretely, we introduce a collapse field and leverage it to construct a force map and initial boundary, enabling a distinctive representation for each instance. Each pixel is assigned a collapse force, with distinct directions between adjacent instances. Starting from the initial boundary, Mudslide executes a pixel-by-pixel collapse along various force
directions. Pixels that collapse into the same region are
considered as one instance, concurrently accounting for
both inter-instance distinctions and intra-instance coherence. Experiments on public datasets show superior performance in both fully-supervised and point-supervised tasks.

1. Introduction
Pathological slide analysis is widely regarded as the gold
standard for cancer diagnosis, treatment, and prevention.
Nuclear instance segmentation is a critical step in this process, as it enables the accurate identification and analysis of
nuclei within pathology images. The morphology of nuclei,
including their shape, appearance, and density, provides interpretable features that can be used as diagnostic and prognostic indicators of cancer [18].
Nuclear instance segmentation presents unique challenges compared to natural image instance segmentation

Figure 1. An analogy between mudslide and nuclear instance
segmentation. (Top) Topographic map before and after the mudslide. The colored arrows indicate the collapse forces in different directions. (Bottom) Nuclear instance segmentation process
in pathological images. The different layers on the left represent
different feature representations of nuclear instances, and the right
shows the result of instance segmentation.

tasks. Firstly, the densely packed distribution of nuclei often results in clustered overlapping instances. Secondly, the
blurry boundaries between touching or overlapping nuclei
make it difficult to distinguish individual instances. Third,
obtaining precise pixel-level annotations is time-consuming
and expensive for professional pathologists.
To address the first two challenges, many fullysupervised methods based on deep learning have made significant progress. Several algorithms based on constructing
innovative network architectures [8, 20, 23] have been applied to this task. Some contour-based techniques have been
investigated to enhance the accurate prediction of nucleus
boundaries [3, 9, 29] which aids in splitting the touched
and overlapped nuclei. However, these methods lack the
capability to characterize the differences among neighboring nuclear instances, making it difficult to accurately segment densely stacked overlapping nuclei. Moreover, their
applicability is hindered in scenarios where fine pixel-level
annotations are insufficient, as obtaining precise boundary
labels becomes a formidable task. Addressing the challenge posed by the scarcity of fine annotations, certain
point annotation-based methods have emerged [2, 19, 21],
leveraging the accessibility of coarse point labels. How-

11673

