This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GDA: Generalized Diffusion for Robust Test-time Adaptation
Yun-Yun Tsai1∗ , Fu-Chen Chen2 , Albert Y. C. Chen2 ,
Junfeng Yang1 , Che-Chun Su2 , Min Sun2 , Cheng-Hao Kuo2
1
Columbia University, 2 Amazon
1
2

{yunyuntsai,junfeng}@cs.columbia.edu

{cfchen,aycchen,ccsu,minnsun,chkuo}@amazon.com

Abstract
Machine learning models face generalization challenges
when exposed to out-of-distribution (OOD) samples with
unforeseen distribution shifts. Recent research reveals that
for vision tasks, test-time adaptation employing diffusion
models can achieve state-of-the-art accuracy improvements
on OOD samples by generating domain-aligned samples
without altering the model’s weights. Unfortunately, those
studies have primarily focused on pixel-level corruptions,
thereby lacking the generalization to adapt to a broader
range of OOD types. We introduce Generalized Diffusion
Adaptation (GDA), a novel diffusion-based test-time adaptation method robust against diverse OOD types. Specifically,
GDA iteratively guides the diffusion by applying a marginal
entropy loss derived from the model, in conjunction with style
and content preservation losses during the reverse sampling
process. In other words, GDA considers the model’s output
behavior and the samples’ semantic information as a whole,
reducing ambiguity in downstream tasks. Evaluation across
various model architectures and OOD benchmarks indicates
that GDA consistently surpasses previous diffusion-based
adaptation methods. Notably, it achieves the highest classification accuracy improvements, ranging from 4.4% to 5.02%
on ImageNet-C and 2.5% to 7.4% on Rendition, Sketch, and
Stylized benchmarks. This performance highlights GDA’s
generalization to a broader range of OOD benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Deep networks have achieved unprecedented performance
in many machine learning applications, yet unexpected corruptions and natural shifts at test time [9–11, 14, 27] still degrade their performance severely. This vulnerability hinders
the deployment of machine learning models in the real world,
especially in safety-critical, high-stake applications [32].
Test-time adaptation (TTA) [44, 50] emerges as a new
*Work done in Amazon applied scientist internship

Figure 1. Sample OOD data and adaptations via existing diffusion
method and our GDA method. The leftmost column shows OOD
samples under different style changes, including sketch, painting,
and sculpture. The middle column shows samples adapted by traditional diffusion. The rightmost column shows samples adapted with
our GDA method. The visualization shows that GDA can generate
samples with multiple visual effects, such as re-colorization for
the sketch sample, texture enhancement for the painting sample,
and object highlighting for the sculpture sample. All three GDAadapted samples are correctly classified by ResNet50, whereas all
others are misclassified.

branch to improve out-of-distribution robustness by adjusting either the model weights or the input data. The former
assumes that the weights are not frozen, and can be modified
iteratively during test time [40, 44, 50]. It thus requires edit
access to the model and complicates model maintenance
because all adapted model versions need to be tracked. The
latter modifies the input with random noise vectors or structural visual prompts [25, 41–43] optimized for pre-defined
objectives. The visual prompt design is, however, prone to
overfitting due to the high dimensionality of the prompts.

23242

