This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GES : Generalized Exponential Splatting for Efficient Radiance Field Rendering
Abdullah Hamdi1
Luke Melas-Kyriazi1
Jinjie Mai2
Guocheng Qian2,4
Ruoshi Liu3
Carl Vondrick3
Bernard Ghanem2
Andrea Vedaldi1
1
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
3
4
Columbia University
Snap Inc.
abdullah.hamdi@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Advancements in 3D Gaussian Splatting have significantly accelerated 3D reconstruction and generation. However, it may require a large number of Gaussians, which
creates a substantial memory footprint. This paper introduces GES (Generalized Exponential Splatting), a novel
representation that employs Generalized Exponential Function (GEF) to model 3D scenes, requiring far fewer particles to represent a scene and thus significantly outperforming Gaussian Splatting methods in efficiency with a plugand-play replacement ability for Gaussian-based utilities.
GES is validated theoretically and empirically in both principled 1D setup and realistic 3D scenes. It is shown to represent signals with sharp edges more accurately, which are
typically challenging for Gaussians due to their inherent
low-pass characteristics. Our empirical analysis demonstrates that GEF outperforms Gaussians in fitting naturaloccurring signals (e.g. squares, triangles, parabolic signals), thereby reducing the need for extensive splitting operations that increase the memory footprint of Gaussian
Splatting. With the aid of a frequency-modulated loss,
GES achieves competitive performance in novel-view synthesis benchmarks while requiring less than half the memory storage of Gaussian Splatting and increasing the rendering speed by up to 39%. The code is available on the
project website https://abdullahamdi.com/ges.

1. Introduction
The pursuit of more engaging and immersive virtual experiences across gaming, cinema, and the metaverse demands advancements in 3D technologies that balance visual richness with computational efficiency. In this regard,
3D Gaussian Splatting (GS) [18] is a recent alternative to
neural radiance fields [10, 12, 29–31, 34, 35, 51] for learning and rendering 3D objects and scenes. GS represents a

PSNR

Memory

Gaussian

Speed

676MB

Splatting
29.41db

137 FPS

GES

399MB
29.68db

160 FPS

Figure 1. GES: Generalized Exponential Splatting We propose
a faster and more memory-efficient alternative to Gaussian Splatting [18] that relies on Generalized exponential Functions (with
additional learnable shape parameters) instead of Gaussians.

scene as a large mixture of small, coloured Gaussians. Its
key advantage is the existence of a very fast differentiable
renderer, which makes this representation ideally suited for
real-time applications and significantly reduces the learning
cost. Specifically, fast rendering of learnable 3D representations is of key importance for applications like gaming,
where high-quality, fluid, and responsive graphics are essential.
However, GS is not without shortcomings. We notice in
particular that GS implicitly makes an assumption on the
nature of the modeled signals, which is suboptimal. Specifically, Gaussians correspond to low-pass filters, but most
3D scenes are far from low-pass as they contain abrupt discontinuities in shape and appearance. Fig.2 demosntrates
this inherent low-pass limitation of Gaussian-based methods. As a result, GS needs to use a huge number of very
small Gaussians to represent such 3D scenes, far more than
if a more appropriate basis was selected, which negatively
impacts memory utilization.
To address this shortcoming, in this work, we intro-

19812

