This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Co-Evaluation of Cameras, HDR, and Algorithms
for Industrial-Grade 6DoF Pose Estimation
Agastya Kalra Guy Stoppi Dmitrii Marin Vage Taamazyan Aarrushi Shandilya
Rishav Agarwal Anton Boykov Tze Hao Chong Michael Stark
Intrinsic Innovation LLC

Abstract
6DoF Pose estimation has been gaining increased importance in vision for over a decade, however it does not
yet meet the reliability and accuracy standards for mass deployment in industrial robotics. To this effect, we present the
Industrial Plenoptic Dataset (IPD): the first dataset for the
co-evaluation of cameras, HDR, and algorithms targeted
at reliable, high-accuracy industrial automation. Specifically, we capture 2,300 physical scenes of 20 industrial
parts covering a 1m × 1m × 0.5m working volume, resulting in over 100,000 distinct object views. Each scene
is captured with 13 well-calibrated multi-modal cameras
including polarization and high-resolution structured light.
In terms of lighting, we capture each scene at 4 exposures
and in 3 challenging lighting conditions ranging from 100
lux to 100,000 lux. We also present, validate, and analyze
robot consistency, an evaluation method targeted at scalable, high accuracy evaluation. We hope that vision systems that succeed on this dataset will have direct industry
impact. The dataset and evaluation code are available at
https://github.com/intrinsic-ai/ipd.

1. Introduction
Only a small fraction of the thousands of robot arms currently deployed in factories use vision, with even fewer
using 6DoF object pose estimation [7, 43]. Instead, the
majority of factories still rely on mechanical fixtures and
pre-planned robot motions that need to be re-fabricated and
reprogrammed whenever the work product changes. This
is due to the fact that computer vision in general, and
6DoF pose estimation in particular, is not seen as reliable
enough for industrial applications [43], where requirements
include sub-millimeter accuracy in pose estimation, robustness to challenging surface properties and drastic changes
in factory lighting conditions, and guaranteed levels of recall. This may seem surprising, considering that 6DoF
pose estimation has been an active area of research in terms

Gray

Gray
Gray

AOLP

Depth

DOLP

Predictions

Predictions
Predictions

Figure 1. The Industrial Plentopic Dataset (IPD) affords coevaluation of cameras, HDR, and pose estimation algorithms.
Our dataset contains polarization (top) which provides high contrast for dark objects, and high-res structured-light (bottom).

of both algorithms [9, 11–13, 15, 16, 31, 38, 42, 44, 47,
48, 52, 54, 65, 70, 72] and benchmarks [21, 22, 26, 32–
34, 37, 44, 45, 55, 61, 63, 67, 71] for over a decade. We
argue that research has so far been lacking in one key ingredient to enable the step to real-world factory floors: the
co-design of camera systems, high dynamic range imaging
(HDR), and corresponding pose estimation algorithms.
In particular, we find that existing public 6DoF pose estimation benchmarks rarely provide enough variety in terms
of cameras, viewpoints, exposure settings, and modalities
(e.g., in the form of RGB, depth, and polarization) to allow the joint optimization of cameras, HDR, and algorithms
that enables industrial applications with high precision requirements. Some datasets collect all data with only a single camera [31, 45, 63, 70]. Others use multiple, but derive ground truth poses from just a single camera, which is
prone to generating biased labels [22, 32, 37]. Only two
datasets consider polarization [34, 67], however only from
a single-camera, without complex lighting or HDR, and in

22691

