This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffPerformer: Iterative Learning of Consistent Latent Guidance for
Diffusion-based Human Video Generation
Chenyang Wang†,1 , Zerong Zheng2 , Tao Yu3 , Xiaoqian Lv1 , Bineng Zhong4 ,
Shengping Zhang∗,1,5 , Liqiang Nie1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 NNKosmos Technology 3 Tsinghua University
4
Guangxi Normal University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{c.wang, xiaoqian.lv}@stu.hit.edu.cn, zrzheng1995@foxmail.com, ytrock@tsinghua.edu.cn,
bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, s.zhang@hit.edu.cn, nieliqiang@gmail.com

Driving Poses

Driving Poses

Reference

Results

Reference

Results

Figure 1. Human performance videos generated by DiffPerformer given the reference appearance and driving poses. The generated
videos contain realistic dynamic details and coherent appearances across the long-range sequence especially under challenging poses.

Abstract
Existing diffusion models for pose-guided human video
generation mostly suffer from temporal inconsistency in the
generated appearance and poses due to the inherent randomization nature of the generation process. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework, DiffPerformer, to synthesize high-fidelity and temporally consistent human video.
Without complex architecture modification or costly training, DiffPerformer finetunes a pre-trained diffusion model
on a single video of the target character and introduces
an implicit video representation as a proxy to learn temporally consistent guidance for the diffusion model. The
guidance is encoded into VAE latent space and an iterative
optimization loop is constructed between the implicit video
representation and the diffusion model, allowing to har† Work done during an internship at Tsinghua University.
∗ Corresponding author.

ness the smooth property of the implicit video representation and the generative capabilities of the diffusion model in
a mutually beneficial way. Moreover, we propose 3D-aware
human flow as a temporal constraint during the optimization to explicitly model the correspondence between driving poses and human appearance. This alleviates the misalignment between driving poses and target performer and
therefore maintains the appearance coherence under various motions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/aipixel/
DiffPerformer.

1. Introduction
Pose-guided human video generation aims to produce a
video of a specific character performing the given poses,
which has a wide range of applications such as human-

6169

