This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Category-Level Multi-Part Multi-Joint 3D Shape Assembly
Yichen Li1, 2 Kaichun Mo3 Yueqi Duan4 He Wang5 Jiequan Zhang1 Lin Shao6
Wojciech Matusik2 Leonidas Guibas1
1
2
Stanford University MIT CSAIL 3 NVIDIA 4 Tsinghua University 5 Peking University
6
National University of Singapore
Abstract

Shape assembly composes complex shapes geometries by
arranging simple part geometries and has wide applications
in autonomous robotic assembly and CAD modeling. Existing works focus on geometry reasoning and neglect the
actual physical assembly process of matching and fitting
joints, which are the contact surfaces connecting different
parts. In this paper, we consider contacting joints for the task
of multi-part assembly. A successful joint-optimized assembly needs to satisfy the bilateral objectives of shape structure
and joint alignment. We propose a hierarchical graph learning approach composed of two levels of graph representation
learning. The part graph takes part geometries as input to
build the desired shape structure. The joint-level graph uses
part joints information and focuses on matching and aligning
joints. The two kinds of information are combined to achieve
the bilateral objectives. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method outperforms previous methods, achieving
better shape structure and higher joint alignment accuracy.

1. Introduction
Shape assembly composes complex shape geometries by
arranging a set of simple or primitive part geometries. Many
important tasks and applications rely on shape assembly algorithms. For example, assembling Ikea furniture requires
one to identify, reorient, and connect the relevant parts.
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) modeling requires designers to reposition and align a set of part geometries to create
complex designs. An accurate and robust shape assembly
algorithm is critical to the development of autonomous systems for furniture assembly or CAD modeling [34, 41, 48].
In this paper, we aim to tackle the task of multi-part
multi-joint shape assembly. This task simulates the realworld furniture assembly setting, where multiple shape parts
are connected in different ways through contacting joints to
make a complex shape geometry [23, 25]. As Fig.1 shows,
we are given (a) multiple shape parts, where each part contains multiple joints. For our setting, we use peg-hole joint
pairs to represent the allowed connections, similar to bolts
and nuts where matching is only allowed between male and

peg joints

hole joints

(a) input

(b) sub-task 1

(d) target
(c) sub-task 2
Figure 1. (a) Joint-annotated part point cloud input where blue
points indicate peg joints and red points denote hole joints. (b) joint
pairing process to produce a bipartite matching between pegs and
holes (c) joint-matching-aware SE(3) pose prediction for each part
to achieve the target (d) of assembling a shape of a valid structure
and with all pegs and holes aligned.

female pieces of the same contacting geometry [49]. Our
goal is to (b) correctly connect all peg joints with hole joints
and (c) piece these parts together to (d) make a desired shape.
Many research efforts have been made towards devising
shape assembly algorithms [3, 5, 7, 12, 15, 18, 26, 30, 39, 42–
44, 49, 52, 53, 58, 60]. These prior works take the holistic
geometric perspective of modeling shapes from parts. These
works produce shapes with great aesthetic value. However,
this pure geometric perspective is agnostic of the rotational
and reflective symmetry of parts, and thus results in upsidedown, flipped, and rotated part pose predictions. These
noisy predictions can lead to unmatched joints or mismatches
between joints, making it difficult to directly employ them
in the context of autonomous assembly [17, 41, 43, 50, 57]
or modeling of functional shapes [32, 62].
Many challenges exist in the multi-part multi-joint assembly setting: 1) large matching search space, 2) noncontinuous optimization, and 3) error compounding. Previously, Willis et al. [49] have considered joints for shape

3281

