This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-Tail Class Incremental Learning via
Independent Sub-prototype Construction
Xi Wang, Xu Yang, Jie Yin, Kun Wei, Cheng Deng*
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
{wangxi6317, xuyang.xd, jieyin.xd, weikunsk, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com

Abstract

Rare data

Adequate data
Sub-prototype Place

Long-tail class incremental learning (LT-CIL) is designed to perpetually acquire novel knowledge from an imbalanced and perpetually evolving data stream while ensuring the retention of previously acquired knowledge. The
existing method only re-balances data distribution and ignores exploring the potential relationship between different
samples, causing non-robust representations and even severe forgetting in classes with few samples. In this paper,
we constructed two parallel spaces simultaneously: 1) Subprototype space and 2) Reminiscence space to learn robust
representations while alleviating forgetfulness. Concretely,
we advance the concept of the sub-prototype space, which
amalgamates insights from diverse classes. This integration
facilitates the mutual complementarity of varied knowledge,
thereby augmenting the attainment of more robust representations. Furthermore, we introduce the reminiscence space,
which encapsulates each class distribution, aiming to constraint model optimization and mitigate the phenomenon
of forgetting. The tandem utilization of the two parallel
spaces effectively alleviates the adverse consequences associated with imbalanced data distribution, preventing forgetting without needing replay examples. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-theart performance on various benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Most deep learning literature focuses on learning a model
on a fixed data stream [41, 42]. However, data in the real
world is not static and even changes its distribution over
time. Consider a scenario where a model trained on old
data needs to be fine-tuned on new data, but the old data
are unavailable due to privacy concerns; such fine-tuning
will significantly degrade the model’s performance in older
data, known as catastrophic forgetting.
Continual learning endeavors to alleviate catastrophic
* Corresponding author.

𝐿3
𝐿𝑡

Construct

Construct

Paw

Body

Tail

Re-sample

Eyes

𝐿2

Re-sample

𝐿1

Figure 1. The sub-prototype space integration knowledge from
different classes, and when the space is constructed, the features
re-sampled from the space less affected by imbalanced data.

forgetting by maintaining a balance between the plasticity
and stability of the model, which ensures that old knowledge remains preserved (stability to changes), while also
accommodating the acquisition of new incoming data (plasticity to adapt) [24]. In the real world, most deep learning
models need to tackle the forgetfulness caused by a continuous data stream. For this purpose, several works have been
proposed to address catastrophic forgetting in many scenarios, including image classification [7], object detection
[36], instance segmentation [10], and even domain adaptation [40]. Unfortunately, those continual learning methods
assume the data distribution is balanced in different tasks.
However, real-world data is often imbalanced, usually in a
long-tailed distribution.
The deep learning on long-tailed data is often dominated
by the majority classes (classes with amount samples), resulting in poor performance of the minority classes (classes
with few samples) [46]. To tackle this problem, existing
work attempts to expand data or change the network structure [35] and so on, both achieved good results. Surprisingly, continual learning on imbalanced data has yet to receive widespread attention. Due to the prevalence of imbalanced data distributions in the real-world, deep learning
models can continually learn without catastrophically for-

28598

