This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Image Dynamics
Zhengqi Li

Richard Tucker

Noah Snavely

Aleksander Holynski

Google Research

Spectral Volume
(Image-Space Modal Basis)

Looping
video

0.2Hz

0.4Hz

Interactive
dynamics

…

…

Input Picture

X coefficients

Y coefficients

3.0Hz

Figure 1. We model a generative image-space prior on scene motion: from a single RGB image, our method generates a spectral volume [23],
a motion representation that models dense, long-term pixel trajectories in the Fourier domain. Our learned motion priors can be used to turn
a single picture into a seamlessly looping video, or into an interactive simulation of dynamics that responds to user inputs like dragging and
releasing points. On the right, we visualize output videos as space-time X-t slices (along the input scanline shown on the left).

Abstract
We present an approach to modeling an image-space
prior on scene motion. Our prior is learned from a collection
of motion trajectories extracted from real video sequences depicting natural, oscillatory dynamics of objects such as trees,
flowers, candles, and clothes swaying in the wind. We model
dense, long-term motion in the Fourier domain as spectral
volumes, which we find are well-suited to prediction with
diffusion models. Given a single image, our trained model
uses a frequency-coordinated diffusion sampling process to
predict a spectral volume, which can be converted into a motion texture that spans an entire video. Along with an imagebased rendering module, the predicted motion representation
can be used for a number of downstream applications, such
as turning still images into seamlessly looping videos, or
allowing users to interact with objects in real images, producing realistic simulated dynamics (by interpreting the spectral
volumes as image-space modal bases). See our project page
for more results: generative-dynamics.github.io.

1. Introduction
The natural world is always in motion, with even seemingly
static scenes containing subtle oscillations as a result of wind,
water currents, respiration, or other natural rhythms. Emulating this motion is crucial in visual content synthesis—human
sensitivity to motion can cause imagery without motion (or
with slightly unrealistic motion) to seem uncanny or unreal.
While it is easy for humans to interpret or imagine motion in scenes, training a model to learn or produce realistic
scene motion is far from trivial. The motion we observe in
the world is the result of a scene’s underlying physical dynamics, i.e., forces applied to objects that respond according
to their unique physical properties—their mass, elasticity,
etc—quantities that are hard to measure and capture at scale.
Fortunately, measuring them is not necessary for certain applications: e.g., one can simulate plausible dynamics in a
scene by simply analyzing some observed 2D motion [23].
This same observed motion can also serve as a supervisory signal in learning dynamics across scenes—because
although observed motion is multi-modal and grounded in
complex physical effects, it is nevertheless often predictable:

24142

