This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VP3D: Unleashing 2D Visual Prompt for Text-to-3D Generation
Yang Chen† , Yingwei Pan† , Haibo Yang§ , Ting Yao† , and Tao Mei†
†

§

HiDream.ai Inc.
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China

{c1enyang, pandy}@hidream.ai, yanghaibo.fdu@gmail.com, {tiyao, tmei}@hidream.ai

Text prompt: “A florist is making a bouquet with fresh flowers”

Abstract
Recent innovations on text-to-3D generation have featured Score Distillation Sampling (SDS), which enables the
zero-shot learning of implicit 3D models (NeRF) by directly
distilling prior knowledge from 2D diffusion models. However, current SDS-based models still struggle with intricate
text prompts and commonly result in distorted 3D models
with unrealistic textures or cross-view inconsistency issues.
In this work, we introduce a novel Visual Prompt-guided
text-to-3D diffusion model (VP3D) that explicitly unleashes
the visual appearance knowledge in 2D visual prompt to
boost text-to-3D generation. Instead of solely supervising
SDS with text prompt, VP3D first capitalizes on 2D diffusion model to generate a high-quality image from input
text, which subsequently acts as visual prompt to strengthen
SDS optimization with explicit visual appearance. Meanwhile, we couple the SDS optimization with additional differentiable reward function that encourages rendering images of 3D models to better visually align with 2D visual
prompt and semantically match with text prompt. Through
extensive experiments, we show that the 2D Visual Prompt
in our VP3D significantly eases the learning of visual appearance of 3D models and thus leads to higher visual fidelity with more detailed textures. It is also appealing in
view that when replacing the self-generating visual prompt
with a given reference image, VP3D is able to trigger a new
task of stylized text-to-3D generation. Our project page is
available at https://vp3d-cvpr24.github.io.

1. Introduction
Generative Artificial Intelligence (especially for vision content generation) has aroused great attention in computer
vision field [5, 6, 20, 26], leading to impressive advancements in text-to-image [30–32] and text-to-video generation
[10, 14, 34]. These accomplishments can be attributed to
the availability of large-scale image-text and video-text pair
data [1, 33] and the emergence of robust diffusion-based
generative models [12, 13, 25, 35]. Recently, researchers

(a) Magic3D

(b) ProlificDreamer

Visual prompt
(c) VP3D (Ours)

Figure 1. Exisiting text-to-3D generation techniques (e.g.,
Magic3D [17] and ProlificDreamer [39]) often suffer from degenerated results (e.g., over-saturated appearances or inaccurate
geometries). Our VP3D novelly integrates a visual prompt to
strength score distillation sampling, leading to better 3D results.

have gone beyond text-driven image/video generation, and
begun exploring diffusion models for text-driven content
creation of 3D assets (e.g., text-to-3D generation). This direction paves a new way for practical 3D content creation
and has a great potential impact for numerous applications
like virtual reality, gaming and Metaverse. Compared to
image generation, text-to-3D generation, however, is more
challenging, due to the complexities associated with intricate 3D geometry and appearance (i.e., object shapes and
textures). Moreover, the collection and annotation of 3D
data are somewhat resourcefully expensive and thus cannot
be easily scaled up to billion level as image data.
To tackle this issue, a pioneering text-to-3D work
(DreamFusion [27]) presents the first attempt of exploiting an off-the-shelf text-to-image diffusion model to generate promising 3D assets in a zero-shot fashion. The key
design behind such success is Score Distillation Sampling
(SDS), which directly optimizes the implicit 3D model of

4896

