This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Scalable 3D Anomaly Detection and Localization: A Benchmark via 3D
Anomaly Synthesis and A Self-Supervised Learning Network
Wenqiao Li1

Xiaohao Xu2 * Yao Gu1∗
1
ShanghaiTech University

Bozhong Zheng1 Shenghua Gao1† Yingna Wu1 †
2
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

{liwq2022}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Bending

Abstract
Recently, 3D anomaly detection, a crucial problem involving fine-grained geometry discrimination, is getting
more attention. However, the lack of abundant real 3D
anomaly data limits the scalability of current models. To
enable scalable anomaly data collection, we propose a 3D
anomaly synthesis pipeline to adapt existing large-scale 3D
models for 3D anomaly detection. Specifically, we construct a synthetic dataset, i.e., Anomaly-ShapeNet, based
on ShapeNet. Anomaly-ShapeNet consists of 1600 point
cloud samples under 40 categories, which provides a rich
and varied collection of data, enabling efficient training and
enhancing adaptability to industrial scenarios. Meanwhile,
to enable scalable representation learning for 3D anomaly
localization, we propose a self-supervised method, i.e., Iterative Mask Reconstruction Network (IMRNet). During training, we propose a geometry-aware sample module to preserve potentially anomalous local regions during point cloud down-sampling. Then, we randomly mask
out point patches and sent the visible patches to a transformer for reconstruction-based self-supervision. During
testing, the point cloud repeatedly goes through the Mask
Reconstruction Network, with each iteration’s output becoming the next input. By merging and contrasting the
final reconstructed point cloud with the initial input, our
method successfully locates anomalies. Experiments show
that IMRNet outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods, achieving 66.1% in I-AUC on our Anomaly-ShapeNet
dataset and 72.5% in I-AUC on Real3D-AD dataset. Our
benchmark will be released at https://github.com/Chopper233/Anomaly-ShapeNet.

1. Introduction
The 3D anomaly detection task is crucial in objectcentered industrial quality inspection, where high accuracy
* Equally contribute to this work
† Corresponding authors

Broken

Bulge

Concavity

Scratch

Original
Mesh

Defected
Mesh

Defected
Point Cloud

Ground
Truth

Figure 1. Examples of the proposed Anomaly-ShapeNet. The
first and second rows are the original mesh and the subdivided
mesh. The third row is synthetic defected point cloud. The fourth
row is the Ground-Truth of the anomalous region.

and detection rates are often required. The goal is to identify
anomaly regions and locate abnormal point clouds within
the 3D context. Image-based anomaly detection algorithms
under fixed perspectives [1,7,15–17,19,24,26,32–35,35,43,
46] have limitations due to blind spots and do not perform
as desired in object-centered scenarios. Consequently, researchers have increasingly focused on 3D information for
anomaly detection [2].
With advancements in 3D sensor technology, several
datasets such as MVTecAD-3D [2], Real3D-AD [25], and
MAD [45] have been created to meet the increasing demand
for 3D anomaly detection. MVTecAD-3D is designed for
anomaly detection in scenarios with a single-angle camera,
while the MAD dataset focuses on multi-pose anomaly detection. Only Real3D-AD specifically addresses anomaly
detection on complete point clouds. Since 3D point clouds
obtained from a 3D scanner generally contain more morphological information compared to data from multiple
cameras, our primary objective is to advance the field of
point cloud-based anomaly detection tasks.
In the field of point cloud anomaly detection, there
are two main issues that need to be addressed: the lack
of diverse distribution datasets and the need for more ef-

22207

