This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DITTO: Dual and Integrated Latent Topologies for Implicit 3D Reconstruction
Jaehyeok Shim and Kyungdon Joo*
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST
{jh.shim,kyungdon}@unist.ac.kr
https://vision3d-lab.github.io/ditto

(a) Input points (10K)

(b) ConvONet [29]

(c) POCO [1]

(d) ALTO [44]

(e) DITTO (ours)

Figure 1. Scene-level 3D reconstruction comparison on the Synthetic Rooms dataset [29]. DITTO maximizes the benefits of both
grid and point latents, thereby improving 3D surface reconstruction performance. We particularly focus on refining features based on point
latents along with grid latents and integrating them (namely, dual and integrated latent topologies). This advancement enhances the ability
to restore complex structures precisely, such as thin and intricate geometries, which posed challenges for previous methods.

Abstract
We propose a novel concept of dual and integrated latent
topologies (DITTO in short) for implicit 3D reconstruction
from noisy and sparse point clouds. Most existing methods
predominantly focus on single latent type, such as point or
grid latents. In contrast, the proposed DITTO leverages
both point and grid latents (i.e., dual latent) to enhance
their strengths, the stability of grid latents and the detailrich capability of point latents. Concretely, DITTO consists
of dual latent encoder and integrated implicit decoder. In
the dual latent encoder, a dual latent layer, which is the
key module block composing the encoder, refines both latents in parallel, maintaining their distinct shapes and enabling recursive interaction. Notably, a newly proposed dynamic sparse point transformer within the dual latent layer
effectively refines point latents. Then, the integrated implicit decoder systematically combines these refined latents,
achieving high-fidelity 3D reconstruction and surpassing
previous state-of-the-art methods on object- and scene-level
datasets, especially in thin and detailed structures.

*Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Implicit 3D reconstruction aims to determine surface
boundaries by estimating implicit values, such as occupancy and signed distance fields, based on given query coordinates [24]. In particular, implicit 3D reconstruction has
evolved using geometric primitives like vectors [6, 24, 27,
32], grids [19, 29, 30, 37], and point clouds [1, 43] as intermediaries, namely, latent representations. Prior studies have focused on selecting appropriate latent representations for 3D reconstruction. Specifically, early methods [6, 24, 27, 32] use vectors as their latent representation because of their simplicity. However, they fall short
in handling large-scale scenes due to the absence of a
geometric prior (i.e., positional information). To alleviate this issue, subsequent methods based on grid latent
have emerged [7, 19, 29, 37]. Grid latents have similar
shapes with occupancy cube, the target domain of 3D reconstruction. Thus, they offer high-fidelity reconstructions
at the scene-level but often lack detail because of resolution constraints. On the other hand, point latent-based approaches [1, 43] enable detailed reconstruction because they
preserve the details of the input points without information
loss (e.g., quantization). However, they can produce unsta-

5396

