This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Variable and Coordinated Holistic Co-Speech Motion Generation
Yifei Liu1,2∗ Qiong Cao2∗ Yandong Wen3 Huaiguang Jiang1 Changxing Ding1†
1
South China University of Technology 2 JD Explore Academy
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
ft lyf@mail.scut.edu.cn, mathqiong2012@gmail.com
yandong.wen@tuebingen.mpg.de, {hihuagong2021, chxding}@scut.edu.cn

... percent or more of its ...

... It is weird that ...

Sample 1

Sample 2

Sample 3

Figure 1. Holistic co-speech motion generation examples. Given a speech signal as input, our approach generates variable and coordinated
holistic body motions. From top to bottom: the speech transcript, the corresponding audio, and three generated samples. In particular, to
emphasize important keywords, our method ensures that facial expressions, head movements, and body motions work in unison.

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of generating lifelike
holistic co-speech motions for 3D avatars, focusing on two
key aspects: variability and coordination. Variability allows the avatar to exhibit a wide range of motions even with
similar speech content, while coordination ensures a harmonious alignment among facial expressions, hand gestures,
and body poses. We aim to achieve both with ProbTalk, a
unified probabilistic framework designed to jointly model facial, hand, and body movements in speech. ProbTalk builds
on the variational autoencoder (VAE) architecture and incorporates three core designs. First, we introduce product
quantization (PQ) to the VAE, which enriches the representation of complex holistic motion. Second, we devise a
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

novel non-autoregressive model that embeds 2D positional
encoding into the product-quantized representation, thereby
preserving essential structure information of the PQ codes.
Last, we employ a secondary stage to refine the preliminary
prediction, further sharpening the high-frequency details.
Coupling these three designs enables ProbTalk to generate
natural and diverse holistic co-speech motions, outperforming several state-of-the-art methods in qualitative and quantitative evaluations, particularly in terms of realism. Our code
and model will be released for research purposes at https:
//feifeifeiliu.github.io/probtalk/.

1. Introduction
Studies in psychology and linguistics suggest that communication is not just about what we hear; it is a comprehensive
sensory experience integrating non-verbal signals like body

1566

