This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Token Transformation Matters:
Towards Faithful Post-hoc Explanation for Vision Transformer

1

Junyi Wu1 , Bin Duan1 , Weitai Kang1 , Hao Tang2 , Yan Yan1,†
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA

{jwu125, bduan2, wkang11}@hawk.iit.edu, haotang2@cmu.edu, yyan34@iit.edu

Abstract
While Transformers have rapidly gained popularity in
various computer vision applications, post-hoc explanations of their internal mechanisms remain largely unexplored. Vision Transformers extract visual information by
representing image regions as transformed tokens and integrating them via attention weights. However, existing
post-hoc explanation methods merely consider these attention weights, neglecting crucial information from the transformed tokens, which fails to accurately illustrate the rationales behind the models’ predictions. To incorporate
the influence of token transformation into interpretation,
we propose TokenTM, a novel post-hoc explanation method
that utilizes our introduced measurement of token transformation effects. Specifically, we quantify token transformation effects by measuring changes in token lengths and correlations in their directions pre- and post-transformation.
Moreover, we develop initialization and aggregation rules
to integrate both attention weights and token transformation effects across all layers, capturing holistic token contributions throughout the model. Experimental results on
segmentation and perturbation tests demonstrate the superiority of our proposed TokenTM compared to state-of-theart Vision Transformer explanation methods.

1. Introduction
The application of Transformer models has resulted in superior performance in computer vision [11, 17, 24, 30, 46, 47],
paving the way for new breakthroughs in various tasks.
However, the inherent complexity of Vision Transformers
often renders them black-box models, making understanding the rationales behind their predictions a challenge. Such
a lack of transparency undermines the trustworthiness of
decision-making processes [2, 16, 26, 38, 49]. Therefore,
it is required to interpret Transformer networks. In the vi† Corresponding author

sual domain, post-hoc explanation sheds light on the rationale behind a model’s predictions using a heatmap over the
input pixel space. This approach is both effective and efficient in providing interpretations that are easily understood
by humans [13, 32, 45, 52].
There exist two types of post-hoc explanation methods,
general traditional explanations [37, 45] and Transformerspecific attention-based explanations [1, 12]. Although traditional explanations excel in visualizing important pixels for predictions of MLPs and CNNs, their effectiveness markedly decreases when applied to Vision Transformers, due to the fundamental differences in model architectures. Therefore, attention-based explanations design
new paradigms specific to Transformers, where attention
weights play a dominant role [1, 12, 26, 35]. Integrating attention information, these explanation methods offer
a promising approach toward Transformer interpretability.
Recent advancements in attention-based explanation
techniques have outperformed traditional methods on Vision Transformers. However, the inherent complexity of
these models, particularly due to their key components:
Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) and Feed Forward Network (FFN) [17], continues to pose unique challenges in
terms of explainability. As elucidated in Section 3, we represent the outputs of both MHSA and FFN as weighted
sums of transformed tokens, with each token scaled by an
attention weight. Existing attention-based methods simply
consider the scaling weights indicated by attention maps
as the corresponding tokens’ contributions, overlooking the
impacts of token transformations. As shown in Figure 1,
attention weights alone misrepresent the contributions from
foreground objects or background regions, while transformation information offers a necessary counterbalance. For
instance, even if certain background regions are scaled by
high attention weights, their actual contribution can be diminished if they are transformed into smaller or divergent
tokens. Conversely, a foreground object, despite receiving
minimal attention weights, can play a pivotal role due to
significant transformation within the model. Given the in-

10926

