This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoLLM-online: Online Video Large Language Model for Streaming Video
Joya Chen1 Zhaoyang Lv2 Shiwei Wu1 Kevin Qinghong Lin1 Chenan Song1
Difei Gao1 Jia-Wei Liu1 Ziteng Gao1 Dongxing Mao1 Mike Zheng Shou1B
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 Reality Labs Research, Meta
Streaming Video
Time = 5s

Time = 5.5s

…

Time = 17.5s

…

What am
I doing
now?

You walk
around in
a kitchen.

…
Help me to
cook
noodles.

(skip, response
no change)

Sure! A general
procedure is 1. clean
hands, 2. takes out
ingredients, 3. boil
water…

…

(skip, response
no change)

Time = 22.0s

…

You open
the stove.

You ready to
boil the water.
Then you can
start to chop…

Time = 80.0s

Time = 80.5s

…

You hold the
container with
your left hand.

(skip, response
no change)

…

You cut the
vegetable with
the knife.

What have
I done?

Example 1:
Real-time Narration
(skip, response
no change)

You have done 1. clean
hands, 2. takes out
ingredients, 3. boil
water, …

…
Example 2:
Online Chat

…
Streaming Dialogue

Figure 1. Zero-shot examples of our VideoLLM-online applied to an egocentric video stream from Ego-Exo4D dataset [27]. Our model
is designed for temporally aligned, long-context, real-time dialogue in continuous video streams, shedding light on the future always-on,
contextual AI assistants (e.g., smart AR glasses). Model responses are appropriately simplified for better visualization.

Abstract
Recent Large Language Models (LLMs) have been enhanced with vision capabilities, enabling them to comprehend images, videos, and interleaved vision-language content. However, the learning methods of these large multimodal models (LMMs) typically treat videos as predetermined clips, rendering them less effective and efficient at
handling streaming video inputs. In this paper, we propose a novel Learning-In-Video-Stream (LIVE) framework,
which enables temporally aligned, long-context, and realtime dialogue within a continuous video stream. Our LIVE
framework comprises comprehensive approaches to achieve
video streaming dialogue, encompassing: (1) a training objective designed to perform language modeling for continuous streaming inputs, (2) a data generation scheme that
converts offline temporal annotations into a streaming dialogue format, and (3) an optimized inference pipeline to
speed up interactive chat in real-world video streams. With
B Corresponding Author.

our LIVE framework, we develop a simplified model called
VideoLLM-online and demonstrate its significant advantages in processing streaming videos. For instance, our
VideoLLM-online-7B model can operate at over 10 FPS
on an A100 GPU for a 5-minute video clip from Ego4D
narration. Moreover, VideoLLM-online also showcases
state-of-the-art performance on public offline video benchmarks, such as recognition, captioning, and forecasting.
The code, model, data, and demo have been made available
at showlab.github.io/videollm-online.

1. Introduction
Building the future of always-on contextual AI agent that
can promptly answer any human question, digitizing inputs
as episodic memories and forecasting future plans given any
query in online continuous setting represents a “holy grail”
mission in AI research. Powered by advancements in large
language models (LLMs) [8, 34, 60, 61, 63, 72], recent large
multimodal models (LMMs) have unveiled impressive ca-

18407

