This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Intra-modal Correlation Learning for
Label-free 3D Semantic Segmentation
Xin Kang1 *
1

Lei Chu2

Jiahao Li2

University of Science and Technology of China

1. Introduction
Label-free 3D semantic segmentation, which aims to
achieve scene understanding without reliance on labeled
data, has recently emerged as a vital research topic. This
task holds significant value for practical applications, including autonomous driving, robotic navigation, and augmented reality, where the collection of 3D annotations is
expensive and novel objects may appear.
Existing methods [4,5,8,15,19,21,31,36,37,40] leverage
the open-world recognition capability of pre-trained vision
language models, such as CLIP [22] and MaskCLIP [39],
* Xin Kang did this work during his internship at Microsoft Research
Asia.

2

Yan Lu2

Microsoft Research Asia

Noisy and inconsistent pseudo-labels from CLIP

Abstract
Recent methods for label-free 3D semantic segmentation
aim to assist 3D model training by leveraging the openworld recognition ability of pre-trained vision language
models. However, these methods usually suffer from inconsistent and noisy pseudo-labels provided by the vision
language models. To address this issue, we present a hierarchical intra-modal correlation learning framework that
captures visual and geometric correlations in 3D scenes at
three levels: intra-set, intra-scene, and inter-scene, to help
learn more compact 3D representations. We refine pseudolabels using intra-set correlations within each geometric
consistency set and align features of visually and geometrically similar points using intra-scene and inter-scene correlation learning. We also introduce a feedback mechanism to
distill the correlation learning capability into the 3D model.
Experiments on both indoor and outdoor datasets show the
superiority of our method. We achieve a state-of-the-art
36.6% mIoU on the ScanNet dataset, and a 23.0% mIoU on
the nuScenes dataset, with improvements of 7.8% mIoU and
2.2% mIoU compared with previous SOTA. We also provide
theoretical analysis and qualitative visualization results to
discuss the mechanism and conduct thorough ablation studies to support the effectiveness of our framework.

Xuejin Chen1

Hierarchical intra-modal correlations

Intra-set label
refinement

…

Intra-scene correlation

Inter-scene correlation

Figure 1. To address the noisy and inconsistent pseudo-label challenge, we design a hierarchical intra-modal correlation learning
framework, including intra-set label refinement, intra-scene correlation learning, and inter-scene correlation learning. Intra-set label refinement reduces label inconsistency for points with similar
geometric attributes in each local set. For intra-scene correlation
learning, we model point correlations in each scene and constrain
visually and geometrically similar points to be closer in feature
space. For inter-scene correlation learning, we use cross-scene
point correlations to help constrain the consistency of feature distribution in different scenes.

to train 3D models through cross-modal transfer learning.
These vision language models generate semantic features
from texts and images to provide semantic guidance for
3D model training. However, pre-trained on image classification tasks, these vision language models struggle to
generate consistent dense semantic predictions [4, 39]. For
instance, as shown in Fig. 1, the predictions for pixels
belonging to the same chair may differ within each view
and across multiple views. The predictions for chairs in

28244

