This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PI3D: Efficient Text-to-3D Generation with Pseudo-Image Diffusion
Ying-Tian Liu1 Yuan-Chen Guo1,2 * Guan Luo1 Heyi Sun1 Wei Yin4 Song-Hai Zhang3,1†
1
BNRist, Tsinghua University 2 VAST 3 Qinghai University 4 The University of Adelaide
“a skiing penguin wearing a puffy jacket”

Lightweight Refinement (3 min)

Diffusion Sampling (3 sec)

Figure 1. Our method, PI3D, is able to generate the pseudo-images of a 3D shape in seconds from text prompts and further refine it in 3
minutes to achieve better quality.

Abstract
Diffusion models trained on large-scale text-image
datasets have demonstrated a strong capability of controllable high-quality image generation from arbitrary text
prompts. However, the generation quality and generalization ability of 3D diffusion models is hindered by the
scarcity of high-quality and large-scale 3D datasets. In
this paper, we present PI3D, a framework that fully leverages the pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models’ ability to generate high-quality 3D shapes from text prompts
in minutes. The core idea is to connect the 2D and 3D
domains by representing a 3D shape as a set of Pseudo
RGB Images. We fine-tune an existing text-to-image diffusion model to produce such pseudo-images using a small
number of text-3D pairs. Surprisingly, we find that it can already generate meaningful and consistent 3D shapes given
complex text descriptions. We further take the generated
shapes as the starting point for a lightweight iterative refinement using score distillation sampling to achieve highquality generation under a low budget. PI3D generates a
single 3D shape from text in only 3 minutes and the quality
is validated to outperform existing 3D generative models by
a large margin.

* Work done during internship at VAST.
† Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
With recent advances in generative modeling, various models have emerged capable of capturing complex data distributions across different modalities such as audio, video,
and images. Notably, pioneering image generation models
like Imagen [40], DALL-E [36, 37], Stable Diffusion [39],
and others demonstrate the ability to generate highly realistic and natural-looking images from text prompts, often
indistinguishable from those produced by humans.
While algorithmic progress plays a crucial role in these
achievements, it’s essential to acknowledge the foundational role of large-scale datasets [42] in facilitating such
applications. Unlike 2D images, 3D objects face inherent challenges in data acquisition. The labor-intensive and
time-consuming processes involved in 3D scanning and creation make gathering 3D data notably challenging. Although datasets like Objaverse [9] and Objaverse-XL [8]
have recently been released with millions of 3D assets, they
suffer from insufficient filtering and processing, leading to
the inclusion of duplicate, low-quality, and texture-less content. The absence of a high-quality, abundant, and semantically rich 3D dataset remains a significant obstacle in directly constructing 3D generative models.
In order to generate 3D assets in scenarios where 3D priors are difficult to obtain, researchers have recently been
keen to utilize various 3D representations [24, 31, 43, 49]
to lift 2D diffusion models with Score Distillation Sampling
(SDS) [34, 48]. However, applying only 2D prior is prone to

19915

