This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physical Property Understanding from Language-Embedded Feature Fields
Albert J. Zhai

Yuan Shen
Emily Y. Chen Gloria X. Wang
Sheng Wang
Kaiyu Guan Shenlong Wang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Input RGB

Abstract
Can computers perceive the physical properties of objects
solely through vision? Research in cognitive science and
vision science has shown that humans excel at identifying
materials and estimating their physical properties based
purely on visual appearance. In this paper, we present a
novel approach for dense prediction of the physical properties of objects using a collection of images. Inspired by how
humans reason about physics through vision, we leverage
large language models to propose candidate materials for
each object. We then construct a language-embedded point
cloud and estimate the physical properties of each 3D point
using a zero-shot kernel regression approach. Our method
is accurate, annotation-free, and applicable to any object in
the open world. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed approach in various physical property reasoning tasks, such as estimating the mass of common objects,
as well as other properties like friction and hardness. Code
is available at https:// ajzhai.github.io/ NeRF2Physics.

1. Introduction
Imagine that you are shopping in a home improvement store.
Even though there is a huge variety of tools and furniture
items in the store, you can most likely make a reasonable
estimate of how heavy most of the objects are in a glance.
Now imagine that you are hiking in a forest and trying to
cross a stream by stepping on some stones in the water.
Simply by looking at the stones, you are probably able to
identify which stones have enough friction to walk on and
which stones would cause you to slip and fall into the water.
Humans are remarkably adept at predicting physical properties of objects based on visual information. Research in
cognitive science and human vision has shown that humans
make such predictions by associating visual appearances
with materials that we have encountered before and have
rich, grounded knowledge about [9, 10].
It is highly desirable for computers to be equipped with
similar or even better capabilities of material perception.
Having computational models for perceiving physics from
visual data is crucial for various applications, including

Xinlei Wang

Materials

Mass Density

Figure 1. Estimating physical properties from images. Humans
can predict physical properties of objects by associating visual
appearances with grounded knowledge about materials. We propose
to equip computers with this capability by combining languageembedded feature fields with LLM-based material reasoning.

robotics, agriculture, urban planning, graphics, and many
other domains. Nevertheless, challenges remain. One is the
difficulty of acquiring labeled ground-truth data. For example, consider the endeavor of measuring the mass of a tree,
or measuring the thermal conductivity densely throughout
a coffee machine. Another is the highly uncertain nature
of the prediction task due to having limited observations –
there is simply no way to know with certainty what is in the
interior of an object without additional information.
This paper presents a training-free approach towards
uncertainty-aware dense prediction of physical properties from a collection of images. Our method, named
NeRF2Physics, integrates object-level semantic reasoning
with point-level appearance reasoning. First, we use a neural
radiance field to extract a set of 3D points on the object’s
surface and fuse 2D vision-language features into each point.
Then, inspired by how humans reason about physics through
vision, we draw upon the semantic knowledge contained
within large language models to obtain a set of candidate
materials for each object. Finally, we estimate the physical
properties of each point using a zero-shot retrieval-based approach and propagate the estimates across the entire object
via spatial interpolation. Our method is accurate, annotationfree, and applicable to any object in the open world.
We evaluate NeRF2Physics on the task of mass estimation
using the ABO dataset, as well as our own dataset of realworld objects with manually measured friction and hardness

28296

