This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HanDiffuser: Text-to-Image Generation With Realistic Hand Appearances
* , Uttaran Bhattacharya2 , Xiang Chen2 ,
Supreeth Narasimhaswamy∗1
Ishita Dasgupta2 , Saayan Mitra2 , and Minh Hoai1
1

Stony Brook University, USA, 2 Adobe Research, USA

Abstract
Text-to-image generative models can generate highquality humans, but realism is lost when generating hands.
Common artifacts include irregular hand poses, shapes, incorrect numbers of fingers, and physically implausible finger orientations. To generate images with realistic hands,
we propose a novel diffusion-based architecture called
HanDiffuser that achieves realism by injecting hand embeddings in the generative process. HanDiffuser consists
of two components: a Text-to-Hand-Params diffusion model
to generate SMPL-Body and MANO-Hand parameters from
input text prompts, and a Text-Guided Hand-Params-toImage diffusion model to synthesize images by conditioning on the prompts and hand parameters generated by the
previous component. We incorporate multiple aspects of
hand representation, including 3D shapes and joint-level
finger positions, orientations and articulations, for robust
learning and reliable performance during inference. We
conduct extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments
and perform user studies to demonstrate the efficacy of
our method in generating images with high-quality hands.
Project page: https://supreethn.github.io/
research/handiffuser/index.html

1. Introduction
Text-to-Image (T2I) generative models have shown impressive advancement in recent years. Generative models such
as Stable Diffusion [56], Imagen [58], and GLIDE [45]
can generate high quality, photorealistic images. However,
these methods often struggle to synthesize high-quality and
realistic hands. The generated hands often have improbable hand poses, irregular hand shapes, incorrect number of
fingers, and poor hand-object interactions (Fig. 1).
Generating images with high-quality hands is a challenging problem since hands often take up a small part of the
image, but are highly articulate. They have high degrees
of freedom, with a wide variety of flexibility where fin* Work started when Supreeth was an intern at Adobe Research

gers can bend to various degrees relatively independently.
Hands can also occur in various shapes, sizes, and orientations and can be occluded with other human body parts.
Further, hands often interact with objects and can have a
wide range of grasps depending on the object’s size, shape,
and affordance. Therefore, capturing such a vast range of
articulations and interactions directly from text inputs remains challenging. Despite having billions of parameters
and several millions of trainable images, T2I models struggle to generate realistic hands.
A central challenge in hand image generation is learning diverse hand poses and configurations at scale. Existing
hand representations based on keypoint skeletons and shape
formats [34, 57] are useful for generative tasks in pose animation [66] and hand-object interactions [12]. These representations provide a grounded understanding of plausible
hand shapes and postures, especially in relation to the rest
of the body and different interacting objects. However, the
necessary steps to incorporate these hand representations
into T2I pipelines, in terms of both learning these representations from text prompts and mapping these representations into the pixel space of images, remain open problems.
These problems are exacerbated when we consider naturally
constructed prompts, which often imply rather than specify
hand postures and articulations (e.g., all prompts in Fig. 1).
Prompt engineering [16, 33], focusing on hand descriptions,
can potentially improve the generation quality. But it comes
with the cost of distilling and learning appropriate prompts
from large-scale data, and with the caveats of learning spurious inter-relationships between the prompt and the hands
or between the hands and the rest of the images.
In this paper, we propose a learning-based model to generate images containing realistic hands in an end-to-end
fashion from text prompts. Our model, called HanDiffuser, consists of two key trainable components. The first
component, Text-to-Hand-Params (T2H), generates parameters of a hand model [34, 57] conditioned on the input
text prompts. The second component, Text-Guided HandParams-to-Image (T-H2I), uses the hand parameters and the
input text prompts as conditions to generate images. By

2468

