This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

View-decoupled Transformer for Person Re-identiﬁcation
under Aerial-ground Camera Network
Quan Zhang1,5
Lei Wang1
Vishal M. Patel5
Xiaohua Xie1,2,3,4
Jianhuang Lai1,2,3,4 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
Pazhou Lab (HuangPu), Guangdong, China
3
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Guangzhou, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
5
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, USA
{zhangq48, wanglei75}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {stsljh, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
vpatel36@jhu.edu

Abstract
Existing person re-identiﬁcation methods have achieved
remarkable advances in appearance-based identity association across homogeneous cameras, such as ground-ground
matching. However, as a more practical scenario, aerialground person re-identiﬁcation (AGPReID) among heterogeneous cameras has received minimal attention. To alleviate the disruption of discriminative identity representation
by dramatic view discrepancy as the most signiﬁcant challenge in AGPReID, the view-decoupled transformer (VDT)
is proposed as a simple yet effective framework. Two major
components are designed in VDT to decouple view-related
and view-unrelated features, namely hierarchical subtractive separation and orthogonal loss, where the former separates these two features inside the VDT, and the latter
constrains these two to be independent. In addition, we
contribute a large-scale AGPReID dataset called CARGO,
consisting of ﬁve/eight aerial/ground cameras, 5,000 identities, and 108,563 images. Experiments on two datasets
show that VDT is a feasible and effective solution for AGPReID, surpassing the previous method on mAP/Rank1 by
up to 5.0%/2.7% on CARGO and 3.7%/5.2% on AG-ReID,
keeping the same magnitude of computational complexity.
Our project is available at https://github.com/
LinlyAC/VDT-AGPReID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) aims to associate interested
person images based on cross-camera identity similarity,
which plays a signiﬁcant and positive contribution to the se* Corresponding Author.

Ground camera
network
Aerial camera
network

View-homogeneous ReID (Existing)

Ground-only matching

Aerial-only matching

View-heterogeneous ReID (Ours)
Figure 1. View-homogeneous vs. view-heterogeneous ReID,
where the former focuses on ground-only or aerial-only camera
networks, and the latter considers the aerial-ground mixed camera
network. Thus, view-heterogeneous ReID considers aerial-aerial,
ground-ground, and aerial-ground matching, which is more challenging and practical than the existing view-homogeneous ReID.

curity and safety of society and citizens [1–5]. Traditional
ReID has achieved remarkable progress in the deep learning era [6–16], but it is far from real-world scenarios for
the following reasons. (1) Most existing ReID datasets are
collected from homogeneous camera networks, which comprises of the same type cameras, such as ground-only [17]
or aerial-only [18] camera networks. However, as can be
seen from Fig. 1, real-world surveillance systems tend to
be deployed as heterogeneous camera networks comprising

22000

