This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VecFusion: Vector Font Generation with Diffusion
Vikas Thamizharasan*1,2 Difan Liu*2 Shantanu Agarwal1 Matthew Fisher2
Michaël Gharbi2 Oliver Wang3 Alec Jacobson2,4 Evangelos Kalogerakis1
University of Massachusetts Amherst1

Adobe Research2

Google Research3

University of Toronto4

(a) Missing Glyph Generation

Synthesized Vector Glyphs

Input Raster Images

(b) Few-shot Vector Glyph Generation

Figure 1. We present VecFusion, a generative model for vector fonts. (a) VecFusion generates missing glyphs in incomplete fonts. Blue
glyphs are glyphs that exist in the fonts. Red glyphs are missing glyphs generated by our method. On the right, we show generated control
points as circles on selected glyphs. (b) VecFusion generates vector glyphs given a few exemplar (raster) images of glyphs. Our method
generates precise, editable vector fonts whose geometry and control points are learned to match the target font style.

Abstract
We present VecFusion, a new neural architecture that
can generate vector fonts with varying topological structures and precise control point positions. Our approach is
a cascaded diffusion model which consists of a raster diffusion model followed by a vector diffusion model. The raster
model generates low-resolution, rasterized fonts with auxiliary control point information, capturing the global style
and shape of the font, while the vector model synthesizes
vector fonts conditioned on the low-resolution raster fonts
from the first stage. To synthesize long and complex curves,
our vector diffusion model uses a transformer architecture
and a novel vector representation that enables the modeling of diverse vector geometry and the precise prediction
of control points. Our experiments show that, in contrast
to previous generative models for vector graphics, our new
cascaded vector diffusion model generates higher quality
vector fonts, with complex structures and diverse styles.

1. Introduction
Vector fonts are extensively used in graphic design, arts,
publishing, and motion graphics. As opposed to rasterized
fonts, vector fonts can be rendered at any resolution without quality degradation, and can be edited via intuitive control point manipulation. However, authoring high-quality
vector fonts remains a challenging and labor-intensive task,
even for expert designers. Recent approaches [6, 31, 49]
use VAEs or autoregressive models to automatically synthesize vector fonts, but they often struggle to capture a diverse
range of topological structures and glyph variations, due to
the inherent ambiguity of vector curves. As a result, they
frequently create artifacts and imprecise control point positions, compromising the overall quality and editability of
the synthesized fonts.
In this work, we leverage recent advances in raster
generative models, to design a generative model for vec∗ Equal contribution
Project website: https://vikastmz.github.io/VecFusion/

7943

