This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning SO(3)-Invariant Semantic Correspondence via Local Shape Transform
Chunghyun Park1*
1

Seungwook Kim1*

POSTECH

2

Jaesik Park2

Minsu Cho1

Seoul National University

Establishing accurate 3D correspondences between
shapes stands as a pivotal challenge with profound implications for computer vision and robotics. However,
existing self-supervised methods for this problem assume
perfect input shape alignment, restricting their real-world
applicability. In this work, we introduce a novel selfsupervised Rotation-Invariant 3D correspondence learner
with local Shape Transform, dubbed RIST, that learns to
establish dense correspondences between shapes even under challenging intra-class variations and arbitrary orientations. Specifically, RIST learns to dynamically formulate
an SO(3)-invariant local shape transform for each point,
which maps the SO(3)-equivariant global shape descriptor
of the input shape to a local shape descriptor. These local
shape descriptors are provided as inputs to our decoder to
facilitate point cloud self- and cross-reconstruction. Our
proposed self-supervised training pipeline encourages semantically corresponding points from different shapes to
be mapped to similar local shape descriptors, enabling
RIST to establish dense point-wise correspondences. RIST
demonstrates state-of-the-art performances on 3D part label transfer and semantic keypoint transfer given arbitrarily
rotated point cloud pairs of the same category, outperforming existing methods by significant margins.

1. Introduction
Establishing dense 3D correspondences between different
shapes is foundational to numerous applications across
computer vision, graphics, and robotics [9, 22, 28, 41].
One of the primary challenges hindering advancements in
this domain is the difficulty of annotating dense inter-shape
correspondences, which limits the leverage of stronglysupervised learning paradigms.
Recently, self-supervised learning methods have been
proposed to address this issue [3, 21], showing promis-

Ours

Abstract

Previous Work

http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/RIST

Figure 1. Semantic correspondence between rotated shapes.
We visualize the semantic correspondence results of the previous
SOTA [3] and ours, given two randomly rotated airplanes from
the ShapeNetPart dataset [39]. Green and red lines indicate the
correct and incorrect matches, respectively. For each method, 100
source points are randomly selected from the source (yellow) for
correspondence visualization1 . Ours predicts SO(3)-invariant correspondences, showing superior accuracy and robustness in comparison to the previous SOTA [3].

ing directions for 3D correspondence estimation. Nonetheless, a significant limitation in existing approaches is their
stringent assumption about the alignment of input shape
pairs; these methods strongly assume that the input point
cloud pair to establish correspondences between is precisely
aligned. This assumption is rarely met in practice, where
object scans and shape instances can be arbitrarily oriented.
We find that the performance of existing methods degrades
significantly when confronted with rotated input shapes, restricting their real-world applicability (Figure 1).
To address this challenge, we introduce a novel selfsupervised learning approach, dubbed RIST, designed to
reliably determine dense SO(3)-invariant correspondences
between shapes via local shape transform. In essence, RIST
learns to formulate SO(3)-invariant local shape transform
for each point in a dynamic and input-dependent manner.
Each point-wise local shape transform maps the SO(3)equivariant global shape descriptor of the input shape to a
local shape descriptor, which is passed to the decoder to re1 For the details of the inference algorithm, please refer to Appendix A.

* Equal contribution

22978

