This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instruct 4D-to-4D: Editing 4D Scenes as Pseudo-3D Scenes Using 2D Diffusion
Linzhan Mou1†
Jun-Kun Chen2†
Yu-Xiong Wang2
1
2
†
Zhejiang University
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Equal Contribution
moulz@zju.edu.cn
{junkun3,yxw}@illinois.edu

Figure 1. Our Instruct 4D-to-4D edits 4D scenes as pseudo-3D scenes with 2D diffusion, achieving much sharper results with detailed
textures across a variety of editing tasks and scenes. Notably, Instruct 4D-to-4D generates realistic and 4D consistent editing results in both
monocular scenes and challenging multi-camera indoor scenes. Please refer to the supplementary video for additional visualization.

Abstract
This paper proposes Instruct 4D-to-4D that achieves 4D
awareness and spatial-temporal consistency for 2D diffusion models to generate high-quality instruction-guided dynamic scene editing results. Traditional applications of 2D
diffusion models in dynamic scene editing often result in inconsistency, primarily due to their inherent frame-by-frame
editing methodology. Addressing the complexities of extending instruction-guided editing to 4D, our key insight
is to treat a 4D scene as a pseudo-3D scene, decoupled
into two sub-problems: achieving temporal consistency in
video editing and applying these edits to the pseudo-3D
scene. Following this, we first enhance the Instruct-Pix2Pix
(IP2P) model with an anchor-aware attention module for
batch processing and consistent editing. Additionally, we
integrate optical flow-guided appearance propagation in
a sliding window fashion for more precise frame-to-frame
editing and incorporate depth-based projection to manage
the extensive data of pseudo-3D scenes, followed by iterative editing to achieve convergence. We extensively evaluate our approach in various scenes and editing instructions,
and demonstrate that it achieves spatially and temporally
consistent editing results, with significantly enhanced detail
and sharpness over the prior art. Notably, Instruct 4D-to4D is general and applicable to both monocular and challenging multi-camera scenes. Code and more results are
available at immortalco.github.io/Instruct-4D-to-4D.

1. Introduction
Being able to synthesize photo-realistic novel-view images
through rendering, neural radiance field (NeRF) [19] and
its variants have become the leading neural representation
for 3D and even 4D dynamic scenes. Moving beyond the
mere representation of existing scenes, there is a growing interest in creating new, varied scenes sourced from an
original scene via scene editing. The most convenient and
straightforward way for users to communicate scene editing operations is through natural language – a task known
as instruction-guided editing.
Success in this task for 2D images has been achieved by
a 2D diffusion model, namely Instruct-Pix2Pix (IP2P) [1].
However, extending this capability to NeRF-represented 3D
or 4D scenes poses a significant challenge. The inherent
difficulty arises from the implicit nature of the NeRF representation, which lacks direct ways to modify the parameters in a targeted direction, along with the significantly increased complexity emerging in new dimensions. Recently,
there has been noticeable progress in instruction-guided
3D scene editing, as exemplified by Instruct-NeRF2NeRF
(IN2N) [10]. IN2N achieves 3D editing through distillation
from 2D diffusion models such as IP2P to edit NeRF, i.e.,
generating edited multi-view images from IP2P and fitting
them on the NeRF-represented scenes. Due to the high diversity in generation results of diffusion models, IP2P may
produce multi-view inconsistent images, with the same ob-

20176

