This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Orthogonal Adaptation for Modular Customization of Diffusion Models
Ryan Po
Stanford University

Guandao Yang
Stanford University

Independent Customization

Orthogonal Concepts

Kfir Aberman
Snap Research

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University
Joint Synthesis

Instant
Merging

Figure 1. Modular Customization of Diffusion Models. Given a large set of individual concepts (left), the goal of Modular Customization
is to enable independent customization (fine-tuning) per concept, while efficiently merging a subset of customized models during inference,
so that the corresponding concepts can be jointly synthesized without compromising fidelity. To tackle this, we propose Orthogonal
Adaptation, which encourages customized weights of one concept to be orthogonal to the customized weights of others.

Abstract
Customization techniques for text-to-image models have
paved the way for a wide range of previously unattainable
applications, enabling the generation of specific concepts
across diverse contexts and styles. While existing methods facilitate high-fidelity customization for individual concepts or a limited, pre-defined set of them, they fall short
of achieving scalability, where a single model can seamlessly render countless concepts. In this paper, we address a new problem called Modular Customization, with
the goal of efficiently merging customized models that were
fine-tuned independently for individual concepts. This allows the merged model to jointly synthesize concepts in one
image without compromising fidelity or incurring any additional computational costs. To address this problem, we
introduce Orthogonal Adaptation, a method designed to encourage the customized models, which do not have access to
each other during fine-tuning, to have orthogonal residual
weights. This ensures that during inference time, the customized models can be summed with minimal interference.
Our proposed method is both simple and versatile, applicable to nearly all optimizable weights in the model architecture. Through an extensive set of quantitative and qualitative evaluations, our method consistently outperforms relevant baselines in terms of efficiency and identity preservation, demonstrating a significant leap toward scalable customization of diffusion models.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) mark a paradigm shift for computer vision and beyond. DM-based foundation models for
text-to-image, video, or 3D generation enable users to create and edit content with unprecedented quality and diversity using intuitive text prompts [32]. Although these foundation models are trained on a massive amount of data, in
order to synthesize user-specific concepts (such as a pet, an
item, or a person) with a high fidelity, they often need to be
fine-tuned.
Several recent approaches to customizing DMs to individual concepts have demonstrated high-quality results [10,
18, 24, 36, 44]. A multi-concept DM strategy, however,
where several pre-trained concepts are mixed in a single
image, remains challenging. Existing multi-concept methods [12, 24] either show a degradation in the quality of individual concepts when merged or require access to multiple concepts during training. The latter makes the process
unscalable and raises privacy concerns when the different
concepts belong to different users. Furthermore, in all cases
the mixing process is computationally inefficient.
We introduce orthogonal adaptation as a new approach
to enabling instantaneous multi-concept customization of
DMs. The primary insight of our work is that changing
how the DM is fine-tuned for novel concepts can lead to
very efficient mixing of these concepts. Specifically, we
represent each new concept using a basis that is approx-

7964

