This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TeMO: Towards Text-Driven 3D Stylization for Multi-Object Meshes
Xuying Zhang1 , Bo-Wen Yin1 , Yuming Chen1 , Zheng Lin1 , Yunheng Li1 , Qibin Hou2,1 ,* Ming-Ming Cheng2,1
1

VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
https://github.com/zhangxuying1004/TeMO

Abstract
Recent progress in the text-driven 3D stylization of a single object has been considerably promoted by CLIP-based
methods. However, the stylization of multi-object 3D scenes
is still impeded in that the image-text pairs used for pretraining CLIP mostly consist of an object. Meanwhile, the
local details of multiple objects may be susceptible to omission due to the existing supervision manner primarily relying on coarse-grained contrast of image-text pairs. To
overcome these challenges, we present a novel framework,
dubbed TeMO, to parse multi-object 3D scenes and edit
their styles under the contrast supervision at multiple levels.
We first propose a Decoupled Graph Attention (DGA) module to distinguishably reinforce the features of 3D surface
points. Particularly, a cross-modal graph is constructed to
align the object points accurately and noun phrases decoupled from the 3D mesh and textual description. Then, we
develop a Cross-Grained Contrast (CGC) supervision system, where a fine-grained loss between the words in the
textual description and the randomly rendered images are
constructed to complement the coarse-grained loss. Extensive experiments show that our method can synthesize highquality stylized content and outperform the existing methods
over a wide range of multi-object 3D meshes.

1. Introduction
3D asset creation through stylization aims to synthesize
stylized content on the bare meshes to conform to the given
text descriptions [15, 19, 25], referring images [38, 50], or
3D shapes [34, 44]. This research plays an important role in
a wide spectrum of applications, e.g., virtual/augmented reality [5, 9], gaming industries [49], and robotics [13]. Moreover, it also presents considerable potential and has attracted
increasing attention in computer vision and graphics communities. Considering the ready availability and expres* Qibin Hou is the corresponding author.

Bare Mesh

TANGO

Our TeMO

two dragons

“a fire dragon and an ice dragon”

person & dragon

“an iron man and an ice dragon”

Figure 1. Visual comparisons between the existing 3D stylization methods (e.g., TANGO [15]) and our TeMO in multi-object
scenes. For a scene with multiple objects of the same/different categories, existing methods are prone to interference between different properties of the objects, while our TeMO is able to accurately
synthesize the desired stylized content for each object.

siveness of text prompts as well as the popularity of largescale Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [28]
model, we choose to work with text-driven 3D stylization.
Recent years have witnessed the emergence of a series
of impressive works [8, 15, 23, 25], aiming to drive the advancement of text-driven 3D stylization. Existing methods
usually adopt multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to predict the
location attribute displacements of the bare mesh under the
supervision of the contrastive loss in CLIP. We observe that
these works focus on the stylization of a single 3D object
and perform poorly on multiple objects, as shown in the
second column of Fig. 1. We argue that two inherent characteristics of CLIP result in this issue: i) CLIP is mainly pretrained with image-text pairs mostly consisting of a single
object; ii) CLIP loss employs global representation vectors
from images and text to coarsely match these two modalities, which inevitably causes the loss of local details. More-

19531

