This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Close Imitation of Expert Retouching for Black-and-White Photography
Seunghyun Shin1
Jisu Shin1
Jihwan Bae2
Inwook Shim3†
1
2
GIST AI Graduate School
School of Medicine, Cha University

3

Hae-Gon Jeon1†
Inha University

{seunghyuns98, jsshin98}@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr
jihwan1008@chauniv.ac.kr, iwshim@inha.ac.kr
Training

Expert A

Expert B

Expert C

Exposure

+0.47

Contrast

+6

Highlight

-100

Shadow

+29

White

+50

Black

-18

Clarity

+35

Exposure

0

Contrast

+78

Highlight

-35

Shadow

+60

White

+53

Black

+10

Clarity

+79

Exposure

+1.85

Contrast

+26

Highlight

+51

Shadow

+44

White

+43

Black

-38

Clarity

Inference

Aesthetic B&W Photos

User Preference Style

Proxy Bank

DeColorful-Net

+34

Sliders

B&W Adobe5k

Input Image

Output Images

Input Images

Expert A’s style Expert B’s style Expert C’s style

Color Image

RGB2Gray

Ours

Figure 1. We train our Decolorful-Net on our new B&W Adobe 5K dataset, retouched by three experts, to produce expert-specific proxies
and corresponding output images. Once trained, we can decolorize an image with any style based on internet downloaded photos.

Abstract
Since the widespread availability of cameras, black-andwhite (BW)photography has been a popular choice for artistic and aesthetic expression. It highlights the main subject in varying tones of gray, creating various effects such
as drama and contrast. However, producing BW photography often demands high-end cameras or photographic
editing from experts. Even the experts prefer different
styles depending on the subject or even the same subject
when taking grayscale photos or converting color images
to BW. It is thus questionable which approach is better. To
imitate the artistic values of decolorized images, this paper introduces a deep metric learning framework with a
novel subject-style specified proxy and a large-scale BW
dataset. Our proxy-based decolorization utilizes a hierarchical proxy-based loss and a hierarchical bilateral grid
network to mimic the experts’ retouching scheme. The proxybased loss captures both expert-discriminative and classsharing characteristics, while the hierarchical bilateral grid
network enables imitating spatially-variant retouching by
considering both global and local scene contexts. Our
dataset, including color and BW images edited by three
experts, demonstrates the scalability of our method, which
can be further enhanced by constructing additional proxies from any set of BW photos like Internet downloaded
figures. Our Experiments show that our framework successfully produce visually-pleasing BW images from color
ones, as evaluated by user preference with respect to artistry
and aesthetics. Code and dataset are publicly available at
https://github.com/seunghyuns98/Decolorization
† Corresponding Author

1. Introduction
Since the birth of camera photography, BW photography has been beloved by photographers and the public because its better dynamic range and natural-looking sharpness [26] convey an ability to enjoy the textures, lines and
patterns as well as contrasts. By representing subjects in varying shades of neutral gray, people can appreciate the revealed
aesthetics that cannot be enjoyed with color photos.
Barbara Davidson, a winner of the 2011 Pulitzer prize in
feature photography, adds both the intimacy and emotion to
the photos with the use of BW because she believes that color
can sometimes become visual pollution [24, 49]. In addition,
some of the BW conversions in Instagram were selected as
the 2021 most popular filters in the world [7]. Recent hit
movies like ‘Parasite’ and ‘Mad-Max’ are even re-opening in
BW videos. This trend indicates that the artistic and aesthetic
purpose of BW photography is becoming recognized.
However, artistic and aesthetic BW photography is not
easy for normal people to achieve. The monochrome camera’s price is burdensome, and the photo-retouching required
to produce satisfying artistic effects still remains the domain of experts. Although smartphones and DSLR cameras can provide basic BW photography functionalities, they
are not aesthetically delightful enough. Image decolorization in the computer vision literature has mostly delved
into preprocessing for various downstream tasks, including semantic segmentation [62], stereo matching [20] and
image recognition [27]. Whether local [16, 31, 37, 52] or
global approaches [6, 57], they focus on minimizing the
loss of textures during the color to grayscale conversion. Of

25037

