This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffeomorphic Template Registration for Atmospheric Turbulence Mitigation
Dong Lao
UCLA Vision Lab

Congli Wang
UC Berkeley

Alex Wong
Yale Vision Lab

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab

lao@cs.ucla.edu

congli.wang@berkeley.edu

alex.wong@yale.edu

soatto@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We describe a method for recovering the irradiance underlying a collection of images corrupted by atmospheric
turbulence. Since supervised data is often technically impossible to obtain, assumptions and biases have to be imposed to solve this inverse problem, and we choose to model
them explicitly. Rather than initializing a latent irradiance
(“template”) by heuristics to estimate deformation, we select one of the images as a reference, and model the deformation in this image by the aggregation of the optical
flow from it to other images, exploiting a prior imposed by
Central Limit Theorem. Then with a novel flow inversion
module, the model registers each image TO the template
but WITHOUT the template, avoiding artifacts related to
poor template initialization. To illustrate the robustness of
the method, we simply (i) select the first frame as the reference and (ii) use the simplest optical flow to estimate the
warpings, yet the improvement in registration is decisive in
the final reconstruction, as we achieve state-of-the-art performance despite its simplicity. The method establishes a
strong baseline that can be further improved by integrating it seamlessly into more sophisticated pipelines, or with
domain-specific methods if so desired.

1. Introduction
Turbulent air motion, once temporally averaged and
sampled to yield a digital picture, causes space- and timevarying blur. A model of the generative process for the measured data given the instantaneous “true” irradiance consists of simple integration over the sampling time interval resulting in discrete samples. Inferring the true irradiance is an ill-posed problem, for there is an equivalence
class of unknowns that yield the same measurements. We
can therefore choose any representative of the equivalence
class, for instance one that would yield the sharpest solution. Traditionally the representative element is chosen as
the (temporal) registered mean but since different images
are blurred differently in different locations, the deformation is not identifiable at all locations, causing the represen-

tative to not have desirable properties, such as being blurry.
Since the choice of representative is arbitrary, we can instead select the sample that has the most desirable properties, for instance the sharpest image (“lucky frame”), as
a canonical reference from which to estimate the deformations. Thus, instead of solving the joint optimization for the
deformations and the resulting average, we select the base
frame I0 = Iτ to correspond to a given image for some τ ,
for instance one that has the desired properties. Note that
this choice is made without loss of generality for the purpose of estimating the deformations ŵt mapping It to I0 ,
since the choice of canonical representative in an equivalence class is arbitrary, so the mean has no more dignity
than any of the samples. Once we have estimated the deformations, however, there is a choice to be made on what
criterion to use to infer the approximation of the underlying
“true” irradiance I0 . We stress that I0 is not just unknown,
but unknowable, and therefore disambiguation rests on the
choice of prior, or model, or complexity criterion.
Deep learning-based methods hide such arbitrary assumptions in the choice of architecture [27,33,44,48] (class
of functions), or prior (loss function) [17, 32, 46, 47]. However, inductive prior based on data used for training can be
problematic for discovery, where by definition one is seeking the unknown. Generic priors may therefore be better
suited for applications to computational astronomical imaging. Among non-learning methods, many directly estimate
a reference image by using heuristics such as various forms
of averaging [29, 30, 38, 51], but mostly result in blurry reference images (Fig. 2). Computing deformation from this
blurry reference image to other images severely impacts the
quality of the deformation fields, which are sometimes of
independent interest. We instead use an input image as the
reference. By the Central Limit arguments, the mean of the
deformation from this frame to other frames converges to
the inverse of the deformation from the ground truth to this
frame (Eq. (5)). Although straightforward, this approach involves inverting the optical flow field, which can be prone to
numerical instabilities. We tackle this flow inversion problem by hard-coding an interpolation scheme, a key contributor to the performance of our method (Sect. 3.1.1).

25107

