This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OMG: Towards Open-vocabulary Motion Generation via Mixture of Controllers
Han Liang1

Jiacheng Bao1
Ruichi Zhang1
Sihan Ren1
Yuecheng Xu1
Sibei Yang1
Xin Chen2
Jingyi Yu1
Lan Xu1
1

ShanghaiTech University

2

Tencent PCG

Abstract
We have recently seen tremendous progress in realistic
text-to-motion generation. Yet, the existing methods often fail or produce implausible motions with unseen text
inputs, which limits the applications. In this paper, we
present OMG, a novel framework, which enables compelling motion generation from zero-shot open-vocabulary
text prompts. Our key idea is to carefully tailor the pretrainthen-finetune paradigm into the text-to-motion generation.
At the pre-training stage, our model improves the generation ability by learning the rich out-of-domain inherent
motion traits. To this end, we scale up a large unconditional diffusion model up to 1B parameters, so as to utilize
the massive unlabeled motion data up to over 20M motion
instances. At the subsequent fine-tuning stage, we introduce motion ControlNet, which incorporates text prompts
as conditioning information, through a trainable copy of
the pre-trained model and the proposed novel Mixtureof-Controllers (MoC) block. MoC block adaptively recognizes various ranges of the sub-motions with a crossattention mechanism and processes them separately with
the text-token-specific experts. Such a design effectively
aligns the CLIP token embeddings of text prompts to various ranges of compact and expressive motion features. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our OMG achieves
significant improvements over the state-of-the-art methods on zero-shot text-to-motion generation. Project page:
https://tr3e.github.io/omg-page.

1. Introduction
Generating vivid motions of human characters is a longstanding task in computer vision, with numerous applications in movies, games, robotics, and VR/AR. The text-tomotion setting aims to democratize motion generation for
novices and has recently received substantive attention.
Benefited from the existing text-annotated motion
datasets [19, 47], recent advances generate diverse motions
from text prompts, equipped with various generative models like VAEs [56, 76], autoregressive models [33, 87], and
diffusion models [12, 13, 77, 89]. However, these meth-

Figure 1. Our Open-vocabulary Motion Generation (OMG) approach is capable of generating high-quality motions in response
to unseen text prompts.

ods heavily rely on the paired text-motion data with limited text annotations, and hence fall short of generalizing
to unseen open-vocabulary text inputs. Imagine generating
“Gollum breakdance footwork”, it requires out-of-domain
generation ability with rich human knowledge to understand
the motion traits in various words like characters (Gollum,
ninja, etc.) or skills (breakdance, spinkick, etc.). To tackle
the open-vocabulary texts, recent works [8, 28, 42] utilize
the zero-shot text-image alignment ability of the large-scale
pre-trained models, e.g., CLIP [57]. They adopt text-pose
alignments and hence remove the reliance on pair-wise text
and continuous motions. Yet, the discrete poses are insufficient to represent the rich motion traits, leading to unrealistic motion generation. On the other hand, recent advances [9, 21, 63, 88] enable impressive and controllable
text-driven image and even video generation, even from
open-vocabulary text inputs. Revisiting their huge success,
both the pretrain-then-finetune paradigm as well as scaling
up the model have played an important role. Yet, adopting

482

