This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

F ED HCA2 : Towards Hetero-Client Federated Multi-Task Learning
Yuxiang Lu,* Suizhi Huang,* Yuwen Yang, Shalayiding Sirejiding, Yue Ding†, Hongtao Lu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
C1

Federated Learning (FL) enables joint training across
distributed clients using their local data privately. Federated Multi-Task Learning (FMTL) builds on FL to handle multiple tasks, assuming model congruity that identical model architecture is deployed in each client. To relax
this assumption and thus extend real-world applicability,
we introduce a novel problem setting, Hetero-Client Federated Multi-Task Learning (HC-FMTL), to accommodate
diverse task setups. The main challenge of HC-FMTL is
the model incongruity issue that invalidates conventional
aggregation methods. It also escalates the difficulties in
model aggregation to deal with data and task heterogeneity inherent in FMTL. To address these challenges, we propose the FedHCA2 framework, which allows for federated
training of personalized models by modeling relationships
among heterogeneous clients. Drawing on our theoretical
insights into the difference between multi-task and federated
optimization, we propose the Hyper Conflict-Averse Aggregation scheme to mitigate conflicts during encoder updates.
Additionally, inspired by task interaction in MTL, the Hyper
Cross Attention Aggregation scheme uses layer-wise cross
attention to enhance decoder interactions while alleviating
model incongruity. Moreover, we employ learnable Hyper
Aggregation Weights for each client to customize personalized parameter updates. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of FedHCA2 in various HCFMTL scenarios compared to representative methods. Code
is available at https://github.com/innovator-zero/FedHCA2.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [32] has emerged as a prominent
paradigm in distributed training, gaining attention in both
academic and industrial fields [4, 5, 17, 28, 83]. The FL
* Equal contribution. B {luyuxiang 2018, huangsuizhi}@sjtu.edu.cn
† Corresponding author. B dingyue@sjtu.edu.cn

This work is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of
China (62176155, 62066002) and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (2021SHZDZX0102).

Task 1

C2

C1

C2

Task 2

Task 1

C3

Task 1 Task 2&3

(a)

C4
Task 2&3

(b)

Aggregation
C1

C2

C3

C4
Task Setups

Task 1

Task 2

Task 3&4

Task 5&6&7

(c)

Figure 1. Comparison of different settings in FMTL. (a) Each
client is dedicated to a single task. (b) Clients are grouped with
peers, and peers in the same group share identical task setting. (c)
Our proposed HC-FMTL setting that enables flexible collaboration among clients with different task setups.

framework empowers to collaboratively train models across
multiple clients, like mobile devices or distributed data centers, while preserving data privacy and reducing communication costs. The impetus behind FL lies in the recognition that harnessing a broader dataset can improve model
performance, but it also introduces the data heterogeneity
issue, as clients often collect samples from non-i.i.d. data
distributions. Nevertheless, most FL research is centered on
single-task scenarios, overlooking applications that demand
simultaneous multi-task processing, e.g., autonomous driving [23]. This gap has led to the integration of Multi-Task
Learning (MTL) with FL, giving rise to Federated MultiTask Learning (FMTL) [22, 56]. While existing FMTL approaches primarily address statistical challenges [53, 70],
recent studies [8, 12, 60, 96] have highlighted the importance of task heterogeneity, particularly for dense predictions such as semantic segmentation and depth estimation
[11, 62, 79].
However, these FMTL methods often assume model
congruity among clients, i.e., all participants either engage
in a single task or aggregate with peers handling identical
task sets, as shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b). Considering the
discrepancy of heterogeneous tasks in practical applications
as well as the expensive labor of annotating task-specific labels, clients often have different task setups in different environments. Here task setup describes a set of tasks that

5599

