This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feedback-Guided Autonomous Driving
Jimuyang Zhang

Zanming Huang Arijit Ray
Boston University

Eshed Ohn-Bar

{zhangjim, huangtom, array, eohnbar}@bu.edu

Abstract
While behavior cloning has recently emerged as a
highly successful paradigm for autonomous driving, humans rarely learn to perform complex tasks, such as driving, via imitation or behavior cloning alone. In contrast,
learning in humans often involves additional detailed guidance throughout the interactive learning process, i.e., where
feedback, often via language, provides detailed information as to which part of their trial was performed incorrectly or suboptimally and why. Motivated by this observation, we introduce an efficient feedback-based framework
for improving behavior-cloning-based training of sensorimotor driving agents. Our key insight is to leverage recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) to provide corrective fine-grained feedback regarding the underlying reason behind driving prediction failures. Moreover, our introduced network architecture is efficient, enabling the first sensorimotor end-to-end training and evaluation of LLM-based driving models. The resulting agent
achieves state-of-the-art performance in open-loop evaluation on nuScenes, outperforming prior state-of-the-art by
over 8.1% and 57.1% in accuracy and collision rate, respectively. In CARLA, our camera-based agent improves
by 16.6% in driving score over prior LIDAR-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Humans often learn new tasks through the synchrony of
demonstration and feedback [46, 60]. Consider the task of
driving, especially the challenging feat of merging onto a
highway. Simply re-watching videos of a driver merging is
often insufficient to learn complex longitudinal and latitudinal control tasks; it is immensely more helpful to receive
feedback on when to accelerate, match the speed of other
cars, and finally merge when safe.
Currently, the most common paradigm for training autonomous driving systems relies primarily on learning from
expert demonstrations, e.g., via behavior cloning [2, 3, 15,
28, 30, 35–37, 37, 39, 95, 99, 108]. While this has fueled
impressive improvements, these systems still fail to gener-

RGB Image

Driving
Agent

Top-down View

Feedback
Generation
Collision with vehicle.
Deviation with planned route.
Deviation with expert trajectory.

Initial Waypoint Pred.
Corrected Waypoint Pred.

Figure 1. Robust Sensorimotor Agent Training through Feedback Guidance. Our study introduces a feedback-guided mechanism for training a sensorimotor driving policy. Specifically, our
proposed approach leverages a Large Language Model to guide the
driving policy learning task through structured critique and reasoning as language prompt, i.e., to effectively reflect and learn from
prediction mistakes.

alize to a wide range of novel scenarios [19, 37, 80, 86, 97].
We believe a possible reason could be the lack of feedback
explaining why a certain action policy fails. Rich feedback
from a teacher can be beneficial to learning the cause of
a control failure in an out-of-domain scenario [6, 26, 59].
While humans can use the rich space of language to receive
feedback, existing model pipelines lack such an intuitive interface. Some works often resort to complicated feedback
pipelines like ranking reward functions [71]. Recently, multimodal large language models [50, 53, 61, 79, 84, 107] with
their ability to converse, perceive, and act [22], seem to have
the fundamental qualities that would allow rich language
feedback to supervise and mitigate robustness issues in sensorimotor driving agents.
Hence, we propose FeD, a feedback-guided end-to-end
sensorimotor driving agent that employs a multimodal large
language model (MLLM) to leverage their rich language
interface for user-control and refinement, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. Our approach overcomes bottlenecks on recentlyproposed contemporary MLLM-based driving methods [58,
90] using three key features: 1) Current models lack a language interface to refine predictions from explanations of
failure. In contrast, we train an MLLM with a rich language
understanding prior to refining its prediction from autogenerated explanations of failure - allowing a user to teach

15000

