This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-step Diffusion with Distribution Matching Distillation
Tianwei Yin1
Michaël Gharbi2
Richard Zhang2
Eli Shechtman2
Frédo Durand1
William T. Freeman1
Taesung Park2
1

(a) DSLR photo of a golden retriever
in heavy snow.

2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Adobe Research
https://tianweiy.github.io/dmd/

(b) Lightshow at the Dolomites.

(c) [...] stylishly dressed elderly woman (d) [...] warrior chief, tribal panther
[...] large glasses [...].
make up, blue on red [...].

(e) hyperrealistic photo of a fox
astronaut; perfect face, artstation.

Figure 1. Which is which? Among these images, some were generated with baseline Stable Diffusion (SD) [63] (2590ms each), the
others with our Diffusion Matching Distillation (DMD) (90ms each). Can you tell which is which? Answers in the footnote1 . (Nonabbreviated prompts in Appendix G.) Our one-step text-to-image generators provide quality rivaling expensive diffusion models.

Abstract
Diffusion models generate high-quality images but require dozens of forward passes. We introduce Distribution
Matching Distillation (DMD), a procedure to transform a
diffusion model into a one-step image generator with minimal impact on image quality. We enforce the one-step image
generator match the diffusion model at distribution level,
by minimizing an approximate KL divergence whose gradient can be expressed as the difference between 2 score
functions, one of the target distribution and the other of the
synthetic distribution being produced by our one-step generator. The score functions are parameterized as two diffusion models trained separately on each distribution. Combined with a simple regression loss matching the large-scale
structure of the multi-step diffusion outputs, our method
outperforms all published few-step diffusion approaches,
reaching 2.62 FID on ImageNet 64⇥64 and 11.49 FID on
zero-shot COCO-30k, comparable to Stable Diffusion but
orders of magnitude faster. Utilizing FP16 inference, our
model can generate images at 20 FPS on modern hardware.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [21, 61, 63, 64, 71, 74] have revolutionized image generation, achieving unprecedented levels of
realism and diversity with a stable training procedure. In
contrast to GANs [15] and VAEs [34], however, their sampling is a slow, iterative process that transforms a Gaussian
noise sample into an intricate image by progressive denoising [21, 74]. This typically requires tens to hundreds of
costly neural network evaluations, limiting interactivity in
using the generation pipeline as a creative tool.
To accelerate sampling speed, previous methods [42, 43,
47, 48, 51, 65, 75, 90, 91] distill the noise!image mapping, discovered by the original multi-step diffusion sampling, into a single-pass student network. However, fitting
such a high-dimensional, complex mapping is certainly a
demanding task. A challenge is the expensive cost of run1 Ours (left to right): bottom, top, bottom, bottom, top.

6613

