This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Triplane Meets Gaussian Splatting:
Fast and Generalizable Single-View 3D Reconstruction with Transformers
Zi-Xin Zou1∗ Zhipeng Yu2 Yuan-Chen Guo1∗ Yangguang Li2
Ding Liang2 Yan-Pei Cao2† Song-Hai Zhang3,1†
1
BNRist, Tsinghua University 2 VAST 3 Qinghai University
{zouzx19@mails., guoyc19@mails., shz@}tsinghua.edu.cn, yuzhipeng21@mails.ucas.ac.cn
liyangguang@vastai3d.com, liangding1990@163.com, caoyanpei@gmail.com
Reconstructed
3D Gaussians

Input Image

Transformers

Novel Views

Novel Views

Input

Figure 1. We propose a method that enables fast reconstruction from a single-view image. We build the 3D representation upon a hybrid
Triplane-Gaussian representation by evaluating a transformer-based framework, from which 3D Gaussians would be decoded (Left). Based
on this, we can perform novel view synthesis with high quality and fast rendering speed via Gaussian Splatting (Right).

Abstract
Recent advancements in 3D reconstruction from single
images have been driven by the evolution of generative
models. Prominent among these are methods based on
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) and the adaptation of diffusion models in the 3D domain. Despite their progress,
these techniques often face limitations due to slow optimization or rendering processes, leading to extensive training and optimization times. In this paper, we introduce
a novel approach for single-view reconstruction that efficiently generates a 3D model from a single image via feedforward inference. Our method utilizes two transformerbased networks, namely a point decoder and a triplane decoder, to reconstruct 3D objects using a hybrid TriplaneGaussian intermediate representation. This hybrid representation strikes a balance, achieving a faster rendering
speed compared to implicit representations while simultaneously delivering superior rendering quality than explicit
representations. The point decoder is designed for generating point clouds from single images, offering an explicit representation which is then utilized by the triplane
decoder to query Gaussian features for each point. This

design choice addresses the challenges associated with directly regressing explicit 3D Gaussian attributes characterized by their non-structural nature. Subsequently, the 3D
Gaussians are decoded by an MLP to enable rapid rendering through splatting. Both decoders are built upon a scalable, transformer-based architecture and have been efficiently trained on large-scale 3D datasets. The evaluations
conducted on both synthetic datasets and real-world images
demonstrate that our method not only achieves higher quality but also ensures a faster runtime in comparison to previous state-of-the-art techniques. Please see our project page
at https://zouzx.github.io/TriplaneGaussian/

1. Introduction
Digitizing 3D objects from single 2D images represents a
crucial and longstanding challenge in both computer vision
and graphics, with wide applications in augmented reality
(AR) and virtual reality (VR). However, the inherent ambiguity and lack of information in single images pose a
substantial challenge in accurately recovering the complete,
∗ Intern at VAST
† Corresponding authors

10324

