This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seamless Human Motion Composition with Blended Positional Encodings
German Barquero
Sergio Escalera
Cristina Palmero
Universitat de Barcelona and Computer Vision Center, Spain
{germanbarquero, sescalera}@ub.edu, crpalmec7@alumnes.ub.edu
https://barquerogerman.github.io/FlowMDM/

("forward kick", 2.5s)

("walk slowly", 3.2s)

("get down on ground", 3s)

("crawl", 3.3s)

("walk", 2s)

("walk", 2s)

("walk", 2s)

("walk", 2s)

...

("walk", 2s)

Figure 1. We present FlowMDM, a diffusion-based approach capable of generating seamlessly continuous sequences of human motion
from textual descriptions (left). The whole sequence is generated simultaneously and it does not require any postprocessing. FlowMDM
also makes strides in the challenging problem of extrapolating and controlling periodic motion such as walking, jumping, or waving (right).

Abstract
Conditional human motion generation is an important
topic with many applications in virtual reality, gaming, and
robotics. While prior works have focused on generating motion guided by text, music, or scenes, these typically result
in isolated motions confined to short durations. Instead,
we address the generation of long, continuous sequences
guided by a series of varying textual descriptions. In this
context, we introduce FlowMDM, the first diffusion-based
model that generates seamless Human Motion Compositions (HMC) without any postprocessing or redundant denoising steps. For this, we introduce the Blended Positional
Encodings, a technique that leverages both absolute and
relative positional encodings in the denoising chain. More
specifically, global motion coherence is recovered at the absolute stage, whereas smooth and realistic transitions are
built at the relative stage. As a result, we achieve state-ofthe-art results in terms of accuracy, realism, and smoothness on the Babel and HumanML3D datasets. FlowMDM
excels when trained with only a single description per motion sequence thanks to its Pose-Centric Cross-ATtention,
which makes it robust against varying text descriptions at
inference time. Finally, to address the limitations of existing
HMC metrics, we propose two new metrics: the Peak Jerk
and the Area Under the Jerk, to detect abrupt transitions.

1. Introduction
In the field of computer vision, recent progress has been
made in developing photorealistic avatars [53] for applications like virtual reality, gaming, and robotics [60, 76].
Aside from looking visually realistic, avatars must also
move in a convincing manner. This is challenging due to
the intricate nature of human motion, strongly influenced
by factors such as the environment, interactions, and physical contact [14]. Furthermore, complexity increases when
attempting to control these motions. Recent advances include the generation of motion sequences from control signals like text descriptions or actions [106]; however, such
methods only produce isolated, standalone motion. Therefore, these approaches fail to handle scenarios where a long
motion is driven by distinct control signals on different time
slices. Such capability is needed to provide full control over
the sequence of desired actions and their duration. In these
scenarios, the generated motion needs to feature seamless
and realistic transitions between actions. In this work, we
tackle this problem, which we refer to as generative Human Motion Composition (HMC). In particular, we focus
on generating single-human motion from text (Fig. 1).
One of the primary obstacles in HMC is the lack of
datasets that offer long motion sequences with diverse textual annotations. Existing datasets typically feature sequences of limited duration, often lasting only up to 10 seconds, and with just a single control signal governing the en-

457

