This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fair Federated Learning under Domain Skew with
Local Consistency and Domain Diversity
Yuhang Chen1∗ Wenke Huang1∗ Mang Ye1,2†
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Taikang Center for Life and Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{yhchen0,wenkehuang,yemang}@whu.edu.cn
1

https://github.com/yuhangchen0/FedHEAL

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a new paradigm
for privacy-preserving collaborative training. Under domain skew, the current FL approaches are biased and face
two fairness problems. 1) Parameter Update Conflict: data
disparity among clients leads to varying parameter importance and inconsistent update directions. These two disparities cause important parameters to potentially be overwhelmed by unimportant ones of dominant updates. It consequently results in significant performance decreases for
lower-performing clients. 2) Model Aggregation Bias: existing FL approaches introduce unfair weight allocation
and neglect domain diversity. It leads to biased model
convergence objective and distinct performance among domains. We discover a pronounced directional update consistency in Federated Learning and propose a novel framework to tackle above issues. First, leveraging the discovered
characteristic, we selectively discard unimportant parameter updates to prevent updates from clients with lower performance overwhelmed by unimportant parameters, resulting in fairer generalization performance. Second, we propose a fair aggregation objective to prevent global model
bias towards some domains, ensuring that the global model
continuously aligns with an unbiased model. The proposed
method is generic and can be combined with other existing
FL methods to enhance fairness. Comprehensive experiments on Digits and Office-Caltech demonstrate the high
fairness and performance of our method.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) aims to collaboratively train a highperformance model while maintaining data privacy [28, 36].
* Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.

Aggregation Bias

Update Conflict
Client

Client

Global Model

Global Model

unimportant important

Caltech

Parameter 𝑖𝑖

Local Update
100

+

Local Update

80
60
40
20

counteract

0

Low Decrease

Significant Decrease

100

Amazon

FedAvg w/o HEAL
STD:23.82

90

Webcam

FedAvg w HEAL
STD:22.08

80
70
60
50
40
30

USPS

MNIST

SVHN

SYN

Figure 1. Problem illustration of Federated Learning under domain skew. Conventional FL methods ( ) exhibit potential performance disparities due to Parameter Update Conflicts and Model
Aggregation Bias. The former indicates that varying parameter
importance and inconsistent update directions lead to an unfair decline in aggregated performance. The latter suggests biased
convergence objective, resulting in performance disparities. Our
method ( ) achieves more equitable performance across different
domains while enhancing overall performance.

The foundational method, FedAvg [36], allows numerous
participants to send their models to the server instead of
data. Then, the server aggregates these models into a
global model and sends it back for further training. Notably, a significant challenge in FL is data heterogeneity
[20, 22, 28, 29, 55] , which means that client data appears in
a Non-IID (non-independently and identically distributed)
manner [32, 50, 54, 56, 59]. One particular heterogeneity
type, domain skew [12, 16, 31, 55], refers to the client data

12077

