This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnyScene: Customized Image Synthesis with Composited Foreground
Ruidong Chen1† Lanjun Wang1† Weizhi Nie1 Yongdong Zhang2 An-An Liu1∗
1
2
Tianjin University
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Recent advancements in text-to-image technology have
significantly advanced the field of image customization.
Among various applications, the task of customizing diverse
scenes for user-specified composited elements holds great
application value but has not been extensively explored.
Addressing this gap, we propose AnyScene, a specialized
framework designed to create varied scenes from composited foreground using textual prompts. AnyScene addresses
the primary challenges inherent in existing methods, particularly scene disharmony due to a lack of foreground semantic understanding and distortion of foreground elements.
Specifically, we develop a foreground injection module that
guides a pre-trained diffusion model to generate cohesive
scenes in visual harmony with the provided foreground. To
enhance robust generation, we implement a layout control
strategy that prevents distortions of foreground elements.
Furthermore, an efficient image blending mechanism seamlessly reintegrates foreground details into the generated
scenes, producing outputs with overall visual harmony and
precise foreground details. In addition, we propose a new
benchmark and a series of quantitative metrics to evaluate
this proposed image customization task. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of AnyScene,
which confirms its potential in various applications.

1. Introduction
Recently, text-to-image (T2I) synthesis models [24, 28, 30,
34] have seen rapid advancements and gained significant
attention due to their ability to generate high-fidelity images from textual prompts. Among the various applications
that harness T2I technology to enhance design efforts, generating diverse scenes tailored to specific composited foregrounds is valuable. It is effective in image editing tasks
demanding background alteration and creation, such as situating e-commerce products in customized scenes, depicting objects in various environmental settings, etc. Despite
its clear utility, this task of “customizing diverse scenes for
1† Equal contribution.
2∗ Corresponding author: An-An Liu (anan0422@gmail.com).

Figure 1. Our proposed AnyScene is capable of synthesizing highquality scenes that align with textual prompts based on the given
foregrounds. Compared to previous alternative methods [42, 45],
AnyScene provides precise control over the introduced foreground
and generates visually harmonious images.

composited foreground” has not been extensively explored.
Currently, several alternative methods [42, 45] can
achieve this task. One such method is employing the canny
edge as a control condition [23, 45], combined with overlaying the original foreground onto the generated image,
often requiring manual adjustments to achieve visual harmony. Another strategy involves inpainting models [30, 42]
that construct backgrounds by painting around the exterior
of a masked foreground area. Furthermore, in cases where
the foreground comprises only one or two specific objects,
subject-driven techniques [17, 19, 32] have shown proficiency in generating customized images.
However, these methods have limitations in practical applications. The method of directly controlling the foreground edge [45] does not consider the visual context, leading to scenes that lack harmony (e.g. Fig. 2(a)). Moreover, inpainting-based approaches [30, 42], though capable of creating cohesive scenes, are commonly trained under a random area recovering paradigm, which may distort
the foreground elements or cause unintended regeneration
of elements from foreground descriptions (e.g. Fig. 2(b)).
Finally, subject-driven methods [17, 19, 32] often compromise high-level details of objects (e.g. Fig. 2(c)), leading
to significant distortions of details such as logos, text, etc,
which is problematic for the applications like commodity
poster design. Meanwhile, their limited capacity to com-

8724

