This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVIP-NeRF: Multi-view 3D Inpainting on NeRF Scenes via Diffusion Prior
Honghua Chen
Chen Change Loy
Xingang Pan
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
honghua.chen@ntu.edu.sg

view 44

view 24

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

xingang.pan@ntu.edu.sg

view 74

Novel views

(a) Input views and masks

(b) Explicit RGB and depth inpainting prior

(d) Remove-NeRF

(e) SPIn-NeRF

(f) Ours

(g) GT

ࠁ

Text prompt
瀡office desk,
carpet floor瀢
(c) Pre-trained text-to-image diffusion prior

Figure 1. Comparison of our MVIP-NeRF with two state-of-the-art approaches, Remove-NeRF [35] and SPIn-NeRF [17]. Existing
methods heavily depend on explicit RGB and depth inpainting results. This type of inpainting prior frequently shows inconsistency,
inaccuracy, and misalignment to a certain degree (sub-ﬁgure (b)). In contrast, our approach implicitly exploits the diffusion prior (subﬁgure (c)), resulting in more faithful and consistent results, in terms of both appearance and geometry.

Abstract
Despite the emergence of successful NeRF inpainting
methods built upon explicit RGB and depth 2D inpainting
supervisions, these methods are inherently constrained by
the capabilities of their underlying 2D inpainters. This is
due to two key reasons: (i) independently inpainting constituent images results in view-inconsistent imagery, and
(ii) 2D inpainters struggle to ensure high-quality geometry
completion and alignment with inpainted RGB images.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel approach called MVIP-NeRF that harnesses the potential of
diffusion priors for NeRF inpainting, addressing both appearance and geometry aspects. MVIP-NeRF performs
joint inpainting across multiple views to reach a consistent solution, which is achieved via an iterative optimization
process based on Score Distillation Sampling (SDS). Apart
from recovering the rendered RGB images, we also extract
normal maps as a geometric representation and deﬁne a
normal SDS loss that motivates accurate geometry inpaint-

ing and alignment with the appearance. Additionally, we
formulate a multi-view SDS score function to distill generative priors simultaneously from different view images, ensuring consistent visual completion when dealing with large
view variations. Our experimental results show better appearance and geometry recovery than previous NeRF inpainting methods.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [14] inpainting involves
the removal of undesired regions from a 3D scene, with the
objective of completing these regions in a contextually coherent, visually plausible, geometrically accurate, and consistent manner across multiple views. This form of 3D editing holds signiﬁcant value for diverse applications, including 3D content creation and virtual/augmented reality.
Inpainting on NeRF scenes presents two intricate challenges: (i) how to ensure that the same region observed
in multiple views is completed in a consistent way, espe-

5344

