This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Calibrating Multi-modal Representations:
A Pursuit of Group Robustness without Annotations
Chenyu You† , Yifei Min† , Weicheng Dai† ,
Jasjeet S. Sekhon, Lawrence Staib, James S. Duncan
Yale University
Abstract
Fine-tuning pre-trained vision-language models, like
CLIP, has yielded success on diverse downstream tasks.
However, several pain points persist for this paradigm: (i)
directly tuning entire pre-trained models becomes both timeintensive and computationally costly. Additionally, these
tuned models tend to become highly specialized, limiting
their practicality for real-world deployment; (ii) recent studies indicate that pre-trained vision-language classifiers may
overly depend on spurious features – patterns that correlate
with the target in training data, but are not related to the
true labeling function; and (iii) existing studies on mitigating the reliance on spurious features, largely based on the
assumption that we can identify such features, does not provide definitive assurance for real-world applications. As a
piloting study, this work focuses on exploring mitigating the
reliance on spurious features for CLIP without using any
group annotation. To this end, we systematically study the
existence of spurious correlation on CLIP and CILP+ERM.
We first, following recent work on Deep Feature Reweighting
(DFR), verify that last-layer retraining can greatly improve
group robustness on pretrained CLIP. In view of them, we
advocate a lightweight representation calibration method for
fine-tuning CLIP, by first generating a calibration set using
the pretrained CLIP, and then calibrating representations
of samples within this set through contrastive learning, all
without the need for group labels. Extensive experiments
and in-depth visualizations on several benchmarks validate
the effectiveness of our proposals, largely reducing reliance
and significantly boosting the model generalization. Our
codes will be available in here

ing visual understanding [11, 27, 28, 49], image-text generation [39, 44] and more [13, 26, 74]. Leveraging these
well-learned and rich representations, fine-tuning pre-trained
VLMs has been the dominant methodology, starting from
pre-training from extensive web-crawled data and then tuning it towards specific downstream tasks. However, when
relying on standard Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) for
training, it raises a risk of inadvertently amplifying spurious
correlations, which may compromise robustness, especially
for underrepresented groups [9]. Consequently, even these
advanced VLMs are not exempt from the challenges posed
by spurious correlation, where patterns may correlate with
the target class without truly pertaining to the classification function. This can inadvertently sideline certain minority groups within the training data, which poses practical
challenges and limits the efficacy of these models in safetycritical applications. For example, on Waterbirds dataset
[51], tasked with classifying “landbird” and “waterbird”,
there exists a bias where an “water (land)” background is
spuriously correlated with the “waterbird (landbird)” class,
leading to a minority groups of “waterbird on land” and
“landbird on water”.
As a result, a considerable body of work has aimed at
improving group robustness of vision models [6, 17, 23,
33, 40, 41, 51]. Specifically, to ensure learning models do
not depend on spurious correlations, which can lead to high
error rates in certain data groups, we align with mainstream
practices and focus on enhancing the worst-case accuracy
(WGA) across different groups. Yet, this remains underexplored in the vision-language context. We therefore attempt
to explore the central question motivating this work:
(Q) Does there exist an efficient way to mitigate multimodal spurious correlations without retraining the
entire model, thereby enhancing its group robustness
without relying on any group annotations?

1. Introduction
In recent years, large-scale pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) [3, 18, 29, 48, 62, 70] have showcased impressive capabilities across various downstream tasks, includ† equal contribution.

To address (Q), we aims to achieve two key objectives:
(i) parameter-efficient fine-tuning – traditional fine-tuning
typically involves updating a large proportion of or even all
the parameters of the pre-trained model. Yet, in many practi-

26140

