This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards More Accurate Diffusion Model Acceleration with A Timestep Tuner
Mengfei Xia1

Yujun Shen2 Changsong Lei1 Yu Zhou1
Ran Yi4 Wenping Wang5 Yong-Jin Liu1 *

Deli Zhao3

1

Tsinghua University 2 Ant Group 3 Alibaba Group
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Texas A&M University

Abstract
A diffusion model, which is formulated to produce an
image using thousands of denoising steps, usually suffers
from a slow inference speed. Existing acceleration algorithms simplify the sampling by skipping most steps yet
exhibit considerable performance degradation. By viewing
the generation of diffusion models as a discretized integral
process, we argue that the quality drop is partly caused
by applying an inaccurate integral direction to a timestep
interval. To rectify this issue, we propose a timestep tuner
that helps find a more accurate integral direction for a particular interval at the minimum cost. Specifically, at each
denoising step, we replace the original parameterization
by conditioning the network on a new timestep, enforcing
the sampling distribution towards the real one. Extensive
experiments show that our plug-in design can be trained
efficiently and boost the inference performance of various
state-of-the-art acceleration methods, especially when there
are few denoising steps. For example, when using 10
denoising steps on LSUN Bedroom dataset, we improve the
FID of DDIM from 9.65 to 6.07, simply by adopting our
method for a more appropriate set of timesteps. Code is
available at https://github.com/THU-LYJ-Lab/time-tuner.

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) [8, 37, 39], known
simply as diffusion models, have recently received growing
attention due to its efficacy of modeling complex data distributions [5, 8, 28]. A DPM first defines a forward diffusion
process (i.e., either discrete-time [8, 38] or continuoustime [39]) by gradually adding noise to data samples, and
then learns the reverse denoising process with a timestepconditioned parameterization. Consequently, it usually
requires thousands of denoising steps to synthesize an
image, which is time-consuming [8, 16, 38].
* Corresponding author.

To accelerate the generation process of diffusion models,
a common practice is to reduce the number of inference
steps. For example, instead of a step-by-step evolution from
the state of timestep 1,000 to the state of timestep 900,
previous works [1, 8, 39] manage to directly link these two
states with a one-time transition. That way, it only needs to
evaluate the denoising network once instead of 100 times,
thus substantially saving the computational cost.
A side effect of the above acceleration pipeline is the
performance degradation that appears as artifacts in the
synthesized images. In this paper, we aim to identify and
address the cause of this side effect. As the gray dashed
line shown in Fig. 1a, the generation process of diffusion
models can be viewed as a discretized integrating process,
where the direction of each integral step is calculated by the
pre-learned noise prediction model. To reduce the number
of steps, existing algorithms [1, 28, 38] typically apply the
direction predicted for the initial state for the following
timestep interval, as the red line shown in Fig. 1a, resulting
in a gap between the sampling distribution and the real
distribution. Karras [14] identifies this distribution gap as
the truncation error, which accumulates over the whole
steps intuitively and theoretically. As the red line shown in
Fig. 1b, the gap between the sampling distribution and the
real distribution increases as the integrating process evolves.
To alleviate the problem arising from skipping steps, we
propose a timestep tuner, termed as TimeTuner, which
targets at finding a more accurate integral direction for a
particular interval. As the green line shown in Fig. 1a,
our approach is designed to achieve this purpose efficiently
by searching a more appropriate timestep τ replacing the
previous t as the new condition input of the pre-learned
noise prediction model. By doing so, we are able to
significantly reduce the one-step truncation error, and hence
the accumulative truncation error, as demonstrated with
the green line in Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b respectively. Our
motivation is intuitive – it is based on the observation that
“although the direction estimated from the initial state may
not be appropriate for integration on the interval, the one

5736

