This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Once for Both: Single Stage of Importance and Sparsity Search for Vision
Transformer Compression
Hancheng Ye1,2

Chong Yu3
Jiwen Lu5

Peng Ye1 Renqiu Xia2,4
Tao Chen1† Bo Zhang2‡

Yansong Tang5

1

3

School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Recent Vision Transformer Compression (VTC) works
mainly follow a two-stage scheme, where the importance
score of each model unit is first evaluated or preset in each
submodule, followed by the sparsity score evaluation according to the target sparsity constraint. Such a separate
evaluation process induces the gap between importance and
sparsity score distributions, thus causing high search costs
for VTC. In this work, for the first time, we investigate how to
integrate the evaluations of importance and sparsity scores
into a single stage, searching the optimal subnets in an efficient manner. Specifically, we present OFB, a cost-efficient
approach that simultaneously evaluates both importance and
sparsity scores, termed Once for Both (OFB), for VTC. First,
a bi-mask scheme is developed by entangling the importance
score and the differentiable sparsity score to jointly determine the pruning potential (prunability) of each unit. Such
a bi-mask search strategy is further used together with a
proposed adaptive one-hot loss to realize the progressiveand-efficient search for the most important subnet. Finally,
Progressive Masked Image Modeling (PMIM) is proposed to
regularize the feature space to be more representative during
the search process, which may be degraded by the dimension
reduction. Extensive experiments demonstrate that OFB can
achieve superior compression performance over state-ofthe-art searching-based and pruning-based methods under
various Vision Transformer architectures, meanwhile promoting search efficiency significantly, e.g., costing one GPU
search day for the compression of DeiT-S on ImageNet-1K.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) are developing rapidly in many
practical tasks, but they suffer from substantial computational costs and storage overhead, preventing their deployments for resource-constrained scenarios. Vision Trans† Corresponding author. ‡ Project lead.

Figure 1. The relationship between importance and sparsity score
distributions in different search paradigms. (a) Importance scores
are fixed during sparsity search, and sparsity scores are related to
importance scores. (b) Importance scores of one submodule are also
related to the sparsity of other to-prune submodules. (c) Importance
and sparsity scores are entangled and simultaneously optimized,
thus correlated at forward and backward phases of searching.

former Compression (VTC), as an effective technique to
relieve such problems, has advanced a lot and can be divided
into several types including Transformer Architecture Search
(TAS) [5, 6, 15, 25, 32, 35, 48] and Transformer Pruning
(TP) [2, 7, 21, 27, 31, 37, 42, 51] paradigms. Although both
TAS and TP can produce compact ViTs, their search process
for the target sparsity often relies on a two-stage scheme, i.e.,
importance-then-sparsity evaluation* for units (e.g., filters)
* The importance evaluation aims at learning each unit’s contribution to
the prediction performance, while the sparsity evaluation aims at learning
each unit’s pruning choice. In general, the importance and sparsity score
distributions are correlated in the search process, as shown in Fig. 1.

5578

