This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural 3D Strokes: Creating Stylized 3D Scenes with Vectorized 3D Strokes
Hao-Bin Duan1 Miao Wang1,2* Yan-Xun Li1 Yong-Liang Yang3
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
Zhongguanchun Laboratory 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Bath

Figure 1. We propose a method to stylize a 3D scene from multi-view 2D images using vectorized 3D strokes based on geometric primitives
and splines. The four scenes from left to right are drawn with axis-aligned box, oriented box, ellipsoid, and cubic Bézier curve, respectively.

Abstract
We present Neural 3D Strokes, a novel technique to generate stylized images of a 3D scene at arbitrary novel views
from multi-view 2D images. Different from existing methods
which apply stylization to trained neural radiance fields at
the voxel level, our approach draws inspiration from imageto-painting methods, simulating the progressive painting
process of human artwork with vector strokes. We develop
a palette of stylized 3D strokes from basic primitives and
splines, and consider the 3D scene stylization task as a
multi-view reconstruction process based on these 3D stroke
primitives. Instead of directly searching for the parameters of these 3D strokes, which would be too costly, we
introduce a differentiable renderer that allows optimizing
stroke parameters using gradient descent, and propose a
training scheme to alleviate the vanishing gradient issue.
The extensive evaluation demonstrates that our approach
effectively synthesizes 3D scenes with significant geometric and aesthetic stylization while maintaining a consistent appearance across different views. Our method can
be further integrated with style loss and image-text contrastive models to extend its applications, including color
transfer and text-driven 3D scene drawing. Results and
code are available at http://buaavrcg.github.
io/Neural3DStrokes.
* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Artistic style image creation, historically a domain requiring significant skill and time, has been revolutionized
by neural network-based Style Transfer techniques [7, 8].
These methods usually separate, manipulate, and merge the
content and style of images to create an artistic effect. Extending this to 3D scenes, however, is challenging due to
complex geometries and appearance traits [28], and traditional convolutional neural network (CNN) methods [25]
are not readily adaptable to 3D spaces. Recently, 3D implicit scene representations, particularly Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF), have become popular, since they are fully
differentiable and easy to optimize. Efforts to apply artistic
styles to NeRF [11, 15, 22] often involve separate NeRF
training and style transfer, followed by integration style
transfer loss from multiple views [3, 5, 32]. The fundamental approach continues to be the independent manipulation of content and style. Nevertheless, existing NeRF stylization techniques only alter the color aspects, leaving the
density-and consequently the geometry—unchanged, leading to stylizations that lack geometric changes.
Style transfer methods in 2D and 3D primarily manipulate pixels or voxels to achieve artistic effects, differing
from traditional art where artists use brushstrokes and a degree of randomness in brushes, materials, and colors. This
traditional approach is time-consuming and skill-intensive.
To automate it, research has explored image generation with
15240

