This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Holo-Relighting: Controllable Volumetric Portrait Relighting
from a Single Image
Yiqun Mei1

Yu Zeng1† He Zhang2† Zhixin Shu2† Xuaner Zhang2
Jianming Zhang2 HyunJoon Jung2 Vishal M. Patel1
1

Johns Hopkins University

2

Sai Bi2

Adobe Inc.

(a) Relighting and Viewpoint Control

Input

(b) Head Pose Control

(c) Shadow Diffusion

Figure 1. Holo-Relighting performs volumetric relighting on a single input portrait image, allowing users to individually control (1) lighting
effect via an environment map, (2) camera viewpoint and (3) head pose. It is highly expressive and can render complex illumination effects
on in-the-wild human faces with accurate view consistency (a). Controls are well disentangled to produce a realistic rendering of moving
shadows cast by a point light while rotating the head (b). Practical photographic applications such as shadow diffusion (softening) are also
made feasible with our system (c).

Abstract
At the core of portrait photography is the search for
ideal lighting and viewpoint. The process often requires
advanced knowledge in photography and an elaborate studio setup. In this work, we propose Holo-Relighting, a volumetric relighting method that is capable of synthesizing
novel viewpoints, and novel lighting from a single image.
Holo-Relighting leverages the pretrained 3D GAN (EG3D)
to reconstruct geometry and appearance from an input portrait as a set of 3D-aware features. We design a relighting module conditioned on a given lighting to process these
features, and predict a relit 3D representation in the form
of a tri-plane, which can render to an arbitrary viewpoint
through volume rendering. Besides viewpoint and lighting
control, Holo-Relighting also takes the head pose as a condition to enable head-pose-dependent lighting effects. With
† The second authors

these novel designs, Holo-Relighting can generate complex
non-Lambertian lighting effects (e.g., specular highlights
and cast shadows) without using any explicit physical lighting priors. We train Holo-Relighting with data captured
with a light stage, and propose two data-rendering techniques to improve the data quality for training the volumetric relighting system. Through quantitative and qualitative
experiments, we demonstrate Holo-Relighting can achieve
state-of-the-arts relighting quality with better photorealism,
3D consistency and controllability.

1. Introduction
One essential challenge in portrait photography is to find the
ideal lighting condition and viewpoint that best portray the
subject, a process that often involves tedious adjustments of
camera and lighting setup in a professional studio environment with expensive equipment [18, 54]. These require-

4263

