This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Honeybee: Locality-enhanced Projector for Multimodal LLM
Junbum Cha*

Wooyoung Kang*

Jonghwan Mun*

Byungseok Roh

Kakao Brain
{junbum.cha, edwin.kang, jason.mun, peter.roh}@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
In Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), a visual projector plays a crucial role in bridging pre-trained
vision encoders with LLMs, enabling profound visual understanding while harnessing the LLMs’ robust capabilities. Despite the importance of the visual projector, it has
been relatively less explored. In this study, we first identify
two essential projector properties: (i) flexibility in managing the number of visual tokens, crucial for MLLMs’ overall efficiency, and (ii) preservation of local context from
visual features, vital for spatial understanding. Based on
these findings, we propose a novel projector design that
is both flexible and locality-enhanced, effectively satisfying the two desirable properties. Additionally, we present
comprehensive strategies to effectively utilize multiple and
multifaceted instruction datasets. Through extensive experiments, we examine the impact of individual design choices.
Finally, our proposed MLLM, Honeybee, remarkably outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods across various benchmarks, including MME, MMBench, SEED-Bench,
and LLaVA-Bench, achieving significantly higher efficiency.
Code and models are available at https://github.
com/kakaobrain/honeybee.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have made great progress
in recent years, mainly thanks to instruction tuning. Visual instruction tuning [34] has been proposed to extend
LLMs into Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) to perceive and
understand visual signals (e.g., images). The main idea for
MLLMs is to introduce a projector connecting the vision
encoder and LLM, and to learn the projector using visual
instruction data while keeping the parameters of the vision
encoder and LLM. Such a simple technique allows to preserve and leverage the pre-trained knowledge and abilities
in vision encoder and LLM, making resulting MLLMs unlock new capabilities, such as generating stories, poems,
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Performance vs. efficiency for projectors where AvgN
means an average of normalized benchmark scores (MME, MMBench, and SEED-Bench) and step time is a single step execution
time during pre-training. Honeybee with the locality-enhanced
projector (i.e., C-Abstractor) offers a more favorable balance between efficiency and performance over existing projectors.
MMB

SEEDI

MMEP

MME

LLaVAW

Previous SoTA
67.7 [33] 68.1 [33] 1531 [33] 1848 [2] 70.7 [33]
Honeybee (Ours) 73.6 (+5.9) 68.6 (+0.5) 1661 (+130) 1977 (+129) 77.5 (+6.8)

Table 1. Comparison with SoTA. The proposed Honeybee outperforms the previous state-of-the-art MLLMs on various benchmarks with significant gaps.

advertisements, code, and more from given images; those
tasks have traditionally been considered challenging for
conventional vision-language foundation models [56, 59].
Such success leads to increasing attention for research into
MLLMs taking multimodal inputs (e.g., videos [28], audio [13], 3d world [17], point cloud [52]) beyond text.
For MLLMs, the projector plays a critical role in the following two aspects: 1) performance: as it bridges the vision
and language models by translating visual features into visual tokens so that the language model can understand, the
quality of conveyed visual tokens directly impacts the overall performance of the MLLM; and 2) efficiency: as most of
the computational burden lies with the language model, the
efficiency of MLLMs is heavily influenced by the number
of resulting visual tokens. However, despite its critical importance, the projector has been relatively underexplored in
the literature and most MLLMs simply adopt either linear
projectors [7, 34] or abstractors [2, 11, 27, 54, 66].

13817

