This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CMA: A Chromaticity Map Adapter for Robust Detection of Screen-Recapture
Document Images
Changsheng Chen1 , Liangwei Lin1 , Yongqi Chen1 , Bin Li1 *, Jishen Zeng2 , Jiwu Huang3
1
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Media Security, Shenzhen University, 2 Alibaba Group,
3
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Faculty of Engineering, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
cschen@szu.edu.cn, 2210433032@email.szu.edu.cn

Abstract
The rebroadcasting of screen-recaptured document images introduces a significant risk to the confidential documents processed in government departments and commercial companies. However, detecting recaptured document
images subjected to distortions from online social networks
(OSNs) is challenging since the common forensics cues,
such as moiré pattern, are weakened during transmission.
In this work, we first devise a pixel-level distortion model of
the screen-recaptured document image to identify the robust
features of color artifacts. Then, we extract a chromaticity
map from the recaptured image to highlight the presence
of color artifacts even under low-quality samples. Based
on the prior understanding, we design a chromaticity map
adapter (CMA) to efficiently extract the chromaticity map,
and feed it into the transformer backbone as multi-modal
prompt tokens. To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we collect a recaptured office document image dataset with over 10K diverse samples. Experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed CMA method outperforms a SOTA approach (with RGB modality only), reducing
the average EER from 26.82% to 16.78%. Robustness evaluation shows that our method achieves 0.8688 and 0.7554
AUCs under samples with JPEG compression (QF=70) and
resolution as low as 534×503 pixels.

1. Introduction
Document images, such as certificates, contracts, and identity documents, are gaining popularity in e-business and
e-government applications, which brings both convenience
and threat to our applications. Traditionally, an organization
controls the distribution of hard-copy documents to guard
* B. Li is the corresponding author.

Genuine
Document
Image

Screenrecaptured
Document
Image
(a) RGB image

(b) LBP
(previous)

(c) Spectrum
(previous)

(d) Chromaticity
(ours)

Figure 1. Illustrations of the low-quality genuine (top row) and
recaptured (bottom row) samples and their transformed domain
representations. (a) Image patches in RGB space. The samples
are collected by Canon C3530 (4800×1200 DPI) printer, OnePlus
5T camera (resolution at 1280×960 pixels), Dell P2418D display
(resolution at 2560×1440 pixels, size 23.8 inches), and subject to
JPEG compression with a quality factor of 70. (b) LBP maps with
a radius 1 containing 8 elements [40]. (c) Amplitude spectrum in
the Fourier domain. (d) Chromaticity map extracted by Eq. (5) in
our work. The color artifacts highlighted in (d) show clear differences between the genuine and recaptured samples.

against the leakage of confidential information. Many office documents with confidential information can be viewed
on screen for a limited time but cannot be printed as hard
copies [29]. However, illegal users could acquire the genuine document image shown on display with their smartphones and distribute the recaptured document image
without being noticed [2, 31]. Worse still, these images are
usually transmitted through online social networks (OSN),
e.g., WhatsApp, and WeChat, which introduces further distortions (compression, resizing, etc.) to the document images. Thus, there is a pressing need to develop a recaptured
document detection scheme robust to various distortions.
Existing works on recaptured image detection focus on
face and natural images. For instance, literature exploits
physical traces of distortion, e.g., specularity distribution
[52], color saturation [7], edge blurriness [45] and moiré

15577

