This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Estimating Extreme 3D Image Rotations using Cascaded Attention
Shay Dekel
Bar Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel

Yosi Keller
Bar Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel

Martin Čadı́k
FIT, Brno University of Technology
Brno, Czech Republic

shaydekel@gmail.com

yosi.keller@gmail.com

cadik@fit.vut.cz

Abstract
Estimating large, extreme inter-image rotations is critical for numerous computer vision domains involving images related by limited or non-overlapping fields of view.
In this work, we propose an attention-based approach with
a pipeline of novel algorithmic components. First, as rotation estimation pertains to image pairs, we introduce an
inter-image distillation scheme using Decoders to improve
embeddings. Second, whereas contemporary methods compute a 4D correlation volume (4DCV) encoding inter-image
relationships, we propose an Encoder-based cross-attention
approach between activation maps to compute an enhanced
equivalent of the 4DCV. Finally, we present a cascaded
Decoder-based technique for alternately refining the crossattention and the rotation query. Our approach outperforms
current state-of-the-art methods on extreme rotation estimation. We make our code publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Estimating the relative pose between a pair of images is a
crucial task in computer vision, which is used in various applications such as indoor navigation, augmented reality, autonomous driving, 3D reconstruction [40, 44], camera localization [5, 45, 47], simultaneous localization and mapping
[12, 38], and novel view synthesis [35, 42]. The current
approach to image registration involves extracting features,
matching them, and establishing correspondence between
them. However, this approach is ineffective for input pairs
with little or no overlap, making it difficult to establish sufficient feature correspondences for matching, such as in the
images shown in Fig. 1.
Numerous applications [1, 32, 49] necessitate precise estimation of inter-image rotations. The prevalent approach
for extreme 3D rotation estimation between images with
limited or no overlap, as in Fig. 1, relates to the seminal work of Coughlan and Yuille [10]. They introduced a
technique premised on linear structures within an image,
primarily arising from three mutually orthogonal directions

Figure 1. The estimation of extreme 3D image rotations. First row:
Images pair with a small overlap. Second row: non-overlapping
image pairs. The proposed scheme estimates the relative rotation
between image pairs.

- one vertical (building walls) and two horizontal (ground
pavements, roads, etc.). Similarly, ”Single View Metrology” by Criminisi et al. [11] and extensions [26, 41, 61] utilize parallel image lines and corresponding vanishing points
[19] for camera calibration. Furthermore, relative camera
rotation can be estimated via illumination cues [2], by analyzing lighting and shadow directions.
In this work, we propose a deep-learning approach for
estimating significant, extreme inter-image rotations. Unlike classical formulations [10, 11] that explicitly detect
hand-crafted cues such as lines, shadows, and vanishing
points, our method directly regresses the relative rotation
from input images through a deep neural network. Inspired
by recent successful applications of Transformers [53] in
computer vision tasks including object detection [8] and im-

2588

