This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Degradation-Independent Representations for Camera ISP Pipelines
Yanhui Guo*
McMaster University, Canada

Fangzhou Luo*
McMaster University, Canada

Xiaolin Wu†
McMaster University, Canada

guoy143@mcmaster.ca

luof1@mcmaster.ca

xwu@mcmaster.ca

Abstract
Image signal processing (ISP) pipeline plays a fundamental role in digital cameras, which converts raw Bayer
sensor data to RGB images. However, ISP-generated images
usually suffer from imperfections due to the compounded
degradations that stem from sensor noises, demosaicing
noises, compression artifacts, and possibly adverse effects
of erroneous ISP hyperparameter settings such as ISO and
gamma values. In a general sense, these ISP imperfections
can be considered as degradations. The highly complex
mechanisms of ISP degradations, some of which are even unknown, pose great challenges to the generalization capability
of deep neural networks (DNN) for image restoration and to
their adaptability to downstream tasks. To tackle the issues,
we propose a novel DNN approach to learn degradationindependent representations (DiR) through the refinement
of a self-supervised learned baseline representation. The
proposed DiR learning technique has remarkable domain
generalization capability and consequently, it outperforms
state-of-the-art methods across various downstream tasks,
including blind image restoration, object detection, and instance segmentation, as verified in our experiments.

1. Introduction
In our information era, digital cameras have become ubiquitous and indispensable in all walks of socioeconomic life.
They are arguably the most common type of sensory device
for both humans and their intelligent agents to sense the environment. The applications of digital imaging fall into two
categories depending on their end purposes: human vision
oriented and machine vision oriented. Examples of the first
category include smartphones, social media, internet videos,
etc., while robotics, automation, and medical imaging are
examples of the second category.
For human vision oriented applications, the image quality metrics should correspond to human visual perception,
because the images are primarily intended to please our
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

eyes. On the other hand, for machine vision oriented applications [18, 19, 40, 49], the image quality requirements
may not completely align with those of human perception.
In the latter case, what matters most is the preservation of
semantically critical image features that are needed to solve
computer vision problems of recognition and classification.
For either human viewing or downstream computer vision
tasks, the image acquisition process of digital cameras is the
same. All images are generated by a hardware image signal
processing (ISP) pipeline that transforms raw Bayer sensor
data into RGB images. The ISP pipeline consists of a set
of cascaded steps, including denoising, color demosaicking,
and compression. Each of the ISP steps can cause a level of
degradation in image quality. At the beginning of the ISP
pipeline, there are sensor noises, particularly in dark environments with a low signal-to-noise ratio. The noisy RAW
data are then demosaiced to produce the corresponding RGB
images. This demosaicking process introduces interpolation
noises of its own. Finally, the RGB image is compressed for
bandwidth efficiency, which adds extra compression noises
on top of sensor noises and demosaicking noises. The resulting compound effects of these cascaded noises are very
difficult to model precisely [11]. The underlying complex
image quality degradation mechanism prevents the synthesis
of clean and degraded image pairs for supervised learning.
Yet, there is another type of ISP degradation that exerts
adverse effects on the applications of ISP-generated images
in downstream tasks. The camera ISP involves a number
of adjustable hyperparameters such as gamma correction,
ISO, gain control, and white balance. Their optimal settings
may vary from application to application, i.e., there exists
no one-fits-all solution. Most cameras have a default hyperparameter setting that is tailored to perceptual quality
rather than optimized for a specific computer vision task.
We consider the deviations of ISP hyperparameters from
their optimal settings, in a general sense, to be degradations
as well. This second type of ISP degradation can lead to
underperformances or even outright failures of downstream
computer vision algorithms [32, 38]. Like the first type
of signal-level degradations, the second type of semanticlevel degradations is extremely difficult, if not impossible,

25774

