This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Hyper-graph Aggregation for Modality-Agnostic Federated Learning
Fan Qi,* Shuai Li
Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin, China
fanqi@email.tjut.edu.cn, lshuai@stud.tjut.edu.cn

Abstract
visual

In Federated Learning (FL), the issue of statistical data
heterogeneity has been a significant challenge to the field’s
ongoing development. This problem is further exacerbated
when clients’ data vary in modalities. In response to these
issues of statistical heterogeneity and modality incompatibility, we propose the Adaptive Hyper-graph Aggregation
framework, a novel solution for Modality-Agnostic Federated Learning. We design a Modular Architecture for Local Model with single modality, setting the stage for efficient intra-modality sharing and inter-modality complementarity. An innovative Global Consensus Prototype Enhancer is crafted to assimilate and broadcast global consensus knowledge within the network. At the core of our
approach lies the Adaptive Hyper-graph Learning Strategy,
which effectively tackles the inherent challenges of modality
incompatibility and statistical heterogeneity within federated learning environments, accomplishing this adaptively
even without the server being aware of the clients’ modalities. Our approach, tested on three multimodal benchmark
datasets, demonstrated strong performance across diverse
data distributions, affirming its effectiveness in multimodal
federated learning.

1. Introduction
Propelled by its capacity to enable collaborative model
training across decentralized data sources while upholding
privacy preservation, federated learning (FL) has rapidly
gained traction as a burgeoning and propitious research
paradigm [1, 21, 26, 32, 39, 51]. Statistical heterogeneity
caused by non-IID data across clients represents the primary challenge for federated learning algorithm research,
spurring an abundance of studies centered around this challenge [9, 11, 14, 30, 38, 42].
To better handle this heterogeneity, numerous client clustering techniques [15, 28, 31, 48] create multiple global
models by clustering clients with similar data distribution.
* Corresponding author.

acoustic

physiological signals

Statistical Area

Modality Area

Server
Server
Clients

…

Clients

……

(a) Unimodal
Collaboration Graph

(b) Multimodal
Collaboration Hypergraph

Figure 1. On the left, the traditional approach emphasizes parameter similarity for collaboration. On the right, our method utilizes
a complex hypergraph to adaptively learn the correlation among
clients, tackling modality incompatibility and statistical heterogeneity.

Typically, client similarity is evaluated by either comparing
local model weights [5, 31] or loss values from different
cluster models [16, 25]. However, client clustering-based
methods lack flexibility in handling diverse data heterogeneity, as they do not specifically determine appropriate
client pairs and collaboration intensity levels.
Another perspective for helping clients collaborate is to
construct a dynamic graph for server aggregation [17, 27,
41]. As shown in Fig.1(a), this collaboration graph exclusively connects clients that mutually benefit from each
other’s data, thereby optimizing the efficiency of the learning process. In this graph, each node symbolizes an individual client’s personalized model. The edges, on the other
hand, represent the collaboration intensity between pairs of
models, with weights that are dynamically updated in each
communication round. Specifically, the server constructs a
collaboration graph that emphasizes model similarity correlations, which is then utilized to generate an aggregated
model for each client. On the client side, local models are
optimized by balancing empirical task-driven loss and their
similarity to the server’s aggregated model, enhancing both
individual and collaborative performance in FL.

12312

