This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PBWR: Parametric-Building-Wireframe Reconstruction from Aerial LiDAR
Point Clouds
Shangfeng Huang1 , Ruisheng Wang1,* , Bo Guo2 , Hongxin Yang1
1
University of Calgary, 2 Guangdong University of Technology
{shangfeng.huang, ruiswang, hongxin.yang}@ucalgary.ca, guobo.lidar@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present an end-to-end 3D-buildingwireframe reconstruction method to regress edges directly
from aerial light-detection-and-ranging (LiDAR) point
clouds. Our method, named parametric-building-wireframe
reconstruction (PBWR), takes aerial LiDAR point clouds
and initial edge entities as input and fully uses the selfattention mechanism of transformers to regress edge parameters without any intermediate steps such as corner prediction. We propose an edge non-maximum suppression (ENMS) module based on edge similarity to remove redundant edges. Additionally, a dedicated edge loss function
is utilized to guide the PBWR in regressing edges parameters when the simple use of the edge distance loss is not
suitable. In our experiments, our proposed method demonstrated state-of-the-art results on the Building3D dataset,
achieving an improvement of approximately 36% in Entrylevel dataset edge accuracy and around a 42% improvement
in the Tallinn dataset.

1. Introduction
3D-building-wireframe reconstruction is an important
mid-level visual process [23]. 3D-wireframe models,
lightweight in nature, offer a comprehensive representation
of the shape and structural information of 3D objects. Further, these models can be easily and efficiently converted
into 3D mesh models, including CAD models, that play a
crucial role in the metaverse, smart cities, and virtual reality
applications. Despite its practical and scientific importance,
3D-building-wireframe reconstruction remains an unsolved
problem in computer vision.
Generally, point clouds are considered as one of the simplest and most flexible ways to represent 3D objects. It possesses innate ability to represent structure of objects with
remarkable fidelity, capturing intricate details with precision. Wireframe models, in contrast, are also specifically
designed to represent 3D objects. Unlike meshes, wire-

Figure 1. Pipeline Comparison. Top: The most popular wireframe-reconstruction methods based on point prediction
and edge classification modules, are optimized by LCorner and
LEdge , respectively. Bottom: Our proposed PBWR avoids the intermediate point classification process.

frames are a more simplified representation of 3D objects
and can be readily converted into CAD. Therefore, the ABC
[15] and Building3D [34] datasets recommend the use of
wireframe models for point cloud reconstruction. Existing
state-of-the-art deep learning methods [13, 18, 21, 43] have
demonstrated impressive performance in wireframe reconstruction, but they are limited by the use of dense synthetic
point clouds. Additionally, they involve heuristic-guided
intermediate processing modules such as corner prediction
and edge classification [18, 21, 34], which lead to error accumulation and limit performance improvement and further
development.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach named
parametric-building-wireframe reconstruction (PBWR)
from aerial light-detection-and-ranging (LiDAR) point
clouds. The method directly regresses edges from point
clouds using transformers [32] and eliminates intermediate
steps such as corner prediction and edge classification.
Existing methods [18, 21, 34] predict N candidate corners

27778

