This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attack To Defend: Exploiting Adversarial Attacks for Detecting Poisoned Models
Samar Fares Karthik Nandakumar
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE (MBZUAI)
{samar.fares,karthik.nandakumar}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Poisoning (trojan/backdoor) attacks enable an adversary
to train and deploy a corrupted machine learning (ML)
model, which typically works well and achieves good accuracy on clean input samples but behaves maliciously on
poisoned samples containing specific trigger patterns. Using
such poisoned ML models as the foundation to build realworld systems can compromise application safety. Hence,
there is a critical need for algorithms that detect whether a
given target model has been poisoned. This work proposes a
novel approach for detecting poisoned models called Attack
To Defend (A2D), which is based on the observation that
poisoned models are more sensitive to adversarial perturbations compared to benign models. We propose a metric
called sensitivity to adversarial perturbations (SAP) to measure the sensitivity of a ML model to adversarial attacks at
a specific perturbation bound. We then generate strong adversarial attacks against an unrelated reference model and
estimate the SAP value of the target model by transferring
the generated attacks. The target model is deemed to be a
trojan if its SAP value exceeds a decision threshold. The
A2D framework requires only black-box access to the target
model and a small clean set, while being computationally
efficient. The A2D approach has been evaluated on four
standard image datasets and its effectiveness under various
types of poisoning attacks has been demonstrated.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNN) have played a key role in
transforming applications such as autonomous vehicles [3],
security [43], finance [16], and healthcare [2]. However,
training of accurate DNN models requires a large amount of
data and significant computing resources. To mitigate this
problem, it is a common practice among machine learning
(ML) practitioners to (a) leverage third-party datasets, (b)
use pre-trained models obtained from third-party sources as
a starting point for model development (because it requires
less training resources compared to learning a model from
scratch), or (c) completely outsource the model training to

a third-party (e.g., cloud) service provider. The advent of
foundation models [4] can be expected to further accelerate
the trend of transfer learning from pre-trained models. However, the above approaches may introduce a vulnerability
called backdoor (a.k.a. poisoning or trojan) attack, where
an attacker manipulates the training dataset to control the
prediction behavior of the trained/pre-trained model [17].
A poisoned model works normally for clean (unmodified)
input samples, but behaves maliciously when activated by
specific triggers in the input sample. This can compromise
the safety of systems that make use of the poisoned model.
Techniques for defending ML models from poisoning
attacks can be broadly classified into two categories [17]:
(i) identifying poisoned samples in the training data (e.g.,
[46]) and (ii) detecting and purifying poisoned models (e.g.,
[49]). In this work, we assume that the model has already
been trained by the adversary and the complete dataset used
for training is no longer available to the defender. Hence,
this work focuses only on the latter category of defense techniques, which can be further sub-divided into detection-only
methods and purification (patching) methods. The goal of
poisoned model detection is to determine whether a given
target model is benign or poisoned [17, 28]. On the other
hand, purification methods attempt to remove/mitigate the
backdoor vulnerability from the target model. It is worth
emphasizing that detection is often the first step in any purification process, and having an effective poisoned model
detector is critical for two reasons. Firstly, as the triggers
become increasingly stealthy [1, 34], purification becomes
inherently hard (especially for unseen attacks). In such cases,
having an accurate trigger-agnostic detector that can reject
suspicious models is the only line of defense. Secondly,
correct identification of benign models can avoid subjecting
them to purification, thereby preserving their clean accuracy
from any degradation introduced during purification.
Though many algorithms have been proposed for detecting poisoned models [17][7, 20, 24, 29, 49, 50, 52, 53, 56],
most existing solutions have one or more of the following limitations: (i) poor generalizability: they are effective
against only a specific type of attack (or a small class of attacks) and lack the ability to generalize to new/unseen types

24726

