This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation with Image Embedding Balancing
Xiangheng Shan, Dongyue Wu, Guilin Zhu, Yuanjie Shao∗ , Nong Sang, Changxin Gao
National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{xianghengshan, dongyue wu, gzhu, shaoyuanjie, nsang, cgao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation is a challenging task, which requires the model to output semantic masks
of an image beyond a close-set vocabulary. Although many
efforts have been made to utilize powerful CLIP models
to accomplish this task, they are still easily overfitting to
training classes due to the natural gaps in semantic information between training and new classes. To overcome
this challenge, we propose a novel framework for openvocabulary semantic segmentation called EBSeg, incorporating an Adaptively Balanced Decoder (AdaB Decoder)
and a Semantic Structure Consistency loss (SSC Loss). The
AdaB Decoder is designed to generate different image embeddings for both training and new classes. Subsequently,
these two types of embeddings are adaptively balanced to
fully exploit their ability to recognize training classes and
generalization ability for new classes. To learn a consistent semantic structure from CLIP, the SSC Loss aligns the
inter-classes affinity in the image feature space with that in
the text feature space of CLIP, thereby improving the generalization ability of our model. Furthermore, we employ
a frozen SAM image encoder to complement the spatial
information that CLIP features lack due to the low training image resolution and image-level supervision inherent
in CLIP. Extensive experiments conducted across various
benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed EBSeg outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Our code and trained
models will be here: https://github.com/slonetime/EBSeg.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an important computer vision
task that requires the model to identify a class label for
each pixel in an image. For traditional (or fully supervised) semantic segmentation, models are trained and evaluated on a fixed dataset with a specific set of classes, and
the test set has the same classes and image distribution
∗ Corresponding author.

(b) The SSC Loss

(a) The AdaB Decoder

AdaB
Decoder

1

Balanced
embeddings

3

Image embeddings

SSC Loss

2

1

Embeddings for
new classes

Text embeddings

2

Embeddings for
training classes

2

3

1

3

Figure 1. Illustration of our main idea. (a) Our AdaB Decoder(Adaptively Balanced Decoder) outputs image embeddings
for both training classes(classes existing in the training set during
test) and new classes(classes not existing in training set). By adaptively balancing these embeddings, our model performs better at
both training and new classes. (b) We propose SSC Loss(Semantic
Structure Consistency loss) that aligns the distribution of the image embeddings with that of the text embeddings. The SSC Loss
helps our model learn the semantic structure of CLIP better and
achieve better generalization capability for new classes.

as the training set. For this task, many effective methods
[3, 5, 6, 13, 21, 23, 26, 35, 36] have been proposed, and
they have significantly improved the prediction accuracy.
However, models designed for this task always fail to segment images in the real world well, because they were only
trained on specific datasets with fixed sets of classes.
To address this problem, the open-vocabulary semantic segmentation task was introduced. In this task, given
an image and an arbitrary set of classes, the model is expected to classify each pixel into its most corresponding
class. This task is much closer to the real-world applications. Many works utilize the CLIP [29] model for this task
because CLIP was trained on a large-scale image-text pair
dataset and has strong generalization capability for openvocabulary tasks.
Some existing works like [10, 17] propose to finetune
models on semantic segmentation datasets. However, models finetuned on a semantic segmentation dataset often overfit to the training classes. Some others [7, 20, 38] adopt
a two-stage framework. Firstly, a category-agnostic mask
generator is used to extract masks. Then, the masks are used

28412

