This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generate Subgoal Images before Act: Unlocking the Chain-of-Thought
Reasoning in Diffusion Model for Robot Manipulation with Multimodal Prompts
Fei Ni1

Jianye Hao1 * Shiguang Wu2
Bin Wang 2
1
Tianjin University, China

Longxin Kou1 Jiashun Liu1 Yan Zheng1
Yuzheng Zhuang2
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China

Abstract
Robotics agents often struggle to understand and follow
the multi-modal prompts in complex manipulation scenes
which are challenging to be sufficiently and accurately described by text alone. Moreover, for long-horizon manipulation tasks, the deviation from general instruction tends to
accumulate if lack of intermediate guidance from high-level
subgoals. For this, we consider can we generate subgoal
images before act to enhance the instruction following in
long-horizon manipulation with multi-modal prompts? Inspired by the great success of diffusion model in image generation tasks, we propose a novel hierarchical framework
named as CoTDiffusion that incorporates diffusion model
as a high-level planner to convert the general and multimodal prompts into coherent visual subgoal plans, which
further guide the low-level policy model before action execution. We design a semantic alignment module that can
anchor the progress of generated keyframes along a coherent generation chain, unlocking the chain-of-thought reasoning ability of diffusion model. Additionally, we propose
bi-directional generation and frame concat mechanism to
further enhance the fidelity of generated subgoal images
and the accuracy of instruction following. The experiments
cover various robotics manipulation scenarios including visual reasoning, visual rearrange, and visual constraints.
CoTDiffusion achieves outstanding performance gain compared to the baselines without explicit subgoal generation,
which proves that a subgoal image is worth a thousand
words of instruction. The details and visualizations are
available at https://cotdiffusion.github.io.

1. Introduction
Embodied manipulation focuses on creating generalists that
can perceive, reason, and act within complex environments,
which sits at the intersection of robotics control, computer
vision, and natural language processing [11]. Recent ad* Corresponding author: jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn

Sweep all
into
Without exceeding
Initial Observation

Instructions

Please follow the multi-modal instruction and finish the task!
The task instruction is too complex to understand and execute !
Well…Decompose the multi-modal prompt into several sub- prompts in text:
First: Sweep the rainbow cube in the lower left corner inside the three-sided rectangle
with yellow and green stripes, not to exceed the green and white line.
Next, ….
Lastly, …

The sub-prompts in text alone are too complex and redundant,
even more confusing to understand and ground !
Okay…I give you subgoal images sequence and follow these keyframes to plan:

I can act towards these subgoals images step-to-step !
A subgoal image is worth a thousand words of instructions !

Figure 1. A motivation example of robotics manipulation tasks in
multi-modal instructions. The subgoal images are worth a thousand words, inspiring us to propose a novel framework CoTDiffusion to generate goal images step-by-step before act.

vances in vision-language model (VLM) such as CLIP [38],
BLIP [22], enable open-vocabulary visual recognition and
show promising potential of robotics closed-loop control
by endowing them with the ability to predict robot actions
in embodied robotics [5, 10, 18, 51]. However, robotics
agents still face significant challenges in following instructions for long-horizon manipulation tasks, especially when
the given general instructions are not progressive step-wise
prompts, but implicitly contain several subtasks to accomplish. Moreover, complex manipulation scenarios with rich
visual contexts are often challenging to be sufficiently and
accurately described through text-only prompts, requiring
multi-modal prompts to convey the instructions and intentions accurately [21], further increasing the difficulty of instruction following and task completion.
For example in Fig. 1, now given a short multi-modal
prompt, the robot arm needs to follow the instructions and
accomplish the task. The multi-modal instruction is brief
but implicitly encapsulates long-horizon multi-step manipulation steps. We have two pathways to solve this task according to the recent embodied manipulation works. The

13991

