This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal Instruction Tuned LLMs with Fine-grained Visual Perception
Junwen He* 1,2 , Yifan Wang1 , Lijun Wang†1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Jun-Yan He2 ,
Jin-Peng Lan2 , Bin Luo2 , and Xuansong Xie2
1
2

Dalian University of Technology
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

junwen.he@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wyfan, ljwang, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn
{leyuan.hjy, lanjinpeng.ljp, luwu.lb}@alibaba-inc.com, xingtong.xxs@taobao.com

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLMs) leverages
Large Language Models as a cognitive framework for diverse visual-language tasks. Recent efforts have been made
to equip MLLMs with visual perceiving and grounding capabilities. However, there still remains a gap in providing fine-grained pixel-level perceptions and extending interactions beyond text-specific inputs. In this work, we
propose AnyRef, a general MLLM model that can generate pixel-wise object perceptions and natural language
descriptions from multi-modality references, such as texts,
boxes, images, or audio. This innovation empowers users
with greater flexibility to engage with the model beyond
textual and regional prompts, without modality-specific designs. Through our proposed refocusing mechanism, the
generated grounding output is guided to better focus on
the referenced object, implicitly incorporating additional
pixel-level supervision. This simple modification utilizes
attention scores generated during the inference of LLM,
eliminating the need for extra computations while exhibiting performance enhancements in both grounding masks
and referring expressions. With only publicly available
training data, our model achieves state-of-the-art results
across multiple benchmarks, including diverse modality referring segmentation and region-level referring expression
generation. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/jwh97nn/AnyRef

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have garnered widespread
influence across various domains, and advancements have
been achieved by augmenting LLMs with visual percep* Work done during internship at DAMO Academy.
† Corresponding author

Can you describe { } in this image and generate
its segmentation mask.
<audio>
<image>
<box>
<text>
“dog”
dog barking

This is a dog running on the grass <obj>.

Figure 1. Multi-modality Referring Segmentation and Expression Generation with AnyRef. Our model possesses the capacity to generate natural language descriptions as well as pixel-wise
grounding masks for the referred object. It accommodates various
referring modalities such as text, bounding boxes, images and
audio, enabling more flexible user interactions.

tion modules to bridge the gap between vision and language
tasks [6, 18, 23, 61], thereby transforming them into Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Most recent
research aims to further endow MLLMs with finer-grained
visual understanding abilities, like visual grounding and referring expression generation, through user-defined formats
(e.g., coordinates, bounding boxes, etc.) [4, 31, 57], surpassing the confines of textual responses alone.
Despite the encouraging results demonstrated by existing MLLMs in grounding linguistic expressions to visual
scenes, their capacity for precise localization remains restricted to coarse-grained levels (bounding boxes), falling
short of pixel-level perceptions (As illustrated in Tab. 1).

13980

