This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TetraSphere: A Neural Descriptor for O(3)-Invariant Point Cloud Analysis
Pavlo Melnyk,

Andreas Robinson,

Michael Felsberg,

Mårten Wadenbäck

Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, Sweden
{pavlo.melnyk, andreas.robinson, michael.felsberg, marten.wadenback}@liu.se

Abstract
In many practical applications, 3D point cloud analysis requires rotation invariance. In this paper, we present
a learnable descriptor invariant under 3D rotations and
reflections, i.e., the O(3) actions, utilizing the recently introduced steerable 3D spherical neurons and vector neurons.
Specifically, we propose an embedding of the 3D spherical
neurons into 4D vector neurons, which leverages end-toend training of the model. In our approach, we perform
TetraTransform—an equivariant embedding of the 3D input
into 4D, constructed from the steerable neurons—and extract deeper O(3)-equivariant features using vector neurons.
This integration of the TetraTransform into the VN-DGCNN
framework, termed TetraSphere, negligibly increases the
number of parameters by less than 0.0002%. TetraSphere
sets a new state-of-the-art performance classifying randomly
rotated real-world object scans of the challenging subsets
of ScanObjectNN. Additionally, TetraSphere outperforms
all equivariant methods on randomly rotated synthetic data:
classifying objects from ModelNet40 and segmenting parts
of the ShapeNet shapes. Thus, our results reveal the practical value of steerable 3D spherical neurons for learning
in 3D Euclidean space. The code is available at https:
//github.com/pavlo-melnyk/tetrasphere.

1. Introduction
Automatic processing of 3D data obtained with sensors such
as LIDARs, sparse stereo, and sparse time-of-flight is a
central problem for many autonomous systems [13, 19, 34].
Point clouds—in the form of an array of a fixed number of
3D coordinates and corresponding optional features (e.g.,
color or intensity)—are a common representation of such
data in various 3D vision tasks.
Consider, for example, the task of 3D object classification,
where the goal is to predict the correct class given a point
cloud. Importantly, the order of the points and different orientations of the shape do not alter its class membership. This
imposes the requirements of permutation and rotation invariance on the classifier. Furthermore, in certain real-world
scenarios (such as left- and right-hand traffic), global reflec-

N×3

TetraTransform

N×4×K

B(S1)

O(3)

G < O(4)

G < O(4)

B(SK)

N×3

N×4×K

Figure 1. Key component in our method (best viewed in color): a
learnable O(3)-equivariant TetraTransform layer consisting of K
steerable 3D spherical neurons [28] that lifts the input 3D points to
equivariant 4D representations (see Section 4.1 for details).

tion invariance is desired. For instance, a vehicle designed
for either type of traffic may be considered the same.
Fulfilling the first requirement is commonly done by
constructing a model using shared multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs) and a global aggregation function, producing
permutation-invariant features, as in, e.g., PointNet [32].
To attain rotation invariance [40], a common approach
is to augment available data by performing random rotations and train the model in the hope that it can generalize
to other, possibly unknown, orientations during inference.
However, such an approach relies heavily on augmentation
and requires an increased model capacity. Such methods
are commonly referred to as rotation-sensitive, e.g., [33, 42].
Using the augmentation approach with rotation-sensitive
methods only approximates rotation invariance. There are
also rotation-equivariant methods [10, 38, 43], in which
the learned features rotate correspondingly with the input,
and rotation-invariant (RI) techniques [6, 8, 18, 24, 47], in
which the central trend is to construct RI low-level geometric features and use them instead of point coordinates. An
alternative approach is to compute a canonical pose and then
de-rotate the input point cloud and perform processing on it
[12, 23, 37].
Our method is a combination of SO(3)-equivariant steer-

5620

