This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GLaMM: Pixel Grounding Large Multimodal Model
Hanoona Rasheed1* , Muhammad Maaz1* , Sahal Shaji1 , Abdelrahman Shaker1 , Salman Khan1,2
Hisham Cholakkal1 , Rao M. Anwer1,3 , Eric Xing1,4 , Ming-Hsuan Yang5,7 , Fahad S. Khan1,6
1

4

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, 2 Australian National University, 3 Aalto University
Carnegie Mellon University, 5 University of California - Merced, 6 Linköping University, 7 Google Research
hanoona.bangalath@mbzuai.ac.ae, muhammad.maaz@mbzuai.ac.ae
https://mbzuai-oryx.github.io/groundingLMM, https://grounding-anything.com

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) extend Large Language Models to the vision domain. Initial LMMs used
holistic images and text prompts to generate ungrounded
textual responses. Recently, region-level LMMs have been
used to generate visually grounded responses. However,
they are limited to only referring to a single object category at a time, require users to specify the regions, or cannot offer dense pixel-wise object grounding. In this work,
we present Grounding LMM (GLaMM), the first model that
can generate natural language responses seamlessly intertwined with corresponding object segmentation masks.
GLaMM not only grounds objects appearing in the conversations but is flexible enough to accept both textual and
optional visual prompts (region of interest) as input. This
empowers users to interact with the model at various levels of granularity, both in textual and visual domains. Due
to the lack of standard benchmarks for the novel setting of
visually Grounded Conversation Generation (GCG), we introduce a comprehensive evaluation protocol with our curated grounded conversations. Our proposed GCG task
requires densely grounded concepts in natural scenes at
a large-scale. To this end, we propose a densely annotated Grounding-anything Dataset (GranD) using our
proposed automated annotation pipeline that encompasses
7.5M unique concepts grounded in a total of 810M regions
available with segmentation masks. Besides GCG, GLaMM
also performs effectively on several downstream tasks, e.g.,
referring expression segmentation, image and region-level
captioning and vision-language conversations.

1. Introduction
Fueled by the generative AI wave, Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have emerged as a pivotal advancement, bridging the gap between vision and language tasks [2]. Initial ef* Equally contributing first authors.

Describe the image in detail. Please output
interleaved segmentation mask

The image showcases a large, white building with a red
roof, surrounded by a well-manicured lawn and palm trees.
The sky is visible over the building, the pavement, and the
grass. The grass is also seen extending to the pavement.

Figure 1. Grounded Conversation Generation with GLaMM.
Our multimodal conversational model can provide natural language responses grounded at the pixel-level in the input image.
Different levels of granularity are depicted in the output groundings, e.g., things (building, tree), stuff (grass, sky, pavement), and
object parts (roof as a subpart of the building) alongside the object attributes (white house, red roof, well-manicured lawn) and
object relationships (grass extending to the pavement, sky over the
building). Existing LMMs, open-source (e.g., LLaVa, miniGPT4,
Shikra, Kosmos-2) and closed-source (e.g., GPT4-V, Bard), do not
offer pixel-level grounded conversational capability.

forts like [5, 6, 17, 22, 41, 48] demonstrate effective textual
responses based on input images. Although these models
are sophisticated, they cannot still ground their responses in
the visual context. Such grounding is crucial for advanced
applications like detailed visual understanding, interactive
embodied agents, and localized content manipulation. Recent efforts have started to address this limitation by enabling models to process user-defined regions specified via
bounding boxes [4, 24, 27, 28, 46].

13009

