This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VINECS: Video-based Neural Character Skinning
Zhouyingcheng Liao1,2

Vladislav Golyanik1

Marc Habermann1,3

1 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Christian Theobalt1,3

2 The University of Hong Kong

3 Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and AI

1. Introduction
Animating 3D characters is a long-standing and challenging problem in computer graphics and vision. Traditionally,
rigging, the process of positioning a sparse skeletal structure
inside a dense 3D mesh, and skinning, the process of associating vertices with the skeleton, require large amounts of
manual effort by experienced artists. This is not only expensive and time-consuming but also inherently difficult since
one set of skinning weights is typically not ideal for all sorts
of articulated character poses.
There are also methods for automated rigging and skinning. Some recent works [33, 34, 41, 59] propose a
learning-based solution for obtaining skinning and rigging
1 https : / / people . mpi - inf . mpg . de / mhaberma /
˜
projects/2023-Vinecs

…
VINECS
Animation

Rigging and skinning clothed human avatars is a challenging task and traditionally requires a lot of manual work
and expertise. Recent methods addressing it either generalize across different characters or focus on capturing the dynamics of a single character observed under different pose
configurations. However, the former methods typically predict solely static skinning weights, which perform poorly
for highly articulated poses, and the latter ones either require dense 3D character scans in different poses or cannot generate an explicit mesh with vertex correspondence
over time. To address these challenges, we propose a fully
automated approach for creating a fully rigged character
with pose-dependent skinning weights, which can be solely
learned from multi-view video. Therefore, we first acquire
a rigged template, which is then statically skinned. Next, a
coordinate-based MLP learns a skinning weights field parameterized over the position in a canonical pose space and
the respective pose. Moreover, we introduce our pose- and
view-dependent appearance field allowing us to differentiably render and supervise the posed mesh using multi-view
imagery. We show that our approach outperforms state-ofthe-art while not relying on dense 4D scans. More details
can be found on our project page1 .

Multi-view
images

Abstract

Rigged
character

Input pose

Pose-dependent
skinning

Animated
character

Figure 1. We propose the first end-to-end trainable method for
generating a dense and rigged 3D character mesh including
learned pose-dependent skinning weights solely from multiview videos. The results demonstrate that our model can generate
visually-plausible geometry without requiring manual user input.

given a single 3D character mesh. However, they do not
consider pose-dependent skinning correctives and lead to
the typical appearance artifacts. Therefore, other techniques
focus on pose-dependent skinning formulations accounting
for pose-dependent variations and deformations [3, 30, 40,
52, 57]. Noteworthy, none of these methods tried to learn
pose-dependent skinning weight correctives purely from 2D
image data. Instead, they typically assume a 3D mesh is
given, and most of them solely work on a fixed mesh resolution, which cannot be easily adjusted.
To overcome these limitations, we propose VINECS,
i.e., VIdeo-based NEural Character Skinning. Given solely
a multi-view video of a human actor, our method creates a
fully rigged, skinned, and textured 3D template (including
hands) along with pose-dependent skinning weights while
no manual editing is required. Moreover, VINECS enables
multi-resolution character skinning since skinning weights
can be sampled over a continuous 3D canonical space,
which is not limited to any specific mesh resolution.
For each character, we select one canonical pose frame,
for which we extract a dense and textured 3D template
mesh using implicit surface reconstruction techniques [55].
Given the template and the respective pose obtained from
an off-the-shelf multi-view markerless capture system [53],

1377

