This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quantifying Task Priority for Multi-Task Optimization
Wooseong Jeong
KAIST

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST

stk14570@kaist.ac.kr

kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The goal of multi-task learning is to learn diverse tasks
within a single unified network. As each task has its own
unique objective function, conflicts emerge during training,
resulting in negative transfer among them. Earlier research
identified these conflicting gradients in shared parameters
between tasks and attempted to realign them in the same
direction. However, we prove that such optimization strategies lead to sub-optimal Pareto solutions due to their inability to accurately determine the individual contributions
of each parameter across various tasks. In this paper, we
propose the concept of task priority to evaluate parameter contributions across different tasks. To learn task priority, we identify the type of connections related to links
between parameters influenced by task-specific losses during backpropagation. The strength of connections is gauged
by the magnitude of parameters to determine task priority.
Based on these, we present a new method named connection
strength-based optimization for multi-task learning which
consists of two phases. The first phase learns the task priority within the network, while the second phase modifies
the gradients while upholding this priority. This ultimately
leads to finding new Pareto optimal solutions for multiple
tasks. Through extensive experiments, we show that our approach greatly enhances multi-task performance in comparison to earlier gradient manipulation methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a learning paradigm that
handles multiple different tasks in a single model [2]. Compared to learning tasks individually, MTL can effectively
reduce the number of parameters, leading to less memory
usage and computation with a higher convergence rate. Furthermore, it leverages multiple tasks as an inductive bias,
enabling the learning of generalized features while reducing overfitting. Complex systems such as robot vision and
autonomous driving require the ability to perform multiple
tasks within a single system. Thus, MTL can be a first step
in finding general architecture for computer vision.

A primary goal of MTL is minimizing negative transfer [6] and finding Pareto-optimal solutions [36] for multiple tasks. Negative transfer is a phenomenon where the
learning of one task adversely affects the performance of
other tasks. Since each task has its own objective, this can
potentially result in a trade-off among tasks. A condition
in which enhancing one task is not possible without detriment to another is called Pareto optimality. A commonly
understood cause of this trade-off is conflicting gradients
[45] that arise during the optimization process. When the
gradients of two tasks move in opposing directions, the task
with larger magnitudes dominates the other, disrupting the
search for Pareto-optimal solutions. The situation becomes
more complex due to imbalances in loss scales across tasks.
The way we weigh task losses is crucial for multi-task performance. When there is a significant disparity in the magnitudes of losses, the task with a larger loss would dominate
the entire network. Hence, the optimal strategy for MTL
should efficiently handle conflicting gradients across different loss scales.
Previous studies address negative transfer by manipulating gradients or balancing tasks’ losses. Solutions for handling conflicting gradients are explored in [26, 36, 37, 45].
These approaches aim to align conflicting gradients towards
a cohesive direction within a shared network space. However, these techniques are not effective at preventing negative transfer, as they don’t pinpoint which shared parameters are crucial for the tasks. This results in sub-optimal
Pareto solutions for MTL, leading to pool multi-task performance. Balancing task losses is a strategy that can be
applied independently from gradient manipulation methods.
It includes scaling the loss according to homoscedastic uncertainty [22], or dynamically finding loss weights by considering the rate at which the loss decreases [29].
In this paper, we propose the concept of task priority to
address negative transfer in MTL and suggest connection
strength as a quantifiable measure for this purpose. The task
priority is defined over shared parameters by comparing the
influence of each task’s gradient on the overall multi-task
loss. This reveals the relative importance of shared parameters to various tasks. To learn and conserve the task pri-

363

