This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sculpt3D: Multi-View Consistent Text-to-3D Generation with Sparse 3D Prior
Cheng Chen1,2 , Xiaofeng Yang1 , Fan Yang1 , Chengzeng Feng1 , Zhoujie Fu1 ,
Chuan-Sheng Foo2,3 , Guosheng Lin1* , Fayao Liu2*
1
Nanyang Technological University
2
Institute for Infocomm Research A*STAR, Singapore
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore
cheng021@e.ntu.edu.sg, gslin@ntu.edu.sg fayaoliu@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent works on text-to-3d generation show that using
only 2D diffusion supervision for 3D generation tends to
produce results with inconsistent appearances (e.g., faces
on the back view) and inaccurate shapes (e.g., animals
with extra legs). Existing methods mainly address this issue by retraining diffusion models with images rendered
from 3D data to ensure multi-view consistency while struggling to balance 2D generation quality with 3D consistency.
In this paper, we present a new framework Sculpt3D that
equips the current pipeline with explicit injection of 3D
priors from retrieved reference objects without re-training
the 2D diffusion model. Specifically, we demonstrate that
high-quality and diverse 3D geometry can be guaranteed by keypoints supervision through a sparse ray sampling approach. Moreover, to ensure accurate appearances of different views, we further modulate the output of
the 2D diffusion model to the correct patterns of the template views without altering the generated object’s style.
These two decoupled designs effectively harness 3D information from reference objects to generate 3D objects
while preserving the generation quality of the 2D diffusion model. Extensive experiments show our method can
largely improve the multi-view consistency while retaining
fidelity and diversity. Our project page is available at:
https://stellarcheng.github.io/Sculpt3D/.

1. Introduction
There has been growing research attention towards text-to3d generation. Compared to image generation, the data
available for 3D generation is less in quantity and lower
in quality. Thus, many studies [19, 28, 41] have begun to
generate 3D objects using 2D text-to-image models [9, 30]
as supervision to leverage their strong priors learned from
billions of real images.
∗ Corresponding authors.

Prolificdreamer

Ours

Reference Sets

Lifelike tiger with fierce expression

An antique glass perfume bottle

Figure 1. Comparison of objects generated by our method and
ProlificDreamer. We retain the 2D model’s capability to produce
high-fidelity objects and adaptively learn 3D information from reference templates retrieved from external datasets.

These methods mainly contain two steps: the first step
is to continuously sample images from different views of
a randomly initialized 3D representation (e.g. NeRF [26],
DMTet [33]). The second step uses a 2D diffusion model
to individually judge whether each image is a high-quality
image that conforms to the text description. Compared to
2D image generation, 3D generation not only requires producing high-quality images for each individual viewpoint
but also needs to create plausible shapes and appearances
as a whole 3D object. Thus, a high-quality 2D generative
model and a mechanism that can accurately provide 3D priors are two keys to achieving decent 3D generation results.
Since early works [19, 28, 41] mainly use the sole 2D diffusion model as supervision, they tend to produce inaccurate
shapes (shape ambiguity) and appearances that are inconsistent across viewpoints (appearance ambiguity), as shown
in Figure 1 left, where examples include incomplete bottles,
tigers with multiple legs, and tails.
Recently, some efforts have been made to expand the
3D datasets [10]. Following this, there were immediate attempts to retrain 2D diffusion models on these 3D datasets
to learn 3D information [21, 22, 35]. Although these meth-

10228

