This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Depth Completion via Depth Feature Upsampling
Yufei Wang1 , Ge Zhang2 , Shaoqian Wang1 , Bo Li1 , Qi Liu1 , Le Hui1 , Yuchao Dai1 *
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University and Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Information
Acquisition and Processing 2 Beijing Institute of Tracking and Telecommunication Technology
Feature is “Sparse”

Feature is “Dense”

Few spatial locations
have rich information

Sparse Depth (SD)

RGB

ED-Net

RGB
SD

+

Sparse Depth

Most spatial locations
have rich information

Encoder

+

+

+

+

Sparse

Sparse

+

Sparse complementary

Decoder

DD
Dense Depth
Low-resolution
Depth Feature

High-resolution
Depth Feature

HR

CGM

CGM

CGM

Dense

Dense

LR

Dense

Visualization of the
intermediate
features of ED-Net by
the feature heatmap
0

Depth Feature Upsampling

1

Figure 1. Typical method (S2D [22]) based on the encoder-decoder network (ED-Net) and its intermediate features are visualized by
the heatmap [46]. The sparse decoder feature fdi derived from the dense fused encoder-decoder feature fedi tends to complement the
corresponding encoder feature fei , where the “dense⇒sparse” process destroys the completeness of features multiple times.

Abstract
The encoder-decoder network (ED-Net) is a commonly
employed choice for existing depth completion methods, but
its working mechanism is ambiguous. In this paper, we visualize the internal feature maps to analyze how the network densifies the input sparse depth. We find that the encoder feature of ED-Net focus on the areas with input depth
points around. To obtain a dense feature and thus estimate complete depth, the decoder feature tends to complement and enhance the encoder feature by skip-connection
to make the fused encoder-decoder feature dense, resulting
in the decoder feature also exhibits sparse. However, EDNet obtains the sparse decoder feature from the dense fused
feature at the previous stage, where the “dense⇒sparse”
process destroys the completeness of features and loses information. To address this issue, we present a depth feature upsampling network (DFU) that explicitly utilizes these
dense features to guide the upsampling of a low-resolution
(LR) depth feature to a high-resolution (HR) one. The
completeness of features is maintained throughout the upsampling process, thus avoiding information loss. Furthermore, we propose a confidence-aware guidance module
(CGM), which is confidence-aware and performs guidance
* Corresponding author: daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn.

with adaptive receptive fields (GARF), to fully exploit the
potential of these dense features as guidance. Experimental
results show that our DFU, a plug-and-play module, can
significantly improve the performance of existing ED-Net
based methods with limited computational overheads, and
new SOTA results are achieved. Besides, the generalization
capability on sparser depth is also enhanced. Project page:
https://npucvr.github.io/DFU.

1. Introduction
Accurate and dense scene depth is crucial for various applications [13, 34, 41], such as autonomous navigation [33]
and augmented reality [24]. Existing active depth sensors
have been widely applied because they can obtain accurate depth information. However, the depth acquired by
these sensors is generally highly sparse due to the imaging principles and power limitation. For instance, roughly
4% pixels in the depth provided by 64-line LiDAR have
values [21, 22, 35]. To facilitate the use of the depth data,
we need to address a sparse-to-dense problem in which the
given sparse depth map is densified to the dense depth map,
usually guided by the corresponding RGB image.
Depth completion is a challenging task as the input
depth information is scarce. Existing approaches commonly
1
21104

