This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaRevD: Adaptive Patch Exiting Reversible Decoder
Pushes the Limit of Image Deblurring
Xintian Mao
Qingli Li
Yan Wang*
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
East China Normal University
52265904010@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, qlli@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, ywang@cee.ecnu.edu.cn
Code: https://github.com/DeepMed-Lab-ECNU/Single-Image-Deblur
output

input

35

𝐑𝐞𝐭𝐫𝐚𝐢𝐧 𝐨𝐧 𝐔𝐅𝐏𝐍𝐞𝐭

34.5

(a)
input

✓



…

Classifier

Only Dec

(b)
output

Degradation Degree

(c)

Enc & Dec

Low-Level
(left: blur image
right: blur pattern)

+0.02 dB

𝐀𝐝𝐚𝐑𝐞𝐯𝐃-B

+0.44 dB

FFTformer

PSNR (dB)

output −0.35 dB

input

UFPNet

34

33.5
Uformer
Restormer

33

𝐀𝐝𝐚𝐑𝐞𝐯𝐃-L

MPRNet

+0.54 dB
32.5

High-Level
(degradation degree)

0

✓ Continue  Exit

5

10

34.06 dB

Memory (G)

(d)

(e)

15

20

Figure 1. Architectures and performance comparisons of AdaRevD and other methods. (a) multi-stage architecture [4, 42]; (b) one-stage
architecture [5, 36, 43]; (c) architecture of our method; (d) comparison of different continue-training strategies; (e) PSNR vs. training
memory cost on GoPro dataset. Our method pushes the limit of image deblurring by exploring the insufficient decoding capability.

Abstract
Despite the recent progress in enhancing the efficacy
of image deblurring, the limited decoding capability constrains the upper limit of State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) methods.
This paper proposes a pioneering work, Adaptive Patch Exiting Reversible Decoder (AdaRevD), to explore their insufficient decoding capability. By inheriting the weights
of the well-trained encoder, we refactor a reversible decoder which scales up the single-decoder training to multidecoder training while remaining GPU memory-friendly.
Meanwhile, we show that our reversible structure gradually
disentangles high-level degradation degree and low-level
blur pattern (residual of the blur image and its sharp counterpart) from compact degradation representation. Besides,
due to the spatially-variant motion blur kernels, different
blur patches have various deblurring difficulties. We further
introduce a classifier to learn the degradation degree of image patches, enabling them to exit at different sub-decoders
for speedup. Experiments show that our AdaRevD pushes
the limit of image deblurring, e.g., achieving 34.60 dB in
PSNR on GoPro dataset.
* Corresponding author: Y. Wang (ywang@cee.ecnu.edu.cn)

1. Introduction
As a sub-task of image restoration, image deblurring aims
at removing degraded blur artifacts to recover clean images.
Generally, two types of backbone networks, i.e., multi-stage
and one-stage architectures, consisting of multiple encoders
and decoders, have been proposed for the image deblurring task. Encoders are used to learn a compact degradation representation from a blur image and decoders decode
the degradation representation to blur patterns1 . The compact degradation representation can be treated as a midlevel feature, equipped with high-level degradation degree2
information and low-level blur pattern. See Fig. 8 and
Sec. 4.3.1 for detailed analysis.
Multi-stage architectures [4, 25, 42] (see Fig. 1 (a)) decompose the feature extraction process into multiple subnetworks. Recent research explorations for image restoration [5, 36, 43] have shown the ability of one-stage architecture (see Fig. 1 (b)). Instead of focusing on the overall design of the model, more attention is paid to the core
components design of the one-stage architecture, such as
1 The residual of the blur image and its sharp counterpart is defined as
blur pattern in this paper.
2 The degradation degree, i.e., the difficulty of restoring an image or a
patch, is decided by the PSNR of blur image and its sharp counterpart.

25681

