This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perception-Oriented Video Frame Interpolation via Asymmetric Blending
Guangyang Wu1 Xin Tao2 Changlin Li3 Wenyi Wang4 Xiaohong Liu1† Qingqing Zheng5†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Kuaishou Technology 3 SeeKoo
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
5
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Ground-Truth

RIFE [17]

EMA-VFI [59]

STMFNet [8]

PerVFI (ours)

Figure 1. We present challenging video frame interpolation examples, demonstrating our approach excels in handling large motion,
outperforming alternatives prone to blurriness or ghosting.

Abstract
Previous methods for Video Frame Interpolation (VFI)
have encountered challenges, notably the manifestation of
blur and ghosting effects. These issues can be traced
back to two pivotal factors: unavoidable motion errors
and misalignment in supervision. In practice, motion estimates often prove to be error-prone, resulting in misaligned
features. Furthermore, the reconstruction loss tends to
bring blurry results, particularly in misaligned regions.
To mitigate these challenges, we propose a new paradigm
called PerVFI (Perception-oriented Video Frame Interpolation). Our approach incorporates an Asymmetric Synergistic Blending module (ASB) that utilizes features from
both sides to synergistically blend intermediate features.
One reference frame emphasizes primary content, while the
other contributes complementary information. To impose
a stringent constraint on the blending process, we introduce a self-learned sparse quasi-binary mask which effectively mitigates ghosting and blur artifacts in the output.
Additionally, we employ a normalizing flow-based generator and utilize the negative log-likelihood loss to learn the
conditional distribution of the output, which further facilitates the generation of clear and fine details. Experimental results validate the superiority of PerVFI, demonstrating significant improvements in perceptual quality com† Corresponding authors.

pared to existing methods. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/mulns/PerVFI

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) is an important task in
computer vision that focuses on synthesizing intermediate
frames between consecutive frames in a video sequence.
This technique plays a crucial role in various applications
such as video enhancement [27, 56], slow-motion rendering [18, 52, 53], and frame rate conversion [33], especially
for producing high-definition videos [17, 44].
Recently, the VFI task has also derived benefits from the
application of deep neural networks [17–19, 24, 26, 29–
32, 34, 36, 37, 39, 42–44, 48, 51, 55, 56, 58]. We broadly
posit that recent methods typically consist of 3 main modules. The motion estimation module is used to estimate motion between consecutive frames using optical flow or deformable kernels. Subsequently, the alignment and fusion
module aligns reference frames via warping operator or deformable convolution. Finally, the reconstruction module
generates final results from extracted features. Despite the
success of recent methods, blurry results and ghosting artifacts persist as inevitable problems. (shown in Figure 1).
We attribute this primarily to two inherent challenges:
Inevitable Motion Errors. Ideally, with accurate motion
estimates, the aforementioned procedure can yield satisfactory results. However, achieving error-free pixel-wise correspondence for real-world videos proves challenging, es-

2753

