This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Rematch Mismatched Pairs for Robust Cross-Modal Retrieval
Haochen Han1 *, Qinghua Zheng1 , Guang Dai2 , Minnan Luo1†, Jingdong Wang3
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation of China 3 Baidu Inc

Several people
ଵ standing outside
a building.

ଵ

Collecting well-matched multimedia datasets is crucial
for training cross-modal retrieval models. However, in realworld scenarios, massive multimodal data are harvested
from the Internet, which inevitably contains Partially Mismatched Pairs (PMPs). Undoubtedly, such semantical irrelevant data will remarkably harm the cross-modal retrieval
performance. Previous efforts tend to mitigate this problem by estimating a soft correspondence to down-weight
the contribution of PMPs. In this paper, we aim to address this challenge from a new perspective: the potential
semantic similarity among unpaired samples makes it possible to excavate useful knowledge from mismatched pairs.
To achieve this, we propose L2RM, a general framework
based on Optimal Transport (OT) that learns to rematch
mismatched pairs. In detail, L2RM aims to generate reﬁned
alignments by seeking a minimal-cost transport plan across
different modalities. To formalize the rematching idea in
OT, ﬁrst, we propose a self-supervised cost function that
automatically learns from explicit similarity-cost mapping
relation. Second, we present to model a partial OT problem while restricting the transport among false positives
to further boost reﬁned alignments. Extensive experiments
on three benchmarks demonstrate our L2RM signiﬁcantly
improves the robustness against PMPs for existing models. The code is available at https://github.com/
hhc1997/L2RM .

1. Introduction
The pursuit of general intelligence has advanced the
progress of multimodal learning, which aims to understand and integrate multiple sensory modalities like humans. Cross-modal retrieval is one of the most important
* This work was completed during his internship at SGIT AI Lab.
† Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National

Key Research and Development Program of China (2022YFB3102600),
and National Nature Science Foundation of China (62272374, 62192781,
62202367, 62250009, and 62137002).

ଶ

A man riding a
ଶ bicycle on a
crowded road.

ଷ

A group of
ଷ people sit on a
wall at the beach.

Images

Captions

Rematched

Abstract

Original

hhc1997@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {qhzheng, minnluo}@xjtu.edu.cn
guang.gdai@gmail.com, wangjingdong@baidu.com

ଵ

ଵ

ଶ

ଶ

ଷ

ଷ

ଵ

ଵ

ଶ

ଶ

ଷ

ଷ

Figure 1. A toy example to illustrate our idea. The potential semantic similarity among unpaired samples makes it possible to excavate useful knowledge from mismatched pairs. Our L2RM aims
to rematch PMPs by generating a reﬁned alignment that brings relevant cross-modal samples (green links) together while repelling
irrelevant ones (red links) away from each other. We also show
some real-world rematched cases for our L2RM in Fig. 5.

techniques in multimodal learning due to its ﬂexibility in
bridging different modalities [15, 20, 22, 25, 37, 42], which
has powered various real-world applications.
Despite the remarkable performance of previous methods, much of their success can be attributed to the voracious
appetite for well-matched cross-modal pairs. In practice,
collecting such ideal data [24] is notoriously labor-intensive
and even impossible. Alternatively, several mainstream
cross-modal datasets utilize the co-occurred information to
crawl data from the Internet, especially for visual-text samples [11]. Although such a data collection way is free from
expensive annotations, it will inevitably introduce partially
mismatched pairs. For example, the standard image-caption
dataset, Conceptual Captions [36], is estimated to contain
about 3% to 20% mismatched pairs. Such semantically irrelevant data will be wrongly treated as the matched pairs
for training, which undoubtedly impairs the performance of
cross-modal retrieval models. Thus, endowing cross-modal
learning with robustness against PMPs is crucial to suit realworld retrieval scenarios.
To alleviate the PMP problem, existing works [19,23,45]

26679

