This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenFlow: Generalizable Recurrent Flow for 6D Pose Refinement of Novel
Objects
Sungphill Moon*

Hyeontae Son*
Dongcheol Hur
NAVER LABS

Sangwook Kim

{sungphill.moon, son.ht, dongcheol.hur, o.s.w.a.l.k}@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Despite the progress of learning-based methods for 6D
object pose estimation, the trade-off between accuracy and
scalability for novel objects still exists. Specifically, previous methods for novel objects do not make good use of
the target object’s 3D shape information since they focus
on generalization by processing the shape indirectly, making them less effective. We present GenFlow, an approach
that enables both accuracy and generalization to novel objects with the guidance of the target object’s shape. Our
method predicts optical flow between the rendered image
and the observed image and refines the 6D pose iteratively.
It boosts the performance by a constraint of the 3D shape
and the generalizable geometric knowledge learned from an
end-to-end differentiable system. We further improve our
model by designing a cascade network architecture to exploit the multi-scale correlations and coarse-to-fine refinement. GenFlow ranked first on the unseen object pose estimation benchmarks in both the RGB and RGB-D cases. It
also achieves performance competitive with existing stateof-the-art methods for the seen object pose estimation without any fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Estimating accurate 6D object pose from an RGB or
RGB-D image is crucial for robotic tasks and augmented
reality applications. In the standard setup of 6D object pose
estimation, 3D models of target objects are given and available in training and testing. Most state-of-the-art algorithms
are learning-based and require training the model per object
or dataset containing few objects. However, these methods
are difficult to handle novel objects since they memorize the
3D shapes of the targets and suffer from the training cost to
support them.
Recent works [5, 37, 51, 54] have proposed generalizable
models that can estimate the 6D pose of novel objects, i.e.,
*These authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Examples of 6D pose estimation of novel objects. Our
method estimates correspondences between the input image and
rendered image, and 6D object pose.

objects unseen during training. Specifically, OSOP [54] and
MegaPose [37] show remarkable performance with the generalizable pose refinement. Their refinement methods have
the scalability to novel objects since the networks learn to
compare the rendered image and the observed image without memorizing 3D shapes. However, their refiners avail
themselves of 3D shape information indirectly. OSOP refiner is trained by the surrogate 2D-2D matching loss, which
makes it suboptimal for 6D pose estimation. MegaPose refiner regresses the relative 6D pose between the rendered
image and the input, but the regression makes no use of the
projective geometry.
Our research question is Is there a better design for generalizable pose refinement that takes advantage of shape
information?. Recently, 2D optical flow-based methods
[20, 31] show noticeable performance on 6D pose estimation. These methods estimate dense 2D-2D correspondences between the rendered image and the observed image. The estimated correspondences are lifted to 2D-3D
correspondences on the 3D shape of the target object, then
the 6D pose is recovered using a PnP solver [31] or pose
regressor networks [20]. The optical flow-based pose refinement provides a clue for the generalization due to its
robustness to the domain shift [31] and shows the potential
to utilize 3D information in the model [20].
We propose GenFlow, the optical flow-based iterative

10039

