This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Personalized Residuals for Concept-Driven Text-to-Image Generation
Cusuh Ham*
Georgia Institute of Technology

Matthew Fisher
Adobe Research

James Hays
Georgia Institute of Technology

cusuh@gatech.edu

matfishe@adobe.com

hays@gatech.edu

Nicholas Kolkin
Adobe Research

Yuchen Liu
Adobe Research

Richard Zhang
Adobe Research

Tobias Hinz
Adobe Research

kolkin@adobe.com

yuliu@adobe.com

rizhang@adobe.com

thinz@adobe.com

Abstract
We present personalized residuals and localized
attention-guided sampling for efficient concept-driven
generation using text-to-image diffusion models. Our
method first represents concepts by freezing the weights of
a pretrained text-conditioned diffusion model and learning
low-rank residuals for a small subset of the model’s layers.
The residual-based approach then directly enables application of our proposed sampling technique, which applies
the learned residuals only in areas where the concept
is localized via cross-attention and applies the original
diffusion weights in all other regions. Localized sampling
therefore combines the learned identity of the concept with
the existing generative prior of the underlying diffusion
model. We show that personalized residuals effectively
capture the identity of a concept in ∼3 minutes on a single
GPU without the use of regularization images and with
fewer parameters than previous models, and localized
sampling allows using the original model as strong prior
for large parts of the image.

1. Introduction
Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models have demonstrated the ability to generate high-quality images that follow the constraints of the input text [21, 22, 26]. However, these models do not inherently encode any information about the identity of a specific concept, thus limiting
the control over specifying a particular instance to appear
in the generated image. To address this, recent approaches
propose techniques to personalize these models such that
they can generate specific concepts in novel environments
and styles.
Given a set of images depicting the desired concept,

personalization approaches differ in which parameters they
train and whether they are specific to a single concept (i.e.,
they need to be separately trained for each new concept) or
can generalize to new concepts without retraining. To enable personalization of arbitrary concepts, one can finetune
the model’s parameters [24] or its inputs [7] directly such
that it can reconstruct the training data. These approaches
can be applied to any kind of concepts, but the finetuning needs to be done on a per-concept basis and different
parameters need to be stored for each. Other approaches
train an encoder specific to a particular domain (e.g., faces)
and finetune the diffusion model once to use the encoder’s
embeddings to reconstruct specific concepts within that domain [8, 25, 33]. The advantage of the latter approach is
that it does not require retraining for every concept and can
instead be used to instantly generate new concepts from the
given domain. However, this approach is limited to a single
domain and requires a large dataset to train the encoder.
Our approach follows the former setting, i.e., it finetunes
the model’s parameters for each concept so that there are
no constraints on the domain (see Figure 1 for examples
using our proposed method). The main challenges of opendomain approaches is the need for regularization to mitigate
forgetting of concepts learned in the model’s original training, and the computational overhead in finetuning a new set
of parameters for each concept. The most common regularization approach is to use images from the same domain as
the target concept with the reference images during the finetuning of parameters. The choice of regularization images
affects the quality of the final outputs and, as such, is usually
model-, training-, and sometimes even concept-dependent.
Finally, to address the large overhead of finetuning a whole
new model for each concept, many approaches only finetune a subset of parameters (e.g., attention layers weights
[16]) or the input to the text-to-image model (e.g., the text
embedding representing a specific concept [7]).
Our approach further reduces the number of learnable

* Work performed during an internship at Adobe Research.

8186

