This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoGrounding-DINO: Towards Open-Vocabulary Spatio-Temporal Video
Grounding
Syed Talal Wasim1 Muzammal Naseer1
Salman Khan1,2 Ming-Hsuan Yang3,4 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,5
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Australian National University
3
University of California, Merced 4 Google Research 5 Linköping University

Abstract
Video grounding aims to localize a spatio-temporal section in a video corresponding to an input text query.
This paper addresses a critical limitation in current
video grounding methodologies by introducing an OpenVocabulary Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding task. Unlike
prevalent closed-set approaches that struggle with openvocabulary scenarios due to limited training data and predefined vocabularies, our model leverages pre-trained representations from foundational spatial grounding models.
This empowers it to effectively bridge the semantic gap between natural language and diverse visual content, achieving strong performance in closed-set and open-vocabulary
settings. Our contributions include a novel spatio-temporal
video grounding model, surpassing state-of-the-art results
in closed-set evaluations on multiple datasets and demonstrating superior performance in open-vocabulary scenarios. Notably, the proposed model outperforms state-of-theart methods in closed-set settings on VidSTG (Declarative
and Interrogative) and HC-STVG (V1 and V2) datasets.
Furthermore, in open-vocabulary evaluations on HC-STVG
V1 and YouCook-Interactions, our model surpasses the recent best-performing models by 4.88 m vIoU and 1.83% accuracy, demonstrating its efficacy in handling diverse linguistic and visual concepts for improved video understanding. Our codes will be publicly released.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal video grounding is pivotal in linking visual
content with natural language descriptions, thus facilitating semantics interpretation within visual data. Prevailing
approaches in video grounding such as TubeDETR [28],
STCAT [9], and STVGFormer [11] focus mainly on supervised closed-set settings, where models are trained on
specific datasets [24, 32] with predefined vocabulary and
meticulously annotated data. While these current state-of-

Figure 1. Performance comparison on conventional closed-set
and open-vocabulary settings for the video grounding task. We
compare our approach with TubeDETR [28] and STCAT [9] in
supervised setting for VidSTG [32] declarative/interrogative and
HC-STVG V1 [24], along with open-vocabulary evaluation on
HC-STVG V1 and YouCook-Interactions [23] datasets.

the-art methods excel in closed-set settings on datasets like
VidSTG [32] and HC-STVG [24], their limited generalization beyond training dataset distributions poses a significant
challenge. The relatively small scale and restricted sample
variety in existing video datasets hinder models from adapting to unseen scenarios effectively.
Motivated by the inherent limitation of supervised
closed-set approaches in terms of their restricted vocabulary, this paper investigates Open-Vocabulary SpatioTemporal Video Grounding. Unlike conventional methodologies, this paradigm addresses challenges posed by the
unrestricted diversity of language and visual concepts in
the wild. The goal is to train on a set of base categories
and generalize to unseen objects/actions based on the openvocabulary nature of backbone models. This paper ex-

18909

