This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HouseCat6D - A Large-Scale Multi-Modal Category Level 6D Object Perception
Dataset with Household Objects in Realistic Scenarios
HyunJun Jung1,∗ , Shun-Cheng Wu1,∗ , Patrick Ruhkamp1,∗ , Guangyao Zhai1,2,∗,† ,
Hannah Schieber1,3,∗ , Giulia Rizzoli4 , Pengyuan Wang1 , Hongcheng Zhao1 ,
Lorenzo Garattoni5 , Sven Meier5 , Daniel Roth1 , Nassir Navab1 , Benjamin Busam1,2,6
1

3

2
Technical University of Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
4
FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg
University of Padova 5 Toyota Motor Europe 6 3dwe.ai

https://sites.google.com/view/housecat6d

Figure 1. HouseCat6D is a multi-modal category level 6D object pose and grasping dataset with highly diverse household object categories
of different photometric complexity and a high number of varying scenes covering large viewpoint distributions. It comprises room-scale
high-quality camera trajectories and object poses without markers in realistic scenarios including occlusions as well as dense grasping pose
annotation. Data includes synchronized RGB, depth from active stereo, and polarimetric RGB+P images in scenes comprising objects
without texture, strong reflections, or translucency.

Abstract
Estimating 6D object poses is a major challenge in 3D
computer vision. Building on successful instance-level approaches, research is shifting towards category-level pose
estimation for practical applications. Current categorylevel datasets, however, fall short in annotation quality and
pose variety. Addressing this, we introduce HouseCat6D,
a new category-level 6D pose dataset. It features 1) multimodality with Polarimetric RGB and Depth (RGBD+P), 2)
encompasses 194 diverse objects across 10 household categories, including two photometrically challenging ones,
and 3) provides high-quality pose annotations with an error range of only 1.35 mm to 1.74 mm. The dataset also
includes 4) 41 large-scale scenes with comprehensive viewpoint and occlusion coverage, 5) a checkerboard-free environment, and 6) dense 6D parallel-jaw robotic grasp an∗ Equal contributions.
† Corresponding Author (e-mail: guangyao.zhai@tum.de).

notations. Additionally, we present benchmark results for
leading category-level pose estimation networks.

1. Introduction
6D pose estimation is one of the cornerstones in many computer vision tasks, especially for interactions like robotic
manipulation [60, 66–68] or augmented reality [20]. Many
methods have been proposed to solve this task from various perspectives and achieve outstanding results on public benchmarks [5, 25, 34, 63]. Most of the methods focus on instance-level where each network is trained and
tested on a single object instance [42, 58]. However, generalization and applicability are limited, as the object mesh
is required, and an individual network needs to be trained
for each instance. Recent methods focus on category-level
pose estimation [9, 11, 37, 43, 44, 59] by training on multiple objects within one category. They can later gener-

22498

