This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Customized Mixture of Adapters for General Image Fusion
Pengfei Zhu, Yang Sun, Bing Cao*, Qinghua Hu
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
{zhupengfei,yangsun,caobing,huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Source image X

1. Introduction
Image fusion aims to integrate complementary information from multi-source images captured by different sensors in the same scene onto a single image. It is usually used to enhance important information and visual quality [14]. Currently, general image fusion mainly includes
multi-modal, multi-exposure, and multi-focus image fusion,
etc. Fusion tasks exhibit diverse fusion mechanisms. The
Multi-Exposure image Fusion (MEF) focuses on integrat* Corresponding author.

Fusion Image

𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑥

𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑦

Visible-infrared
Mulit-Focus

General image fusion aims at integrating important information from multi-source images. However, due to the
significant cross-task gap, the respective fusion mechanism
varies considerably in practice, resulting in limited performance across subtasks. To handle this problem, we propose a novel task-customized mixture of adapters (TC-MoA)
for general image fusion, adaptively prompting various fusion tasks in a unified model. We borrow the insight from
the mixture of experts (MoE), taking the experts as efficient tuning adapters to prompt a pre-trained foundation
model. These adapters are shared across different tasks and
constrained by mutual information regularization, ensuring compatibility with different tasks while complementarity
for multi-source images. The task-specific routing networks
customize these adapters to extract task-specific information from different sources with dynamic dominant intensity, performing adaptive visual feature prompt fusion. Notably, our TC-MoA controls the dominant intensity bias for
different fusion tasks, successfully unifying multiple fusion
tasks in a single model. Extensive experiments show that
TC-MoA outperforms the competing approaches in learning commonalities while retaining compatibility for general image fusion (multi-modal, multi-exposure, and multifocus), and also demonstrating striking controllability on
more generalization experiments. The code is available at
https://github.com/YangSun22/TC-MoA.

Source image Y

Mulit-Exposure

Abstract

0.0

MFF

MEF VIF

Value of 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡

VIF MEF

MFF 1.0

Figure 1. Prompt can adaptively select the complementary information from multi-source features. The dominant intensity bias
vary according to the task, which is reflected by the different
shades of colors.

ing images with multiple exposure levels into a high-quality
full exposure image [40]. Each source image contributes
its own illumination and structural information to the fused
image [28]. The Visible-Infrared image Fusion (VIF) is a
subfield of the Multi-Modal Fusion (MMF) [8, 16, 48] that
aims at fusing complementary information of infrared and
visible modalities to produce robust and informative fused
images [25]. Infrared images provide more intensity information, while visible images offer more texture and gradient information. The Multi-Focus image Fusion (MFF)
aims at generating an all-in-focus image from a series of
partially focused images [23]. A patch of multi-focus fused
image typically corresponds to only one source image. Consequently, it can be observed that the MEF and VIF tasks involve relatively balanced fusion, while MFF is an extremely
unbalanced task that tends to exhibit polarized choices.
With the rapid development of deep learning techniques, image fusion has achieved great progress in recent
years [31, 41], while most existing methods [28, 54, 55]
focus on single image fusion scenario alone. Task-specific
methods [28, 36] often employ task-specific strategies such
as designing complex task-biased networks or utilizing
task-specific fusion loss functions, resulting in the weak
generalization to other tasks [41]. Considering that different

7099

