This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S2MAE: A Spatial-Spectral Pretraining Foundation Model for
Spectral Remote Sensing Data

1

Xuyang Li1,2 Danfeng Hong1,2 * Jocelyn Chanussot3
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100094 Beijing, China
2
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049 Beijing, China
3
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
lixuyang23@mails.ucas.ac.cn, hongdf@aircas.ac.cn, jocelyn.chanussot@inria.fr

Abstract
In the expansive domain of computer vision, a myriad of pre-trained models are at our disposal. However,
most of these models are designed for natural RGB images
and prove inadequate for spectral remote sensing (RS) images. Spectral RS images have two main traits: (1) multiple bands capturing diverse feature information, (2) spatial alignment and consistent spectral sequencing within
the spatial-spectral dimension. In this paper, we introduce
Spatial-SpectralMAE (S2MAE), a specialized pre-trained
architecture for spectral RS imagery. S2MAE employs a
3D transformer for masked autoencoder modeling, integrating learnable spectral-spatial embeddings with a 90%
masking ratio. The model efficiently captures local spectral consistency and spatial invariance using compact cube
tokens, demonstrating versatility to diverse input characteristics. This adaptability facilitates progressive pretraining on extensive spectral datasets. The effectiveness of
S2MAE is validated through continuous pretraining on two
sizable datasets, totaling over a million training images.
The pre-trained model is subsequently applied to three distinct downstream tasks, with in-depth ablation studies conducted to emphasize its efficacy.

1. Introduction
Spectral imaging, with its ability to capture a diverse spectrum of spectral information, significantly enhances the
precision and recognition of objects and scenes beyond
the capabilities of RGB data alone. This has positioned
multi/hyperspectral (MS/HS) remote sensing data as a preferred and vital component in numerous Earth Observation
(EO) applications [19]. These applications encompass var* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Spectral RS data displays spatial invariance and channelwise continuity. The 3D random mask helps in learning local
spatial-spectral correlations by enabling reconstruction.

ious domains such as land use/land cover mapping, ecosystem monitoring, weather forecasting, energy resource development, biodiversity conservation, and geological exploration.
In the realm of RS imagery, a wealth of open-resource
images is readily accessible, yet a significant portion remains unlabeled. Existing algorithms and models tend to
underutilize these expansive datasets, primarily relying on
the limited labeled data available. However, the process of
labeling such data is resource-intensive, time-consuming,
and often financially burdensome. To unlock the full potential of these resources, there is a critical need for the development and implementation of self-supervised or unsupervised methods driven by data.
A wave of pioneering self-supervised methods has
emerged within the RS community [1, 4, 15, 17, 18, 26–
28, 30, 33, 34, 40, 42, 43]. Wang et al. [39] trained a
plain vision transformer on RS RGB images and developed rotated varied-size window attention for fine-tuning
the model. Mall et al. [26] improved SeCo [27] by designing the CACo loss to better utilize contrastive learn-

24088

