This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Better Vision-Inspired Vision-Language Models
Yun-Hao Cao1 , Kaixiang Ji2 , Ziyuan Huang2 , Chuanyang Zheng2 ,
Jiajia Liu2 , Jian Wang2 , Jingdong Chen2 , Ming Yang2 *
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 Ant Group
caoyh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {kaixiang.jkx, pishi.hzy, zhengchuanyang.zcy}@antgroup.com
{lekun.ljj, bobblair.wj, jingdongchen.cjd, m.yang}@antgroup.com

Abstract

BLIP-2+VIVL (Ours)

145

Vision-language (VL) models have achieved unprecedented success recently, in which the connection module
is the key to bridge the modality gap. Nevertheless, the abundant visual clues are not sufficiently exploited in most existing methods. On the vision side, most existing approaches
only use the last feature of the vision tower, without using the
low-level features. On the language side, most existing methods only introduce shallow vision-language interactions. In
this paper, we present a vision-inspired vision-language connection module, dubbed as VIVL, which efficiently exploits
the vision cue for VL models. To take advantage of the lowerlevel information from the vision tower, a feature pyramid
extractor (FPE) is introduced to combine features from different intermediate layers, which enriches the visual cue with
negligible parameters and computation overhead. To enhance VL interactions, we propose deep vision-conditioned
prompts (DVCP) that allows deep interactions of vision and
language features efficiently. Our VIVL exceeds the previous
state-of-the-art method by 18.1 CIDEr when training from
scratch on the COCO caption task, which greatly improves
the data efficiency. When used as a plug-in module, VIVL
consistently improves the performance for various backbones
and VL frameworks, delivering new state-of-the-art results
on multiple benchmarks, e.g., NoCaps and VQAv2.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has greatly transformed computer vision
(CV) and natural language processing (NLP) and led to stateof-the-art results on a series of tasks [3, 8, 9, 15, 49]. The
rapid progress in single-modality domains inspires soaring
interests in investigating how to join multiple modalities
in real-word applications like image captioning [7] and visual question answering [12]. Thus, vision-language (VL)
models emerge as the new frontline for both communities.
The current mainstream methods [23, 38, 40] use a con* Corresponding author.

COCO Caption CIDEr

VIVL (Ours)

BLIP-2

VIVL (Ours)

140

LEMON
135

LEMON

BLIP-2

BLIP

LEMON
130
BLIP
125

120

BLIP-2

LLaMA-Adapter V2
0

25

50

75

100

125

150

175

200

Pre-train Data Scale (Million)

Figure 1. Image captioning performance on COCO when pretrained using different dataset sizes. Our VIVL significantly exceeds the previous state-of-the-art results [11] on COCO caption
without using pre-training data, which is even comparable to the
methods that rely on a large amount of pre-training data [17,23,24],
which demonstrates the data efficiency of our method.

nection module to bridge a pre-trained image encoder and
a pre-trained large language model (LLM) since this is a
practical way to reuse both models with manageable training
overhead and deliver fairly good performance [2, 23]. The
connection module bridges the modality gap which is the
key to exerting the capabilities of pre-trained unimodal vision and language models. Many efforts have been made to
design the connection module: BLIP-2 [23] designs a BERTbased Q-Former, LLaVA [30] uses a simple fully connected
layer, and Flamingo [2] inserts cross-attention layers into
LLM. While, these connection modules have not fully take
the advantage of abundant visual features in terms of both
visual feature extraction and vision-language interaction.
On the image encoder side, previous works [2, 23, 30]
primarily use the output from a single layer of the image
encoder (e.g., the last layer), without utilizing the early lowlevel features. In fact, many successful practices from object
detection [14, 28] and semantic segmentation [5, 6] indicated

13537

