This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapting Visual-Language Models for
Generalizable Anomaly Detection in Medical Images
†

†

Chaoqin Huang1,2,3 ,* Aofan Jiang1,3∗ , Jinghao Feng1,3 , Ya Zhang1,3 , Xinchao Wang2, , Yanfeng Wang1,3,
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 National University of Singapore
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{huangchaoqin,stillunnamed,fjh1345528968,ya zhang,wangyanfeng622}@sjtu.edu.cn; {xinchao}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent advancements in large-scale visual-language
pre-trained models have led to significant progress in zero/few-shot anomaly detection within natural image domains.
However, the substantial domain divergence between natural and medical images limits the effectiveness of these
methodologies in medical anomaly detection. This paper
introduces a novel lightweight multi-level adaptation and
comparison framework to repurpose the CLIP model for
medical anomaly detection. Our approach integrates multiple residual adapters into the pre-trained visual encoder,
enabling a stepwise enhancement of visual features across
different levels. This multi-level adaptation is guided by
multi-level, pixel-wise visual-language feature alignment
loss functions, which recalibrate the model’s focus from object semantics in natural imagery to anomaly identification
in medical images. The adapted features exhibit improved
generalization across various medical data types, even in
zero-shot scenarios where the model encounters unseen
medical modalities and anatomical regions during training. Our experiments on medical anomaly detection benchmarks demonstrate that our method significantly surpasses
current state-of-the-art models, with an average AUC improvement of 6.24% and 7.33% for anomaly classification,
2.03% and 2.37% for anomaly segmentation, under the
zero-shot and few-shot settings, respectively. Source code is
available at: https://github.com/MediaBrainSJTU/MVFA-AD

1. Introduction
Medical anomaly detection (AD), which focuses on identifying unusual patterns in medical data, is central to preventing misdiagnoses and facilitating early interventions [14,
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding authors: Yanfeng Wang and Xinchao Wang

Natural Image Domain

Medical Image Domain
Train: Adaptation

Pre-trained
VLM

CLIP

Domain
Gap
Task
Gap

Chest X-ray

Multi-Level
Feature Adaptation
Test: Comparison

Brain MRI

Histopathology Retinal OCT

Unseen

Unseen Modality
Unseen Anatomical Regions
Prediction

Liver CT
compare

Seen

Generalizable
Medical AD

compare

AC

A photo of a {cat}.
A photo of a {dog}. ✔
A photo of a {car}.

normal liver
abnormal liver

Text Prompts
Zero-Shot

JL

AS
Reference Images
Few-Shot

Figure 1. The overview of adaptation in pre-trained visuallanguage models for zero-/few-shot medical anomaly classification (AC) and anomaly segmentation (AS).

47, 61]. The vast variability in medical images, both in
terms of modalities and anatomical regions, necessitates a
model that is versatile across various data types. The fewshot AD approaches [12, 22, 46, 57] strive to attain model
generalization with scarce training data, embodying a preliminary attempt for a universal AD model, despite the need
for lightweight re-training [12, 46, 57] or distribution adjustment [22] for each new AD task.
Contemporary large-scale pre-trained visual-language
models (VLMs) have recently paved the way for robust and
generalizable anomaly detection. A notable initial effort is
to directly adopt CLIP [38], a representative open-source
VLM for natural imagery, for AD, simply by carefully crafting artificial text prompts [26]. By further employing annotated training data, Chen et al. [9] introduces extra linear layers to map the image features to the joint embedding
space to the text features, facilitating their comparison. Despite the promise of the above two approaches, their extension to the medical domain has not been explored.
This paper attempts to develop a universal generalizable
AD model for medical images, designed to be adaptable to
previously unseen modalities and anatomical regions. The

11375

