This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Space-Time Diffusion Features for Zero-Shot Text-Driven Motion Transfer
Danah Yatim1∗

Rafail Fridman1∗
Omer Bar-Tal1
Yoni Kasten2
1
Weizmann Institute of Science
NVIDIA Research2

Tali Dekel1

Input

*Indicates equal contribution.

Edit

ÒA bike driving in a snowy forestÓ

ÒA horse jumping into a riverÓ

ÒA train riding on rails, autumn viewÓ

ÒA dolphin jumping into the oceanÓ

Figure 1. Given an input video and a text prompt describing the target objects and scene, our method generates a new video in which the
overall motion and scene layout of the input video are preserved, while allowing for notable structural and appearance changes.

Abstract
We present a new method for text-driven motion transfer – synthesizing a video that complies with an input text
prompt describing the target objects and scene while maintaining an input video’s motion and scene layout. Prior
methods are confined to transferring motion across two subjects within the same or closely related object categories
and are applicable for limited domains (e.g., humans). In
this work, we consider a significantly more challenging setting in which the target and source objects differ drastically in shape and fine-grained motion characteristics (e.g.,
translating a jumping dog into a dolphin). To this end,
we leverage a pre-trained and fixed text-to-video diffusion
model, which provides us with generative and motion priors. The pillar of our method is a new space-time feature loss derived directly from the model. This loss guides
the generation process to preserve the overall motion of
the input video while complying with the target object in
terms of shape and fine-grained motion traits. 1 Project
page: https://diffusion-motion-transfer.
github.io/

1. Introduction
Imagine transferring the car’s motion shown in the video
in Fig. 1 to a different object, such as a bicycle or a train.
This task poses a crucial challenge – retaining key motion
1 Code will be made publicly available.

characteristics of the input video, such as the car’s direction of motion, speed, and pose, while substantially altering
the dynamic object’s structure to convey the target’s unique
visual attributes. Conceptually, solving this task requires
prior knowledge about objects’ appearance, pose, shape,
and motion under deformations and different viewpoints, as
well as an understanding of their interaction with the scene
(e.g., turning the car into a bicycle requires revealing unseen background content and synthesizing plausible scene
effects, such as shadows).
Previous methods have been primarily focused on transferring motion across two similarly-looking videos depicting two subjects within the same object category. These
methods are typically confined to object categories for
which strong geometric priors exist, e.g., humans for which
parametric models for robust shape and pose are available
(e.g., [7, 11]). Other works attempt to learn such explicit
mid-level representation in a self-supervised manner from
the input videos (e.g., [38, 58])– an extremely challenging task by itself. In this work, we take the task of motion transfer to the realm of text-driven video editing, where
the target object and scene are specified via a text prompt.
We aim at addressing a significantly more general setting,
which involves transferring motion across different object
categories under significant variations in shape and deformations across time (Fig. 1). Here, we define motion as a
sequence of semantic objects’ parts’ positions and strive to
preserve the position of those parts across different object

8466

