This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ANIM: Accurate Neural Implicit Model
for Human Reconstruction from a single RGB-D image
Marco Pesavento1,3*

Yuanlu Xu3

Nikolaos Sarafianos3

Robert Maier3

Ziyan Wang3

Chun-Han Yao2

Marco Volino1

Edmond Boyer3

Adrian Hilton1

Tony Tung3

1

University of Surrey, CVSSP, UK

2

UC Merced

3

Meta Reality Labs

Abstract
Recent progress in human shape learning, shows that
neural implicit models are effective in generating 3D human surfaces from limited number of views, and even from
a single RGB image. However, existing monocular approaches still struggle to recover fine geometric details such
as face, hands or cloth wrinkles. They are also easily
prone to depth ambiguities that result in distorted geometries along the camera optical axis. In this paper, we explore the benefits of incorporating depth observations in
the reconstruction process by introducing ANIM, a novel
method that reconstructs arbitrary 3D human shapes from
single-view RGB-D images with an unprecedented level of
accuracy. Our model learns geometric details from both
multi-resolution pixel-aligned and voxel-aligned features
to leverage depth information and enable spatial relationships, mitigating depth ambiguities. We further enhance the
quality of the reconstructed shape by introducing a depthsupervision strategy, which improves the accuracy of the
signed distance field estimation of points that lie on the reconstructed surface. Experiments demonstrate that ANIM
outperforms state-of-the-art works that use RGB, surface
normals, point cloud or RGB-D data as input. In addition, we introduce ANIM-Real, a new multi-modal dataset
comprising high-quality scans paired with consumer-grade
RGB-D camera, and our protocol to fine-tune ANIM, enabling high-quality reconstruction from real-world human
capture. https://marcopesavento.github.io/ANIM/

1. Introduction
The increasing interest in 3D virtual world creation has
led to a substantial demand for easily accessible 3D reconstruction solutions. Consequently, this has emerged as a
prominent research domain in computer vision with applications in virtual and augmented reality, gaming, medicine
and e-shopping, among others. A recurrent challenge revolves around ensuring the fidelity of the created models
* Work performed during an internship at Meta Reality Labs, Sausalito

Figure 1. ANIM enables human shape reconstruction with higher
accuracy and without shape distortions compared to the state-ofthe-art methods based on monocular RGB-D or RGB input.

and, consequently, the accuracy of the reconstruction methods, especially when reconstructing 3D avatars of real people. To this aim, depth sensors that are nowadays ubiquitous in commercial devices (e.g., LiDAR Depth Camera,
AI Stereo Depth Map, Azure Kinect, and Asus) can be
leveraged to develop efficient and accurate reconstruction
solutions. Our objective is to build high-fidelity models of
clothed humans from single RGB-D images by learning an
Accurate Neural Implicit Model (ANIM). Monocular approaches based on generative adversarial networks [33, 54]
produce realistic front and back depths of the model. However, their fidelity is limited as the prediction depends on
the generative ability of the network. While leveraging priors such as parametric body models can produce complete
body shapes [37], they often lack details. Several works resort to multiple RGB-D images or monocular videos, combining multiple predictions to reconstruct higher-quality 3D
shapes [15, 16, 50]. In contrast to previous works that exclusively process either single RGB images [45–47, 57, 64] or
3D point clouds [8, 12, 52], our proposed approach, which
relies on a neural implicit model (a learned Signed Distance Field, or SDF), reconstructs accurate 3D models of
clothed humans from a single RGB-D image with significantly higher levels of detail. Related approaches that also

5448

