This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Action Detection via an Image Diffusion Process
Lin Geng Foo1 Tianjiao Li1 Hossein Rahmani2 Jun Liu1†
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 Lancaster University
{lingeng_foo,tianjiao_li}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg,
h.rahmani@lancaster.ac.uk, jun_liu@sutd.edu.sg

1. Introduction
The goal of action detection is to localize the starting and
ending points of action instances in untrimmed videos, while
also predicting the classes of those actions. Action detection
is important across many video analysis applications, including healthcare monitoring [44, 47], sports analysis [17, 24]
and security surveillance [1, 60], and has attracted a lot of research attention. A common approach [10, 16, 29, 62, 63] is
to first extract proposals of action instances, before processing each of these proposals individually to produce refined
starting point, ending point, and action-class predictions.
Many works focus on improving the action proposal localization process (e.g., with a better starting and ending point
regression head [30, 31, 36]), or designing better model architectures (e.g., graph models [26, 65, 70] and Transformers
[35, 69]). Nevertheless, action detection still remains challenging, since actions often contain complex motions with
high intra-class variability [21, 73], and difficulties also arise
due to the varying lighting conditions, different viewpoints
and background clutter [21, 29, 48].
† Corresponding author

Imagify

Starting Point AD image (𝒙𝒔𝟎 ) Ending Point AD image (𝒙𝒆𝟎 )
Is starting point? (Yes/No)

Is ending point? (Yes/No)

𝑁 frames

𝐶 classes

𝑁 frames

Action-class AD image (𝒙𝒂𝟎 )

𝑁 frames

Action detection aims to localize the starting and ending
points of action instances in untrimmed videos, and predict
the classes of those instances. In this paper, we make the
observation that the outputs of the action detection task can
be formulated as images. Thus, from a novel perspective, we
tackle action detection via a three-image generation process
to generate starting point, ending point and action-class
predictions as images via our proposed Action Detection
Image Diffusion (ADI-Diff) framework. Furthermore, since
our images differ from natural images and exhibit special
properties, we further explore a Discrete Action-Detection
Diffusion Process and a Row-Column Transformer design
to better handle their processing. Our ADI-Diff framework
achieves state-of-the-art results on two widely-used datasets.

Input video clip

𝑁 frames

Abstract

Figure 1. Illustration of our formulated AD images, which allow
us to tackle action detection by generating three images. The
action-class AD image (xa ) has a shape of N × C, while the
starting and ending point AD images (xs and xe ) both have a shape
of N × 2, where we show N = 5 and C = 5 in this figure for
illustration. Specifically, the pixel values in a row of the image form
the probabilities of a discrete distribution regarding a specific video
frame, e.g., the n-th row of the action-class AD image represents
the probability distribution over the action classes for the n-th
frame. We depict the ground truth AD images (xa0 , xs0 , xe0 ) in this
figure, thus each row contains a single white pixel (with value 1)
in each row depicting the correct prediction, while the other pixels
are black in color (with value 0).

On the other hand, image diffusion models [22, 56] have
recently undergone rapid development and show an excellent
capability to generate high-quality images. Image diffusion
models aim to obtain a high-quality image from an noisy
and uncertain image, and achieve this via step-by-step progressive denoising. Intuitively, the diffusion model’s process
of progressive denoising helps to bridge the large gap between the high-quality target images and the noisy images by
breaking it down into smaller intermediate steps [55], which
assists the model in converging towards generating the highquality target images. Thus, image diffusion models [22, 56]
can improve image quality and training stability, and possess
a strong ability to generate high-quality target images that
align well with the provided input conditions.
In this work, inspired by the efficacy of image diffusion
models, we make the following observation: the three outputs (starting point, ending point and action-class) for the
action detection task can be formulated as images. For instance, the action-class predictions can be represented by a
N × C image (where N is the number of frames and C is
the number of action-classes), while the starting and ending
point predictions can each be represented by a N × 2 image,

18351

