This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RealNet: A Feature Selection Network with Realistic Synthetic Anomaly for
Anomaly Detection
Xiuzhuang Zhou2
Ximiao Zhang1
Min Xu1 *
College of Information and Engineering, Capital Normal University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
1

{2211002048, xumin}@cnu.edu.cn1 , xiuzhuang.zhou@bupt.edu.cn2

Abstract
Self-supervised feature reconstruction methods have
shown promising advances in industrial image anomaly detection and localization. Despite this progress, these methods still face challenges in synthesizing realistic and diverse anomaly samples, as well as addressing the feature
redundancy and pre-training bias of pre-trained feature.
In this work, we introduce RealNet, a feature reconstruction network with realistic synthetic anomaly and adaptive
feature selection. It is incorporated with three key innovations: First, we propose Strength-controllable Diffusion
Anomaly Synthesis (SDAS), a diffusion process-based synthesis strategy capable of generating samples with varying anomaly strengths that mimic the distribution of real
anomalous samples. Second, we develop Anomaly-aware
Features Selection (AFS), a method for selecting representative and discriminative pre-trained feature subsets to
improve anomaly detection performance while controlling
computational costs. Third, we introduce Reconstruction
Residuals Selection (RRS), a strategy that adaptively selects
discriminative residuals for comprehensive identification of
anomalous regions across multiple levels of granularity. We
assess RealNet on four benchmark datasets, and our results
demonstrate significant improvements in both Image AUROC and Pixel AUROC compared to the current state-ofthe-art methods. The code, data, and models are available
at https://github.com/cnulab/RealNet.

1. Introduction
Image anomaly detection is a critical task in industrial
production, with wide-ranging applications in quality control and safety monitoring. While self-supervised methods
[18, 29, 42, 44, 46] have gained attention for training models using synthetic anomalies, they still face challenges in
synthesizing realistic and diverse anomaly images, espe* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. SDAS generates anomaly images using only normal
images. The example images are sourced from the MVTec-AD
dataset [3].

cially generating complex structural anomalies and unseen
anomaly categories. Due to the lack of available anomaly
images and prior knowledge about anomaly categories, existing methods rely on carefully crafted data augmentation
strategies [18, 29] or external data [42] for anomaly synthesis, leading to significant distribution discrepancy between synthetic anomalies and real anomalies, thereby limiting the generalization ability of anomaly detection models to real-world applications. To address these issues, we
introduce Strength-controllable Diffusion Anomaly Synthesis (SDAS), a novel synthesis strategy that generates diverse
samples more closely aligned with natural distributions, and
offers flexibility in controlling anomaly strength. SDAS
employs DDPM [15] to model the distribution of normal
samples and introduces perturbation terms during the sampling process to generate samples in low probability density
regions. These samples simulate various natural anomaly
patterns, such as aging, structural changes, abnormal textures, and color changes, as shown in Fig. 1.
Parallel to this, feature reconstruction-based anomaly detection [8, 30, 38, 43, 46] is another promising research direction, which reconstructs the features of anomalous images as those of normal images and conducts anomaly detection and localization by reconstruction residuals. They
have attracted considerable attention due to the simple

16699

