This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VS: Reconstructing Clothed 3D Human from Single Image via Vertex Shift
Leyuan Liu1 , Yuhan Li1 , Yunqi Gao1 , Changxin Gao2 , Yuanyuan Liu3 , Jingying Chen1,∗
1
National Engineering Research Center for E-Learning, Central China Normal University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences (Wuhan)
{lyliu,chenjy}@mail.ccnu.edu.cn, {lyh985812,gaoyunqi}@mails.ccnu.edu.cn, cgao@hust.edu.cn, liuyy@cug.edu.cn

SMPL-X

Input Estimation SMPL-X

Strech

Coarse Model

Refine

Detailed Model (8 views)

Figure 1. Using two stages of vertex shift, VS first stretches the estimated SMPL-X into a coarse human model and then refines it into
a detailed clothed human model. Results on both benchmarks (1st row) and in-the-wild images (2nd row) show that VS can reconstruct
high-fidelity and artifact-less clothed 3D humans from single images, even under scenarios of challenging poses and loose clothes. To
comprehensively inspect results from all perspectives, we rotate the results through a full circle and show them from 8 views.

Abstract
Various applications require high-fidelity and artifactfree 3D human reconstructions. However, current implicit
function-based methods inevitably produce artifacts while
existing deformation methods are difficult to reconstruct
high-fidelity humans wearing loose clothing. In this paper,
we propose a two-stage deformation method named Vertex
Shift (VS) for reconstructing clothed 3D humans from single
images. Specifically, VS first stretches the estimated SMPLX mesh into a coarse 3D human model using shift fields inferred from normal maps, then refines the coarse 3D human
model into a detailed 3D human model via a graph convolutional network embedded with implicit-function-learned
features. This “stretch-refine” strategy addresses large deformations required for reconstructing loose clothing and
delicate deformations for recovering intricate and detailed
surfaces, achieving high-fidelity reconstructions that faithfully convey the pose, clothing, and surface details from the
input images. The graph convolutional network’s ability to
exploit neighborhood vertices coupled with the advantages
inherited from the deformation methods ensure VS rarely
produces artifacts like distortions and non-human shapes

and never produces artifacts like holes, broken parts, and
dismembered limbs. As a result, VS can reconstruct highfidelity and artifact-less clothed 3D humans from single images, even under scenarios of challenging poses and loose
clothing. Experimental results on three benchmarks and
two in-the-wild datasets demonstrate that VS significantly
outperforms current state-of-the-art methods. The code
and models of VS are available for research purposes at
https://github.com/starVisionTeam/VS.

1. Introduction
Human avatars will be an essential medium for connecting
the physical and digital worlds. Recent advancements in
3D human reconstruction [7, 40] have made it convenient
to create human avatars even from single phone-taken images, but the reconstructions are not yet perfect. An ideal reconstruction should be high-fidelity and artifact-free. More
specifically, it should faithfully convey the pose, clothing,
and surface details of the human in the image while being
free from artifacts like holes, broken or missing parts, disembodied limbs, distortions, and non-human shapes.

10498

