This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Atlantis: Enabling Underwater Depth Estimation with Stable Diffusion
Fan Zhang1 Shaodi You2 Yu Li3 Ying Fu1†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 University of Amsterdam
3
International Digital Economy Academy
More diverse generated images

Depth

Generated Image

Real Image

Estimated Depth

Generated Image

Depth

Figure 1. Left & Right: vivid underwater scenes generated in Atlantis, retaining the scene layout of terrestrial depth with diverse variations.
Middle: depth models trained on Atlantis can well handle unseen real underwater scenes and predict reliable depth maps.

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation has experienced significant
progress on terrestrial images in recent years thanks to
deep learning advancements. But it remains inadequate for
underwater scenes primarily due to data scarcity. Given
the inherent challenges of light attenuation and backscatter in water, acquiring clear underwater images or precise
depth is notably difficult and costly. To mitigate this issue,
learning-based approaches often rely on synthetic data or
turn to self- or unsupervised manners. Nonetheless, their
performance is often hindered by domain gap and looser
constraints. In this paper, we propose a novel pipeline for
generating photorealistic underwater images using accurate terrestrial depth. This approach facilitates the supervised training of models for underwater depth estimation,
effectively reducing the performance disparity between terrestrial and underwater environments. Contrary to previous
synthetic datasets that merely apply style transfer to terrestrial images without scene content change, our approach
uniquely creates vivid non-existent underwater scenes by
leveraging terrestrial depth data through the innovative Sta† Corresponding author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

ble Diffusion model. Specifically, we introduce a specialized Depth2Underwater ControlNet, trained on prepared
{Underwater, Depth, Text} data triplets, for this generation
task. Our newly developed dataset, Atlantis, enables terrestrial depth estimation models to achieve considerable improvements on unseen underwater scenes, surpassing their
terrestrial pretrained counterparts both quantitatively and
qualitatively. Moreover, we further show its practical utility by applying the improved depth in underwater image
enhancement, and its smaller domain gap from the LLVM
perspective. Code and dataset are publicly available at
https://github.com/zkawfanx/Atlantis.

1. Introduction
Precise underwater depth acquisition is essential for human
exploration of the sea. This holds particularly true for fields
such as autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV) [8, 39],
underwater robotics [56], marine biology, ecology [20]
and archaeology [4, 11]. Unlike costly and operationally
complex active ranging equipment, such as underwater LiDARs [17, 63], monocular depth estimation [25, 34] offers a
more cost-effective and convenient deployment solution. In

11852

