This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP-Driven Open-Vocabulary 3D Scene Graph Generation via Cross-Modality
Contrastive Learning
Lianggangxu Chen1

Xuejiao Wang1
Jiale Lu1
1*
Changbo Wang
Gaoqi He1,3 *

Shaohui Lin1,2

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science, Ministry of Education, China
3
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Precision Optics, Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, Chongqing, China
2

{lgxchen,52275901001,jllu}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {shlin, cbwang, gqhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D Scene Graph Generation (3DSGG) aims to classify
objects and their predicates within 3D point cloud scenes.
However, current 3DSGG methods struggle with two main
challenges. 1) The dependency on labor-intensive groundtruth annotations. 2) Closed-set classes training hampers
the recognition of novel objects and predicates. Addressing
these issues, our idea is to extract cross-modality features
by CLIP from text and image data naturally related to 3D
point clouds. Cross-modality features are used to train a robust 3D scene graph (3DSG) feature extractor. Specifically,
we propose a novel Cross-Modality Contrastive Learning
3DSGG (CCL-3DSGG) method. Firstly, to align the text
with 3DSG, the text is parsed into word level that are consistent with the 3DSG annotation. To enhance robustness
during the alignment, adjectives are exchanged for different
objects as negative samples. Then, to align the image with
3DSG, the camera view is treated as a positive sample and
other views as negatives. Lastly, the recognition of novel
object and predicate classes is achieved by calculating the
cosine similarity between prompts and 3DSG features. Our
rigorous experiments confirm the superior open-vocabulary
capability and applicability of CCL-3DSGG in real-world
contexts.

1. Introduction
3D scene graph generation (3DSGG) is a fundamental task
in scene understanding, which aims to detect objects and
represent their relationships using predicates in 3D scenes
[12, 31, 48]. Consequently, 3DSGG can be applied to
robot planning [1, 30, 67], autonomous driving [36, 46] and
human-computer interactive query-answer [5, 41, 55].
* Changbo Wang and Gaoqi He are the corresponding authors.

Existing 3DSGG models are mainly working in two directions to improve the accuracy. 1) Visual contextual
based methods successively pass 3D scene graph (3DSG)
features through a given network, such as graph neural networks [47, 59] and transformers [33]. They collect spatial
and semantic clues of adjacent objects by message passing
mechanism for the purpose of enhancing the feature representations of objects and predicates. 2) Prior knowledge
based methods extract class embeddings [6, 48, 61] and
probability co-occurrence [11, 12] to refine predicate features, with the aim of enhancing recall for the infrequent
predicate classes.
Despite notable advancements in 3DSGG, existing stateof-the-art (SOTA) methods still encounter two obstacles
that constrain their practicality in the open-vocabulary (OV)
settings. 1) The training of 3DSGG models necessitates extensive ground-truth object and predicate labeling. The annotation of 3DSG is costly and time-consuming to perform
manually [45, 49, 62]. 2) All currently available 3DSGG
methods are trained on a close-set of classes and struggle to extend their capabilities to novel classes in realistic
scenarios [11, 47, 48, 59]. As illustrated in Figure 1(a),
previous 3DSGG methods trained on closed-set object and
predicate classes with fully supervised present a deficiency
in recognizing novel classes. Also as Figure 1(b) highlights, in real-world applications, employing prediction results of 3DSG in closed-set might make an incorrect humancomputer interactive query-answer or a terrible vehicle collision [10, 21].
Recently, vision-language pre-trained (VLP) models like
CLIP [42] have shown its remarkable performance in 2D
OV vision understanding tasks [3, 38, 65]. Some works
have extended VLP models to comprehend 3D point clouds
by transferring the text and image features from VLP to 3D
point clouds [58, 60, 66]. However, directly applying them
to unsupervised OV 3DSGG is undesirable due to two rea-

27863

