This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Exposure Fusion for High-Dynamic Range Object Detection
Emmanuel Onzon1

Maximilian Bömer1 Fahim Mannan1
1
Torc Robotics 2 Princeton University

Abstract
Computer vision in unconstrained outdoor scenarios
must tackle challenging high dynamic range (HDR) scenes
and rapidly changing illumination conditions. Existing
methods address this problem with multi-capture HDR sensors and a hardware image signal processor (ISP) that produces a single fused image as input to a downstream neural
network. The output of the HDR sensor is a set of low dynamic range (LDR) exposures, and the fusion in the ISP is
performed in image space and typically optimized for human perception on a display. Preferring tonemapped content with smooth transition regions over detail (and noise)
in the resulting image, this image fusion does typically not
preserve all information from the LDR exposures that may
be essential for downstream computer vision tasks. In this
work, we depart from conventional HDR image fusion and
propose a learned task-driven fusion in the feature domain.
Instead of using a single companded image, we introduce a
novel local cross-attention fusion mechanism that exploits
semantic features from all exposures – learned in an endto-end fashion with supervision from downstream detection
losses. The proposed method outperforms all tested conventional HDR exposure fusion and auto-exposure methods in
challenging automotive HDR scenarios.

1. Introduction
A wide range of computer vision tasks requires predictions
in outdoor scenarios at real-time rates, with applications
ranging from self-driving vehicles and advanced driver assistance systems to drones and robots in farming and outdoor maintenance. The global dynamic range of luminances
in real-world scenes is 280 dB, see [34]. Inside this range,
a typical outdoor scene covers a sub-range of about 120 dB,
and such a typical scene already exceeds what conventional
CMOS image sensors can capture at around 60-70 dB. And
yet, in-the-wild computer vision systems, routinely have to
handle more challenging conditions, like facing the sun in
presence of large, shadow-casting objects (backlights) or
moving from indoor to outdoor and back (e.g., entrance and
exit of a tunnel). In such cases, the range of luminances
seen at the same time can reach 180 dB, and they exceed
the range of today’s robotic and automotive high dynamic
range (HDR) image sensors (covering around 120-140 dB).

Felix Heide1,2

Moreover, existing computer vision systems must also be
able to adapt to changing illumination conditions in realtime, for example, when the vision system, or when large
objects in the environment move quickly.
The traditional approach to tackle these challenges is
to employ an HDR image sensor coupled with a hardware
image signal processor (ISP) and an auto-exposure control
system, each of them having been designed independently.
More precisely, the HDR image sensor captures multiple
exposures that are fused and processed in image space by
an ISP. The output of the ISP is a single HDR color image which is consumed by a computer vision module that
has been designed and trained independently of the other
components in the pipeline. Each individual capture in this
pipeline, acquired at a different exposure, covers a low dynamic range (LDR), i.e., not exceeding 70 dB per image,
while the total dynamic range covered by the set of LDR
images covers a larger dynamic range. The fusion algorithm that produces the image output in image space (i.e.,
the fused image), is typically designed in isolation from the
other components of the vision pipeline. In particular, it is
not optimized for the computer vision task at hand, be that
detection, segmentation, or localization.
In this work, we depart from the conventional approach
of capturing a bracketed HDR raw capture, fusion and detection. Instead of image-space HDR fusion, we propose
a feature-domain fusion approach driven by a downstream
detection task, without needing to reconstruct a single HDR
image, see Figure 3. Specifically, we propose an early fusion approach that fuses feature maps from the different exposures into a single feature map. We introduce a novel
attention module to help the neural network determine, at
each spatial location, the exposure that contains the most
relevant information concerning the object detection task.
To this end, we devise a local cross-attention fusion block
which attends to features locally across exposures. The
queries of this cross-attention module are learned, while the
keys and the values are the feature vectors at each location,
across the different exposures.
The intuition behind our local cross-attention module is
best conveyed by the attention maps it produces. Figure 2
shows an example of such learned attention maps paired
with the corresponding images. The maps illustrate that

17564

