This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Semantic Correspondence with Viewpoint-Guided Spherical Maps
Octave Mariotti

Oisin Mac Aodha
Hakan Bilen
University of Edinburgh
groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/vico/research/sphericalmaps
Input

Abstract
Recent self-supervised models produce visual features
that are not only effective at encoding image-level, but
also pixel-level, semantics. They have been reported to
obtain impressive results for dense visual semantic correspondence estimation, even outperforming fully-supervised
methods. Nevertheless, these models still fail in the presence of challenging image characteristics such as symmetries and repeated parts. To address these limitations, we
propose a new semantic correspondence estimation method
that supplements state-of-the-art self-supervised features
with 3D understanding via a weak geometric spherical
prior. Compared to more involved 3D pipelines, our model
provides a simple and effective way of injecting informative geometric priors into the learned representation while
requiring only weak viewpoint information. We also propose a new evaluation metric that better accounts for repeated part and symmetry-induced mistakes. We show that
our method succeeds in distinguishing between symmetric
views and repeated parts across many object categories in
the challenging SPair-71k dataset and also in generalizing
to previously unseen classes in the AwA dataset.

1. Introduction
Semantic correspondence (SC) estimation aims to find local
regions that correspond to the same semantic entities across
a collection of images, where each image contains a different instance of the same object category [30]. SC has
been studied in both supervised [9, 26, 59] and unsupervised [2, 50] settings. Thanks to the recent progress in selfsupervised learning (SSL) [6, 40, 60], recent SSL-based approaches have been shown to obtain strong performance on
multiple benchmarks [1, 2, 54]. However, they often act as
simple part detectors, without having any 3D understanding
of object extent, or relative location of object parts. As these
SSL methods are typically trained using only 2D-based objectives, they are not able to learn 3D-aware representations,
and often converge to similar features for object parts that
share appearance but not fine-grained semantics.

DINOv2

Ours

collapsed sides

distinct sides

collapsed parts

distinct parts

Figure 1. Features from self-supervised methods such as DINOv2 [40] have been used to discover parts and regions of objects.
However, these features fail to correctly distinguish (i) object symmetries, e.g. the left and right side of the car have the same features and (ii) individual parts, e.g. the wheels are represented by
the same features irrespective of their location on the car. Our approach through use of a weak geometric spherical prior addresses
these issues. Note, we use the 3D PCA projection of the features
for DINOv2 and our learned spherical mapping for our method.

The two main failure modes of current methods are depicted in Fig. 1. First, they are often confused by the symmetries that objects can exhibit (e.g. left vs. right side of a
car), producing reflected versions of the feature maps when
presented with the two different sides of a symmetric object. Second, they predict similar features for similar looking parts (e.g. the front left vs. back left wheel of a car), and
fail to discriminate between part instances. Such symmetries and repeated structures are ubiquitous in both humanmade and naturally occurring object categories.
We posit that these shortcomings can be addressed by enforcing an explicit 3D structure into correspondence learning, allowing the model to disambiguate multiple repeated
parts, and accounting for the fact that some object parts
might not be visible in all images. Indeed, scene-based correspondence pipelines use geometric verification in order
to guarantee robustness in their matches [44], while other
works have shown that detailed 3D meshes can be used to

19521

