This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary 3D Semantic Segmentation with Foundation Models
Li Jiang
Shaoshuai Shi Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
{lijiang, sshi, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
…

In dynamic 3D environments, the ability to recognize a
diverse range of objects without the constraints of predefined categories is indispensable for real-world applications.
In response to this need, we introduce OV3D, an innovative framework designed for open-vocabulary 3D semantic
segmentation. OV3D leverages the broad open-world knowledge embedded in vision and language foundation models to
establish a fine-grained correspondence between 3D points
and textual entity descriptions. These entity descriptions are
enriched with contextual information, enabling a more open
and comprehensive understanding. By seamlessly aligning
3D point features with entity text features, OV3D empowers open-vocabulary recognition in the 3D domain, achieving state-of-the-art open-vocabulary semantic segmentation
performance across multiple datasets, including ScanNet,
Matterport3D, and nuScenes.

1. Introduction
For real-world applications like autonomous vehicles [14, 37,
52] and robotics [13, 19], the surrounding 3D environment
is dynamic and ever-changing. The objects in the scenes can
vary widely, and using fixed categories can limit the system’s
ability to recognize previously unseen objects. This motivates us to develop open-vocabulary techniques for 3D point
cloud understanding to allow the system to handle a broader
range of data without relying on pre-defined categories.
In open-vocabulary recognition, a common strategy is
to unify visual and language features in the same feature
space, leveraging the generalization abilities of language
models trained on unbounded open text data. This strategy is commonly employed in 2D open-vocabulary frameworks [15, 28, 32, 46, 66]. To achieve such visual-language
alignment, paired image and text data is essential. However,
unlike the more plentiful (image, text) pairs available on the
Internet, acquiring (point cloud, text) pairs is more difficult
due to their relative scarcity and limited availability.
For 3D open-vocabulary semantic segmentation, current
methods [5, 12, 40, 64] employ images as intermediaries
to establish the connection between text and 3D modali-

Multi-view 2D Images

Bridge

Foundation
Models

couch: a brown couch, a
large seating area, a cozy
sofa, a cushioned piece of
furniture
tree: a decorative plant, a
green addition to the room,
a living element in the space
…

Entity Text Descriptions

3D Point Cloud
Fine-grained Point-EntityText
Correspondence

Figure 1. An overview of OV3D. We take multi-view 2D images as
a bridge, leveraging the open-world knowledge in vision and language foundation models (e.g., large vision-language models and
vision foundation models) to build a fine-grained correspondence
between points and entity-level text descriptions.

ties, due to the easier acquisition of (point cloud, image)
pairs over (point cloud, text) pairs. A typical strategy involves aligning point cloud features with image features that
are already aligned with text features. For instance, OpenScene [40] aligns point features with pixel features from
2D open-vocabulary semantic segmentation models [15, 28].
Alternatively, another effective strategy involves generating
captions for multi-view images representing the 3D scene,
as demonstrated in [12, 64]. By doing so, the extracted 3D
scene features can be directly compared and aligned with
text features, promoting a more seamless cross-modality interaction. However, establishing a fine-grained point-to-text
correspondence can be challenging through this strategy.
In this work, we introduce OV3D for open-vocabulary
3D semantic segmentation. The overview of OV3D is shown
in Fig. 1. OV3D also engages in bridging the 3D point
cloud and text descriptions with images to enable seamless
point-text alignment. Different from previous works, we
put our focus on exploiting the broad knowledge of openworld concepts encapsulated within vision and language
foundation models [25, 34, 46, 78]. Our approach achieves
two critical objectives: 1) Fine-grained Correspondence:
We establish a fine-grained correspondence between entity
text descriptions and points; 2) Context-enriched PointText Alignment: We facilitate a semantic-enriched mapping
of point features to an open text feature space.

21284

