This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Model Adaptation for Time Constrained Embodied Control
Jaehyun Song,* Minjong Yoo,* Honguk Woo†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
{s7159540, mjyoo2, hwoo}@skku.edu

Abstract
When adopting a deep learning model for embodied
agents, it is required that the model structure be optimized
for specific tasks and operational conditions. Such optimization can be static such as model compression or dynamic such as adaptive inference. Yet, these techniques have
not been fully investigated for embodied control systems
subject to time constraints, which necessitate sequential
decision-making for multiple tasks, each with distinct inference latency limitations. In this paper, we present MoDeC,
a time constraint-aware embodied control framework using
the modular model adaptation. We formulate model adaptation to varying operational conditions on resource and
time restrictions as dynamic routing on a modular network,
incorporating these conditions as part of multi-task objectives. Our evaluation across several vision-based embodied environments demonstrates the robustness of MoDeC,
showing that it outperforms other model adaptation methods in both performance and adherence to time constraints
in robotic manipulation and autonomous driving applications.

1. Introduction
In the literature on embodied artificial intelligence (embodied AI), where deep learning models have been increasingly
adopted, optimizing the deep learning model structure for
specific tasks and operational conditions becomes crucial.
Several studies focus on static model optimization and compression [12, 21, 34]. On the other hand, there are a few
studies that investigate dynamic model structures, which are
designed to adapt more effectively to conditions that change
over time [1, 2, 18, 23, 39]. These dynamic approaches,
often known as adaptive inference, are particularly beneficial for embodied environments where surrounding conditions evolve and the agent model’s capabilities to adapt
in real-time are essential. Yet, a substantial gap remains in
the exploration of these approaches within the context of
* Equal contribution.
† Honguk Woo is the corresponding author.

embodied control systems, especially those operating under strict time constraints and involving more than a single
task. Specifically, the systems are distinct in their requirement for sequential decision-making across multiple tasks,
each with its own latency limitations. For example, consider
an autonomous driving agent. This agent must continuously
make driving control decisions in response to moving obstacles. Each decision must be made rapidly and accurately,
as any delay can significantly impact driving safety and efficiency due to the time-sensitive nature of driving tasks.
To address the challenges faced in such time-constrained
embodied environments, we present MoDeC (MoDel adaptation for time constrained Embodied Control), a novel
modular network framework with efficient and adaptive inference capabilities. In embodied AI, where models are deployed on specific hardware with different limitations, the
ability to rapidly adapt to both operational resource conditions and time constraints is crucial. Recognizing this,
we employ a constraint-aware modular model architecture,
which can transform the procedure of time-sensitive inference into effective module selection within a single modular network that can be deployed on different target devices. This approach enables dynamic model adaptation to
varied operational conditions in a sample-efficient way. We
also use a meta-learning scheme combined with knowledge
distillation for restructuring the module selection in noniterative time-sensitive computations.
Through intensive experiments with several embodied
control scenarios such as robot manipulation tasks in Metaworld [42], autonomous driving tasks in CARLA [7], and
object navigation tasks in AI2THOR [16], we demonstrate
that our MoDeC framework is applicable for different time
constraints and devices, achieving robust adaptation performance in terms of both constraint satisfaction and model
accuracy. For instance, MoDeC shows a performance gain
of 14.4% in success rates over the most competitive baseline, DS-Net [18] for autonomous driving tasks in CARLA,
while it keeps the violation of time constraints to be less
than 1%. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We present the constraint-aware modular model frame-

16499

