This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GEARS: Local Geometry-aware Hand-object Interaction Synthesis
Keyang Zhou1,2

Bharat Lal Bhatnagar1,2 Jan Eric Lenssen2 Gerard Pons-Moll1,2
1
University of Tübingen, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany

InterCap

GRAB

ObMan

Figure 1. We propose GEARS, a method to synthesize sequence of hand poses during interaction with an object. GEARS takes hand and
object trajectory as input. It generates realistic hand poses that are well-adapted to object surface, irrespective of object category and size.
We show sample results on different datasets. Hands colored in blue are inputs while hands colored in cyan are our predictions.

Abstract
Generating realistic hand motion sequences in interaction with objects has gained increasing attention with the
growing interest in digital humans. Prior work has illustrated the effectiveness of employing occupancy-based or
distance-based virtual sensors to extract hand-object interaction features. Nonetheless, these methods show limited
generalizability across object categories, shapes and sizes.
We hypothesize that this is due to two reasons: 1) the limited
expressiveness of employed virtual sensors, and 2) scarcity
of available training data. To tackle this challenge, we introduce a novel joint-centered sensor designed to reason
about local object geometry near potential interaction regions. The sensor queries for object surface points in the
neighbourhood of each hand joint. As an important step towards mitigating the learning complexity, we transform the
points from global frame to hand template frame and use a
shared module to process sensor features of each individual joint. This is followed by a spatio-temporal transformer

network aimed at capturing correlation among the joints in
different dimensions. Moreover, we devise simple heuristic
rules to augment the limited training sequences with vast
static hand grasping samples. This leads to a broader spectrum of grasping types observed during training, in turn enhancing our model’s generalization capability. We evaluate on two public datasets, GRAB and InterCap, where our
method shows superiority over baselines both quantitatively
and perceptually.

1. Introduction
We humans mostly rely on hands to interact with different
objects in the surrounding environment. Learning the highdimensional space of plausible hand-object interactions is
an important and challenging task that needs to be solved
in many applications. These include modeling digital humans in Augmented and Virtual Reality, or reasoning about
potential grasps in robotics.

20634

