This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ParamISP: Learned Forward and Inverse ISPs using Camera Parameters
Woohyeok Kim1∗
Geonu Kim1∗
Seungyong Lee1
Seung-Hwan Baek1
1

POSTECH

2

Samsung AI Center Toronto

Abstract
RAW images are rarely shared mainly due to its excessive data size compared to their sRGB counterparts obtained by camera ISPs. Learning the forward and inverse
processes of camera ISPs has been recently demonstrated,
enabling physically-meaningful RAW-level image processing on input sRGB images. However, existing learningbased ISP methods fail to handle the large variations in the
ISP processes with respect to camera parameters such as
ISO and exposure time, and have limitations when used for
various applications. In this paper, we propose ParamISP,
a learning-based method for forward and inverse conversion between sRGB and RAW images, that adopts a
novel neural-network module to utilize camera parameters,
which is dubbed as ParamNet. Given the camera parameters provided in the EXIF data, ParamNet converts them
into a feature vector to control the ISP networks. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that ParamISP achieve superior
RAW and sRGB reconstruction results compared to previous
methods and it can be effectively used for a variety of applications such as deblurring dataset synthesis, raw deblurring, HDR reconstruction, and camera-to-camera transfer.

1. Introduction
A camera ISP converts a RAW image into a visually pleasing sRGB image, which is typically saved as a JPEG image.
A camera ISP performs a series of operations including defective pixel correction, denoising, lens shading correction,
white balance, color filter array interpolation, color space
conversion, tone reproduction, and non-linear contrast enhancement. Detailed operations of camera ISPs are typically sealed to the public and vary from camera to camera.
Unlike sRGB images, RAW images provide physicallymeaningful and interpretable information such as noise
distributions as they have the linear relationship between
image intensity and radiant energy incident on a camera
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done prior to joining Samsung.

Junyong Lee2†
Sunghyun Cho1

sensor. Such properties of RAW images have been exploited for denoising [1, 17, 23], HDR [5, 14], and superresolution [24, 32], leading to superior quality than using
only sRGB images. However, a RAW image demands large
memory to store due to the use of high-precision bits without any compression. Therefore, only sRGB images are often shared without their RAW counterparts, making it difficult to utilize the useful properties of RAW images.
Recently, several approaches have been proposed to reconstruct RAW images from sRGB images and vice versa
by modeling forward and inverse ISPs [3, 4, 7, 29, 30].
However, despite notable improvements, they still suffer
from limitations. First, real-world ISPs adjust their operations based on the camera parameters, e.g., exposure time
and sensor sensitivity, as shown in Fig. 1. However, previous methods overlook this adaptive nature of real-world
ISPs, and learn average ISP operations, which leads to
low reconstruction performance. Second, previous methods
adopt rather simple network architectures disregarding the
complexity of the ISP operations, which leads to low RAW
reconstruction quality. They construct a single network by
stacking invertible or residual blocks [29, 30], or organize
modules by simply arranging convolution layers [3].
In this paper, we present a novel forward and inverse ISP
framework, ParamISP. ParamISP is designed to faithfully
reflect the real-world ISP operations that change based on
camera parameters. To this end, ParamISP leverages camera parameters provided in the EXIF metadata of a JPEG
image. To effectively incorporate the camera parameters,
ParamISP consists of a pair of forward and inverse ISP networks that include a novel neural network module ParamNet. ParamNet extracts a feature vector from the camera parameters including exposure time, sensitivity, aperture size,
and focal length, and feeds it to the forward and inverse ISP
subnetworks to control their behaviors.
To learn ISP operations for varying camera parameters,
we need to address the following problems. First, the camera parameters have significantly different scales, such as
an exposure time of 0.01 sec. and a sensitivity of 800.
Moreover, some parameters such as exposure time and sensor sensitivity have non-linearly increasing parameter val-

26067

