This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAOR: Single-View Articulated Object Reconstruction
Mehmet Aygün Oisin Mac Aodha
University of Edinburgh
mehmetaygun.github.io/saor

Input

Pose

Reconstruction

Parts

Input

Pose

Reconstruction

Parts

Figure 1. SAOR capable of predicting the 3D shape of an articulated object category from a single image. Our model is trained on
multiple categories simultaneously using self-supervision on single-view image collections. It can efficiently predict object pose, 3D shape
reconstruction, and unsupervised part-level assignment using only a single forward pass per image at test time in a category-agnostic way.

Abstract
We introduce SAOR, a novel approach for estimating the
3D shape, texture, and viewpoint of an articulated object
from a single image captured in the wild. Unlike prior
approaches that rely on pre-defined category-specific 3D
templates or tailored 3D skeletons, SAOR learns to articulate shapes from single-view image collections with a
skeleton-free part-based model without requiring any 3D
object shape priors. To prevent ill-posed solutions, we propose a cross-instance consistency loss that exploits disentangled object shape deformation and articulation. This is
helped by a new silhouette-based sampling mechanism to
enhance viewpoint diversity during training. Our method
only requires estimated object silhouettes and relative depth
maps from off-the-shelf pre-trained networks during training. At inference time, given a single-view image, it efficiently outputs an explicit mesh representation. We obtain
improved qualitative and quantitative results on challenging quadruped animals compared to relevant existing work.

1. Introduction
Considered as one of the first PhD theses in computer vision, Roberts [49] aimed to reconstruct 3D objects from
single-view images. Despite significant progress in the preceding sixty years [5, 6, 19, 20], the problem remains very
challenging, especially for highly deformable categories
photographed in the wild, e.g., animals. In contrast, humans
can infer the 3D shape of an object from a single image by
making use of priors about the natural world and familiarity
with the object category present. Some of these naturalworld low-level priors can be explicitly defined (e.g., symmetry or smoothness), but manually encoding and utilizing
high-level priors (e.g., 3D category shape templates) for all
categories of interest is not a straightforward task.
Recently, multiple methods have attempted to learn 3D
shape by making use of advances in deep learning and
progress in differentiable rendering [21, 36, 38]. This has
resulted in impressive results for synthetic man-made categories [7, 21, 59] and humans [12, 37], where full or partial 3D supervision is readily available. However, when
3D supervision is not available, the reconstruction of ar-

10382

