This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual-MAE: Adaptive Distribution Masked Autoencoders for Continual
Test-Time Adaptation
†

‡

Jiaming Liu1,2 , Ran Xu1,2 ,* Senqiao Yang1 , Renrui Zhang 3 , Qizhe Zhang1 ,
Zehui Chen 4 , Yandong Guo2 , Shanghang Zhang1
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Peking University 2 AI2 Robotics 3 MMLab, CUHK 4 University of Science and Technology of China
jiamingliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, xu ran@bupt.edu.cn, shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Continually Changing Target Environments
Full Image
M
M

Sampling

Masked Image

M
M
M
M

Target Features

* Equal contribution, † Technical contribution, ‡ Project leader,
Corresponding author. Web: https://sites.google.com/view/continual-mae/home

Domain 4
(Snow)

Linear Decoder

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated impressive performance across various computer vision tasks, including image-level classification [9, 18, 32], dense predic-

Domain 3
(Rain)

Masked Tokens

1. Introduction

Domain 2
(Night)

Consistency

Continual Test-Time Adaptation (CTTA) is proposed to
migrate a source pre-trained model to continually changing target distributions, addressing real-world dynamism.
Existing CTTA methods mainly rely on entropy minimization or teacher-student pseudo-labeling schemes for knowledge extraction in unlabeled target domains. However, dynamic data distributions cause miscalibrated predictions
and noisy pseudo-labels in existing self-supervised learning
methods, hindering the effective mitigation of error accumulation and catastrophic forgetting problems during the
continual adaptation process. To tackle these issues, we
propose a continual self-supervised method, Adaptive Distribution Masked Autoencoders (ADMA), which enhances
the extraction of target domain knowledge while mitigating the accumulation of distribution shifts. Specifically, we
propose a Distribution-aware Masking (DaM) mechanism
to adaptively sample masked positions, followed by establishing consistency constraints between the masked target
samples and the original target samples. Additionally, for
masked tokens, we utilize an efficient decoder to reconstruct
a hand-crafted feature descriptor (e.g., Histograms of Oriented Gradients), leveraging its invariant properties to boost
task-relevant representations. Through conducting extensive
experiments on four widely recognized benchmarks, our proposed method attains state-of-the-art performance in both
classification and segmentation CTTA tasks.

Domain 1
(Fog)

M

Figure 1. In continually changing environments, existing methods [46, 48] primarily focus on applying entropy minimization to
update the normalization layer. However, these approaches are
susceptible to miscalibrated predictions, resulting in uncontrollable
error accumulation. Alternative mainstream approaches [11, 50]
involve the teacher-student scheme for generating pseudo labels,
but noisy pseudo labels limit the model’s ability for continuous
generalization. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to
continual self-supervised learning known as Adaptive Distribution
Masked Autoencoders (ADMA). ADMA introduces the mask reconstruction mechanism to enhance the extraction of target domain
knowledge while mitigating the domain shift accumulation.

tion [42, 53, 62], and multi-model task [29, 56, 57], when
the test data distribution closely aligns with the training
data. However, this assumption is frequently challenged
in real-world scenarios due to dynamic environments, with
deployed models exhibiting insufficient generalization capabilities and performance degradation [21, 45]. Therefore, the
problem of continual test-time adaptation (CTTA) has been
introduced [50], aiming to adapt a source pre-trained model
to continually changing target distributions. Due to privacy
and practical considerations, during the continual adaptation process, access to source domain data is not permitted,

28653

