This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantically-Shifted Incremental Adapter-Tuning is A Continual ViTransformer
Yuwen Tan*, Qinhao Zhou∗ , Xiang Xiang∗†
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Tech., Wuhan, China
92

Abstract

Adapter

1. Introduction
In traditional deep learning, the model can access all the
data at once and learning is performed on a static dataset.
However, in real-life applications, data usually arrives in a
stream format with new classes, requiring the model to learn
continuously, known as class-incremental learning (CIL).
The primary objective of CIL is to enable the model to
learn continuously from non-stationary data streams, facilitating adaptation to new classes and mitigating catastrophic
forgetting [7]. A number of methods [28, 34, 54] have
been devoted to alleviating catastrophic forgetting. Those
methods can be mainly divided into replay-based [2, 3, 28],
regularization-based [1, 17, 43], and isolation-based meth* Equal contribution, co-first author; also with Nat. Key Lab of MSIIPT.
† Correspondence to xex@hust.edu.cn; also with Peng Cheng Lab.

Accuracy (%)

88

Class-incremental learning (CIL) aims to enable models
to continuously learn new classes while overcoming catastrophic forgetting. The introduction of pre-trained models
has brought new tuning paradigms to CIL. In this paper,
we revisit different parameter-efficient tuning (PET) methods within the context of continual learning. We observe
that adapter tuning demonstrates superiority over promptbased methods, even without parameter expansion in each
learning session. Motivated by this, we propose incrementally tuning the shared adapter without imposing parameter
update constraints, enhancing the learning capacity of the
backbone. Additionally, we employ feature sampling from
stored prototypes to retrain a unified classifier, further improving its performance. We estimate the semantic shift of
old prototypes without access to past samples and update
stored prototypes session by session. Our proposed method
eliminates model expansion and avoids retaining any image samples. It surpasses previous pre-trained model-based
CIL methods and demonstrates remarkable continual learning capabilities. Experimental results on five CIL benchmarks validate the effectiveness of our approach, achieving
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance.

Ke Wang, Yuchuan Wu, Yongbin Li
DAMO Academy,
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China

CODA-Prompt

VPTShallow

84

Fine-tuning
SSF

80

VPT-Deep
0

0.15

0.30

Trainable Parameters (Million)

85

100

Figure 1. Comparison of different parameter-efficient tuning CIL
baselines on CIFAR100 dataset. Left: The relationship between
the average accuracy of the incremental sessions and the number
of tunable parameters. Right: The average performance of old
classes and new classes for each PET method.

ods [23, 24, 30]. However, all these methods assume that
models are trained from scratch while ignoring the generalization ability of a strong pre-trained model [5] in the CIL.
Pre-trained vision transformer models [5] have demonstrated excellent performance on various vision tasks. Recently, it has been explored in the field of CIL and continues
to receive considerable attention [37, 38, 45, 50]. Due to
the powerful representation capabilities of pre-trained models, CIL methods based on pre-trained models achieve significant performance improvements compared to traditional
SOTA methods which are trained from scratch. CIL with
a pre-trained model typically fixes the pre-trained model to
retain the generalizability and adds a few additional training
parameters such as adapter [4], prompt [15] and SSF [22],
which is referred to as parameter-efficient tuning (PET).
Inspired by language-based intelligence, current research in CIL is primarily focused on the prompt-based
method [31, 37, 52]. Typically, these approaches require
the construction of a pool of task-specific prompts during
the training phase which increases storage overhead. Additionally, selecting prompts during the testing stage incurs
additional computational costs. Other PET methods as well
as fully fine-tuning are still in exploration in the context
of CIL. Recently, SLCA [45] proposes fine-tuning the entire ViT and classifier incrementally with different learning
rates. However, fine-tuning the entire pre-trained model
requires substantial computational resources. In addition,
Adam [50] initially explores the application of other PET

23252

