This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fully Convolutional Slice-to-Volume Reconstruction for Single-Stack MRI
Sean I. Young*
Harvard Medical School

Yaël Balbastre*
Harvard Medical School

siyoung@mit.edu

ybalbastre@mgh.harvard.edu

Bruce Fischl
Harvard Medical School

Polina Golland
MIT

Juan Eugenio Iglesias
Harvard Medical School

fischl@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu

polina@csail.mit.edu

jei@mit.edu

Single View

Splat and
Interpolate

Splat–Slice
U-Net

Standard
U-Net

Disparity Map

Single Slice Stack

(a) Monocular Depth (Disparity) Estimation [38–41]

Motion Stack

3D Reconstruction

(b) Single-Stack Slice-to-Volume Reconstruction (Proposed)

Figure 1: Method overview. Inspired by monocular disparity estimation (a), we tackle slice-to-volume reconstruction (b) by predicting slice
motion from a single stack of 2D slices using a fully convolutional network model. ?e intensities of the 2D slices are splatted using the slice
motion predicted by our network and the splatting is then interpolated to produce an artifact-free 3D MR reconstruction.

Abstract

into a 3D volume, a computational procedure often referred
to as slice-to-volume reconstruction (SVR). Unlike 3D MRI
acquisitions where the entire 𝑘-space (Fourier) coeﬃcients
can become corrupted even from a single motion event, 2D
techniques can restrict this corruption to within a slice while
leaving the 𝑘-space data for the other slices intact. Le SVR
procedure can then be applied on the non-corrupted slices to
enable artifact-free imaging of the brain and facilitate other
downstream tasks, such as brain morphometry [1–3], whole
brain segmentation [4–6] and atlas creation [7–9].
A large number of classical SVR techniques [10–18] are
descended from the work of Rousseau et al. [19], where the
SVR task is posed as an optimization problem to recover an
unknown 3D volume from observed 2D slices. Such inverse
methods do not have the capability to learn the latent space
of reconstructions, and as a result, typically require multiple
orthogonal slice stacks to cross-regularize the estimation of
the motion of each stack, adding a computational burden to
an already iterative numerical method. More recent methods
[20–25] overcome the burden of numerical optimization by
directly predicting the position parameters of 2D slices with
neural network models. However, these approaches process
slices independently of each other and cannot constrain the
reconstruction in 3D space [20–22] or require multiple slice
stacks for accurate reconstruction [25], precluding their use
in time-sensitive applications such as fetal fMRI [26, 27].
In the closely related tasks of pairwise image registration
[28–32], motion [33–39] and depth estimation [40–43], fully
convolutional network (FCN) architectures have been used

In magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), slice-to-volume
reconstruction (SVR) refers to computational reconstruction
of an unknown 3D magnetic resonance volume from stacks
of 2D slices corrupted by motion. While promising, current
SVR methods require multiple slice stacks for accurate 3D
reconstruction, leading to long scans and limiting their use
in time-sensitive applications such as fetal fMRI. Here, we
propose a SVR method that overcomes the shortcomings of
previous work and produces state-of-the-art reconstructions
in the presence of extreme inter-slice motion. Inspired by the
recent success of single-view depth estimation methods, we
formulate SVR as a single-stack motion estimation task and
train a fully convolutional network to predict a motion stack
for a given slice stack, producing a 3D reconstruction as a
byproduct of the predicted motion. Extensive experiments on
the SVR of adult and fetal brains demonstrate that our fully
convolutional method is twice as accurate as previous SVR
methods. Our code is available at github.com/seannz/svr.

1. Introduction
For non-invasive imaging of the brain where the subject
may potentially exhibit severe uncontrollable motion—such
as in the case of the fetal population—two-dimensional (2D)
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques are typically
used to acquire a stack of 2D brain slices and assemble them
*?ese authors contributed equally to this work.

11535

