This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instruct-ReID: A Multi-purpose Person Re-identification Task with Instructions
Weizhen He1† Yiheng Deng1 Shixiang Tang2,3 * Qihao Chen4
Qingsong Xie5 Yizhou Wang2 Lei Bai2 Feng Zhu3 Rui Zhao3,6
Wanli Ouyang2 Donglian Qi1 Yunfeng Yan1 *
1
Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
SenseTime Research 4 Liaoning Technical University 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
6
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
hewz@zju.edu.cn, yvonnech@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Human intelligence can retrieve any person according to
both visual and language descriptions. However, the current computer vision community studies specific person reidentification (ReID) tasks in different scenarios separately,
which limits the applications in the real world. This paper
strives to resolve this problem by proposing a new instructReID task that requires the model to retrieve images according to the given image or language instructions. Our
instruct-ReID is a more general ReID setting, where existing 6 ReID tasks can be viewed as special cases by designing different instructions. We propose a large-scale OmniReID benchmark and an adaptive triplet loss as a baseline method to facilitate research in this new setting. Experimental results show that the proposed multi-purpose ReID
model, trained on our OmniReID benchmark without finetuning, can improve +0.5%, +0.6%, +7.7% mAP on Market1501, MSMT17, CUHK03 for traditional ReID, +6.4%,
+7.1%, +11.2% mAP on PRCC, VC-Clothes, LTCC for
clothes-changing ReID, +11.7% mAP on COCAS+ real2
for clothes template based clothes-changing ReID when using only RGB images, +24.9% mAP on COCAS+ real2
for our newly defined language-instructed ReID, +4.3% on
LLCM for visible-infrared ReID, +2.6% on CUHK-PEDES
for text-to-image ReID. The datasets, the model, and code
are available at https://github.com/hwz-zju/Instruct-ReID.

1. Introduction
Identifying individuals exhibiting significant appearance
variations from multi-model descriptions is a fundamental
aspect of human intelligence with broad applications [35,
37, 38, 70]. To imbue our machine with this capability,
person re-identification (ReID) [8, 73, 75] has been introduced to retrieve images of the target person from a vast
* Corresponding authors.
† The work was done during an internship at SenseTime.

repository of surveillance videos or images across locations
and time [11, 51]. Recently, significant advancements have
been made in developing precise and efficient ReID algorithms and establishing benchmarks covering various scenarios, such as traditional ReID [6, 52, 72, 74], clotheschanging ReID (CC-ReID) [13, 18, 21, 24, 46], clothes template based clothes-changing ReID (CTCC-ReID) [32, 64],
visible-infrared ReID (VI-ReID) [36, 55, 56, 65] and textto-image ReID (T2I-ReID) [3, 4, 30, 63, 76]. However, focusing solely on one specific scenario possesses inherent
limitations. For instance, customers must deploy distinct
models to retrieve persons according to the query information, which significantly increases the cost for model training and results in inconvenience for the application. To facilitate real-world deployment, there is a pressing need to
devise one generic framework capable of re-identifying individuals across all scenarios mentioned above.
This paper proposes a new multi-purpose instruct-ReID
task where existing 6 ReID settings can be formulated as its
special cases. Specifically, the instruct-ReID uses query images and multi-model instructions as the model inputs, requiring the model to retrieve the same identity images from
the gallery following the instructions. Using language or
image instructions, models trained on the instruct-ReID task
can be specialized to tackle diverse ReID tasks (Fig. 1a).
For example, the clothes-changing ReID can be viewed
as using the instruction “Ignore clothes” to retrieve. As
another example, clothes template-based clothes-changing
ReID can utilize a clothes template image as instruction.
The proposed instruct-ReID task offers three significant advantages: easy deployment, improved performance, and
easy extension to new ReID tasks. First, it enables costeffective and convenient deployment in real-world applications. Unlike existing ReID approaches limited to specific
tasks, instruct-ReID allows for utilizing a single model for
various ReID scenarios, which is more practical in real applications. Second, as all existing ReID tasks can be consid-

17521

