This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Visual Document Understanding with Contrastive Learning in
Large Visual-Language Models
Xin Li†*

Yunfei Wu*

Xinghua Jiang Zhihao Guo Mingming Gong
Yinsong Liu Deqiang Jiang Xing Sun
Tencent YouTu Lab

Haoyu Cao

{fujikoli, marcowu, clarkjiang, nicholasguo, riemanngong, rechycao,
jasonysliu, dqiangjiang, winfredsun}@tencent.com

Abstract
Recently, the advent of Large Visual-Language Models (LVLMs) has received increasing attention across various domains, particularly in the field of visual document
understanding (VDU). Different from conventional visionlanguage tasks, VDU is specifically concerned with textrich scenarios containing abundant document elements.
Nevertheless, the importance of fine-grained features remains largely unexplored within the community of LVLMs,
leading to suboptimal performance in text-rich scenarios.
In this paper, we abbreviate it as the fine-grained feature
collapse issue. With the aim of filling this gap, we propose a contrastive learning framework, termed Document
Object COntrastive learning (DoCo), specifically tailored
for the downstream tasks of VDU. DoCo leverages an auxiliary multimodal encoder to obtain the features of document
objects and align them to the visual features generated by
the vision encoder of LVLM, which enhances visual representation in text-rich scenarios. It can represent that the
contrastive learning between the visual holistic representations and the multimodal fine-grained features of document
objects can assist the vision encoder in acquiring more effective visual cues, thereby enhancing the comprehension
of text-rich documents in LVLMs. We also demonstrate that
the proposed DoCo serves as a plug-and-play pre-training
method, which can be employed in the pre-training of various LVLMs without inducing any increase in computational
complexity during the inference process. Extensive experimental results on multiple benchmarks of VDU reveal that
LVLMs equipped with our proposed DoCo can achieve superior performance and mitigate the gap between VDU and
generic vision-language tasks.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 3, 5, 26, 34] have
aroused increasing research interest due to their powerful

Image
Encoder

Image-level
Alignment

Text
Encoder

A document
A
document
image of
...
A document
image
of ...
image of ...

(a) Image-level instance discrimination (CLIP)

Image
Encoder

Document
Object
Alignment

Multimodal
Encoder

Image
Image
Image
Box
Box
Box
Text
Text
Text

(b) Document object discrimination (Our DoCo)

Figure 1. The motivation of the proposed DoCo. (a) Image-level
instance discrimination between visual and textual inputs, which
aims to learn the holistic representations but fails to extract finegrained features in text-rich scenarios. (b) Document object
discrimination between visual and multimodal inputs, which enhances the visual representation of image encoder in LVLMs and
achieves the better visual understanding performance for VDU.

text generation and understanding capabilities. These models can be aligned with user intent through fine-tuning instructions, demonstrating strong interactive capabilities and
potential to serve as productivity-boosting intelligent assistants. However, the inherent limitation of these models is
their confinement to the domain of textual data, rendering them incapable of processing other prevalent modalities such as images, speech, and video. This significantly curtails the applicability of these models. To circumvent this constraint, a set of Large Visual-Language Models (LVLMs) [2, 16, 18, 40, 43] has been devised to enhance
the ability of LLMs to perceive and understand visual signals. These LVLMs have shown immense potential in addressing real-world visual challenges.

* Equal contribution. † Contact person.

Despite these multimodal large models having com-

15546

