This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LeGO: Leveraging a Surface Deformation Network for Animatable Stylized Face
Generation with One Example
Soyeon Yoon*

Kwan Yun*

Kwanggyoon Seo Sihun Cha
KAIST, Visual Media Lab

Jung Eun Yoo

Junyong Noh

{thoyeony, yunandy, skg1023, chacorp, jey920, junyongnoh}@kaist.ac.kr

LeGO

35683 verts

15662 verts

Exemplar

996 verts

1787 verts

Output
(Desired topologies)

Deformation target
(Unseen IDs and topologies)

(a) Diverse deformation targets and output of LeGO

(b) Facial animation of stylized avatar

Figure 1. (a) The proposed method demonstrates robustness to unseen face identities and topologies and effectively generates stylized
output faces with desired topologies. (b) Our stylized avatars can be animated using 3DMM blend shapes.

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D face stylization have made significant strides in few to zero-shot settings. However, the degree of stylization achieved by existing methods is often not
sufficient for practical applications because they are mostly
based on statistical 3D Morphable Models (3DMM) with
limited variations. To this end, we propose a method that
can produce a highly stylized 3D face model with desired
topology. Our methods train a surface deformation network
with 3DMM and translate its domain to the target style using a paired exemplar. The network achieves stylization of
the 3D face mesh by mimicking the style of the target using
a differentiable renderer and directional CLIP losses. Additionally, during the inference process, we utilize a Mesh
Agnostic Encoder (MAGE) that takes deformation target, a
mesh of diverse topologies as input to the stylization process and encodes its shape into our latent space. The resulting stylized face model can be animated by commonly
used 3DMM blend shapes. A set of quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that our method can produce

highly stylized face meshes according to a given style and
output them in a desired topology. We also demonstrate example applications of our method including image-based
stylized avatar generation, linear interpolation of geometric styles, and facial animation of stylized avatars.

1. Introduction
Crafting animatable stylized 3D avatars that encapsulate
both personal identity and character style requires extensive
efforts from skilled artists. When creating animated films,
the artists design stylized 3D avatars whose facial appearance matches the theme of the entire content while putting
careful effort into preserving the idiosyncrasy of the actors.
Similarly, on social media, artists create numerous stylized
presets so that the combinations of these presets can represent diverse identities.
To reduce the burden of manual crafting effort, generating stylized 3D faces has been a prominent area of research. Recent attempts include 3D-aware generative ad* These authors contributed equally to this work

4505

