This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Quanta Color Imaging
Vishal Purohit, Junjie Luo, Yiheng Chi, Qi Guo, Stanley H. Chan, Qiang Qiu
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA.
{purohitv,luo330,chi14,guo675,stanchan,qqiu}@purdue.edu

Abstract
The astonishing development of single-photon cameras
has created an unprecedented opportunity for scientific and
industrial imaging. However, the high data throughput generated by these 1-bit sensors creates a significant bottleneck
for low-power applications. In this paper, we explore the
possibility of generating a color image from a single binary
frame of a single-photon camera. We evidently find this
problem being particularly difficult to standard colorization approaches due to the substantial degree of exposure
variation. The core innovation of our paper is an exposure
synthesis model framed under a neural ordinary differential
equation (Neural ODE) that allows us to generate a continuum of exposures from a single observation. This innovation ensures consistent exposure in binary images that colorizers take on, resulting in notably enhanced colorization.
We demonstrate applications of the method in single-image
and burst colorization and show superior generative performance over baselines. Project website can be found at
https://vishal- s- p.github.io/projects/
2023/generative_quanta_color.html

1. Introduction
Single-photon image sensors are gaining a strong momentum over the past decade due to their impeccable photoncounting capability. This not only opens the door for advanced scientific imaging in low-light environment, but
also creates the opportunity for new imaging in high-speed,
high dynamic range, and low-bit conditions. Single-photon
imaging today are realized through single-photon avalanche
diodes (SPAD) and quanta image sensors (QIS). The latest
development of QIS has demonstrated a mega-pixel resolution [48] which is compatible with mainstream cell phone
cameras, whereas SPAD has achieved hundreds of thousands of (binary) frames per second which has enabled a
plethora of industrial and 3D imaging applications [16].
Problem Statement. In the context of 1-bit singlephoton imaging, the data volume generated is huge. Taking a 1000 × 1000 SPAD array as an example, a video of

Figure 1. We introduce generative quanta color imaging. Given
a binary frame captured by a single-photon camera (quanta image
sensor (QIS) in this example), the proposed method generates a
continuum of exposures using a neural ordinary differential equation framework. Color are then generated based on these exposures. Left: A qualitative comparison between our approach and
existing methods is shown. Right: Comparison between colorization results and image captured using a RGB CMOS camera under
similar conditions.

500 binary frames requires a 500 Mb/s data transfer rate;
if the frame rate becomes 150k fps, the data transfer rate
increases to 150 Gb/s. Since data throughput scales proportionally with the power consumption, it quickly becomes infeasible to use these sensors continuously without considering power supply, memory, and transmission issues. While
solid progress are being made across the sensor and signal
processing community [1, 11, 17, 23, 24, 45–47, 49, 50], the
data throughput remains an unsolved problem for singlephoton sensors to be considered applicable in many applications, including low-power devices, wireless devices, underwater vehicles, spacecrafts, etc., where bandwidth is the
bottleneck.
In this paper, instead of compressing data or redesigning
the sensor, we ask the question
Is it possible to recover a color image from a single
1-bit image?

25138

