This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Infer from What You Have Seen Before:
Temporally-dependent Classifier for Semi-supervised Video Segmentation
Jiafan Zhuang
Shantou University

Zilei Wang* Yixin Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China

Zhun Fan
Shantou University

jfzhuang@stu.edu.cn

{zlwang, zhyx12}@ustc.edu.cn

zfan@stu.edu.cn

Abstract

t

Due to high expense of human labor, one major challenge for semantic segmentation in real-world scenarios is
the lack of sufficient pixel-level labels, which is more serious
when processing video data. To exploit unlabeled data for
model training, semi-supervised learning methods attempt
to construct pseudo labels or various auxiliary constraints
as supervision signals. However, most of them just process
video data as a set of independent images in a per-frame
manner. The rich temporal relationships are ignored, which
can serve as valuable clues for representation learning. Besides, this per-frame recognition paradigm is quite different from that of humans. Actually, benefited from the internal temporal relevance of video data, human would wisely
use the distinguished semantic concepts in historical frames
to aid the recognition of the current frame. Motivated by
this observation, we propose a novel temporally-dependent
classifier (TDC) to mimic the human-like recognition procedure. Comparing to the conventional classifier, TDC can
guide the model to learn a group of temporally-consistent
semantic concepts across frames, which essentially provides an implicit and effective constraint. We conduct extensive experiments on Cityscapes and CamVid, and the results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method to
previous state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/jfzhuang/TDC.

t+1

1. Introduction
As a fundamental tool, semantic segmentation has profited many downstream applications, and deep learning further boosts this area with remarkable progress. However,
training a promising segmentation network relies on sufficient finely annotated data. And pixel-wise labeling is timeconsuming, e.g., the annotation process costs more than 1.5
hours on average for a single image in Cityscapes [6].
In real-world scenarios, we can usually collect unlabeled
* Corresponding author

𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡

Constructed
Supervision

𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡+1

(a) SSIS Methods

t

𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡

t+1

𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡+1

t
t+1

Constructed
Supervision
(b) IFR

𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡
𝐹𝐹𝑡𝑡+1
Feature Extractor

Constructed
Supervision
(c) Ours
Classifier

Figure 1. Comparison between previous methods and ours.
To exploit unlabeled frames, SSIS methods attempted to construct
different supervision signals. IFR [42] proposed to optimize feature extractor by inter-frame feature reconstruction. Differently,
in this work, we propose to improve the recognition procedure by
designing a temporal-dependent classifier.

data conveniently and economically, especially video data.
Therefore, to alleviate the label-hungry problem, a growing attention is drown on semi-supervised learning to take
advantage of unlabeled data to aid model training. Besides regular supervised learning on limited labeled images,
semi-supervised image segmentation (SSIS) methods proposed to construct extra supervision signals for unlabeled
images, e.g., consistency constraint [21, 28] and pseudo label [4, 43]. It is shown that they can bring considerable
performance improvement on the challenging datasets, e.g.,
PASCAL VOC [10] and Cityscapes [6].
However, when unlabeled data is scaled up by adding
video data, SSIS methods can not obtain further improvement [42]. The primary reason is the homogenization of
video data, i.e., the contents of different frames within a

3575

