This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Low-Rank Knowledge Decomposition for Medical Foundation Models
Yuhang Zhou1,2 , Haolin Li2,3 , Siyuan Du2,3 , Jiangchao Yao1,2, , Ya Zhang1,2 , Yanfeng Wang1,2,
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Fudan University
{zhouyuhang, Sunarker, ya zhang, wangyanfeng622}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{dusiyuan, lihaolin}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract

Foundation Model

Multiple Lightweight Expert models
Decomposition

The popularity of large-scale pre-training has promoted
the development of medical foundation models. However,
some studies have shown that although foundation models
exhibit strong general feature extraction capabilities, their
performance on specific tasks is still inferior to task-specific
methods. In this paper, we explore a new perspective called
“Knowledge Decomposition” to improve the performance
on specific medical tasks, which deconstruct the foundation model into multiple lightweight expert models, each
dedicated to a particular task, with the goal of improving specialization while concurrently mitigating resource
expenditure. To accomplish the above objective, we design a novel framework named Low-Rank Knowledge Decomposition (LoRKD), which explicitly separates graidents
by incorporating low-rank expert modules and the efficient
knowledge separation convolution. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the decomposed models perform well in terms of performance and transferability, even
surpassing the original foundation models. Source code is
available at: https://github.com/MediaBrainSJTU/LoRKD

1. Introduction
Foundation models pre-trained on large-scale and diverse
datasets, have been proven to possess powerful general feature extraction capabilities and can handle various tasks [4,
38]. However, some studies [15, 21, 49] have indicated
that the performance of foundation models is still inferior
to task-specific methods, suggesting that current foundation
models are unable to simultaneously guarantee both generality and specialization. Moreover, with the gradual expansion of data scale and model capacity, the deployment costs
of future foundation models may become exorbitant. To
address them, we proposes a new perspective called knowledge decomposition, aiming to offer potential solutions for
the practical application of medical foundation models.

Expert1 Expert2

Deployment
Hospital

Expert3

Expert4

Correspondingly Deployment
Departments

Lower Costs
Stronger
Specialization

Lung

Skin

Brain

Eye

Figure 1. Knowledge decomposition is employed to break down
the foundation model into multiple lightweight expert models,
each dedicated to a specific domain. The goal of this paradigm is
to improve the specialization of deployment models within a specific domain, while simultaneously reducing deployment costs.

The purpose of knowledge decomposition is to break
down the foundation model into multiple lightweight expert models, where each expert model focuses solely on a
specific domain, such as a department within a hospital (as
shown in Figure 1). The resulting expert models, compared
to the original foundation model, gain stronger specialization and lower deployment costs. In order to preserve both
the performance and transferability of decomposed models, we need to inject task-specific knowledge and common knowledge into each expert model correspondingly,
which is highly challenging. To the best of our knowledge,
there has been no research conducted in the medical field
on how to decompose a foundation model into multiple expert models. However, recently in the field of natural images, KF [52] has made preliminary explorations into this
issue. KF decomposes the pre-trained model into a common
knowledge network (CKN) and multiple task-specific networks (TSNs) by manipulating the mutual information between models. After decomposition, the CKN can be combined with each TSN to form task-specific expert models.
However, in our experiments, we find that the effectiveness

11611

