This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PARA-Drive: Parallelized Architecture for Real-time Autonomous Driving
Xinshuo Weng1 , Boris Ivanovic1 , Yan Wang1 , Yue Wang1,2 , Marco Pavone1,3
1
NVIDIA Research, 2 University of Southern California, 3 Stanford University
{xweng,bivanovic,yanwan,yuewang,mpavone}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Recent works have proposed end-to-end autonomous vehicle (AV) architectures comprised of differentiable modules, achieving state-of-the-art driving performance. While
they provide advantages over the traditional perceptionprediction-planning pipeline (e.g., removing information
bottlenecks between components and alleviating integration
challenges), they do so using a diverse combination of tasks,
modules, and their interconnectivity. As of yet, however,
there has been no systematic analysis of the necessity of
these modules or the impact of their connectivity, placement, and internal representations on overall driving performance. Addressing this gap, our work conducts a comprehensive exploration of the design space of end-to-end
modular AV stacks. Our findings culminate in the development of PARA-Drive1 : a fully parallel end-to-end AV architecture. PARA-Drive not only achieves state-of-the-art performance in perception, prediction, and planning, but also
significantly enhances runtime speed by nearly 3×, without
compromising on interpretability or safety.

1. Introduction
Developing a full-stack autonomous vehicle (AV) system
poses significant challenges due to the need to integrate
many complex modules such as detection, tracking, prediction, localization, mapping, and planning. To address these
challenges, there has been a growing trend towards the development of end-to-end yet modular AV systems, such as
UniAD [12], VAD [13] and OccNet [25]. These systems
have gained popularity because they have successfully integrated various modules and tasks and achieved state-of-theart motion planning performance. Also, they enhance safety
and interpretability by optimizing upstream perception and
prediction modules in an end-to-end manner.
Although these end-to-end modular AV stacks have been
successful, there are notable differences in their architectural designs (e.g., incorporating occupancy vs. not, semantic BEV vs. vectorized maps, using queries or outputs, see
Fig. 1) and it remains unclear which design, if any, is opti1 Project: https://xinshuoweng.github.io/paradrive/

Prediction

Occupancy flow

Prediction outputs

Trajectories

Mapping outputs

(a) Prediction representations

Mapping

Semantic BEV map

Vectorized polylines
and polygons

(b) Map representations

Planning

(c) Using compact outputs for planning

Latent queries

mapping, occupancy, mapping

Planning

Ego queries

(d) Using high-dimensional latent features

Figure 1. Examples of design variations for end-to-end AV stack.
(a)(b) Modules for the same task can be designed with different
representations; (c)(d) variations of information flow to planning.

mal. Aside from these recent few architectures, the vast design space of end-to-end modular AV stacks remains largely
under-explored, primarily due to the multiplicity of possible tasks, associated information representations, and intermodule connectivities. In this work, we tackle this challenge and conduct a systematic exploration of this design
space organized along the following three key axes: Module necessity, placement, and information flow (Sec. 3.1).
To effectively navigate this complex landscape, we build
a versatile framework that enables the flexible manipulation of an end-to-end stack’s computational graph, including the ability to activate or deactivate modules, modify
inter-module connectivity, and access outputs from different layers of upstream modules. With this framework, we
uncover several intriguing insights: state-of-the-art performance can be achieved with sequential, hybrid, or even pure
parallel designs; state-of-the-art planning performance can
be achieved with only bird’s-eye-view (BEV) features as inputs to planning (with proper auxiliary tasks and high-level
commands); and modules which are redundant when placed
sequentially may in fact be complementary when placed in
parallel (Sec. 3.3).
We further leverage these insights to develop PARADrive, a full-stack parallelized AV architecture that encompasses a diverse set of modules for the co-training of BEV
features (Sec. 4). Through comprehensive experiments on

15449

