This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D IS C O: Disentangled Control for Realistic Human Dance Generation
Tan Wang1 ,* Linjie Li2 ,* Kevin Lin2 ,* Yuanhao Zhai3 , Chung-Ching Lin2 , Zhengyuan Yang2 ,
Hanwang Zhang1,4 , Zicheng Liu5 , Lijuan Wang2
Nanyang Technological University

2

Microsoft

3

University at Buffalo

4

Skywork AI

5

Advanced Micro Devices

Generated Image/Video (Baselines vs. Ours)

Unseen Reference
FG & BG

MRAA

Unseen Target Pose

T2I
DisCo DreamPose Adaptor

1

(a) Generalizability
(b) Compositionality

Target Pose (from source B)

DisCo

Reference FG
(from source A)

Reference BG (from source C/D/E/F)

Generated Image/Video (Ours)

Figure 1. We propose D IS C O for human dance generation on social media platforms, focusing on two key properties compared to
conventional human motion transfer: (a) Generalizability: generalizable to unseen human subject (FG), background (BG) and pose; (b)
Compositionality: adapting to the arbitrary composition of FG, BG and pose, each from a different source.

Abstract
Generative AI has made significant strides in computer
vision, particularly in text-driven image/video synthesis
(T2I/T2V). Despite the notable advancements, it remains
challenging in human-centric content synthesis such as realistic dance generation. Current methodologies, primarily
tailored for human motion transfer, encounter difficulties
when confronted with real-world dance scenarios (e.g., social media dance), which require to generalize across a wide
spectrum of poses and intricate human details. In this paper,
we depart from the traditional paradigm of human motion
transfer and emphasize two additional critical attributes
for the synthesis of human dance content in social media
contexts: (i) Generalizability: the model should be able
to generalize beyond generic human viewpoints as well as
unseen human subjects, backgrounds, and poses; (ii) Compositionality: it should allow for the seamless composition
of seen/unseen subjects, backgrounds, and poses from different sources. To address these challenges, we introduce
* Equal contribution. Work was done when Tan interned at Microsoft.

D IS C O, which includes a novel model architecture with disentangled control to improve the compositionality of dance
synthesis, and an effective human attribute pre-training for
better generalizability to unseen humans. Extensive qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate that D IS C O can
generate high-quality human dance images and videos with
diverse appearances and flexible motions. Code is available
at https://disco-dance.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Starting from the era of GAN [3, 12], researchers [52, 53]
have tried to explore the human motion transfer by transferring talking and Tai-Chi poses from a source image to a
target individual. This requires the generated images/videos
to precisely follow the source pose and retain the appearance
of human subjects and backgrounds from the target image.
However, when it comes to much more diverse and nuanced
visual contents such as TikTok dancing videos, GANs tend
to struggle due to mode collapse, capturing only a limited
portion of the real data distribution (Figure 1a, MRAA [53]).

9326

