This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Semantic-Guided Vision Transformer for Zero-Shot Learning
Shiming Chen1 , Wenjin Hou2 , Salman Khan1,3 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,4
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Australian National University 4 Linköping University
{shimingchen, houwj17}@gmail.com

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) recognizes the unseen classes
by conducting visual-semantic interactions to transfer semantic knowledge from seen classes to unseen ones, supported by semantic information (e.g., attributes). However,
existing ZSL methods simply extract visual features using a
pre-trained network backbone (i.e., CNN or ViT), which fail
to learn matched visual-semantic correspondences for representing semantic-related visual features as lacking of the
guidance of semantic information, resulting in undesirable
visual-semantic interactions. To tackle this issue, we propose a progressive semantic-guided vision transformer for
zero-shot learning (dubbed ZSLViT). ZSLViT mainly considers two properties in the whole network: i) discover the
semantic-related visual representations explicitly, and ii)
discard the semantic-unrelated visual information. Specifically, we first introduce semantic-embedded token learning to improve the visual-semantic correspondences via
semantic enhancement and discover the semantic-related
visual tokens explicitly with semantic-guided token attention. Then, we fuse low semantic-visual correspondence
visual tokens to discard the semantic-unrelated visual information for visual enhancement. These two operations
are integrated into various encoders to progressively learn
semantic-related visual representations for accurate visualsemantic interactions in ZSL. The extensive experiments
show that our ZSLViT achieves significant performance
gains on three popular benchmark datasets, i.e., CUB, SUN,
and AWA2.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL), aiming to recognize unseen
classes by exploiting the intrinsic semantic relatedness between seen and unseen categories during training [26, 28,
38, 56], has achieved significant progress. Inspired by the
way humans learn unknown concepts, semantic information
(e.g., attributes [27]) shared by seen and unseen classes is
employed to support knowledge transfer from seen classes

{salman.khan, fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae

to unseen ones. Targeting this goal, ZSL conducts effective
visual-semantic interactions between visual and semantic
spaces to align them. For example, discovering the semantic representations in visual spaces and matching them with
the semantic information. As such, exploring the shared semantic knowledge between the visual and semantic spaces
is essential.
Existing ZSL methods [2, 3, 9, 11–13, 25, 31, 35, 46, 49,
51, 52] typically take a network backbone (convolutional
neural network (CNN) or vision Transformer (ViT)) pretrained on ImageNet [42] to extract visual features. However, the network backbone fails to learn matched visualsemantic correspondences for representing semantic-related
visual features, because they lack sufficient guidance of semantic information, as shown in Fig. 1(a). As shown in
Fig. 1(c1), the CNN backbone learns the representations
focused on the meaningless background information or the
whole object. Although some methods adopt the attention
mechanism to enhance the CNN visual features via attribute
localization [8, 9, 33, 37, 52, 53, 58], they only obtain the
sub-optimal visual representations as the visual spaces are
almost fixed after the CNN backbone learning.
Thanks to the strong capability of modeling long-range
association of whole image, some methods simply take the
pre-trained ViT to extract visual features for ZSL tasks
[2, 3, 13, 31, 35] and achieve better performance than CNN
features-based ZSL methods. Unfortunately, they localize the semantic attribute incorrectly without explicit guidance of semantic information, which also fails to represent
the correspondences between visual-semantic features, as
shown in Fig. 1(c2). Therefore, the visual features learned
by CNN or ViT backbone cannot be well related to their
corresponding semantic attributes (e.g., the ‘neck color yellow’ of Yellow Headed Blackbird), resulting in undesirable
visual-semantic interactions. Consequently, the semantic
knowledge transferring in ZSL is limited, thus leading to
inferior ZSL performance. As such, properly constructing matched visual-semantic correspondences for learning
semantic-related visual features in the feature extraction
network for advancing ZSL is highly necessary.
1
23964

