This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Model Alignment Using Direct Preference Optimization
Bram Wallace1∗
Meihua Dang2
Rafael Rafailov2
Linqi Zhou2
Aaron Lou2
Senthil Purushwalkam1
Stefano Ermon2
Caiming Xiong1
Shafiq Joty1
1
Nikhil Naik
1
Salesforce AI, 2 Stanford University
bram@openai.com {spurushwalkam,cxiong,sjoty}@salesforce.com naik@alum.mit.edu
{mhdang,rafailov,lzhou907,aaronlou}@stanford.edu ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are fine-tuned using human comparison data with Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) methods to make them better
aligned with users’ preferences. In contrast to LLMs,
human preference learning has not been widely explored
in text-to-image diffusion models; the best existing approach is to fine-tune a pretrained model using carefully
curated high quality images and captions to improve visual appeal and text alignment. We propose DiffusionDPO, a method to align diffusion models to human preferences by directly optimizing on human comparison data.
Diffusion-DPO is adapted from the recently developed Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [36], a simpler alternative to RLHF which directly optimizes a policy that
best satisfies human preferences under a classification objective. We re-formulate DPO to account for a diffusion
model notion of likelihood, utilizing the evidence lower
bound to derive a differentiable objective. Using the Picka-Pic dataset of 851K crowdsourced pairwise preferences,
we fine-tune the base model of the state-of-the-art Stable
Diffusion XL (SDXL)-1.0 model with Diffusion-DPO. Our
fine-tuned base model significantly outperforms both base
SDXL-1.0 and the larger SDXL-1.0 model consisting of an
additional refinement model in human evaluation, improving visual appeal and prompt alignment. We also develop
a variant that uses AI feedback and has comparable performance to training on human preferences, opening the door
for scaling of diffusion model alignment methods.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image diffusion models have been the state-of-theart in image generation for the past few years. They are typically trained in a single stage, using web-scale datasets of
text-image pairs by applying the diffusion objective. This
∗ Work done while at Salesforce AI

stands in contrast to the state-of-the-art training methodology for Large Language Models (LLMs). The best performing LLMs [31, 51] are trained in two stages. In the
first (“pretraining”) stage, they are trained on large webscale data. In the second (“alignment”) stage, they are
fine-tuned to make them better aligned with human preferences. Alignment is typically performed using supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) using preference data. LLMs
trained with this two-stage process have set the state-of-theart in language generation tasks and have been deployed in
commercial applications such as ChatGPT and Bard.
Despite the success of the LLM alignment process, most
text-to-image diffusion training pipelines do not incorporate
learning from human preferences. [11, 38, 39] perform twostage training, following large-scale pretraining with finetuning on a high-quality text-image pair dataset. This approach is much more rudimentary than the final-stage alignment methods of LLMs. [7, 13] develop more advanced
alignment methods, but have not demonstrated the ability to
stably generalize to a fully open-vocabulary setting across
an array of feedback. Other methods use the pixel-level gradients from reward models on generations to tune diffusion
models, but suffer from mode collapse and can only incorporate a relatively narrow set of feedback types [9, 34].
We address this gap in diffusion model alignment for the
first time, developing a method to directly optimize diffusion models on human preference data. We generalize Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [36], where a generative model is trained on paired human preference data to
implicitly estimate a reward model. We define a notion of
data likelihood under a diffusion model in a novel formulation and derive a simple but effective loss resulting in stable
and efficient preference training, dubbed Diffusion-DPO.
We connect this formulation to a multi-step RL approach
in the same setting as existing work [7, 13].
We demonstrate the efficacy of Diffusion-DPO by finetuning state-of-the-art text-to-image diffusion models, such

8228

