This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incremental Residual Concept Bottleneck Models
Chenming Shang12 * Shiji Zhou1 Hengyuan Zhang1 Xinzhe Ni1 Yujiu Yang1† Yuwang Wang12†
1
Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{scm22@mails.,zhoushiji@mail.,zhang-hy22@mails.}tsinghua.edu.cn
{nxz22@mails.,yang.yujiu@sz.,wang-yuwang@mail.}tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) map the black-box
visual representations extracted by deep neural networks
onto a set of interpretable concepts and use the concepts
to make predictions, enhancing the transparency of the
decision-making process. Multimodal pre-trained models
can match visual representations with textual concept embeddings, allowing for obtaining the interpretable concept
bottleneck without the expertise concept annotations. Recent research has focused on the concept bank establishment and the high-quality concept selection. However, it
is challenging to construct a comprehensive concept bank
through humans or large language models, which severely
limits the performance of CBMs. In this work, we propose
the Incremental Residual Concept Bottleneck Model (ResCBM) to address the challenge of concept completeness.
Specifically, the residual concept bottleneck model employs
a set of optimizable vectors to complete missing concepts,
then the incremental concept discovery module converts the
complemented vectors with unclear meanings into potential concepts in the candidate concept bank. Our approach
can be applied to any user-defined concept bank, as a posthoc processing method to enhance the performance of any
CBMs. Furthermore, to measure the descriptive efficiency
of CBMs, the Concept Utilization Efficiency (CUE) metric
is proposed. Experiments show that the Res-CBM outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods in terms of both
accuracy and efficiency and achieves comparable performance to black-box models across multiple datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) [31, 45] have achieved
unprecedented success in a wide range of machine learning tasks, including computer vision [16, 32], natural language processing [14, 59], and speech recognition [34, 41].
* Work done during an internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
† Corresponding author.

Input Image: lizard

Concept Bank
green
green body with large eyes,

the body has scales

Challenges
Good Concept!
Human: Not Productive

amphibians

DNNs: Not Accurate

Missing Concept: claw

Result: Missing Concept

Figure 1. Challenges in CBMs. When a concept contains many
atomic attributes, making it too complex for human to comprehend. When a concept is too high-level, DNNs may struggle to
provide accurate prediction. Additionally, there is a risk of humandesigned concept bank missing some important concepts.

However, due to their complex and deep structures, they
are often regarded as black-box models [7, 49], which are
too difficult to understand and interpret. In fields that demand high levels of trustworthiness, such as medicine [44],
healthcare [21], education [60], and finance [39], model interpretability has become increasingly crucial. It indicates
whether we can trust the DNNs’ decisions, and how we can
rectify the errors when the DNNs make mistakes. Making
deep learning models more interpretable is a significant yet
challenging research topic.
A promising approach for achieving interpretability in
deep learning is through concept-based models [46], which
leverage human-generated high-level concepts to explain
the black-box features of DNNs. Among these approaches,
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [26] map the visual
representations to a set of concept values that are understandable to humans. These interpretable concepts are then
used to make the final decision by a linear function, greatly
enhancing our understanding of the decision-making process. Of greater significance, humans can repair models’
faults by directly editing or intervening on the concept bottleneck [3, 48].
Due to the considerable cost of the fine-grained and precise annotation for each concept in CBMs, multimodal pretrained model-based CBMs [58] have recently emerged as
a research hotspot. CLIP [40] demonstrates the capacity to
establish correspondences between visual information and

11030

