This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Large-Factor EM Image Super-Resolution with Generative Priors
Jiateng Shou1 Zeyu Xiao1 Shiyu Deng1 Wei Huang1 Peiyao Shi3
Ruobing Zhang3,2 Zhiwei Xiong1,2 Feng Wu1,2,†
1

MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
2
3

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

Suzhou Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
shoujt@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
As the mainstream technique for capturing images of biological specimens at nanometer resolution, electron microscopy (EM) is extremely time-consuming for scanning
wide field-of-view (FOV) specimens. In this paper, we investigate a challenging task of large-factor EM image superresolution (EMSR), which holds great promise for reducing
scanning time, relaxing acquisition conditions, and expanding imaging FOV. By exploiting the repetitive structures
and volumetric coherence of EM images, we propose the
first generative learning-based framework for large-factor
EMSR. Specifically, motivated by the predictability of repetitive structures and textures in EM images, we first learn
a discrete codebook in the latent space to represent highresolution (HR) cell-specific priors and a latent vector indexer to map low-resolution (LR) EM images to their corresponding latent vectors in a generative manner. By incorporating the generative cell-specific priors from HR EM
images through a multi-scale prior fusion module, we then
deploy multi-image feature alignment and fusion to further
exploit the inter-section coherence in the volumetric EM
data. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed
framework outperforms advanced single-image and video
super-resolution methods for 8× and 16× EMSR (i.e., with
64 times and 256 times less data acquired, respectively),
achieving superior visual reconstruction quality and downstream segmentation accuracy on benchmark EM datasets.
Code is available at https://github.com/jtshou/
GPEMSR.

1. Introduction
Electron microscopy (EM) is a commonly used imaging
technique in life sciences to investigate the ultrastructure of
cells, tissues, organelles, and macromolecular complexes,
which captures images of biological specimens at nanome† Corresponding author.

{zwxiong,fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

ter resolution. However, high-quality EM image acquisition
typically requires a strict and time-consuming process, involving careful adjustments of beam current, aperture size,
and detector settings. This process may take up to years
to scan wide field-of-view (FOV) specimens. For example, Zheng et al. [57] spent approximately 16 months to acquire a ∼106TB whole-brain dataset of an adult drosophila
melanogaster. The long acquisition time greatly limits the
application of EM imaging in analyzing complete biological structures in large specimens, such as neuron connections in mammalian brains.
Image super-resolution (SR), which is capable of restoring high-resolution (HR) images from their corresponding
low-resolution (LR) observations, has the potential to revolutionize EM imaging by allowing for faster and less restrictive data acquisition, while also providing high-quality
images with a wide field of view. By applying SR to EM
images (shorted as EMSR hereafter), the capturing time
can be significantly reduced, and the strict capturing conditions can be relaxed. By deploying a simple ResNetbased UNet model, Fang et al. [13] have demonstrated
the promising performance of EMSR for 4× magnification
(i.e., with 16 times less data acquired). However, achieving
even larger-factor EMSR to further reduce capturing time
remains challenging. This is in accordance with existing
methods [5, 18, 30, 35, 50, 58] for natural images, which
can achieve satisfactory results for up to 4× magnification,
but fail to meet the demand for larger factors.
On the other hand, recent advances in generative models, such as ChatGPT and diffusion-based models [9, 16,
21, 43], reveal powerful capability in automatic content
generation, including natural languages and images. This
motivates us to consider the EMSR task from a generative perspective. Especially, compared with natural images
that possess diverse structures and textures, EM images often exhibit repetitive structures and textures due to the predictability of imaging specimens, making it more suitable to
leverage generative learning for accurate reconstruction. In

11313

