This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PEGASUS: Personalized Generative 3D Avatars with Composable Attributes
Hyunsoo Cha
Byungjun Kim
Hanbyul Joo
Seoul National University
243stephen@snu.ac.kr

byungjun.kim@snu.ac.kr

hbjoo@snu.ac.kr

https://snuvclab.github.io/pegasus/

Hair / Eyes / Mouth

Monocular Video Input
for Target

z

Eyebrows

Nose

Eyes

Hat

Hair

Mouth

PEGASUS

Eyebrows / Nose

Hat

Monocular Video Input for Database

Figure 1. PEGASUS. Our method builds a personalized generative 3D face avatar from monocular video sources.

Abstract
We present PEGASUS, a method for constructing a personalized generative 3D face avatar from monocular video
sources. Our generative 3D avatar enables disentangled
controls to selectively alter the facial attributes (e.g., hair or
nose) while preserving the identity. Our approach consists of
two stages: synthetic database generation and constructing
a personalized generative avatar. We generate a synthetic
video collection of the target identity with varying facial attributes, where the videos are synthesized by borrowing the
attributes from monocular videos of diverse identities. Then,
we build a person-specific generative 3D avatar that can
modify its attributes continuously while preserving its identity. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our
method of generating a synthetic database and creating a 3D
generative avatar is the most effective in preserving identity
while achieving high realism. Subsequently, we introduce
a zero-shot approach to achieve the same goal of generative modeling more efficiently by leveraging a previously
constructed personalized generative model.

1. Introduction
Building a personalized 3D avatar for representing an individual in virtual spaces can bring significant advancements

in the field of AR/VR and applications within the metaverse.
Importantly, the method should be user-friendly to allow
novices to build their avatars without the need for complex
capture systems. It should also offer a high level of realism,
depicting the fine-grained details of the individual’s geometry and appearance, and, importantly, the avatar should be
animatable to mirror the user’s facial expressions in the virtual space. However, the 3D avatar does not need to maintain
an exact replica of the user’s single appearance, as users may
prefer to alter their avatars. This includes modifications of
changing hairstyles, adding accessories like hats, or even
altering facial parts to give the avatar a more aesthetically
pleasing look, such as adopting the appearance of celebrities.
Recent technologies make it possible to build high-quality
3D face avatars for general users from monocular video inputs only [2, 14, 16, 17, 46, 47]. By leveraging parametric
morphable face models [3, 29], these approaches produce
realistic animatable human avatars from sparse monocular
videos that capture naturally moving facial images, by fusing
observed cues into a canonical space. However, the previous
approaches mainly focus on creating the exact replica from
the input videos, without providing the functionality to alter
the subparts of the avatars, such as hairstyles or nose. As an
alternative direction, generative models in producing realistic faces have been studied in the 2D field, by producing 2D

1072

