This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GlitchBench: Can large multimodal models detect video game glitches?
Mohammad Reza Taesiri1 , Tianjun Feng1 , Cor-Paul Bezemer1 , Anh Nguyen2
1

University of Alberta, {mtaesiri, robbie020428, bezemer}@ualberta.ca
2

Auburn University, anh.ng8@gmail.com

Abstract

GPT-4V fails to focus on the rain inside the room

Large multimodal models (LMMs) have evolved from
large language models (LLMs) to integrate multiple input
modalities, such as visual inputs. This integration augments
the capacity of LLMs for tasks requiring visual comprehension and reasoning. However, the extent and limitations of
their enhanced abilities are not fully understood, especially
when it comes to real-world tasks. To address this gap,
we introduce GlitchBench, a novel benchmark derived
from video-game quality assurance tasks, to test and evaluate the reasoning capabilities of LMMs. Our benchmark
is curated from a variety of unusual and glitched scenarios
from video games and aims to challenge both the visual and
linguistic reasoning powers of LMMs in detecting and interpreting out-of-the-ordinary events. Our evaluation shows
that GlitchBench presents a new, interesting challenge
to state-of-the-art LMMs. Code and data are available at:
https://glitchbench.github.io/

Question: What is wrong with this image?
Ground truth: It is raining inside the building
GPT-4V: There’s nothing inherently “wrong” with
this image; however, if you’re referring to
inconsistencies or peculiarities that might not align
with the established Batman canon, the red Batman
suit is unusual since Batman is traditionally known
in black or very dark colors. The use of red could
be an artistic choice for the game, an alternate suit
available within the game’s universe, or indicative
of a different character who takes on the Batman
mantle.

1. Introduction
The video game industry boasts an estimated annual revenue of USD 217 billion [57] with a total of 3.2 billion
gamers worldwide in 2022 [1]. Automatically detecting ingame glitches is, therefore, a highly demanding task, but
that remains a long-standing challenge [12, 39, 51, 55, 56,
65, 66, 72, 83]. A glitch is an unexpected frame that occurs
within a game due to either an unforeseen software bug,
player actions, or unanticipated interactions between game
elements and does not result in a program crash. From a
computer vision perspective, glitch detection involves recognizing an extremely wide spectrum of long-tail video
frames, from rendering (e.g., 3D objects with missing textures; Fig. 2f), unrealistic physics (e.g., two people sitting
in an invisible car; Fig. 2b), to semantic errors (e.g., indoor
rain; Fig. 1). Unlike software bugs that can be caught by
examining the code alone, glitches are more non-trivial to
detect because they are mostly the result of a one-time event
that unexpectedly happens in-game.
A holy grail of game quality assurance is to build a

Figure 1. The image depicts a screenshot in which it rains inside
a room. While the rain should be what is wrong with the image,
GPT-4V fails to reason correctly and instead focuses on the color
of Batman’s costume. Note that the ground truth is never presented
as part of the prompt in our study.

general glitch detector that works for any game of any
genre and mechanics. We set the first step toward this
goal by building GlitchBench, an evaluation benchmark
of 593 glitches, leveraging the public’s crowd knowledge
from the game community’s reports on reddit.com/r/
GamePhysics. The glitches span across 205 games of
various genres. Each glitch has a video clip, a representative frame, a one-line description, and a reference to a corresponding Reddit thread where gamers discussed the error.

22444

