This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Label-Efficient Group Robustness via Out-of-Distribution Concept Curation
Yiwei Yang1

Anthony Z. Liu2 Robert Wolfe1 Aylin Caliskan1 Bill Howe1
1
University of Washington, 2 University of Michigan
{yanyiwei, rwolfe3, aylin, billhowe}@uw.edu anthliu@umich.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks are prone to capture correlations
between spurious attributes and class labels, leading to low
accuracy on some combinations of class labels and spurious attribute values. When a spurious attribute represents
a protected class, these low-accuracy groups can manifest
discriminatory bias. Existing methods attempting to improve worst-group accuracy assume the training data, validation data, or both are reliably labeled by the spurious attribute. But a model may be perceived to be biased towards
a concept that is not represented by pre-existing labels on
the training data. In these situations, the spurious attribute
must be defined with external information. We propose Concept Correction, a framework that represents a concept as
a curated set of images from any source, then labels each
training sample by its similarity to the concept set to control spurious correlations. For example, concept sets representing gender can be used to measure and control gender
bias even without explicit labels. We demonstrate and evaluate an instance of the framework as Concept DRO, which
uses concept sets to estimate group labels, then uses these
labels to train with a state of the art distributively robust
optimization objective. We show that Concept DRO outperforms existing methods that do not require labels of spurious attributes by up to 33.1% on three image classification
datasets and is competitive with the best methods that assume access to labels. We consider how the size and quality
of the concept set influences performance and find that even
smaller, manually curated sets of noisy AI-generated images
are effective at controlling spurious correlations, suggesting that high-quality, reusable concept sets are easy to create and effective in reducing bias.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are prone to capture spurious correlations, patterns that are predictive of the target class in
training data but are inherently irrelevant to the classification task. For example, consider an image classification
task to distinguish doctors from nurses. Suppose that in

the training data, 95% of the doctors present as men, and
95% of the nurses present as women. A model trained with
the standard empirical risk minimization (ERM) tends toclassify images of men as doctors and images of women as
nurses by learning a spurious correlation between genderexpression features (e.g., hairstyle, clothing) and occupation. While the model may achieve high average accuracy,
it performs poorly on the minority groups (in this example, female-presenting doctors and male-presenting nurses),
thus exhibiting low worst-group accuracy. Such spurious
correlations happen in a wide variety of real-world tasks, including facial recognition, medical imaging, and language
tasks [3, 8, 11, 17, 18, 23].
Existing approaches typically consider the setting in
which each training (or validation) sample is explicitly assigned a group, represented as a pair (y, a) where y is a
class label and a is a value from the (potentially unknown)
spurious attribute. For instance, Group DRO assumes the
availability of group labels during training, and directly
minimizes the worst-group loss [17]. Recognizing that obtaining labels requires expensive human annotation, several recent approaches avoid relying on group labels during training [7, 9, 19, 24]. These approaches train an ERM
model to infer group labels, then a second model is trained
to optimize for worst-group loss with the inferred labels.
However, these approaches require validation labels for crucial hyperparameter tuning [9], since their effectiveness depends on the accuracy of the group inference. One exception is GEORGE [19], which assumes that the feature space
of a model trained for the predictive task is easily separable by groups and learns group assignment via clustering.
GEORGE then optimizes for worst-cluster accuracy without requiring labels. However, while GEORGE is effective
when the input features are simple and cluster well (e.g. colored digits), its performance drops significantly when the
input features are more complex and clusters become less
well-defined (e.g., for human faces) [19]
We propose Concept Correction (figure 1), a framework
that instead uses a set of example images to represent a
concept involved in the spurious correlation. These examples can be out-of-distribution and task-agnostic, as long as

12426

