This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPU-PMD: Self-Supervised Point Cloud Upsampling via Progressive Mesh
Deformation
Yanzhe Liu1 , Rong Chen * 1 , Yushi Li * 2 , Yixi Li1 and Xuehou Tan3
1

2

Dalian Maritime University
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
3
Tokai University

{liuyanzhe,rchen,superlyxi}@dlmu.edu.cn
yushi.li@xjtlu.edu.cn
xtan@tsc.u-tokai.ac.jp

Abstract
Despite the success of recent upsampling approaches,
generating high-resolution point sets with uniform distribution and meticulous structures is still challenging. Unlike
existing methods that only take spatial information of the
raw data into account, we regard point cloud upsampling
as generating dense point clouds from deformable topology.
Motivated by this, we present SPU-PMD, a self-supervised
topological mesh deformation network, for 3D densification. As a cascaded framework, our architecture is formulated by a series of coarse mesh interpolator and mesh deformers. At each stage, the mesh interpolator first produces
the initial dense point clouds via mesh interpolation, which
allows the model to perceive the primitive topology better.
Meanwhile, the deformer infers the morphing by estimating the movements of mesh nodes and reconstructs the descriptive topology structure. By associating mesh deformation with feature expansion, this module progressively refines point clouds’ surface uniformity and structural details.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method,
extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments are conducted on synthetic and real-scanned 3D data. Also, we
compare it with state-of-the-art techniques to further illustrate the superiority of our network. The project page is:
https://github.com/lyz21/SPU-PMD.

1. Introduction
As unordered sets of discrete elements, point clouds provide high flexibility for 3D data representation [7, 8]. Due
* Corresponding authors. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62002039, No. 61672122), and the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No.36330603).

Figure 1. Illustration of point cloud upsampling based on mesh deformation. Although the meshes constructed from the point cloud
topology coarsely locate the insertion points, the unconnected
meshes often result in unexpected vacancies and detail missing
(as shown in the lower left part of the figure). The proposed upsampling method that combines mesh interpolation with deformation successfully compensates for potential holes and maintains
descriptive structures.

to these properties, point clouds have been applied in a wide
variety of fields. However, the point clouds captured by 3D
scanning (e.g., LiDAR or RGB-D cameras) are often sparse
and fragmented, which affects downstream tasks such as
shape classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation [2, 9, 30, 42]. Hence, point cloud upsampling is a
fundamental and crucial issue in 3D vision.
With the development of data-driven models, some
learning-based models [4, 12, 13, 17, 19–21, 27, 29, 40,
41, 44] have been proposed for point cloud upsampling.
The typical frameworks consist of three components: feature extraction (FE), feature expansion (FX), and coordinate reconstruction (CR). Early, this upsampling problem

5188

