This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Degrees of Freedom Matter:
Inferring Dynamics from Point Trajectories
Yan Zhang†2 , Sergey Prokudin1,3 , Marko Mihajlovic1 , Qianli Ma†4 , Siyu Tang1
1
ETH Zürich, Switzerland , 2 Meshcapade
3
ROCS, University Hospital Balgrist, University of Zürich, 4 Nvidia
A (x, t) x + u (x, t)

Abstract
Understanding the dynamics of generic 3D scenes is fundamentally challenging in computer vision, essential in enhancing applications related to scene reconstruction, motion tracking, and avatar creation. In this work, we address the task as the problem of inferring dense, long-range
motion of 3D points. By observing a set of point trajectories, we aim to learn an implicit motion field parameterized by a neural network to predict the movement of
novel points within the same domain, without relying on
any data-driven or scene-specific priors. To achieve this,
our approach builds upon the recently introduced dynamic
point field model [48] that learns smooth deformation fields
between the canonical frame and individual observation
frames. However, temporal consistency between consecutive frames is neglected, and the number of required parameters increases linearly with the sequence length due to
per-frame modeling. To address these shortcomings, we exploit the intrinsic regularization provided by SIREN [53],
and modify the input layer to produce a spatiotemporally
smooth motion field. Additionally, we analyze the motion
field Jacobian matrix, and discover that the motion degrees
of freedom (DOFs) in an infinitesimal area around a point
and the network hidden variables have different behaviors
to affect the model’s representational power. This enables
us to improve the model representation capability while retaining the model compactness. Furthermore, to reduce the
risk of overfitting, we introduce a regularization term based
on the assumption of piece-wise motion smoothness. Our
experiments assess the model’s performance in predicting
unseen point trajectories and its application in temporal
mesh alignment with guidance. The results demonstrate its
superiority and effectiveness. The code and data for the
project are publicly available1 .

1 https://yz-cnsdqz.github.io/eigenmotion/DOMA/

† This work was done when YZ and QM were at ETH Zürich.

x
t
Figure 1. We introduce DOMA, a compact implicit motion model
designed to capture generic dynamics of 3D scenes. By processing a 3D point x in the canonical frame alongside a 1D time step
t, DOMA predicts an affine mapping, parameterized by a linear
map A✓ and a translation vector u✓ . By leveraging the inherent
regularity of the utilized SIREN framework [54], DOMA ensures
the generation of a spatiotemporally smooth motion field. The
model’s capacity to represent complex dynamics can be controlled
by adjusting the degrees of freedom of the output affine mapping.

1. Introduction
Motion estimation plays a crucial role in several key areas of computer vision, such as dynamic scene reconstruction, autonomous navigation, and avatar creation. Treated
as a distinct task, it emerges in various contexts as nonrigid tracking [11], point set [39, 57] and mesh registration [3, 17], shape matching [42], as well as optical and
scene flow estimation [68]. The solutions adopted in these
contexts significantly differ based on the ultimate objective
and the foundational assumptions about the scene. A substantial amount of research exists concentrating on humancentric [4, 47] and rigid object motion [2, 63], alongside
efforts in learning generic 2D motion priors in a data-driven
manner [12, 23]. The diversity in applications and approaches underscores the complexity and significance of
motion estimation within the field of computer vision [34].
In this work, we aim to develop a motion model capable
of reconstructing the dynamics of generic 3D scenes without relying on data-driven motion priors or object-specific
models. Specifically, by analyzing observed point trajectories within dynamic 3D scenes, we seek to learn an implicit motion model capable of predicting the movement of

2018

