This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LSK3DNet: Towards Effective and Efficient 3D Perception with Large Sparse Kernels
Tuo Feng1 , Wenguan Wang2 , Fan Ma2 ,* Yi Yang2
1

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney 2 ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/FengZicai/LSK3DNet

Abstract
Autonomous systems need to process large-scale, sparse,
and irregular point clouds with limited compute resources.
Consequently, it is essential to develop LiDAR perception
methods that are both efficient and effective. Although naively enlarging 3D kernel size can enhance performance, it will
also lead to a cubically-increasing overhead. Therefore, it is
crucial to develop streamlined 3D large kernel designs that
eliminate redundant weights and work effectively with larger
kernels. In this paper, we propose an efficient and effective
Large Sparse Kernel 3D Neural Network (LSK3DNet) that
leverages dynamic pruning to amplify the 3D kernel size.
Our method comprises two core components: Spatial-wise
Dynamic Sparsity (SDS) and Channel-wise Weight Selection
(CWS). SDS dynamically prunes and regrows volumetric
weights from the beginning to learn a large sparse 3D kernel. It not only boosts performance but also significantly
reduces model size and computational cost. Moreover, CWS
selects the most important channels for 3D convolution during training and subsequently prunes the redundant channels
to accelerate inference for 3D vision tasks. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of LSK3DNet on three benchmark datasets
and five tracks compared with classical models and large kernel designs. Notably, LSK3DNet achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on SemanticKITTI (i.e., 75.6% on single-scan
and 63.4% on multi-scan), with roughly 40% model size reduction and 60% computing operations reduction compared
to the naive large 3D kernel model.

1. Introduction
Autonomous systems are equipped with 3D LiDAR sensors
and data processing platforms. The LiDAR sensor generates point clouds, which serve as the input for the processing platform. The platform performs perception tasks such
as semantic segmentation [1–3] and object detection [4–6],
providing a foundation for motion planning and decisionmaking [7] in autonomous systems. On the one hand, the
processing platform is required to handle large-scale, sparse,
* Corresponding author.

The partition of spatial groups

K3

K2

K1

1 spatial group

Activated weight in example group

w×Ddimensional
channels

Sort Channels

8 shared weights

Spatial-Wise Convolution [18]
Pruning &
Growth

Ks

Select
Channels

Din /Dout

Most salient
D-dimensional
channels
Ks

K3
K1

1 spatial group
K2

Din /Dout

Sparse weights

Spatial-Wise Dynamic Sparsity

Channel-Wise
Weight Selection

Figure 1. Illustrations on Spatial-wise Group Convolution [18],
SDS, and CWS. The spatial dimensions Ks (i.e., K1 , K2 , K3 ) and
channel dimensions (Din /Dout ) are shown. Spatial-wise Group
Convolution shares the weights within each spatial group during
training, leading to redundant model weights. In contrast, SDS
removes non-salient weights and redundancies that are not sensitive
to the input in each group, while CWS eliminates redundant weights
in a channel-wise manner (Sec.1).

and irregular point clouds. On the other hand, the platform’s computing resources are limited. Therefore, it is
crucial to develop effective and efficient LiDAR perception
methods. Point-based methods [1, 8, 9] rely on computationally expensive, memory inefficient, and time-consuming
point sampling strategy [10]. In contrast, sparse convolution [11–14] has been widely adopted for processing largescale point clouds up to 160×160×20 meters [5, 11, 12, 15–
17]. Nevertheless, the application of such a technique in
autonomous systems has also been hindered by limited computational resources [16]. PV-KD [19] attempts to reduce the
model size with knowledge distillation, but its performance
is bounded by its teacher model [15]. In opposition, large
kernels can enhance performance through the advantages of
large receptive fields [18, 20, 21]. However, naive 3D large
kernels will significantly increase computational burdens.
LargeKernel3D [18] explores large 3D kernels with Spatialwise Group Convolution to circumvent optimization and
efficiency problems caused by naive 3D large kernels. However, LargeKernel3D has a lot of redundant model weights
during training as it shares the weights in each spatial group.
Moreover, the performance of LargeKernel3D [18] drops

14916

