This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EFHQ: Multi-purpose ExtremePose-Face-HQ dataset
Trung Tuan Dao1,⇤
1

VinAI Research, Vietnam

2

Duc Hong Vu1,2,⇤
Miami University

3

2D Image
Generation

3D Image
Generation

vudh3@miamioh.edu

cuongpv@ptit.edu.vn

Equal contribution

Text-to-image
Generation

Re-enactment

Verification
Benchmark

A proﬁle portrait image of a person.

Sample

Anh Tran1

Posts & Telecommunications Inst. of Tech., Vietnam

{v.trungdt21, v.ducvh5, v.cuongpv11, v.anhtt152}@vinai.io
*

Cuong Pham1,3

Standard
datasets

LPFF

EFHQ

Figure 1. Benefits of our proposed dataset (EFHQ). Standard large-scale facial datasets have most images at near frontal views, causing
inferior performance of trained models on downstream tasks when dealing with extreme head poses. For instance, the trained 2D image
generators and text-to-image ones often produce only near frontal faces, while the 3D face generators and face reenactment methods often
show distorted outputs at profile views. The recently proposed dataset LPFF [47] partially handles that issue by providing complementary
images at extreme head poses for only 2D and 3D image generation tasks. Our proposed dataset EFHQ provides high-quality extreme-pose
images to complement a wide range of face-related tasks. It supports 2D and 3D image generation, with generally better diversity than
LPFF. EFHQ also helps correct the outputs of text-to-image generation and face reenactment at extreme views. Finally, EFHQ provides a
more challenging pose-based face verification benchmark to better assess the quality of face recognition networks.

Abstract
The existing facial datasets, while having plentiful images at near frontal views, lack images with extreme
head poses, leading to the downgraded performance of
deep learning models when dealing with profile or pitched
faces. This work aims to address this gap by introducing
a novel dataset named Extreme Pose Face High-Quality
Dataset (EFHQ), which includes a maximum of 450k highquality images of faces at extreme poses. To produce
such a massive dataset, we utilize a novel and meticulous
dataset processing pipeline to curate two publicly available datasets, VFHQ and CelebV-HQ, which contain many
high-resolution face videos captured in various settings.
Our dataset can complement existing datasets on various
facial-related tasks, such as facial synthesis with 2D/3Daware GAN, diffusion-based text-to-image face generation,
and face reenactment. Specifically, training with EFHQ
helps models generalize well across diverse poses, significantly improving performance in scenarios involving ex-

treme views, confirmed by extensive experiments. Additionally, we utilize EFHQ to define a challenging cross-view
face verification benchmark, in which the performance of
SOTA face recognition models drops 5-37% compared to
frontal-to-frontal scenarios, aiming to stimulate studies on
face recognition under severe pose conditions in the wild.

1. Introduction
The human face is a central focus in computer vision, with
extensive research dedicated to tasks like detection, recognition, generation, and manipulation [39, 42]. Numerous
large-scale facial datasets[9, 12, 14, 24, 28, 30, 45, 48, 54,
55] have facilitated the face-related studies. Along with
deep learning techniques, many tasks have made a considerable leap in performance in recent years. For instance,
face recognition systems can recognize near-frontal faces in
the wild with near-perfect accuracy [13, 18]. Facial generative models, such as [5, 15, 49], can synthesize realistic

22605

