This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Your Transferability Barrier is Fragile: Free-Lunch for
Transferring the Non-Transferable Learning

1

Ziming Hong1
Li Shen2
Tongliang Liu1 *
2
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney
JD Explore Academy

Abstract
Recently, non-transferable learning (NTL) was proposed
to restrict models’ generalization toward the target domain(s), which serves as state-of-the-art solutions for intellectual property (IP) protection. However, the robustness
of the established “transferability barrier” for degrading
the target domain performance has not been well studied.
In this paper, we first show that the generalization performance of NTL models is widely impaired on third-party domains (i.e., the unseen domain in the NTL training stage).
We explore the impairment patterns and find that: due to
the dominant generalization of non-transferable task, NTL
models tend to make target-domain-consistent predictions
on third-party domains, even though only a slight distribution shift from the third-party domain to the source domain.
Motivated by these findings, we uncover the potential risks
of NTL by proposing a simple but effective method (dubbed
as TransNTL) to recover the target domain performance
with few source domain data. Specifically, by performing
a group of different perturbations on the few source domain
data, we obtain diverse third-party domains that evoke the
same impairment patterns as the unavailable target domain.
Then, we fine-tune the NTL model under an impairmentrepair self-distillation framework, where the source-domain
predictions are used to teach the model itself how to predict on third-party domains, thus repairing the impaired
generalization. Empirically, experiments on standard NTL
benchmarks show that the proposed TransNTL reaches up
to ∼72% target-domain improvements by using only 10%
source domain data. Finally, we also explore a feasible defense method and empirically demonstrate its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Well-trained deep learning models are the core of MachineLearning-as-a-Service (MLaaS), which are being provided
in a wide range of applications closely related to our daily
life [40, 55]. The training process of deep learning models requires massive well-annotated training data, expensive
hardware resources, and often takes weeks or even months,
* Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au)

which requires high cost, and thus leading to the high business value [55]. As such, how can the model owners protect
the intellectual property (IP) [15, 17, 49, 53, 55, 58] of deep
learning models is waiting to be solved.
Recently, Non-Transferable Learning (NTL) [49] was
proposed as a novel technology in IP protection. NTL
aims to restrict the generalization of a deep learning model
toward a certain target domain (target-specified NTL) or
all other domains except the source domain (source-only
NTL). To this end, built upon the source-domain supervised learning (SL) paradigm, existing methods [21, 49, 50]
impose a non-transferable task to maximize the target domain representations and correct labels. Target-specified
NTL and source-only NTL serve as promising solutions of
two types of IP protection techniques: ownership verification [32] and applicability authorization [49], respectively.
Despite the success of NTL in restricting source-totarget knowledge transferring, the robustness of the “transferability barrier” established in NTL models has not been
well studied. Earlier evaluations in [49, 50] show that NTL
models are still resistant to state-of-art watermark removal
attacks when up to 30% source domain data are available for
attack. An intriguing inquiry is thus: How can an attacker
break the transferability barrier, thus effectively recovering
target domain performance? In this work, we seek to test
the robustness of the transferability barrier in NTL models
and show that it is possible to recover target domain knowledge using only few source domain data.
We start by exploring the performance of target-specified
NTL models on unseen third-party domains (i.e., the domain with distribution gaps to both the source and target
domain1 , as shown in Fig. 1). We involve three kinds of
third-party domains: perturbed source domain2 , augmented
source domain3 , and real domains collected from different
environments. As shown in Fig. 2, we observe that although
the intention is to degrade the target domain performance,
the generalization of target-specified NTL models are im1 In NTL scenarios, the defined third-party domain shares the same contents (i.e., class labels) with the source and the target domain.
2 We perturbed the image by adding Gaussian noise with different std.
3 We augment the image by using RandAugment [8].

28805

