This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Auto-Train-Once: Controller Network Guided Automatic Network Pruning
from Scratch
Xidong Wu∗1 , Shangqian Gao∗1 , Zeyu Zhang2 , Zhenzhen Li3 ,
Runxue Bao4 , Yanfu Zhang5 , Xiaoqian Wang6 , Heng Huang7†
1
University of Pittsburgh, 2 University of Arizona, 3 Bosch Center for AI, 4 GE HealthCare,
5
College of William and Mary, 6 Purdue University, 7 University of Maryland College Park

Abstract
Current techniques for deep neural network (DNN)
pruning often involve intricate multi-step processes that require domain-specific expertise, making their widespread
adoption challenging. To address the limitation, the OnlyTrain-Once (OTO) and OTOv2 are proposed to eliminate
the need for additional fine-tuning steps by directly training and compressing a general DNN from scratch. Nevertheless, the static design of optimizers (in OTO) can lead
to convergence issues of local optima. In this paper, we
proposed the Auto-Train-Once (ATO), an innovative network pruning algorithm designed to automatically reduce
the computational and storage costs of DNNs. During the
model training phase, our approach not only trains the target model but also leverages a controller network as an architecture generator to guide the learning of target model
weights. Furthermore, we developed a novel stochastic
gradient algorithm that enhances the coordination between
model training and controller network training, thereby improving pruning performance. We provide a comprehensive convergence analysis as well as extensive experiments,
and the results show that our approach achieves stateof-the-art performance across various model architectures
(including ResNet18, ResNet34, ResNet50, ResNet56, and
MobileNetv2) on standard benchmark datasets (CIFAR10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet). The code is available at
https://github.com/xidongwu/AutoTrainOnce.

1. Introduction
Large-scale Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable prowess in various real-world applications [15, 29, 40, 41, 44, 62]. These large-scale networks
leverage their substantial depth and intricate architecture
† This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 2347592, 2347604,
2348159, 2348169, DBI 2405416, CCF 2348306, CNS 2347617.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Overview of Auto-Train-Once (ATO). The controller
network generates mask w based on the size of ZIGs G to guide
the automatic network pruning of the target model and we remove
variable groups according to mask w after training. Additional
training (such as fine-tuning) is not required after model training
and we can directly get the final compressed model.

to enhance approximations capability [46], capture intricate data features, and address a variety of computer vision
tasks. Nevertheless, the large-scale models present a significant conflict with the hardware capability of devices during
deployment since DNNs require substantial computational
and storage overheads. To address this issue, model compression techniques [3, 14, 20, 51] have gained popularity to
reduce the size of DNNs with minimal performance degradation and ease the deployment.
Structural pruning is a widely adopted direction to reduce the size of DNNs due to its generality and effectiveness [9]. Compared with weight pruning, structural
pruning, particularly channel pruning, is more hardwarefriendly, since it eliminates the need for post-processing
steps to achieve computational and storage savings. Therefore, we focus on structural pruning for DNNs. However,
it’s worth noting that many existing pruning methods often
come with notable limitations and require a complex multistage process. The process typically includes initial pre-

16163

