This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WANDR: Intention-guided Human Motion Generation
Markos Diomataris 1,2 Nikos Athanasiou1 Omid Taheri1
Otmar Hilliges2 Michael J. Black1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

2

Xi Wang2

ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Figure 1. WANDR starts from an arbitrary body pose and generates precise and realistic human motions that reach a specified 3D goal
(depicted as a red sphere). Employing a purely data-driven approach, WANDR is a conditional Variational Autoencoder guided by intention
features (depicted arrows) that steer the human’s orientation (yellow), position (cyan) and wrist (pink) towards the goal. WANDR is able
to reach a wide range of goals even if they deviate significantly from the training data.

Abstract
Synthesizing natural human motions that enable a 3D
human avatar to walk and reach for arbitrary goals in 3D
space remains an unsolved problem with many applications. Existing methods (data-driven or using reinforcement
learning) are limited in terms of generalization and motion
naturalness. A primary obstacle is the scarcity of training
data that combines locomotion with goal reaching. To address this, we introduce WANDR, a data-driven model that
takes an avatar’s initial pose and a goal’s 3D position and
generates natural human motions that place the end effector (wrist) on the goal location. To solve this, we introduce novel intention features that drive rich goal-oriented
movement. Intention guides the agent to the goal, and interactively adapts the generation to novel situations without
needing to define sub-goals or the entire motion path. Crucially, intention allows training on datasets that have goaloriented motions as well as those that do not. WANDR is

a conditional Variational Auto-Encoder (c-VAE), which we
train using the AMASS and CIRCLE datasets. We evaluate
our method extensively and demonstrate its ability to generate natural and long-term motions that reach 3D goals and
generalize to unseen goal locations. Our models and code
are available for research purposes at wandr.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Goals drive our motions. Even the simplest goal can give
rise to intricate motions. Consider reaching for a coffee cup
– it can be as straightforward as an arm extension or can involve the coordinated action of our entire body. Actions like
bending down, extending our arm, and walking must come
together to achieve the goal. At a granular level, we continuously make subtle adjustments to maintain balance and stay
on course towards our objective. The result is a fluid motion
that seamlessly integrates numerous smaller movements, all

927

