This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EVS-assisted joint Deblurring, Rolling-Shutter Correction and Video Frame
Interpolation through Sensor Inverse Modeling
Rui Jiang∗ , Fangwen Tu∗ , Yixuan Long, Aabhaas Vaish, Bowen Zhou, Qinyi Wang
Wei Zhang, Yuntan Fang, Luis Eduardo Garcia Capel, Bo Mu, Tiejun Dai, Andreas Suess
OMNIVISION
Equal contribution

slingshot
basketball
egg

∗

(a) CIS frame

(b) Ours

(c) EDI

(d) AKF

(e) Time Lens

(f) FILM

(g) CBMNet

(h) EvUnroll

(i) REFID

(j) Ground truth

Figure 1. Qualitative results comparing the proposed method with EDI [27], AKF [39], Time Lens [37], FILM [32], CBMNet [23],
EvUnroll [44], and REFID [36] on simulation datasets. In the “basketball” scene, our method provides frames that are rolling shutter effect
corrected and deblurred. In the “slingshot egg” scene, our method can reconstruct the shape of the pellet with the best quality, as indicated
in the yellow box. The images have been magnified for optimal viewing quality.

Abstract
Event-based Vision Sensors (EVS) gain popularity in enhancing CMOS Image Sensor (CIS) video capture. Nonidealities of EVS such as pixel or readout latency can significantly influence the quality of the enhanced images and
warrant dedicated consideration in the design of fusion
algorithms. A novel approach for jointly computing deblurred, rolling-shutter artifact corrected high-speed videos
with frame rates up to 10 000 FPS using inherently blurry
rolling shutter CIS frames of 120 FPS to 150 FPS in conjunction with EVS data from a hybrid CIS-EVS sensor is
presented. EVS pixel latency, readout latency and the
sensor’s refractory period are explicitly incorporated into
the measurement model. This inverse function problem is
solved on a per-pixel manner using an optimization-based
framework. The interpolated images are subsequently processed by a novel refinement network. The proposed method
is evaluated using simulated and measured datasets, under natural and controlled environments. Extensive experiments show reduced shadowing effect, a 4 dB increment in
PSNR, and a 12 % improvement in LPIPS score compared
to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Event-Based Vision Sensors (EVS) capture our world from
a completely different perspective compared to CMOS Image Sensors (CIS) [9, 14, 24, 25]. In EVS, each pixel independently triggers an event if a relative illuminance change
on the pixel reaches a certain triggering threshold (typically
in the range of 10 % to 30 %). Conversely to CIS, EVS
operate time-continuously and asynchronously - there is no
common exposure period or “frame rate”. Thus, EVS pixels
can be read out comparatively fast in a low-power manner
enabling efficient high-speed data capture. Recent work on
enhancement of high-quality images [23, 27, 34, 37, 39] focuses on fusing CIS and EVS information so that the high
fidelity of CIS measurement and the fast response of EVS
measurement can complement each other.
In practice it is observed [3, 14, 21, 25] that the dynamic
characteristics of EVS pixels are highly dependent on the
illuminance in the sensor plane. Under low-light conditions
such as indoor capture, a slower EVS response during video
enhancement can result in ghosting or blurry frames and
needs to be considered in algorithm design. Furthermore,
the inevitable readout latency and refractory period of EVS
pixels can significantly aggravate artifacts. Current methods
are not specifically designed to address sensor nonidealities.

25172

