This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

De-confounded Data-free Knowledge Distillation for Handling Distribution Shifts
Yuzheng Wang1∗
Dingkang Yang1∗
Zhaoyu Chen1
Yang Liu1
Wenqiang Zhang2 Lihua Zhang1† Lizhe Qi1,2,3†
1
2

Siao Liu1

Shanghai Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University

Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Ministry of Education, Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University
3

Green Ecological Smart Technology School-Enterprise Joint Research Center
{yzwang20, dkyang20}@fudan.edu.cn

Original Data

DAFL (FID=357.45)

(a)

DeepInv (FID=265.97)

DFND (FID=176.24)

Abstract
Data-Free Knowledge Distillation (DFKD) is a promising task to train high-performance small models to enhance
actual deployment without relying on the original training
data. Existing methods commonly avoid relying on private
data by utilizing synthetic or sampled data. However, a
long-overlooked issue is that the severe distribution shifts
between their substitution and original data, which manifests as huge differences in the quality of images and class
proportions. The harmful shifts are essentially the confounder that significantly causes performance bottlenecks.
To tackle the issue, this paper proposes a novel perspective with causal inference to disentangle the student models from the impact of such shifts. By designing a customized causal graph, we first reveal the causalities among
the variables in the DFKD task. Subsequently, we propose a
Knowledge Distillation Causal Intervention (KDCI) framework based on the backdoor adjustment to de-confound the
confounder. KDCI can be flexibly combined with most existing state-of-the-art baselines. Experiments in combination
with six representative DFKD methods demonstrate the effectiveness of our KDCI, which can obviously help existing
methods under almost all settings, e.g., improving the baseline by up to 15.54% accuracy on the CIFAR-100 dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), as a powerful and reliable tool, are increasingly expected to be applied to practical artificial intelligence scenes [1–7]. Despite significant
progress, good performance of deep learning models is often inseparable from large-scale models [8–13] and highquality original training data [14–20]. The dependencies
hinder the deployment of this technology on mobile devices
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

(b)

Figure 1. Diagrams of the distribution shifts between the original
and substitute data for existing DFKD methods on CIFAR-10. (a)
represents the random visualization and FID score of the synthetic
data by DAFL, DeepInv, and sampled by DFND. (b) indicates the
proportion of sample numbers in various classes (%) of the original and substitute data.

and data privacy scenes. Therefore, model compression
and data-free technology have become the key to breaking
through the bottleneck. To this end, Lopes et al. [21] propose the Data-Free Knowledge Distillation (DFKD) task. In
this process, knowledge is transferred from the cumbersome
model to a small model that is more suitable for deployment
[22–24] without relying on the original training data. As a
result, DFKD has received more attention due to its convenience and wide application.
Since the original training data is not available for privacy or other reasons [25], the key is how to supplement
the new training data, i.e., the substitution data. Based
on the source of the substitution data, almost all existing
DFKD methods can be divided into generation-based and
sampling-based methods. Despite the impressive improvements achieved by these DFKD methods through complex
loss stacking [26, 27] and knowledge distillation strategies
[28, 29], the trained students still suffer from distribution
shifts between the substitution and original data, which has
long been overlooked. First, the quality of the synthetic
or sampled images significantly differs from the original.
Besides, for generation-based methods, the synthetic data

12615

