This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mixed-Precision Quantization for Federated Learning on Resource-Constrained
Heterogeneous Devices
Huancheng Chen
University of Texas at Austin

Haris Vikalo
University of Texas at Austin

huanchengch@utexas.edu

hvikalo@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
While federated learning (FL) systems often utilize quantization to battle communication and computational bottlenecks, they have heretofore been limited to deploying fixedprecision quantization schemes. Meanwhile, the concept of
mixed-precision quantization (MPQ), where different layers
of a deep learning model are assigned varying bit-width,
remains unexplored in the FL settings. We present a novel
FL algorithm, FedMPQ, which introduces mixed-precision
quantization to resource-heterogeneous FL systems. Specifically, local models, quantized so as to satisfy bit-width
constraint, are trained by optimizing an objective function
that includes a regularization term which promotes reduction of precision in some of the layers without significant
performance degradation. The server collects local model
updates, de-quantizes them into full-precision models, and
then aggregates them into a global model. To initialize the
next round of local training, the server relies on the information learned in the previous training round to customize
bit-width assignments of the models delivered to different
clients. In extensive benchmarking experiments on several
model architectures and different datasets in both iid and
non-iid settings, FedMPQ outperformed the baseline FL
schemes that utilize fixed-precision quantization while incurring only a minor computational overhead on the participating devices.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [27, 32, 37, 52] paradigm enables
collaboration among numerous distributed devices (clients)
while protecting their privacy by avoiding collection of data
stored at those devices. The vanilla FL algorithm, FedAvg
[37], deploys a client-server framework in which the server
periodically collects locally trained/updated models from
the clients and aggregates them into the global model. A
number of of follow-up studies [44, 54, 55, 62] explored
convergence guarantees for FedAvg with convex and nonconvex loss functions in the settings where clients’ data

is independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). However, in real-world scenarios, the participating clients’ data
is likely to be non-i.i.d., which has detrimental effects on
the convergence properties of FedAvg [33]. This motivated
a considerable amount of research aiming to address the
challenges of statistical heterogeneity in federated learning
[2, 5–7, 27, 30–32, 47, 48, 52, 65]. On a related note, clients
in large-scale FL systems are likely to have varying communication and computational resources at their disposal,
requiring development of more sophisticated, constraintsaware schemes [26]. Recently, there has been a growing interest in compressing models so that they can be deployed
on devices having limited resources [10]. A particularly effective model compression technique is that of model quantization [20, 38, 39, 42, 43, 61].
The use of model quantization in FL has primarily been
motivated by the high communications costs that arise when
the server collects updates from a potentially very large
number of clients. Reducing the precision of local updates by using lower bit-width to represent model parameters allows the clients with limited bandwidth to efficiently
communicate with the server [17, 20, 24, 39, 40, 42, 43].
However, existing quantization-based FL algorithms expect each client to learn a full-precision local model regardless of the potential constraints on the client’s computational resources. In real-world settings, clients such as
smart phones or wearable devices may not have sufficient
amount of memory to allow full-precision model training.
Nevertheless, there are only few prior studies considering
quantization-aware training in FL [1, 13, 25, 38, 61], all of
them implementing fixed-precision quantization (FPQ) of
local models. The recent advancements in mixed-precision
quantization (MPQ) [1, 11, 51, 53, 56, 58, 59] remain unexplored in the federated learning settings. Adapting the existing MPQ schemes to federated learning is far from straightforward. The existing MPQ schemes typically train a fullprecision model to enable computing the quantization errors which are then used to optimize layer-wise bit-width
allocation. Both search-based [53, 56] and optimizationbased [51, 59, 64] MPQ methods consume significantly

6138

