This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PeerAiD: Improving Adversarial Distillation from a Specialized Peer Tutor
Jaewon Jung, Hongsun Jang, Jaeyong Song, and Jinho Lee*
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{jungjaewon, hongsun.jang, jaeyong.song, leejinho}@snu.ac.kr

Robust Acc. (%) against xS* of the pretrained teacher T
Robust Acc. (%) against xT* of the pretrained teacher T
Robust Acc. (%) against xS* of the peer model P
Robust Acc. (%) against xP* of the peer model P

1. Introduction
Deep learning is undoubtedly an irreplaceable tool in many
domains such as images [11, 17, 27], natural language processing [5, 9, 35], voice recognition [4, 15], and many
real-life scenarios. However, it has been found that DNNs
are vulnerable to an imperceptible noise crafted by attackers [14, 28], and this severely raises concerns about deploying DNNs in critical domains, e.g., autonomous driving [29]
and healthcare [44]. Though [28] found that a large model
* Corresponding author

80

Test Robust Acc. (%)

Adversarial robustness of the neural network is a significant concern when it is applied to security-critical domains. In this situation, adversarial distillation is a promising option which aims to distill the robustness of the teacher
network to improve the robustness of a small student network. Previous works pretrain the teacher network to make
it robust against the adversarial examples aimed at itself.
However, the adversarial examples are dependent on the
parameters of the target network. The fixed teacher network inevitably degrades its robustness against the unseen
transferred adversarial examples which target the parameters of the student network in the adversarial distillation
process. We propose PeerAiD to make a peer network learn
the adversarial examples of the student network instead of
adversarial examples aimed at itself. PeerAiD is an adversarial distillation that trains the peer network and the
student network simultaneously in order to specialize the
peer network for defending the student network. We observe that such peer networks surpass the robustness of the
pretrained robust teacher model against adversarial examples aimed at the student network. With this peer network
and adversarial distillation, PeerAiD achieves significantly
higher robustness of the student network with AutoAttack
(AA) accuracy by up to 1.66%p and improves the natural accuracy of the student network by up to 4.72%p with
ResNet-18 on TinyImageNet dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/jaewonalive/PeerAiD.

Test Robust Acc. (%)

Abstract

60
40
20
0

0

50

100 150 200
Epochs

40
20
0

0

50

100 150 200
Epochs

Figure 1. Test robust accuracy of a pretrained robust teacher and
a peer network trained from scratch. xS∗ , xT∗ and x∗P denotes the
adversarial examples generated from the student, teacher, and peer
model, respectively. Results on CIFAR-10 (left) and CIFAR-100
(right) show that the peer sustains increasing robustness for the
student not provided by the pretrained teacher.

has better robustness than a smaller neural network, a large
model is not always applicable to all circumstances, especially in an edge device which has a small size of memory
and limited computational capability. Currently, the only
defense technique known to be effective is a variant of adversarial training [14, 28], which essentially trains a model
from attacked samples to gain robustness. Even though the
training samples are adversarially perturbed, guiding the
training with the correct label allows the model to learn features that are not fooled by similar perturbations.
Among the adversarial training family, one promising
and popular way to enhance robustness of the small student network is adversarial distillation (AD), which uses a
robustly pre-trained teacher to guide the student. In an extenstion of knowledge distillation [18] which uses the pretrained teacher to approximate the label distribution of the
data, many AD methods [19, 45, 46] use the pretrained robust teacher network which approximates the label distribution of adversarial examples aimed at the student network.
For such AD methods, an underlying assumption is that
the robustness contained within the pretrained teacher is
maintained along the adversarial distillation process. In
other words, we expect the teacher to provide a defense

24482

