This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Solving the Catastrophic Forgetting Problem in Generalized Category Discovery
Xinzi Cao1,2 ,* Xiawu Zheng2,3⇤ , Guanhong Wang4
Weijiang Yu1 , Yunhang Shen6 , Ke Li6 , Yutong Lu1†, Yonghong Tian2,8†
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Xiamen University
4
Zhejiang University, 5 Tecent Youtu Lab, 6 Peking University
caoxz@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

zhengxiawu@xmu.edu.cn

{weijiangyu8, shenyunhang01}@gmail.com
luyutong@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) aims to identify
a mix of known and novel categories within unlabeled data
sets, providing a more realistic setting for image recognition. Essentially, GCD needs to remember existing patterns thoroughly to recognize novel categories. Recent
state-of-the-art method SimGCD transfers the knowledge
from known-class data to the learning of novel classes
through debiased learning. However, some patterns are
catastrophically forgot during adaptation and thus lead to
poor performance in novel categories classification. To address this issue, we propose a novel learning approach, LegoGCD, which is seamlessly integrated into previous methods to enhance the discrimination of novel classes while
maintaining performance on previously encountered known
classes. Specifically, we design two types of techniques
termed as Local Entropy Regularization (LER) and Dualviews Kullback–Leibler divergence constraint (DKL). The
LER optimizes the distribution of potential known class
samples in unlabeled data, thus ensuring the preservation of
knowledge related to known categories while learning novel
classes. Meanwhile, DKL introduces Kullback–Leibler divergence to encourage the model to produce a similar prediction distribution of two view samples from the same image. In this way, it successfully avoids mismatched prediction and generates more reliable potential known class samples simultaneously. Extensive experiments validate that the
proposed LegoGCD effectively addresses the known category forgetting issue across all datasets, e.g., delivering
a 7.74% and 2.51% accuracy boost on known and novel
classes in CUB, respectively. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/Cliffia123/LegoGCD.
* Equal Contribution.
† Joint Corresponding Authors.

guanhongwang@zju.edu.cn

tristanli@tencent.com

yhtian@pku.edu.cn

72.18%
(↑ 7.74)

Catastrophic
forgetting
64.44%
57.82%

(a) Baseline SimGCD [39]

60.33%
(↑ 2.51)

(b) Ours LegoGCD

Figure 1. Visualization of the accuracy results in unlabeled dataset
on CUB dataset [37] during training. (a) shows a decrease in the
accuracy of known (Old) classes (green) in the baseline as the accuracy of novel (New) classes (orange) increases. (b) demonstrates
that LegoGCD solves the catastrophic forgetting problem and surpasses the baseline by a significant margin of 7.74.

1. Introduction
Deep learning have achieved superior performance on computer vision tasks [4, 11, 24, 25, 30, 34], particularly on
image classification [10, 12, 27, 28, 51]. However, conventional methods work in a close-world setting, where
all training data comes with pre-defined classes. Consequently, deploying these models in real-world scenarios with potential novel classes becomes a considerable
challenge. Furthermore, these achievements rely heavily on large-scale annotated dataset, which is not easily
accessible in realistic scenarios. To address these challenges, a new paradigm of Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) [1, 7, 9, 23, 36, 39, 45, 46] has been proposed
and attracts increasing attention in recent years.
The goal of GCD is to train a classification model capable of recognizing both known and novel categories within
unlabeled data. To be clear, GCD distinguishes itself from
the Novel Class Discovery (NCD) [8], which relies on an

16880

