This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DRESS : Instructing Large Vision-Language Models to
Align and Interact with Humans via Natural Language Feedback
WARNING: This paper contains qualitative examples which are offensive in nature.
https://dresslvlm.github.io/

Yangyi Chen1,2 *, Karan Sikka1 , Michael Cogswell1 , Heng Ji2 , Ajay Divakaran1
1
SRI International 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
yangyic3@illinois.edu
Abstract
We present DRESS , a large vision language model
(LVLM) that innovatively exploits Natural Language feedback (NLF) from Large Language Models to enhance its
alignment and interactions by addressing two key limitations
in the state-of-the-art LVLMs. First, prior LVLMs generally rely only on the instruction finetuning stage to enhance
alignment with human preferences. Without incorporating
extra feedback, they are still prone to generate unhelpful,
hallucinated, or harmful responses. Second, while the visual
instruction tuning data is generally structured in a multiturn dialogue format, the connections and dependencies
among consecutive conversational turns are weak. This reduces the capacity for effective multi-turn interactions. To
tackle these, we propose a novel categorization of the NLF
into two key types: critique and refinement. The critique
NLF identifies the strengths and weaknesses of the responses
and is used to align the LVLMs with human preferences.
The refinement NLF offers concrete suggestions for improvement and is adopted to improve the interaction ability of the
LVLMs– which focuses on LVLMs’ ability to refine responses
by incorporating feedback in multi-turn interactions. To
address the non-differentiable nature of NLF, we generalize
conditional reinforcement learning for training. Our experimental results demonstrate that DRESS can generate more
helpful (9.76%), honest (11.52%), and harmless (21.03%)
responses, and more effectively learn from feedback during
multi-turn interactions compared to SOTA LVLMs.

1. Introduction
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) can perceive the
visual world and follow the instructions to generate userfriendly responses [6, 43, 90]. This is achieved by effectively
combining large-scale visual instruction finetuning [78] with
* Work done during internship at SRI International.

Figure 1. We instruct DRESS to improve both alignment with
human preferences and interaction ability via natural language
feedback, which is categorized into critique and refinement.

large language models (LLMs) [5, 53].
However, existing LVLMs solely leverage the LLMsgenerated or hand-crafted datasets to achieve alignment
via supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [6, 43, 78]. While it’s
effective at transforming LVLMs from caption generators
to instruction-following models, LVLMs can still generate
responses that are unhelpful, hallucinated, or even harmful (see Figure 4). This indicates that their present level of
alignment with human preference is still relatively low [81].
In addition, although existing work motivates to structure
visual instruction tuning samples in multi-turn formats, the
connection and dependencies among various turns are weak,
which restricts the interaction ability of the LVLMs. Here the
interaction ability measures whether LVLMs can effectively
leverage the previous context in multi-turn interactions and
refine their responses [72]. These two limitations restrict the
potential of LVLMs to serve as visual assistants in practice.
In this work, we introduce DRESS , an LVLM
distinctively trained through the application of Natural

14239

