This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-agent Collaborative Perception
via Motion-aware Robust Communication Network
Shixin Hong1 , Yu Liu2 †, Zhi Li1 , Shaohui Li1 , You He2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University

1

hsx22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyu77360132@126.com,
{zhilizl, lishaohui}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, heyou@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Collaborative perception allows for information sharing between multiple agents, such as vehicles and infrastructure, to obtain a comprehensive view of the environment through communication and fusion. Current research
on multi-agent collaborative perception systems often assumes ideal communication and perception environments
and neglects the effect of real-world noise such as pose
noise, motion blur, and perception noise. To address this
gap, in this paper, we propose a novel motion-aware robust communication network (MRCNet) that mitigates noise
interference and achieves accurate and robust collaborative perception. MRCNet consists of two main components:
multi-scale robust fusion (MRF) addresses pose noise by developing cross-semantic multi-scale enhanced aggregation
to fuse features of different scales, while motion enhanced
mechanism (MEM) captures motion context to compensate
for information blurring caused by moving objects. Experimental results on popular collaborative 3D object detection datasets demonstrate that MRCNet outperforms competing methods in noisy scenarios with improved perception
performance using less bandwidth. Our code will be released at https://github.com/IndigoChildren/collaborativeperception-MRCNet.

1. Introduction
Collaborative perception enables information sharing
among multiple agents, including vehicles and infrastructure, to provide a comprehensive view of the environment
through information communication and fusion [37]. This
helps individual autonomous vehicles to tackle challenging
perception scenarios, such as physical occlusion or longrange detection [27]. Collaborative perception technology
has gained significant attention due to its advantages [20].
Previous works on multi-agent collaborative perception
†Corresponding author: Yu Liu.

systems focus on improving perception performance by designing superior fusion modules [2, 14, 29, 35] and effective communication strategies [8, 24, 33]. For example, the
CoBEVT [39] framework uses sparse transformers [32] to
capture local and global spatial interactions across agents.
The UMC [34] framework optimises communication by using a two-stage entropy-based selection mechanism. However, these frameworks assume ideal communication and
perception environments [7], while real-world scenarios are
affected by noise, such as pose noise in vehicle localization, perception noise in raw data [21], and the motion blur
in fast-moving object detection. These noises cannot be ignored for real-world applications of multi-agent collaborative systems. Unfortunately, studies on robust collaborative
perception with real-world noise are largely limited.
In fact, different forms of noise in the real world can affect the performance of collaborative perception systems in
different ways. For example, when noise interferes with the
positioning system, it affects the accuracy of pose information. Pose information is vital for fusing the perception data
(e.g., raw data, intermediate features, or detection outputs)
of the collaborative agents in different coordinates [40].
Thus, pose noise can lead to information misalignment and
inconsistency among agents [26] during data fusion, resulting in a reduced system performance. Perception noise introduces distortions into the sensor data, which affects the
final performance of the perception system. In addition, the
presence of motion blur due to rapid object movement affects the accuracy of target detection [1, 9, 15, 30].
However, the development of a robust collaborative perception system against real-world noise is complicated by
the following challenges. First, a robust fusion strategy that
adequately processes the multi-source perception data is required to deal with the perceptual misalignment caused by
pose noise. Second, a feature selection strategy that filters
out highly informative features is crucial to reduce bandwidth consumption and improve the efficiency of multiagent collaboration [28]. Finally, it is desirable to find a sta-

15301

