This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Is Ego Status All You Need for Open-Loop End-to-End Autonomous Driving?
Zhiqi Li1,2 *, Zhiding Yu2†, Shiyi Lan2 , Jiahan Li1 , Jan Kautz2 , Tong Lu1 , Jose M. Alvarez2
1

2

National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University

NVIDIA

1. Introduction
End-to-end autonomous driving aims to jointly consider
perception and planning in a full-stack manner [1, 5, 32,
35]. An underlying motivation is to evaluate autonomous
vehicle (AV) perception as a means to an end (planning),
instead of overfitting to certain perception metrics.
Unlike perception, the planning is generally much more
open-ended and hard to quantify [6, 7]. This open-ended
nature of planning would ideally favor a closed-loop eval* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
† Corresponding author: zhidingy@nvidia.com.

Trajectories

Ego Status

Ego Status

(a.1) Pipeline of AD-MLP

BEV Net

Perception

MLP

Past Trajectories

End-to-end autonomous driving recently emerged as a
promising research direction to target autonomy from a
full-stack perspective. Along this line, many of the latest
works follow an open-loop evaluation setting on nuScenes
to study the planning behavior. In this paper, we delve
deeper into the problem by conducting thorough analyses
and demystifying more devils in the details. We initially
observed that the nuScenes dataset, characterized by relatively simple driving scenarios, leads to an under-utilization
of perception information in end-to-end models incorporating ego status, such as the ego vehicle’s velocity. These
models tend to rely predominantly on the ego vehicle’s status for future path planning. Beyond the limitations of the
dataset, we also note that current metrics do not comprehensively assess the planning quality, leading to potentially
biased conclusions drawn from existing benchmarks. To
address this issue, we introduce a new metric to evaluate whether the predicted trajectories adhere to the road.
We further propose a simple baseline able to achieve competitive results without relying on perception annotations.
Given the current limitations on the benchmark and metrics, we suggest the community reassess relevant prevailing research and be cautious about whether the continued pursuit of state-of-the-art would yield convincing and
universal conclusions. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/NVlabs/BEV-Planner.

MLP

Abstract
Trajectories

(a.2) Pipeline of Ego-MLP

Prediction

Planner
Trajectories

Sensors
Ego Status

Ego Status

(b) Commonly Used Pipeline of End-to-End Autonomous Driving Model

BEV Net

BEV
Features

Attention

MLP
Trajectories

Sensors
Ego Status

Ego Query

Ego Status

(c) Pipeline of Our BEV-Planner

Figure 1. (a) AD-MLP uses both ego status and past trajectory GTs
as input. Our reproduced version (Ego-MLP) drops the past trajectories. (b) The existing end-to-end autonomous driving pipeline
consists of perception, prediction, and planning modules. Ego status can be integrated into the bird’s-eye view (BEV) generation
module or within the planning module. (c) We design a simple
baseline for comparison with existing methods. The simple baseline does not leverage the perception or prediction module and directly predicts the final trajectories based on BEV features.

uation setting where other agents could react to the behavior of the ego vehicle, and the raw sensor data could also
change accordingly. However, both agent behavior modeling and real-world data simulation within closed-loop simulators [8, 19] remain challenging open problems to date.
As such, closed-loop evaluation inevitably introduces considerable domain gaps to the real world.
Open-loop evaluation, on the other hand, aims to treat
human driving as the ground truth and formulate planning
as imitation learning [13]. Such formulation allows the
readily usage of real-world datasets via simple log-replay,
avoiding the domain gaps from simulation. It also offers
other advantages, such as the capacity to train and validate models in complex and diverse traffic scenarios, which
are often difficult to generate with high fidelity in simulations [5]. For these benefits, a well-established body of re14864

