This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pre-trained Model Guided Fine-Tuning for Zero-Shot Adversarial Robustness
Sibo Wang1,2 Jie Zhang1,2 Zheng Yuan1,2 Shiguang Shan1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{wangsibo22z, zhangjie, sgshan}@ict.ac.cn , zheng.yuan@vipl.ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained vision-language models like
CLIP have demonstrated impressive performance across
various tasks, and exhibit remarkable zero-shot generalization capability, while they are also vulnerable to imperceptible adversarial examples. Existing works typically employ adversarial training (fine-tuning) as a defense method
against adversarial examples. However, direct application
to the CLIP model may result in overfitting, compromising the model’s capacity for generalization. In this paper,
we propose Pre-trained Model Guided Adversarial FineTuning (PMG-AFT) method, which leverages supervision
from the original pre-trained model by carefully designing
an auxiliary branch, to enhance the model’s zero-shot adversarial robustness. Specifically, PMG-AFT minimizes the
distance between the features of adversarial examples in the
target model and those in the pre-trained model, aiming to
preserve the generalization features already captured by the
pre-trained model. Extensive Experiments on 15 zero-shot
datasets demonstrate that PMG-AFT significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art method, improving the top-1 robust accuracy by an average of 4.99%. Furthermore, our
approach consistently improves clean accuracy by an average of 8.72%. Our code is available at here.1

(a) Robust Accuracy

(b) Clean Accuracy

1. Introduction
Vision-language models pre-trained on large dataset
have achieved impressive success in numerous tasks, such
as image classification [22, 36], text-to-image generation
[37, 38], image caption [7, 27]. They have also showcased
excellent zero-shot generalization ability. As for CLIP [36],
given a test image and a set of candidate class labels, it computes the similarity between the image embedding and the
embedding of each candidate class label and predicts the
class as the one with the highest similarity. While contemporary researches predominantly focus on enhancing their
1 https://github.com/serendipity1122/Pre-trained-Model-Guided-FineTuning-for-Zero-Shot-Adversarial-Robustness

Figure 1. Zero-shot robust accuracy (a) and clean accuracy (b) of
CLIP and CLIPs fine-tuned on TinyImageNet [12] using various
methods across multiple datasets. FT-Standard: CLIP fine-tuned
on clean samples. FT-TeCoA: CLIP fine-tuned using [32]. PMGAFT (ours): CLIP fine-tuned by our method.

performance [27], comparatively less attention is devoted
to investigating their robustness problem [50]. Deep models, including those at a large scale, are well-known to be
vulnerable to adversarial examples [18, 30]. By introducing
deliberately designed imperceptible perturbations, it is easy
to induce model failures. Since an increasing number of
large-scale models are deployed in security-related downstream tasks, it is imperative to enhance the robustness of
such models. To address the threat of adversarial examples,

24502

