This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Z ∗ : Zero-shot Style Transfer via Attention Reweighting
Yingying Deng◦,1 , Xiangyu He◦,1 ,Fan Tang ,2 , Weiming Dong1
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
dyy15@outlook.com, xiangyu.he@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, tfan.108@gmail.com, weiming.dong@ia.ac.cn

VCT
ICCV'23

Ours

InST
CVPR '23

CAST
SIGGRAPH'22

StyTr²
CVPR '22

ArtFlow
CVPR '21

Figure 1. Image style transfer results by the proposed Z ∗ . Top: The stylized results by style/content references of different types. Our method
can well balance the contents and styles in the results. Bottom: Comparisons with state-of-the-art methods, including diffusion-based models
(VCT [9] and InST [51]), transformer-based model (StyTr2 [13]), flow-based model (ArtFlow [2]), and CNN-based model (CAST [50]).
Our method excels in generating stylized images with vivid style patterns and accurate content details.

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress in image style transfer,
formulating style in the context of art is inherently subjective
and challenging. In contrast to existing methods, this study
shows that vanilla diffusion models can directly extract
style information and seamlessly integrate the generative
prior into the content image without retraining. Specifically,
we adopt dual denoising paths to represent content/style
references in latent space and then guide the content image
denoising process with style latent codes. We further
reveal that the cross-attention mechanism in latent diffusion
models tends to blend the content and style images, resulting
in stylized outputs that deviate from the original content
image. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a crossattention reweighting strategy. Through theoretical analysis
and experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness and
superiority of the diffusion-based zero-shot style transfer
via attention reweighting, Z-STAR.
◦ These authors contributed equally to this work.

Corresponding author: Fan Tang.

1. Introduction
The task of image style transfer has received significant
attention in the research community, with numerous machine
learning techniques utilized, such as convolutional neural
networks (CNN) [11, 15, 18, 21, 32, 38], flow-based networks [2], visual transformers (ViT) [13, 46], and diffusion
models [9, 51]. After completing the training process, the
output stylized image is generated based on a content and
style image, as shown in Figure 1. The generated image
retains the content layout from the input content while
adopting a similar style to that of the input style. In essence,
the networks are trained by ensuring that the generated image
and the content/style image exhibit content/style similarity.
While certain methods, such as [2, 13, 18], employ
the Gram matrix [15] to measure global style similarity
and achieve promising style transfer outcomes, the secondorder statistics contained in the Gram matrix are limited
in their ability to capture intricate style patterns and fail
to transfer corresponding local features from the content
image to the style image (e.g., hair and eyes in StyTr2 [13],

6934

