This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Paintbrush: Local Stylization of 3D Shapes with Cascaded Score Distillation
Dale Decatur
University of Chicago

Heart shaped sunglasses

Itai Lang
University of Chicago

Colorful crochet hat

Kfir Aberman
Snap Research

Gold chain necklace

Rana Hanocka
University of Chicago

Stained glass turtle shell

Figure 1. Utilizing only a text prompt as guidance, 3D Paintbrush seamlessly generates local stylized textures on bare meshes. Our
approach produces a localization map (yellow regions) and a highly detailed texture map which conforms to it.

Abstract
We present 3D Paintbrush, a technique for automatically texturing local semantic regions on meshes via text
descriptions. Our method is designed to operate directly
on meshes, producing texture maps which seamlessly integrate into standard graphics pipelines. We opt to simultaneously produce a localization map (to specify the edit region)
and a texture map which conforms to it. This approach improves the quality of both the localization and the stylization. To enhance the details and resolution of the textured
area, we leverage multiple stages of a cascaded diffusion
model to supervise our local editing technique with generative priors learned from images at different resolutions.
Our technique, referred to as Cascaded Score Distillation
(CSD), simultaneously distills scores at multiple resolutions
in a cascaded fashion, enabling control over both the granularity and global understanding of the supervision. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of 3D Paintbrush to locally
texture different semantic regions on a variety of shapes.
Project page: https://threedle.github.io/3dpaintbrush

edits. While some progress has been made on local editing using an explicit localization of the edit region [49, 67],
these regions are often coarse and lack fine-grained detail.
Highly-detailed and accurate localizations are important for
constraining the edits to be within a specific region, preventing changes unrelated to the target edit. Furthermore, while
meshes with texture maps are the de facto standard in graphics pipelines, existing local editing work does not natively
operate on meshes nor produce texture maps for them.

1. Introduction

In this work we develop 3D Paintbrush, a method for
automatically texturing local semantic regions on meshes
via text descriptions. Our method is designed to operate
directly on meshes, producing texture maps which seamlessly integrate into standard graphics pipelines. 3D Paintbrush is controlled via intuitive, free-form text input, allowing users to describe their edits using open vocabulary on
a wide range of meshes. Specifically, given an input mesh
and a text prompt, 3D Paintbrush produces the corresponding high-quality texture map and a localization region to
confine it. To enhance the details and resolution of the locally textured area, we introduce Cascaded Score Distillation (CSD) which leverages multiple stages of a cascaded
diffusion model. Our explicit localization masks can be
used to layer our edit texture onto existing textures.

The ability to edit existing high-quality 3D assets is a fundamental capability in 3D modeling workflows. Recent works
have shown exceptional results for text-driven 3D data creation [32, 38, 48, 53, 58, 59], but focus on making global

We opt to represent both our localization map and texture map as neural fields encoded by multi-layer perceptions. Our method synthesizes both a fine-grained localization mask and high-quality texture in tandem. Simultane-

4473

