This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Single Image Camera Calibration by Heatmap Regression to Recover
Fisheye Images Under Manhattan World Assumption
Nobuhiko Wakai1
Satoshi Sato1
Yasunori Ishii1
Takayoshi Yamashita2
1
2
Panasonic Holdings Corporation
Chubu University
{wakai.nobuhiko,sato.satoshi,ishii.yasunori}@jp.panasonic.com

takayoshi@isc.chubu.ac.jp

Abstract
A Manhattan world lying along cuboid buildings is useful for camera angle estimation. However, accurate and
robust angle estimation from fisheye images in the Manhattan world has remained an open challenge because general
scene images tend to lack constraints such as lines, arcs,
and vanishing points. To achieve higher accuracy and robustness, we propose a learning-based calibration method
that uses heatmap regression, which is similar to pose estimation using keypoints, to detect the directions of labeled
image coordinates. Simultaneously, our two estimators recover the rotation and remove fisheye distortion by remapping from a general scene image. Without considering
vanishing-point constraints, we find that additional points
for learning-based methods can be defined. To compensate
for the lack of vanishing points in images, we introduce auxiliary diagonal points that have the optimal 3D arrangement of spatial uniformity. Extensive experiments demonstrated that our method outperforms conventional methods
on large-scale datasets and with off-the-shelf cameras.

1. Introduction
In city scenes, image-based recognition methods are widely
used for cars, drones, and robots. It is desirable to recognize the directions in which roads exist for navigation, selfdriving, and driver assistance. To avoid colliding with cars
and pedestrians, it is more important to detect these objects
in front of a vehicle rather than at the sides in Figure 1. We
can obtain the travel direction from odometry, gyroscopes,
or accelerator sensors using these specific devices. However, for cars, drones, and robots, image-based angle estimation of the travel direction without these devices is better
for miniaturized and lightweight design. To determine the
origin of angles, a Manhattan world [12] defines orthogonal world coordinates along cuboid buildings and a grid
of streets. Although this image-based angle estimation is
a long-studied topic in areas of geometric tasks [1, 4, 51],

Input fisheye image

Front direction
Side direction
Recovered images in a Manhattan world
Remap

VP
estimator

𝜙𝜙

𝜓𝜓

Extrinsics

VP and ADP
heatmaps
Distortion
estimator

𝜃𝜃

𝑓𝑓

𝑘𝑘1

Intrinsics

Figure 1. Our network estimates extrinsics and intrinsics in a
Manhattan world from a single image. Our estimated camera
parameters are used to fully recover images by remapping them
while distinguishing the front and side directions on the basis of
the Manhattan world. Cyan, magenta, and yellow lines indicate
the three orthogonal planes of the Manhattan frame in each of the
images. The input image is generated from [38].

accurate and robust angle estimation has remained an open
challenge because general scene images tend to lack constraints such as lines, arcs, and vanishing points (VPs).
To control cars, drones, and robots, images for recognition are needed that have a large field of view (FOV). Fisheye cameras have a larger FOV than other cameras, but fisheye images are highly distorted. After fisheye distortion has
been removed, we can use various learning-based recognition methods, such as object detection [25, 27], semantic
segmentation [10, 26], lane detection [15, 61], action recognition [50, 59], and action prediction [6, 20]. To recover
fisheye images, performing camera calibration before the
recognition tasks mentioned above is desirable.
Geometry-based calibration methods can estimate the
camera rotation and distortion from a distorted image [3, 32,
41, 57]. However, it is difficult for geometry-based methods
to calibrate cameras from images that contain few artificial

11884

