This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Super-Resolution Reconstruction from Bayer-Pattern Spike Streams
Yanchen Dong1 , Ruiqin Xiong1 ,* Jian Zhang2 , Zhaofei Yu3 , Xiaopeng Fan4 , Shuyuan Zhu5 , Tiejun Huang1,3
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
5
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
yanchendong@stu.pku.edu.cn, {rqxiong, zhangjian.sz, yuzf12, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn,
fxp@hit.edu.cn, eezsy@uestc.edu.cn

20000Hz

Spike camera is a neuromorphic vision sensor that can
capture highly dynamic scenes by generating a continuous
stream of binary spikes to represent the arrival of photons
at very high temporal resolution. Equipped with Bayer
color filter array (CFA), color spike camera (CSC) has
been invented to capture color information. Although spike
camera has already demonstrated great potential for highspeed imaging, its spatial resolution is limited compared
with conventional digital cameras. This paper proposes
a Color Spike Camera Super-Resolution (CSCSR) network
to super-resolve higher-resolution color images from spike
camera streams with Bayer CFA. To be specific, we first
propose a representation for Bayer-pattern spike streams,
exploring local temporal information with global perception to represent the binary data. Then we exploit the CFA
layout and sub-pixel level motion to collect temporal pixels for the spatial super-resolution of each color channel.
In particular, a residual-based module for feature refinement is developed to reduce the impact of motion estimation errors. Considering color correlation, we jointly utilize the multi-stage temporal-pixel features of color channels to reconstruct the high-resolution color image. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed scheme
can reconstruct satisfactory color images with both high
temporal and spatial resolution from low-resolution Bayerpattern spike streams. The source codes are available at
https://github.com/csycdong/CSCSR.

1. Introduction
With the quick development of high-speed vision applications such as autonomous driving and unmanned aerial ve* Corresponding author.

Lens
Photoreceptor

Light

Integrator

Dynamic
Scene

sW

Color Spike Camera

Comparator
(  )

Fire
Spike

Y

output

Abstract

reset

CFA

Inference

H

CSCSR

sH
HR Color Image

LR Spike Stream

HR Image

Synthetic Training Dataset

Training

W
N

O

CSC
Simulator
HR Videos

Figure 1. Pipeline of super-resolution reconstruction from Bayerpattern spike streams. The super-resolution scale is denoted as s.

hicles, the demand for cameras that can capture high-speed
motion and respond quickly is increasing. Most conventional digital cameras use a certain exposure time window to
accumulate photoelectric signals and create a snapshot image, which requires the scene to be still during the exposure
interval. Due to the exposure time, conventional cameras
suffer from motion blur when capturing high-speed scenes.
To be specific, a given point of moving objects can move
during exposure time, bringing undesired motion blur to the
image. Therefore, it’s hard for conventional digital cameras
to meet the requirements of high-speed imaging.
Mimicking the structure of human vision, neuromorphic cameras with ultra-high temporal resolution (e.g.,
20,000Hz) show great potential in capturing high-speed
scenes. A well-known type of neuromorphic camera called

24871

