This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhotoMaker: Customizing Realistic Human Photos via Stacked ID Embedding
Zhen Li∗1,2 , Mingdeng Cao∗2,3 , Xintao Wang†2 , Zhongang Qi2 , Ming-Ming Cheng†4,1 , Ying Shan2
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 The University of Tokyo
4
NKIARl, Shenzhen Futian
https://photo-maker.github.io/
A man wearing
headphones with red hair

A woman wearing
sunglasses and necklace

User inputs

A man wearing a
Christmas hat

A boy wearing a
doctoral cap

A man wearing a spacesuit

A man wearing
headphones

A woman in the snow

A woman holding a bottle
of red wine

User inputs

(a) Attributes change
A man coding in front of a
computer

A man in a helmet and
vest riding a motorcycle

User inputs

User inputs

User inputs
A photo of a woman

(b) Artwork / old-photo to reality
User inputs

A woman with red hair

(c) Identity mixing

Figure 1. Given a few images of input ID(s), the proposed PhotoMaker can generate diverse personalized ID images based on the text
prompt in a single forward pass. Our method can well preserve the ID information from the input image pool while generating realistic
human photos. PhotoMaker also empowers many interesting applications such as (a) changing attributes, (b) bringing persons from
artworks or old photos into reality, or (c) performing identity mixing. (Zoom-in for the best view)

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image generation have made
remarkable progress in synthesizing realistic human photos
conditioned on given text prompts. However, existing personalized generation methods cannot simultaneously satisfy the requirements of high efficiency, promising identity
(ID) fidelity, and flexible text controllability. In this work,
we introduce PhotoMaker, an efficient personalized text∗ Interns in ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

† Corresponding authors.

to-image generation method, which mainly encodes an arbitrary number of input ID images into a stack ID embedding for preserving ID information. Such an embedding,
serving as a unified ID representation, can not only encapsulate the characteristics of the same input ID comprehensively, but also accommodate the characteristics of different IDs for subsequent integration. This paves the way for
more intriguing and practically valuable applications. Besides, to drive the training of our PhotoMaker, we propose
an ID-oriented data construction pipeline to assemble the

8640

