This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation
via Iterative Support-Query Correspondence Mining
Jiahao Nie1,2 * Yun Xing2 * Gongjie Zhang3 Pei Yan4,2 Aoran Xiao2
Yap-Peng Tan2 Alex C. Kot2 Shijian Lu2†
1
Interdisciplinary Graduate Programme, Nanyang Technological University
2
Nanyang Technological University 3 Black Sesame Technologies
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{jiahao007,xing0047}@e.ntu.edu.sg

gjz@ieee.org

yanpei@hust.edu.cn

{aoran.xiao,eyptan,eackot,shijian.lu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation (CD-FSS) poses
the challenge of segmenting novel categories from a distinct domain using only limited exemplars. In this paper,
we undertake a comprehensive study of CD-FSS and uncover two crucial insights: (i) the necessity of a fine-tuning
stage to effectively transfer the learned meta-knowledge
across domains, and (ii) the overfitting risk during the
naı̈ve fine-tuning due to the scarcity of novel category examples. With these insights, we propose a novel crossdomain fine-tuning strategy that addresses the challenging
CD-FSS tasks. We first design Bi-directional Few-shot Prediction (BFP), which establishes support-query correspondence in a bi-directional manner, crafting augmented supervision to reduce the overfitting risk. Then we further extend BFP into Iterative Few-shot Adaptor (IFA), which is
a recursive framework to capture the support-query correspondence iteratively, targeting maximal exploitation of supervisory signals from the sparse novel category samples.
Extensive empirical evaluations show that our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-arts (+7.8%), which
verifies that IFA tackles the cross-domain challenges and
mitigates the overfitting simultaneously. The code is available at: https://github.com/niejiahao1998/IFA.

1. Introduction
Few-Shot Segmentation (FSS) aims to segment novel categories based on very limited support exemplars, typically
by transferring category-agnostic knowledge learned from
abundant base categories to novel categories [10, 13, 40,
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. We investigate two types of category correspondence,
left: Support-to-Query (S2Q) and right: Support-to-Query-toSupport (S2Q2S) under four experimental setups (a-d). (a) Indomain performances without fine-tuning (FT) set oracle baselines
for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation (CD-FSS). (b) Crossdomain results without fine-tuning suffer from severe performance
drops, which verifies the necessity of bridging domain gap for CDFSS. (c) Cross-domain setups with naı̈ve fine-tuning only bring
small performance gains, which is attributed to the overfitting risk
of CD-FSS fine-tuning. Notably, there also underlies rich unexplored category correspondence in S2Q2S. (d) Cross-domain setup
with our proposed Iterative Few-Shot Adaptor (IFA) achieve significant performance gains. IFA comprehensively exploits maximum information content in the given data by capturing both S2Q
and S2Q2S category correspondence during fine-tuning.

43, 46, 47]. Similar to other few-shot tasks [6, 24, 27,
28, 57, 63, 65], FSS is generally addressed with metalearning [1, 6, 37, 50, 54] and learns generalizable category
correspondence from constructed support-query pairs.
Current state-of-the-art FSS approaches [13, 43] have
demonstrated impressive performance when novel categories fall in the same domain with base categories, yet
still suffer from severe performance drop when a clear domain gap is present [33] (e.g., base categories from Pascal
VOC [11], and novel categories from Deepglobe [8]). To

3380

