This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring the Transferability of Visual Prompting for Multimodal
Large Language Models
Yichi Zhang1,2 Yinpeng Dong1,2
Siyuan Zhang1 Tianzan Min1 Hang Su1,3
Jun Zhu1,2,3
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
RealAI 3 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong
{zyc22@mails., dongyinpeng@, siyuan-z20@mails., suhangss@, dcszj@}tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Although Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
have demonstrated promising versatile capabilities, their
performance is still inferior to specialized models on downstream tasks, which makes adaptation necessary to enhance
their utility. However, fine-tuning methods require independent training for every model, leading to huge computation
and memory overheads. In this paper, we propose a novel
setting where we aim to improve the performance of diverse
MLLMs with a group of shared parameters optimized for a
downstream task. To achieve this, we propose Transferable
Visual Prompting (TVP), a simple and effective approach to
generate visual prompts that can transfer to different models
and improve their performance on downstream tasks after
trained on only one model. We introduce two strategies to
address the issue of cross-model feature corruption of existing visual prompting methods and enhance the transferability of the learned prompts, including 1) Feature Consistency
Alignment: which imposes constraints to the prompted feature changes to maintain task-agnostic knowledge; 2) Task
Semantics Enrichment: which encourages the prompted images to contain richer task-specific semantics with language
guidance. We validate the effectiveness of TVP through extensive experiments with 6 modern MLLMs on a wide variety of tasks ranging from object recognition and counting to
multimodal reasoning and hallucination correction.

1. Introduction
The recent success of Large Language Models (LLMs) [45,
49, 50] has motivated researchers to explore their capabilities in solving multimodal tasks. Tremendous efforts have
been made to develop Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) [2, 9, 34, 37, 69], which seamlessly integrate visual input into LLMs by aligning image features with text
embeddings. These models have achieved remarkable performance in image understanding and reasoning [15, 32, 59]
Corresponding authors. Code available at https://github.
com/zycheiheihei/Transferable-Visual-Prompting

(a)

(b)

Benefit Different MLLMs

MLLM
#1

MLLM
#2

MLLM
#3

··· MLLM
#N

Target
Task

Target
Task

Target
Task

Target
Task

+36.4
+25.4

ZS

VP

EVP

+28.8

+26.9

TVP (ours)

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of problem setting: We aim to improve
the performance of different MLLMs on a specific task with a set
of shared parameters. This is achieved by exploiting the transferability of the visual prompts trained on one model and using them
on other models. (b) Demonstration of the effect: We show the
partial results on SVHN [42] with the visual prompt trained on
MiniGPT-4 [69] and tested on InstructBLIP [9], BLIP2 [34] and
BLIVA [21]. Compared with the existing visual prompting methods [3, 56], the proposed Transferable Visual Prompting (TVP)
improves different models with larger margins. Detailed results
are in Sec. 4.2. ZS is for zero-shot inference when non-prompted.

and serve as “foundation models” [5] for a variety of tasks.
Despite their excellent generalization performance, existing
MLLMs usually lag behind the specialized state-of-the-art
models on downstream tasks (e.g., image classification), especially when evaluated in zero-shot manner [59, 62]. This
is because MLLMs are primarily pre-trained on massive
data and fine-tuned on a small amount of modality alignment and instruction data [9, 37, 69], while lacking specialized training on certain tasks. Consequently, when users
aim to employ MLLMs for downstream tasks, their performance is far from satisfactory, making it necessary to develop effective and efficient strategies to bridge this gap and
enhance the utility of MLLMs in task-specific applications.

26562

