This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Emu Edit: Precise Image Editing via Recognition and Generation Tasks
Shelly Sheynin* , Adam Polyak* , Uriel Singer* , Yuval Kirstain* , Amit Zohar* , Oron Ashual,
Devi Parikh and Yaniv Taigman
GenAI, Meta

Dress the emu with a fireman outfit

Let’s see it graduating

Mark the drinks

Figure 1. Emu Edit is a multi-tasking model that combines various editing (left, middle) and vision (right) tasks for precise image editing.

Abstract
Instruction-based image editing holds immense potential
for a variety of applications, as it enables users to perform any editing operation using a natural language instruction. However, current models in this domain often
struggle with accurately executing user instructions. We
present Emu Edit, a multi-task image editing model which
sets state-of-the-art results in instruction-based image editing. To develop Emu Edit we train it to multi-task across an
unprecedented range of tasks, such as region-based editing, free-form editing, and Computer Vision tasks, all of
which are formulated as generative tasks. Additionally, to
enhance Emu Edit’s multi-task learning abilities, we provide it with learned task embeddings which guide the generation process towards the correct edit type. Both these
elements are essential for Emu Edit’s outstanding performance. Furthermore, we show that Emu Edit can generalize to new tasks, such as image inpainting, super-resolution,
and compositions of editing tasks, with just a few labeled
examples. This capability offers a significant advantage in
scenarios where high-quality samples are scarce. Lastly,
to facilitate a more rigorous and informed assessment of
instructable image editing models, we release a new challenging and versatile benchmark that includes seven different image editing tasks. 1

1 Project Page: https://emu-edit.metademolab.com/
* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Image editing is a widely-used application that millions engage with every day. Popular image editing tools, however, either demand considerable expertise and are timeconsuming to use, or are quite limited, providing only a
predefined set of editing operations, such as specific filters. Instruction-based image editing [2, 25] attempts to
resolve these limitations by allowing users to effortlessly
describe their editing goals using natural language instructions. For instance, a user can provide a model with an image and instruct it to “Dress the emu with a fireman outfit” or “Let’s see it graduating" (see Fig. 1). Nevertheless,
while instruction-based image editing models like InstructPix2Pix [2] are designed to process any given instruction,
they often struggle to accurately interpret and execute such
instructions. Moreover, their generalization is limited, often falling short on tasks that deviate slightly from those
they were trained on (see Fig. 3). To address these gaps, we
introduce Emu Edit, the first image editing model trained on
an extensive and diverse set of tasks, including both image
editing and computer vision tasks. Emu Edit provides a substantial improvement in both compliance with the edit instruction and preservation of the visual fidelity of the original image. As we show through both automatic metrics [14]
and human judgments on two benchmarks [25], Emu Edit
achieves state-of-the-art results in instruction-based image
editing. The success of Emu Edit stems from two key contributions. First, we train our model to multi-task across sixteen distinct image editing tasks. These tasks span regionbased editing tasks, free-form editing tasks and computer

8871

