This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ControlRoom3D: Room Generation using Semantic Proxy Rooms
Jonas Schult1,2∗ Sam Tsai1 Lukas Höllein1,3∗ Bichen Wu1 Jialiang Wang1 Chih-Yao Ma1 Kunpeng Li1
Xiaofang Wang1 Felix Wimbauer1,3∗ Zijian He1 Peizhao Zhang1 Bastian Leibe2 Peter Vajda1 Ji Hou1
2

RWTH Aachen University

3

Technical University of Munich

Cyberpunk bedroom

Meta GenAI

3D Proxy Room

🎛️ ControlRoom3D

Watertight 3D Mesh

Rustic farmhouse bedroom

1

Figure 1. Textured 3D Mesh Generation from 3D Semantic Layouts and Text Prompts. Given a textual description of the overall room
style and a rough 3D room layout based on 3D semantic bounding boxes, our method called ControlRoom3D creates diverse and globally
plausible 3D room meshes which align well with the room layout.

Abstract
Manually creating 3D environments for AR/VR applications is a complex process requiring expert knowledge
in 3D modeling software. Pioneering works facilitate this
process by generating room meshes conditioned on textual
style descriptions. Yet, many of these automatically generated 3D meshes do not adhere to typical room layouts, compromising their plausibility, e.g., by placing several beds in
one bedroom. To address these challenges, we present ControlRoom3D, a novel method to generate high-quality room
meshes. Central to our approach is a user-defined 3D semantic proxy room that outlines a rough room layout based
on semantic bounding boxes and a textual description of the
overall room style. Our key insight is that when rendered
to 2D, this 3D representation provides valuable geometric
and semantic information to control powerful 2D models to
generate 3D consistent textures and geometry that aligns
well with the proxy room. Backed up by an extensive study
including quantitative metrics and qualitative user evaluations, our method generates diverse and globally plausible 3D room meshes, thus empowering users to design 3D
rooms effortlessly without specialized knowledge.
∗ Work performed during an internship at Meta GenAI.

Project Page: jonasschult.github.io/ControlRoom3D

1. Introduction
Generating high-quality mesh representations of 3D scenes
is essential for creating immersive experiences in AR/VR
applications. However, manually synthesizing these 3D environments is a complex task that requires expertise in 3D
modeling software [1, 18], posing a substantial barrier for
end-users looking to create personalized scenes. Fueled by
the recent progress in 2D generative models [13, 20, 40, 46],
an emerging line of work aims to simplify the creation process of 3D objects [9, 27, 49, 53, 54] or even room-scale
scenes [10, 16, 21, 58]. Among them, the recent work
of Text2Room [21] creates compelling textured 3D roomscale meshes using a text prompt describing the scene and
an off-the-shelf text-to-image model [40]. This is achieved
by iteratively inpainting missing 2D regions of the rendered
3D mesh from a novel viewpoint. Subsequently, depth is
estimated for the new content, followed by backprojection
and fusion with the current 3D mesh. Despite Text2Room’s
ability to generate locally convincing meshes with detailed
textures, it suffers from two crucial shortcomings due to its
iterative mesh inpainting strategy solely based on local context: First, Text2Room does not follow conventional room
layouts, yielding unrealistic spatial arrangements of objects
and walls. Secondly, it tends to duplicate the most promi-

6201

