This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Magic Tokens: Select Diverse Tokens for Multi-modal Object Re-Identification
Pingping Zhang1,2 ,* Yuhao Wang1 , Yang Liu1 , Zhengzheng Tu2,3 and Huchuan Lu1
1
School of Future Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation, Anhui University, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, China
{zhpp,ly,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, 924973292@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zhengzhengahu@163.com

Abstract
Single-modal object re-identification (ReID) faces great
challenges in maintaining robustness within complex visual scenarios. In contrast, multi-modal object ReID utilizes complementary information from diverse modalities,
showing great potentials for practical applications. However, previous methods may be easily affected by irrelevant backgrounds and usually ignore the modality gaps. To
address above issues, we propose a novel learning framework named EDITOR to select diverse tokens from vision Transformers for multi-modal object ReID. We begin with a shared vision Transformer to extract tokenized
features from different input modalities. Then, we introduce a Spatial-Frequency Token Selection (SFTS) module
to adaptively select object-centric tokens with both spatial and frequency information. Afterwards, we employ
a Hierarchical Masked Aggregation (HMA) module to facilitate feature interactions within and across modalities.
Finally, to further reduce the effect of backgrounds, we
propose a Background Consistency Constraint (BCC) and
an Object-Centric Feature Refinement (OCFR). They are
formulated as two new loss functions, which improve the
feature discrimination with background suppression. As
a result, our framework can generate more discriminative features for multi-modal object ReID. Extensive experiments on three multi-modal ReID benchmarks verify
the effectiveness of our methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/924973292/EDITOR.

1. Introduction
Object re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve specific objects (e.g., person, vehicle) across non-overlapping cameras. Over the past few decades, object ReID has advanced
significantly. However, traditional object ReID with singlemodal input encounters substantial challenges [17], partic* Corresponding author

Previous Methods

EDITOR

Aggregate

Aggregate
Select

Extract with
Background

(a)

Extract

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 1. Comparison of different methods and token selections.
(a) Framework of previous methods; (b) Framework of our proposed EDITOR; (c) RGB images; (d) Spatial-based token selection; (e) Multi-modal frequency transform; (f) Frequency-based
token selection; (g) Selected tokens in the NIR modality; (h) Selected tokens in the TIR modality.

ularly in complex visual scenarios, such as extreme illumination, thick fog and low image resolution. It can result in noticeable distortions in critical object regions, leading to disruptions during the retrieval process [53]. Therefore, there has been a notable shift toward multi-modal
approaches in recent years, capitalizing on diverse data
sources to enhance the feature robustness for practical applications [43, 44, 53]. However, as illustrated in Fig. 1, previous multi-modal ReID methods typically extract global
features from all regions of images in different modalities and subsequently aggregate them. Nevertheless, these

17117

