This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unifying Top-down and Bottom-up Scanpath Prediction Using Transformers
Zhibo Yang1,2 , Sounak Mondal1 , Seoyoung Ahn1 , Ruoyu Xue1 ,
Gregory Zelinsky1 , Minh Hoai1,3 , Dimitris Samaras1
1
Stony Brook University 2 Waymo LLC 3 VinAI Research

Most models of visual attention aim at predicting either top-down or bottom-up control, as studied using different visual search and free-viewing tasks. In this paper we propose the Human Attention Transformer (HAT),
a single model that predicts both forms of attention control. HAT uses a novel transformer-based architecture
and a simplified foveated retina that collectively create
a spatio-temporal awareness akin to the dynamic visual
working memory of humans. HAT not only establishes
a new state-of-the-art in predicting the scanpath of fixations made during target-present and target-absent visual
search and “taskless” free viewing, but also makes human
gaze behavior interpretable. Unlike previous methods that
rely on a coarse grid of fixation cells and experience information loss due to fixation discretization, HAT features
a sequential dense prediction architecture and outputs a
dense heatmap for each fixation, thus avoiding discretizing fixations. HAT sets a new standard in computational
attention, which emphasizes effectiveness, generality, and
interpretability. HAT’s demonstrated scope and applicability will likely inspire the development of new attention
models that can better predict human behavior in various attention-demanding scenarios. Code is available at
https://github.com/cvlab-stonybrook/HAT.

1. Introduction
Attention, a cognitive process that allows humans to selectively allocate their limited cognitive resources to specific
regions of the visual world, plays a crucial role in human
perception system. Understanding and predicting human
(visual) attention will enable numerous applications such as
assistive technologies that can anticipate a person’s needs
and intents, perceptions system that can prioritize processing regions of human interest and enhancing the accuracy
and speed of various visual tasks (e.g., object detection),
and image/video compression that allocates more resources
to encoding and transmitting high-attention regions, optimizing the use of bandwidth.

cNSS

Abstract

Target-present search

Target-absent search

5.086

3.103
2.606

Category 1
HAT (ours)

1.977

Chen et al [10]

Free viewing

3.382
1.600

Category 1

IRL [62]

1.655

1.524

FFMs [63]

1.418

DeepGaze III [32]

Figure 1. Given an image, the proposed HAT is able to predict
scanpaths under three settings target-present search for TV; targetabsent scanpath for sink; and free viewing. Importantly, HAT
outperforms previous state-of-the-art scanpath prediction methods
on multiple datasets across three settings: target-present, targetabsent visual search and free viewing, that were studied separately.

Human attention control can take two broad forms. One
is bottom-up, meaning that attention saliency signals are
computed from the visual input and used to prioritize shifts
of attention. The same visual input should therefore lead to
the same shifts of bottom-up attention. The second type of
attention is top-down, meaning that a task or goal is used
to control attention. Given a kitchen scene, very different fixations are observed depending on whether a person
is searching for a clock or a microwave oven [67]. These
two types of attention control spawned two separate literatures on gaze fixation prediction (the accepted measure
of attention), one where studies use a free-viewing task to
study questions of bottom-up attention and the other using
a goal-directed task (typically, visual search) to study topdown attention control. Consequently, most models have
been designed to address either bottom-up or top-down attention, not both. Can a single model architecture predict
both bottom-up and top-down attention control?
Our answer to this question is HAT, a Human Attention Transformer that generally predicts scanpaths of fixations, meaning that it can be applied to both top-down visual search and bottom-up free viewing tasks (Figure 1).
Devising a unified model architecture capable of predicting
both bottom-up and top-down attention control is nontrivial:
1) predicting human fixation scanpaths requires the model

1683

