This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLM4SGG: Large Language Models for Weakly Supervised
Scene Graph Generation
Kibum Kim1 Kanghoon Yoon1 Jaehyeong Jeon1 Yeonjun In1 Jinyoung Moon2
Donghyun Kim3 Chanyoung Park1 *
1
KAIST 2 ETRI 3 Korea University
{kb.kim,ykhoon08,wogud405,yeonjun.in,cy.park}@kaist.ac.kr jymoon@etri.re.kr, d_kim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly-Supervised Scene Graph Generation (WSSGG)
research has recently emerged as an alternative to the fullysupervised approach that heavily relies on costly annotations. In this regard, studies on WSSGG have utilized image captions to obtain unlocalized triplets while primarily
focusing on grounding the unlocalized triplets over image
regions. However, they have overlooked the two issues involved in the triplet formation process from the captions:
1) Semantic over-simplification issue arises when extracting
triplets from captions, where fine-grained predicates in captions are undesirably converted into coarse-grained predicates, resulting in a long-tailed predicate distribution, and
2) Low-density scene graph issue arises when aligning the
triplets in the caption with entity/predicate classes of interest, where many triplets are discarded and not used in training, leading to insufficient supervision. To tackle the two
issues, we propose a new approach, i.e., Large Language
Model for weakly-supervised SGG (LLM4SGG), where we
mitigate the two issues by leveraging the LLM’s in-depth
understanding of language and reasoning ability during the
extraction of triplets from captions and alignment of entity/predicate classes with target data. To further engage
the LLM in these processes, we adopt the idea of Chainof-Thought and the in-context few-shot learning strategy.
To validate the effectiveness of LLM4SGG, we conduct extensive experiments on Visual Genome and GQA datasets,
showing significant improvements in both Recall@K and
mean Recall@K compared to the state-of-the-art WSSGG
methods. A further appeal is that LLM4SGG is dataefficient, enabling effective model training with a small
amount of training images. Our code is available on
https://github.com/rlqja1107/torch-LLM4SGG

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) is a fundamental task in
computer vision, aiming at extracting structured visual

knowledge from images [21, 32, 36, 39, 45, 56]. Most existing SGG methods are fully-supervised, i.e., they heavily rely on the ground-truth annotations that involve the
class information of entities and predicates as well as the
bounding box of entities [19, 48, 50]. However, since creating extensively annotated scene graph datasets is costly,
the heavy reliance on these annotations imposes practical limitations on the model training [54]. To mitigate
the high cost associated with manual annotations, weaklysupervised scene graph generation (WSSGG) approaches
have recently emerged, aiming at training an SGG model
without any annotated scene graph dataset. Specifically, the
main idea of recent WSSGG methods is to leverage image
captions along with associated images, as they can be easily
collected from the Web [20, 47, 54, 57].
The training process of WSSGG model using image captions requires four steps as illustrated in Figure 1(a). Step
1: Preparing an image and its caption. Step 2: Parsing
the image caption, i.e., triplets formed as ⟨subject, predicate, object⟩ are extracted from the image caption through
an off-the-shelf parser [30, 43]. Step 3: Aligning the triplets
in the caption with entity/predicate classes of interest, i.e.,
entity (subject, object) and predicate classes in the extracted
triplets obtained in Step 2 are aligned with the entity and
predicate classes in the target data1 , respectively. This
alignment is based on their synonym/hypernym/hyponym
contained in an external knowledge base (KB), e.g., WordNet [25]. Step 4: Grounding unlocalized entities in the extracted triplets, i.e., unlocalized entities (subjects and objects) are matched with relevant image regions generated by
a pre-trained object detector, e.g., Faster R-CNN [29]. The
localized entities and predicates in the extracted triplets then
serve as pseudo-labels for training an SGG model.
Existing WSSGG approaches mainly focus on Step 4
[20, 33, 47, 57]. For example, in Figure 1(a), their efforts
have been focused on grounding the entity person in an unlocalized triplet with an image region that captures the sitting behavior. More precisely, LSWS [47] exploits the con1 We use Visual Genome [13] as the target data.

* Corresponding Author

28306

