This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Physics-Augmented Continuum Neural Radiance Field-Based
Geometry-Agnostic System Identification with Lagrangian Particle Optimization
Takuhiro Kaneko
NTT Corporation

Abstract
Geometry-agnostic system identification is a technique
for identifying the geometry and physical properties of an
object from video sequences without any geometric assumptions. Recently, physics-augmented continuum neural
radiance fields (PAC-NeRF) has demonstrated promising
results for this technique by utilizing a hybrid Eulerian–
Lagrangian representation, in which the geometry is represented by the Eulerian grid representations of NeRF, the
physics is described by a material point method (MPM),
and they are connected via Lagrangian particles. However,
a notable limitation of PAC-NeRF is that its performance
is sensitive to the learning of the geometry from the first
frames owing to its two-step optimization. First, the grid
representations are optimized with the first frames of video
sequences, and then the physical properties are optimized
through video sequences utilizing the fixed first-frame grid
representations. This limitation can be critical when learning of the geometric structure is difficult, for example, in
a few-shot (sparse view) setting. To overcome this limitation, we propose Lagrangian particle optimization (LPO),
in which the positions and features of particles are optimized through video sequences in Lagrangian space. This
method allows for the optimization of the geometric structure across the entire video sequence within the physical
constraints imposed by the MPM. The experimental results
demonstrate that the LPO is useful for geometric correction
and physical identification in sparse-view settings.1

1. Introduction
System identification is a technique used to identify the geometry and physical properties of an object based on visual
observations. It has been actively studied in computer vision and physics because of its wide range of applications,
including 3D reproduction, environmental understanding,
and content creation. To solve this problem in a realistic
environment, it is important to adequately address both the
extrinsic geometry structure and the intrinsic physical prop1 Video samples are available at https://www.kecl.ntt.co.
jp/people/kaneko.takuhiro/projects/lpo/.

PSNR: 23.99

PSNR: 30.07

(a) Ground truth

(b) PAC-NeRF

(c) +LPO (proposed)

E = 1.00 × 106
ν = 0.300

E = 1.89 × 106
ν = 0.215

E = 1.15 × 106
ν = 0.299

Figure 1. Impact of the proposed Lagrangian particle optimization (LPO) in sparse-view geometric-agnostic system identification. We aim to identify the geometry and physical properties of
an object from visual observations without any geometric assumptions in severe (e.g., sparse-view) settings. As shown in (b), a
standard PAC-NeRF [41] has difficulty learning the geometry in a
sparse-view setting (particularly, when the number of viewpoints
is three). Consequently, it also fails to estimate the physical properties (Young’s modulus E and Poisson’s ratio µ). As shown in (c),
LPO is useful for correcting this failure and succeeds in improving
the identification of both geometry and physical properties.

erties. For example, to identify the geometry and physical
properties of an object from the observation that it collides
with the ground, it is necessary to understand not only the
appearance and shape change in the geometry but also other
internal factors in physics which are necessary to explain
this phenomenon without any discrepancies over time. Generally, this problem is ill-posed and challenging to resolve.
However, the emergence of powerful geometric representations by neural fields [82], 2D–3D connections by neural
rendering [74], and trainable physical simulations using differentiable physical simulators [1] provide clues for solving
this problem. For instance, previous studies [34, 35, 47]
succeeded in estimating physical properties such as velocity, mass, friction, inertia, and elasticity directly from video
sequences by combining differentiable physical simulators
with differentiable renderers.
Although these studies have yielded promising results
in terms of physical property estimation, their applicability is restricted by the assumption that the geometric struc-

5470

