This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeaBird: Segmentation in Bird’s View with Dice Loss Improves
Monocular 3D Detection of Large Objects
Abhinav Kumar1
Yuliang Guo2
Xinyu Huang2
Liu Ren2
Xiaoming Liu1
1
2
Michigan State University
Bosch Research North America, Bosch Center for AI
1

[kumarab6,liuxm]@msu.edu

2

[yuliang.guo2,xinyu.huang,liu.ren]@us.bosch.com

https://github.com/abhi1kumar/SeaBird

(a) Improve KITTI-360 Val SoTA.

(b) Improve nuScenes Val SoTA.

(c) Theory Advancement.

Figure 1. Teaser (a) SoTA frontal detectors struggle with large objects (low APLrg ) even on a nearly balanced KITTI-360 dataset (Skewness in Fig. 7). Our proposed SeaBird achieves significant Mono3D improvements, particularly for large objects. (b) SeaBird also improves
two SoTA BEV detectors, BEVerse-S [116] and HoP [121] on the nuScenes dataset, particularly for large objects. (c) Plot of convergence
variance Var(ϵ) of dice and regression losses with the noise σ in depth prediction. The y-axis denotes the deviation from the optimal
weight, so the lower the better. SeaBird leverages dice loss, which we prove is more noise-robust than regression losses for large objects.

Abstract
Monocular 3D detectors achieve remarkable performance on cars and smaller objects. However, their performance drops on larger objects, leading to fatal accidents.
Some attribute the failures to training data scarcity or the
receptive field requirements of large objects. In this paper,
we highlight this understudied problem of generalization to
large objects. We find that modern frontal detectors struggle to generalize to large objects even on nearly balanced
datasets. We argue that the cause of failure is the sensitivity of depth regression losses to noise of larger objects. To
bridge this gap, we comprehensively investigate regression
and dice losses, examining their robustness under varying
error levels and object sizes. We mathematically prove that
the dice loss leads to superior noise-robustness and model
convergence for large objects compared to regression losses
for a simplified case. Leveraging our theoretical insights,
we propose SeaBird (Segmentation in Bird’s View) as the
first step towards generalizing to large objects. SeaBird
effectively integrates BEV segmentation on foreground objects for 3D detection, with the segmentation head trained
with the dice loss. SeaBird achieves SoTA results on the
KITTI-360 leaderboard and improves existing detectors on
the nuScenes leaderboard, particularly for large objects.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D object detection (Mono3D) task aims to estimate both the 3D position and dimensions of objects in
a scene from a single image. Its applications span autonomous driving [43, 50, 74], robotics [84], and augmented reality [1, 70, 76, 110], where accurate 3D understanding of the environment is crucial. Our study focuses
explicitly on 3D object detectors applied to autonomous vehicles (AVs), considering the challenges and motivations
deviate drastically across different applications.
AVs demand object detectors that generalize to diverse
intrinsics [6], camera-rigs [35, 39], rotations [72], weather
and geographical conditions [21] and also are robust to adversarial examples [120]. Since each of these poses a significant challenge, recent works focus exclusively on the generalization of object detectors to all these out-of-distribution
shifts. However, our focus is on the generalization of another type, which, thus far, has been understudied in the
literature – Mono3D generalization to large objects.
Large objects like trailers, buses and trucks are harder to
detect [102] in Mono3D, sometimes resulting in fatal accidents [8, 24]. Some attribute these failures to training data
scarcity [119] or the receptive field requirements [102] of
large objects, but, to the best of our knowledge, no existing

10269

