This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CG-HOI: Contact-Guided 3D Human-Object Interaction Generation
Christian Diller
Technical University of Munich

Angela Dai
Technical University of Munich

christian.diller@tum.de

angela.dai@tum.de

Carry a
plastic
container

Play with a
yoga ball

Lift a
small table

Carry a
large box

Conditioning on Object Trajectory Without Re-Training

Move the chair
sideways

Contact-Guided 3D Human-Object Interaction Synthesis from Text

Application to Objects in Static 3D Scene Scans

Figure 1. We present an approach to generate realistic 3D human-object interactions (HOIs), from a text description and given static object
geometry to be interacted with (left). Our main insight is to explicitly model contact (visualized as colors on the body mesh, closer contact
in red), in tandem with human and object sequences, in a joint diffusion process. In addition to synthesizing HOIs from text, we can also
synthesize human motions conditioned on given object trajectories (top right), and generate interactions in static scene scans (bottom right).

Abstract
We propose CG-HOI, the first method to address the task
of generating dynamic 3D human-object interactions (HOIs)
from text. We model the motion of both human and object
in an interdependent fashion, as semantically rich human
motion rarely happens in isolation without any interactions.
Our key insight is that explicitly modeling contact between
the human body surface and object geometry can be used as
strong proxy guidance, both during training and inference.
Using this guidance to bridge human and object motion
enables generating more realistic and physically plausible
interaction sequences, where the human body and corresponding object move in a coherent manner. Our method
first learns to model human motion, object motion, and contact in a joint diffusion process, inter-correlated through
cross-attention. We then leverage this learned contact for
guidance during inference to synthesize realistic and coherent HOIs. Extensive evaluation shows that our joint
contact-based human-object interaction approach generates
realistic and physically plausible sequences, and we show

two applications highlighting the capabilities of our method.
Conditioned on a given object trajectory, we can generate
the corresponding human motion without re-training, demonstrating strong human-object interdependency learning. Our
approach is also flexible, and can be applied to static realworld 3D scene scans.

1. Introduction
Generating human motion sequences in 3D is important for
many real-world applications, e.g. efficient realistic character animation, assistive robotic systems, room layout planning, or human behavior simulation. Crucially, human interaction is interdependent with the object(s) being interacted
with; the object structure of a chair or ball, for instance, constrains the possible human motions with the object (e.g., sitting, lifting), and the human action often impacts the object
motion (e.g., sitting on a swivel chair, carrying a backpack).
Existing works typically focus solely on generating dynamic humans, and thereby disregarding their surroundings
[14, 17, 59, 63, 106, 109], or grounding such motion gen-

19888

