This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-Efficient Multimodal Fusion on a Single GPU
Noël Vouitsis*
Jesse C. Cresswell

Zhaoyan Liu*
Guangwei Yu

Satya Krishna Gorti*
Valentin Villecroze
Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem
Maksims Volkovs
Layer 6 AI

{noel, zhaoyan, satya, valentin.v, jesse, guang, gabriel, maks}@layer6.ai

Abstract

80
(ALIGN, 1B)

1. Introduction
Recent advances in multimodal machine learning have unlocked unprecedented capabilities across a wide array of
understanding-based [46, 47] and generation-based [22,
45, 48, 53] applications, some of which have even garnered mainstream attention [1, 69, 70, 99]. Of particular interest to us for this work is multimodal alignment
[27, 29, 35], which we alternatively refer to as multimodal
fusion, wherein the goal is to learn a single latent space
that is shared between inputs of various modalities. Recent
successes in multimodal fusion have been largely driven
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

Recall@1

The goal of multimodal alignment is to learn a single latent space that is shared between multimodal inputs. The
most powerful models in this space have been trained using massive datasets of paired inputs and large-scale computational resources, making them prohibitively expensive
to train in many practical scenarios. We surmise that existing unimodal encoders pre-trained on large amounts of
unimodal data should provide an effective bootstrap to create multimodal models from unimodal ones at much lower
costs. We therefore propose FuseMix, a multimodal augmentation scheme that operates on the latent spaces of arbitrary pre-trained unimodal encoders. Using FuseMix for
multimodal alignment, we achieve competitive performance
– and in certain cases outperform state-of-the art methods
– in both image-text and audio-text retrieval, with orders
of magnitude less compute and data: for example, we outperform CLIP on the Flickr30K text-to-image retrieval task
with ∼ 600× fewer GPU days and ∼ 80× fewer image-text
pairs. Additionally, we show how our method can be applied to convert pre-trained text-to-image generative models
into audio-to-image ones. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/layer6ai-labs/fusemix.

(FILIP, 300M)

70

(3T, 5B)

(FuseMix, 5M)
(LiT, 4B)
(CLIP, 400M)
(FuseMix, 2.5M)

60

(FuseMix, 1.5M)
(FuseMix, 500K)

50

106
107
108
109
# of training image-text pairs

1010

Figure 1. Text-to-image retrieval performance as a function of the
number of image-text pairs used during training, evaluated on the
Flickr30K test set [101]. Note the x-axis is in log-scale.

by large-scale training regimes requiring many GPUs, and
often relying on datasets of billions of multimodal pairs
[39, 67, 102]. This presents a cost that is unacceptable for
many practical scenarios where access to compute is limited
and where multimodal data is scarce [55, 88]. It is thus of
paramount importance to design efficient frameworks that
can democratize research in multimodal fusion.
In this work, our key insight is that off-the-shelf unimodal encoders that have been pre-trained on large amounts
of unimodal data already encode rich semantics that should
provide an effective bootstrap for multimodal fusion. We introduce FuseMix, a simple and easy-to-implement data augmentation scheme for multimodal fusion inspired by mixup
[106], where we share the mixing coefficient across modalities. We show that by aligning the latent spaces of existing
pre-trained unimodal encoders using FuseMix, we obtain
highly competitive fused multimodal models, which in certain cases even outperform state-of-the-art methods in both
image-text and audio-text retrieval tasks, all while using orders of magnitude less compute and data. For example, we

27239

