This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rapid Motor Adaptation for Robotic Manipulator Arms
Yichao Liang1,2
1

Kevin Ellis3

João Henriques2

Computational and Biological Learning Lab, University of Cambridge
2
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
3
Cornell University
yliang6@gmail.com, kellis@cornell.edu, joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Developing generalizable manipulation skills is a core
challenge in embodied AI. This includes generalization
across diverse task configurations, encompassing variations in object shape, density, friction coefficient, and external disturbances such as forces applied to the robot. Rapid
Motor Adaptation (RMA) offers a promising solution to this
challenge. It posits that essential hidden variables influencing an agent’s task performance, such as object mass and
shape, can be effectively inferred from the agent’s action
and proprioceptive history. Drawing inspiration from RMA
in locomotion and in-hand rotation, we use depth perception to develop agents tailored for rapid motor adaptation
in a variety of manipulation tasks. We evaluated our agents
on four challenging tasks from the Maniskill2 benchmark,
namely pick-and-place operations with hundreds of objects
from the YCB and EGAD datasets, peg insertion with precise position and orientation, and operating a variety of
faucets and handles, with customized environment variations. Empirical results demonstrate that our agents surpass state-of-the-art methods like automatic domain randomization and vision-based policies, obtaining better generalization performance and sample efficiency.

1. Introduction
With recent advances in computer vision [11, 19, 25] and
high-level planning [1, 36], dexterous manipulation of objects (i.e. low-level control skills) remains one of the last
major obstacles to the creation of robots that can help in
general manipulation tasks. Such an advance would have a
wide-ranging impact, allowing robots to take on repetitive
tasks in industry and in households.
Classical approaches to robotic manipulation often rely
on accurate models of both the robot and the environ-

ment [9]. The complexity of creating these models can be a
significant hurdle, as they need to account for various physical properties and constraints. On the other hand, many
Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods are very sampleinefficient, and fail to generalize robustly [33]. Many efforts have therefore been invested into simulation training
for real-world deployment [43]. However, models trained
in simulation often fail to perform well in the real world
due to the sim-to-real gap – direct deployment (without any
domain adaptation) results in decreased performance [3].
More generally, RL agents face the challenge of generalizing to unseen tasks or even tasks with out-of-distribution
configurations.
To address these limitations, Kumar et al. [20] proposed
Rapid Motor Adaptation (RMA), and demonstrated it for
quadruped robot locomotion. The main idea behind RMA
is to train a policy that is conditional on environmental factors which are not available in real-world deployment, but
are easily randomized and conditioned on during simulation
training. A predictor, called the adaptation module (adapter
for brevity), is then trained to regress these factors from
available sensors (such as proprioception). This is possible
because environmental factors, such as the density, friction,
and ground elevation, can be reasonably inferred based on
the dynamic response of the robot (e.g. the difference between desired and actually observed motion). In particular,
these factors do not usually have to be precisely predicted
for the agent to successfully conduct these tasks, which is
why a low-dimensional projection of the environment factors is sufficient (and removes the ambiguity of useless but
difficult-to-estimate factors) [20].
While this demonstrates an encouraging path forward, it
is not straightforward to bring RMA to general manipulation tasks, which feature diverse objectives and behaviours
depending on each object’s characteristics. Proprioception
alone does not suffice, as it only contains information about
the object after touching it – visual reasoning prior to grasp-

16404

