This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Integrating Efficient Optimal Transport and Functional Maps For Unsupervised
Shape Correspondence Learning
Tung Le1
1

Khai Nguyen2
Shanlin Sun1
Nhat Ho2
1
University of California, Irvine
2
The University of Texas at Austin
2

{thanhtul, shanlins, xhx}@uci.edu

Abstract
In the realm of computer vision and graphics, accurately establishing correspondences between geometric 3D
shapes is pivotal for applications like object tracking, registration, texture transfer, and statistical shape analysis.
Moving beyond traditional hand-crafted and data-driven
feature learning methods, we incorporate spectral methods
with deep learning, focusing on functional maps (FMs) and
optimal transport (OT). Traditional OT-based approaches,
often reliant on entropy regularization OT in learning-based
framework, face computational challenges due to their
quadratic cost. Our key contribution is to employ the sliced
Wasserstein distance (SWD) for OT, which is a valid fast optimal transport metric in an unsupervised shape matching
framework. This unsupervised framework integrates functional map regularizers with a novel OT-based loss derived
from SWD, enhancing feature alignment between shapes
treated as discrete probability measures. We also introduce
an adaptive refinement process utilizing entropy regularized
OT, further refining feature alignments for accurate pointto-point correspondences. Our method demonstrates superior performance in non-rigid shape matching, including
near-isometric and non-isometric scenarios, and excels in
downstream tasks like segmentation transfer. The empirical
results on diverse datasets highlight our framework’s effectiveness and generalization capabilities, setting new standards in non-rigid shape matching with efficient OT metrics
and an adaptive refinement module. Code is available at1 .

1. Introduction
Establishing precise correspondences between geometric
3D shapes is a core challenge in various domains of computer vision and graphics, including but not limited to, object tracking, registration, reconstruction, deformation, texture transfer, and statistical shape analysis [7, 14, 22, 53,
1 https : / / github . com / Tungthanhlee / EOT Correspondence

Xiaohui Xie1

{khainb, minhnhat}@utexas.edu

56, 63]. To facilitate the mapping between non-rigid shapes,
early approaches [6, 9, 49] concentrated on the development
of hand-crafted features, leveraging geometric invariance as
a key principle. In the latter approaches [4, 10, 16, 28],
there has been a shift towards the utilization of data-driven
methods for feature learning, which has resulted in marked
enhancements in terms of accuracy, efficiency, and robustness.
Recently, an increasing body of work has exploited the
use of spectral methods [5, 18, 21, 33, 47], especially the
functional map (FM) representation [40]. Specifically, the
FM methods succinctly encode correspondences through
compact matrices, utilizing a truncated spectral basis. With
recent developments in deep learning, deep FM (DFM) is
quickly employed in numerous settings [11, 12, 28, 55]
by incorporating feature learning as geometric descriptors
for FM frameworks. Most DFM works focus on learning features that optimize FM priors to express desirable
map priors, e.g. area preservation, isometry, and bijectivity, which achieves remarkable results even without supervision [10, 12, 20, 21, 47]. On the other hand, less attention
is paid to the problem of explicitly aligning features outputted from the feature extractor network, due to the lack of
smoothness and consistency of linear assignment problems.
In this work, we focus on jointly learning features via
the functional map, and explicit features, i.e. directly from
the feature extractor to establish correct correspondence.
Nonetheless, learning to map explicit features is not easy
since the geometric objects might potentially undergo arbitrary deformations. Therefore, we propose to employ optimal transport (OT), which is a well-known approach for linear assignment problems, to cast the feature alignment from
3D shapes as a probability measures matching problem.
The Wasserstein distance [42, 61] is widely acknowledged as an effective OT metric for comparing two probability measures, particularly when their supports are disjoint. However, it comes with the drawback of high computational complexity. Specifically, for discrete probability measures with at most m supports, the time and

23188

