This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChAda-ViT : Channel Adaptive Attention for Joint Representation Learning of
Heterogeneous Microscopy Images
Nicolas Bourriez1 * Ihab Bendidi1,2 * Ethan Cohen1,3 * Gabriel Watkinson1,3
Maxime Sanchez1,3 Guillaume Bollot3 Auguste Genovesio1
1

Ecole Normale Supérieure PSL, Paris, France
2
Minos Biosciences, Paris, France
3
Synsight, Evry, France
firstname.lastname@ens.psl.eu
∗
Equal Contribution

Abstract
Unlike color photography images, which are consistently
encoded into RGB channels, biological images encompass
various modalities, where the type of microscopy and the
meaning of each channel varies with each experiment. Importantly, the number of channels can range from one to
a dozen and their correlation is often comparatively much
lower than RGB, as each of them brings specific information content. This aspect is largely overlooked by methods
designed out of the bioimage field, and current solutions
mostly focus on intra-channel spatial attention, often ignoring the relationship between channels, yet crucial in most
biological applications. Importantly, the variable channel
type and count prevent the projection of several experiments
to a unified representation for large scale pre-training. In
this study, we propose ChAda-ViT, a novel Channel Adaptive Vision Transformer architecture employing an InterChannel Attention mechanism on images with an arbitrary
number, order and type of channels. We also introduce IDRCell100k, a bioimage dataset with a rich set of 79 experiments covering 7 microscope modalities, with a multitude of
channel types, and counts varying from 1 to 10 per experiment. Our architecture, trained in a self-supervised manner, outperforms existing approaches in several biologically
relevant downstream tasks. Additionally, it can be used to
bridge the gap for the first time between assays with different microscopes, channel numbers or types by embedding
various image and experimental modalities into a unified
biological image representation. The latter should facilitate
interdisciplinary studies and pave the way for better adoption of deep learning in biological image-based analyses.

‡ Code, Data & Model weights : https://github.com/nicoboou/chadavit

Figure 1. Performance comparison on downstream tasks, showcasing ChAda-ViT’s superiority in 6 out of 8 tasks compared to
existing approaches[47] using CLS token only. R^2 scores, normalized to 0-100, are presented for BBBC021 Channel Reconstruction and Nuclear Translocation prediction tasks. This success is
attributed to the combined use of Intra-Channel and Inter-Channel
Attention. Evaluation on all tokens is detailled in Appendix.

1. Introduction
Revolutionizing the field of image processing, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) set the stage for unprecedented advancements [24, 30, 32]. Meanwhile, originally
designed for Natural Language Processing (NLP), transformers emerged [43] later in computer vision as Vision
Transformers (ViTs) [16]. ViTs excel in handling large
datasets, detecting long-range dependencies [38] and capturing spatial correlations, often surpassing the capabilities

11556

