This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-based Visible and Infrared Fusion via Multi-task Collaboration
Mengyue Geng1 , Lin Zhu2 ∗ , Lizhi Wang2 , Wei Zhang4 , Ruiqin Xiong1 , Yonghong Tian1,3,4 ∗
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{mygeng, rqxiong, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn, {linzhu, wanglizhi}@bit.edu.cn, zhangwei1213052@126.com

Prone to Motion Blur
Thermal Sensing
106 Hz
Dynamic Range < 70dB Also Exhibits Blurriness High Dynamic Range

Abstract
Visible and Infrared image Fusion (VIF) offers a comprehensive scene description by combining thermal infrared
images with the rich textures from visible cameras. However, conventional VIF systems may capture over/under exposure or blurry images in extreme lighting and high dynamic motion scenarios, leading to degraded fusion results.
To address these problems, we propose a novel Event-based
Visible and Infrared Fusion (EVIF) system that employs a
visible event camera as an alternative to traditional framebased cameras for the VIF task. With extremely low latency
and high dynamic range, event cameras can effectively address blurriness and are robust against diverse luminous
ranges. To produce high-quality fused images, we develop
a multi-task collaborative framework that simultaneously
performs event-based visible texture reconstruction, eventguided infrared image deblurring, and visible-infrared fusion. Rather than independently learning these tasks, our
framework capitalizes on their synergy, leveraging crosstask event enhancement for efficient deblurring and bi-level
min-max mutual information optimization to achieve higher
fusion quality. Experiments on both synthetic and real
data show that EVIF achieves remarkable performance in
dealing with extreme lighting conditions and high-dynamic
scenes, ensuring high-quality fused images across a broad
range of practical scenarios.

1. Introduction
Visible and Infrared image Fusion (VIF) has attracted sustained research interest due to its wide range of applications
such as robotic vision [21], surveillance [45] and remote
sensing [6]. Visible images contain abundant scene textures. However, they are sensitive to illumination changes.
∗ Corresponding authors.

Visible Camera

Infrared Camera

Conventional VIF System

Event Camera

Our EVIF System

Figure 1. Comparision between conventional VIF system and
our EVIF system. In challenging scenes with extreme lighting and rapid motion, conventional VIF systems often produce
over/underexposed or blurry images, leading to poor fusion quality. Leveraging the high dynamic range and low latency of event
cameras, EVIF excels in capturing visible textures and can effectively mitigating issues of blurriness in such scenarios.

Infrared images, on the other hand, capture thermal information that is not affected by light but may lose texture details. Recognizing this complementarity, the goal of VIF is
to take the best of both modalities and produce a fused image that allows a comprehensive description of the scene.
Studies over the past decades have provided remarkable progress in the field of VIF [20, 28, 44]. Traditional approaches typically fall into several categories such
as multiscale transforms-based and sparse representationbased ones [29]. With the rise of deep learning techniques, a plethora of deep learning-based methods have also
been developed [59]. Alongside algorithmic advancements,
there have been significant data contributions, marked by
the release of increasingly comprehensive and valuable

26929

