This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tri-Perspective View Decomposition for Geometry-Aware Depth Completion
Zhiqiang Yan1 , Yuankai Lin2 , Kun Wang1 , Yupeng Zheng3 , Yufei Wang4 ,
Zhenyu Zhang5 , Jun Li1 *, and Jian Yang1 *
1
†
PCA Lab , Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 3 Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University 5 Nanjing University
{yanzq, kunwang, junli, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, zhangjesse@foxmail.com
linyuankai@hust.edu.cn, zhengyupeng2022@ia.ac.cn, wangyufei1951@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Depth completion [38], the technique of recovering dense
depth maps from sparse ones, has a variety of applications
in computer vision, such as scene understanding [17, 21, 34,
44, 47, 57, 59], 3D reconstruction [26, 28, 32, 46, 49, 56],
and autonomous driving [40, 48, 51, 52, 54, 58, 60]. All of
* Corresponding authors
† PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-

Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab
of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Sci. & Tech.

(c) Ours

Depth completion is a vital task for autonomous driving,
as it involves reconstructing the precise 3D geometry of a
scene from sparse and noisy depth measurements. However, most existing methods either rely only on 2D depth
representations or directly incorporate raw 3D point clouds
for compensation, which are still insufficient to capture the
fine-grained 3D geometry of the scene. To address this challenge, we introduce Tri-Perspective View Decomposition
(TPVD), a novel framework that can explicitly model 3D
geometry. In particular, (1) TPVD ingeniously decomposes
the original point cloud into three 2D views, one of which
corresponds to the sparse depth input. (2) We design TPV
Fusion to update the 2D TPV features through recurrent
2D-3D-2D aggregation, where a Distance-Aware Spherical
Convolution (DASC) is applied. (3) By adaptively choosing TPV affinitive neighbors, the newly proposed Geometric
Spatial Propagation Network (GSPN) further improves the
geometric consistency. As a result, our TPVD outperforms
existing methods on KITTI, NYUv2, and SUN RGBD. Furthermore, we build a novel depth completion dataset named
TOFDC, which is acquired by the time-of-flight (TOF) sensor and the color camera on smartphones. Project page.

(b) 2D-3D (a) 2D based

Abstract

point cloud

sparse depth

dense depth

proj.

proj.

top view
proj.

front view
side view

Figure 1. Framework comparison. (a) Previous 2D methods focus
on 2D space to recover dense depth, and (b) recent 2D-3D joint
approaches introduce 3D point clouds for assistance. Differently,
(c) our TPVD decomposes the 3D point clouds into three 2D views
to densify the sparse input while preserving the 3D geometry.

these applications are highly dependent on accurate and reliable depth predictions. However, due to the constraints of
hardware development and challenging environment, depth
sensors are unable to deliver pixel-wise depth feedback, particularly in outdoor scenarios where the depth density is as
low as 5%. Thus, it is essential and worthwhile to complete
the void areas of sparse depth for realistic applications.
Most previous depth completion methods [2, 7, 12, 28,
30, 41, 50, 54] focus on 2D feature space to learn depth
representations, leading to a severe lack of 3D geometric
information. As an alternative, some recent approaches
[3, 14, 25, 31, 53, 55, 60] attempt to incorporate 3D geometric priors directly from raw point clouds, rather than
relying only on 2D representations. For example, [53, 60]
extract point cloud features to embed 3D geometry into their
2D depth generation branches. However, as we known that
the point clouds are extremely sparse and their point distributions are varying in different distances, both of which
deeply impede the performance of recent models.

4874

