This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborative Semantic Occupancy Prediction
with Hybrid Feature Fusion in Connected Automated Vehicles
Rui Song1,2 * , Chenwei Liang1 , Hu Cao2 , Zhiran Yan3 , Walter Zimmer2 ,
Markus Gross1 , Andreas Festag1,3 , Alois Knoll2
1

Fraunhofer IVI

2

Technical University of Munich

3

Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt

https://rruisong.github.io/publications/CoHFF

Figure 1. Collaborative semantic occupancy prediction leverages the power of collaboration in multi-agent systems for 3D occupancy
prediction and semantic segmentation. This approach enables a deeper understanding of the 3D road environment by sharing latent features
among connected automated vehicles (CAVs), surpassing the ground truth captured by a multi-camera system in the ego vehicle.

Abstract
Collaborative perception in automated vehicles leverages the exchange of information between agents, aiming to
elevate perception results. Previous camera-based collaborative 3D perception methods typically employ 3D bounding boxes or bird’s eye views as representations of the environment. However, these approaches fall short in offering
a comprehensive 3D environmental prediction. To bridge
this gap, we introduce the first method for collaborative 3D
semantic occupancy prediction. Particularly, it improves
local 3D semantic occupancy predictions by hybrid fusion
of (i) semantic and occupancy task features, and (ii) compressed orthogonal attention features shared between vehicles. Additionally, due to the lack of a collaborative perception dataset designed for semantic occupancy prediction,
we augment a current collaborative perception dataset to
include 3D collaborative semantic occupancy labels for a
more robust evaluation. The experimental findings highlight
that: (i) our collaborative semantic occupancy predictions
excel above the results from single vehicles by over 30%,
and (ii) models anchored on semantic occupancy outpace
*Corresponding author, email address: rui.song@ivi.fraunhofer.de

state-of-the-art collaborative 3D detection techniques in
subsequent perception applications, showcasing enhanced
accuracy and enriched semantic-awareness in road environments.

1. Introduction
Collaborative perception, also known as cooperative perception, significantly improves the accuracy and completeness of each connected and automated vehicle’s (CAV)
sensing capabilities by integrating multiple viewpoints, surpassing the limitations of single-vehicle systems [11, 12,
15, 16, 25, 26, 35, 42, 45, 50]. This approach enables
CAVs to achieve comparable or superior perception abilities, even with cost-effective sensors. Notably, recent research in [12] suggests that camera-based systems may outperform LiDAR in 3D perception through collaboration
in Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communication networks.
Previous studies in camera-based collaborative perception
typically processed inputs from various CAVs into simplified formats such as 3D bounding boxes or Bird’s Eye View
(BEV) segmentation. While efficient, these methods tend
to miss important 3D semantic details, which are indispens-

17996

