This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimDA: Simple Diffusion Adapter for Efficient Video Generation
Zhen Xing1,2 Qi Dai3 Han Hu3 Zuxuan Wu1,2† Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Research Asia
https://chenhsing.github.io/SimDA

A horse galloping through van Gogh’s ‘Starry Night’.

A jeep car is moving on the road.

Fireworks being displayed for a crowd of people.

An AE86 car is moving on the road.

A dog wearing virtual reality goggles on the grass.

A jeep car is moving on the road, cartoon style.

Time lapse at a fantasy landscape, 4k, high resolution.

A jeep car is moving in a forest, in Autumn.

(a) Text-to-Video Generation

(b) Text-guided Video Editing

Figure 1. Examples of our SimDA results: (a) The results of open-wild Text-to-Video Generation. (b) Text-guided video Editing results
using one text-video pair tuning.

Abstract
The recent wave of AI-generated content has witnessed
the great development and success of Text-to-Image (T2I)
technologies. By contrast, Text-to-Video (T2V) still falls
short of expectations though attracting increasing interest.
Existing works either train from scratch or adapt large T2I
model to videos, both of which are computation and resource expensive. In this work, we propose a Simple Diffusion Adapter (SimDA) that fine-tunes only 24M out of
1.1B parameters of a strong T2I model, adapting it to video
generation in a parameter-efficient way. In particular, we
turn the T2I model for T2V by designing light-weight spa-

tial and temporal adapters for transfer learning. Besides,
we change the original spatial attention to the proposed
Latent-Shift Attention (LSA) for temporal consistency. With
a similar model architecture, we further train a video superresolution model to generate high-definition (1024 × 1024)
videos. In addition to T2V generation in the wild, SimDA
could also be utilized in one-shot video editing with only 2
minutes tuning. Doing so, our method could minimize the
training effort with extremely few tunable parameters for
model adaptation.

† Corresponding author.

7827

