This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianEditor: Editing 3D Gaussians Delicately with Text Instructions
Junjie Wang,* Jiemin Fang*†, Xiaopeng Zhang,
Huawei Inc.

Lingxi Xie,

{is.wangjunjie, jaminfong, zxphistory, 198808xc}@gmail.com

Qi Tian

tian.qi1@huawei.com

Edited 3D Gaussians
First Edit

Second Edit

Give him a red nose

Make his right face looks like Orc

3D Gaussians

Gaussian
Editor

Gaussian
Editor

Make his left face looks like the Tolkien Elf

Make his right face looks like vampire

Make him completely bald

Make his right face looks like Lord Voldemort

Figure 1. We propose GaussianEditor, an interactive framework to achieve delicate 3D scene editing following text instructions. As shown
in this figure, our method can precisely control the editing region and achieve multi-round editing.

Abstract
Recently, impressive results have been achieved in 3D
scene editing with text instructions based on a 2D diffusion
model. However, current diffusion models primarily generate images by predicting noise in the latent space, and
the editing is usually applied to the whole image, which
makes it challenging to perform delicate, especially localized, editing for 3D scenes. Inspired by recent 3D Gaussian
splatting, we propose a systematic framework, named GaussianEditor, to edit 3D scenes delicately via 3D Gaussians
with text instructions. Benefiting from the explicit property of 3D Gaussians, we design a series of techniques to
achieve delicate editing. Specifically, we first extract the
region of interest (RoI) corresponding to the text instruction, aligning it to 3D Gaussians. The Gaussian RoI is fur* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

ther used to control the editing process. Our framework
can achieve more delicate and precise editing of 3D scenes
than previous methods while enjoying much faster training
speed, i.e. within 20 minutes on a single V100 GPU, more
than twice as fast as Instruct-NeRF2NeRF (45 minutes –
2 hours)1 . The project page is at GaussianEditor.
github.io.

1. Introduction
Creating 3D assets has played a critical role in many applications and industries, e.g. movie/game production, artistic creation, AR, VR etc. However, this process is usually expensive and cumbersome, especially for traditional
pipelines. Designers need to take a lot of labor and time to
1 The editing time varies in different scenes according to the scene structure complexity.

20902

