This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Harmonization with Triplet Spatio-Temporal Variation Patterns
Zonghui Guo1 Xinyu Han2 Jie Zhang1,3 Shiguang Shan1,3,∗ Haiyong Zheng2, *
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
College of Electronic Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{guozonghui,zhangjie,sgshan}@ict.ac.cn, hanxinyu8585@stu.ouc.edu.cn, zhenghaiyong@ouc.edu.cn

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62276249 and No. 62171421), the TaiShan Scholars
Youth Expert Program of Shandong Province (No. tsqn202306096) and
the Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS.

Real

* Correspondence to Shiguang Shan and Haiyong Zheng.

HT+

Ours

Video compositing is a typical operation that involves extracting a desired region (as foreground) from one video clip
and pasting it into another video (as background) to create
unique visual effects. However, composite video inevitably
suffers from visual inconsistencies due to differences in
appearance between foreground and background, such as
color, brightness, and contrast [5, 13]. The manual creation

CO2Net

1. Introduction

HT+

Video harmonization is an important and challenging
task that aims to obtain visually realistic composite videos
by automatically adjusting the foreground’s appearance to
harmonize with the background. Inspired by the short-term
and long-term gradual adjustment process of manual harmonization, we present a Video Triplet Transformer framework to model three spatio-temporal variation patterns
within videos, i.e., short-term spatial as well as long-term
global and dynamic, for video-to-video tasks like video harmonization. Specifically, for short-term harmonization, we
adjust foreground appearance to consist with background
in spatial dimension based on the neighbor frames; for
long-term harmonization, we not only explore global appearance variations to enhance temporal consistency but
also alleviate motion offset constraints to align similar contextual appearances dynamically. Extensive experiments
and ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method, achieving state-of-the-art performance in video
harmonization, video enhancement, and video demoiréing
tasks. We also propose a temporal consistency metric to
better evaluate the harmonized videos. Code is available at
https://github.com/zhenglab/VideoTripletTransformer.

Comp

Abstract

frame 9

frame 10

frame 11

Real
Comp

HT+

CO2Net

Ours

Figure 1. We present harmonized results from image-based
(HT+ [14]) and video-based (CO2 Net [31] and Ours) methods
(left), along with the inter-frame foreground brightness differences
in the video (right). In the radar chart, values that differ greatly
with “Real” indicate potential flickering, and the closer the overlap
with “Real”, the better the visual effect. HT+ and CO2 Net exhibit
flickering, while our method closely resembles the real video.

of a visually natural composite video is a labor-intensive
and expert-level work that demands careful adjustment of
pixel intensities frame-by-frame. Thus, video harmonization (VH), aiming to automatically align the foreground
appearance with the background in composite videos, has
emerged as a critical and challenging task [17, 31].
Applying image harmonization methods [5, 13, 14, 41]
to composite videos leads to undesirable inter-frame flickering, as evident in Figure 1, where HT+ [14] exhibits significant brightness differences in the harmonized video (pink
area marked by “HT+” in the radar chart). Indeed, videos
capture object motion and appearance changes within the
scene, and these continuous spatio-temporal variations provide crucial guidance and constraints for most video tasks,
e.g. video action recognition [10, 45] and inpainting [21].
Therefore, modeling the spatio-temporal variation patterns
within videos is fundamental and reasonable for VH.
Similar to the local and global properties observed in
images, videos also exhibit short-term and long-term temporal characteristics. Various video processing techniques
(e.g., SlowFast [10], TDN [45], and TSN [44]) have demon-

19177

