This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latency Correction for Event-guided Deblurring and Frame Interpolation
Yixin Yang1,2,† Jinxiu Liang1,2 Bohan Yu1,2 Yan Chen3 Jimmy S. Ren3 Boxin Shi1,2,∗
1
2

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University 3 SenseTime Research

{yangyixin93,cssherryliang,ybh1998,shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn

yanchenace@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Emerging as a groundbreaking visual sensing paradigm,
event cameras [1, 12, 13, 20, 22] provide a novel perspective
to capturing and interpreting dynamic scenes. They have
advantages of high temporal resolution (the discrete measurement resolution of the event detection time, in the order of microseconds [8]), high dynamic range (e.g., 120 dB
for DAVIS346), and low power consumption. They asynchronously record changes in logarithmic pixel intensity
only when they exceed a predefined threshold. Their unique
characteristics have led to impressive performance gains
in various time-sensitive applications, including deblurring [5, 19, 24, 26, 32] and frame interpolation [19, 25, 30].
† This work is done during Yixin’s internship at SenseTime.
∗ Corresponding author: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

space

Event cameras, with their high temporal resolution, dynamic range, and low power consumption, are particularly good at time-sensitive applications like deblurring and
frame interpolation. However, their performance is hindered by latency variability, especially under low-light conditions and with fast-moving objects. This paper addresses
the challenge of latency in event cameras — the temporal
discrepancy between the actual occurrence of changes in
the corresponding timestamp assigned by the sensor. Focusing on event-guided deblurring and frame interpolation
tasks, we propose a latency correction method based on a
parameterized latency model. To enable data-driven learning, we develop an event-based temporal fidelity to describe
the sharpness of latent images reconstructed from events
and the corresponding blurry images, and reformulate the
event-based double integral model differentiable to latency.
The proposed method is validated using synthetic and realworld datasets, demonstrating the benefits of latency correction for deblurring and interpolation across different
lighting conditions.

space

Abstract

rensijie@sensetime.com

Moving
direction

30 Lux

12 Lux

4 Lux

time [ms]

latency

(b) EDI results before correction

time [ms]

(a) Ideal event vs. real event

(c) EDI results after correction

Figure 1. Illustration of latency in an event camera, and its influence on an event-guided deblurring algorithm. (a) The aerial view
of ideal vs. real events triggered by a black point moving upwards
on a white background, where the real events are captured in lowlight conditions (below 0.1 Lux). (b) Deblurring results using the
Event-based Double Integral (EDI) [19] method, guided by events
captured under different illumination conditions. (c) Improved deblurring results from EDI [19] using event with latency corrected
by the proposed method.

(c) Event trigger

(d) Latency vs.

The ideal event model posits that event triggering is instantaneous upon the detection of intensity changes. However, real-world event timestamps deviate from this, exhibiting a temporal discrepancy between the actual moment of
intensity change and the corresponding event timestamp.
As claimed by the inventors of the event-based sensors,
in well-lit environments above 1k Lux, event cameras can
achieve latency as low as 3 µs [22]. However, in dimmer
conditions for a few Lux, the latency can exceed 1 ms [22].
The challenge in modeling this temporal discrepancy arises
from the sensor pixels’ non-linear and variable response
to illumination, which is further complicated by manufacturing imperfection, inherent electronic noise, and the unpredictable nature of real-world scenes [13, 15, 16, 21].
Therefore, the profile of the temporal discrepancy is spatialvarying, inconsistent, and noisy. All these complexities
make algorithms for handling them scarce.
Without specifying the nature of the temporal discrepancy, we consider the collective temporal discrepancies in
the timing of the camera’s response to real-world changes, a
phenomenon we term “latency”, where the aforementioned
sensor-level latency is one of the dominant components.

24977

