This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neighbor Relations Matter in Video Scene Detection
Jiawei Tan, Hongxing Wang,* Jiaxin Li, Zhilong Ou, Zhangbin Qian
Key Laboratory of Dependable Service Computing in Cyber Physical Society (Chongqing University), Ministry of Education, China
School of Big Data and Software Engineering, Chongqing University, China
{jwtan, ihxwang, jiaxin li}@cqu.edu.cn, zlou@stu.cqu.edu.cn, zbqian@cqu.edu.cn

Scene 1

Abstract
Video scene detection aims to temporally link shots for
obtaining semantically compact scenes. It is essential for
this task to capture scene-distinguishable affinity among
shots by similarity assessment. However, most methods
relies on ordinary shot-to-shot similarities, which may
inveigle similar shots into being linked even though they
are from different scenes, and meanwhile hinder dissimilar
shots from being blended into a complete scene. In this
paper, we propose NeighborNet to inject shot contexts into
shot-to-shot similarities through carefully exploring the relations between semantic/temporal neighbors of shots over
a local time period. In this way, shot-to-shot similarities
are remeasured as semantic/temporal neighbor-aware similarities so that NeighborNet can learn context embedding
into shot features using graph convolutional network. As
a result, not only do the learned shot features suppress
the affinity among similar shots from different scenes, but
they also promote the affinity among dissimilar shots in
the same scene. Experimental results on public benchmark
datasets show that our proposed NeighborNet yields substantial improvements in video scene detection, especially
outperforms released state-of-the-arts by at least 6% in
Average Precision (AP). The code is available at https:
//github.com/ExMorgan-Alter/NeighborNet.

1. Introduction
Video scene detection aims to determine whether the scene
happens to change from a shot to the next [24]. It facilitates long video to be truncated into and understood by
multiple short yet storytelling units, i.e., scenes, thereby
holding great significance across diverse applications, such
as text-to-video retrieval [1] and human-centric storyline
* Corresponding author: Hongxing Wang. This work is supported in
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
61976029 and the Key Project of Chongqing Technology Innovation and
Application Development under Grant cstc2021jscx-gksbX0033.

Scene 2

Relation ?

Relation with
Similar Shot of
Different Scene

High
Related

Similar

∑ Dissimilar Low
+

Similar

Similar

Semantic Neighbor Shots
over a Local Time Period

Semantic Neighbor Shots
over a Local Time Period

Dissimilar
Relation with
Different Shot in
the Same Scene

Related

Dissimilar

∑ Similar

High
+
Dissimilar Related

Dissimilar
Similar
Low
Related

Shot-to-Shot
Similarity

Temporal Neighbor Shots
over a Local Time Period

Temporal Neighbor Shots
over a Local Time Period

Neighbor-Aware Similarity
(Ours)

Figure 1. Shot-to-Shot Similarity based methods may deceive
themselves into (i) relating different scenes that have similar shots
into a single and (ii) relating little with dissimilar shots even
though they are in the same scene. In contrast, the proposed
Neighbor-Aware Similarity introduces affinity relations between
semantic/temporal neighbor shots over a local time period to make
shot relations align better with scene relations.

construction [40].
Like humans, affinity relations among shots are pivotal
for computers in discerning whether adjacent shots belong
to the same scene or not. Most efforts [23, 29, 42] have been
made on ordinary shot-to-shot similarity to explore scenedistinguishable affinity relations among shots. However, we
illustrate in Fig. 1 shot-to-shot similarities prefer bracketing
similar shots together even though they are from different
scenes. On the other hand, a complete scene is highly
likely to be fractured into incomplete segments by dissimilar shots. Both circumstances can imply inferior scene
detection results.
In fact, shot-to-shot similarities neglect the contribution of context information to the affinity relations among
shots. For instance, information from other shots within
the same scene can aid in measuring the relations between
any two shots. Although it is impossible to know the
exact shot contexts at scene scale in the absence of scene

18473

