This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Language-Driven Video Inpainting
via Multimodal Large Language Models
Jianzong Wu1,3 * Xiangtai Li2,3 † Chenyang Si2 Shangchen Zhou2 Jingkang Yang2
Jiangning Zhang5 Yining Li3 Kai Chen3 Yunhai Tong1,4 Ziwei Liu2 Chen Change Loy2
1

National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 PKU-Wuhan Institute for Artificial Intelligence 5 Zhejiang University
Project Page: https://jianzongwu.github.io/projects/rovi

Abstract
We introduce a new task – language-driven video inpainting, which uses natural language instructions to guide
the inpainting process. This approach overcomes the limitations of traditional video inpainting methods that depend on manually labeled binary masks, a process often
tedious and labor-intensive. We present the Remove Objects from Videos by Instructions (ROVI) dataset, containing 5,650 videos and 9,091 inpainting results, to support
training and evaluation for this task. We also propose
a novel diffusion-based language-driven video inpainting
framework, the first end-to-end baseline for this task, integrating Multimodal Large Language Models to understand and execute complex language-based inpainting requests effectively. Our comprehensive results showcase the
dataset’s versatility and the model’s effectiveness in various language-instructed inpainting scenarios. We have
made datasets, code, and models publicly available at
https://github.com/jianzongwu/LanguageDriven-Video-Inpainting.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting, a technique for restoring missing or corrupted segments in video frames, finds extensive application in areas such as video completion [4], video restoration [15], and object removal [6]. Despite continuous advancements in enhancing image quality and temporal coherence of inpainting results [10, 23, 47, 69], current methods predominantly depend on manually annotated binary
masks to identify restoration areas. This manual process
is time-consuming and impractical for long videos. While
automatic labeling tools, such as segmentation and object
tracking models [57, 61, 64], offer some relief, they often
necessitate manual refinement due to imperfect labeling.
* The work is done during the internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory. † :
Project Lead and corresponding author. Email: xiangtai94@gmail.com

(a) Referring Video Inpainting
Remove the woman on the left

Running…

(b) Interactive Video Inpainting
Hello, I took a photo of my dog training session in my
room! Could you make the video more focus on me and
my dogs without any distractions in the background?

Implicit Requests

Certainly! The video shows two individuals and two dogs. I guess
you are the woman in the center, and you want to remove the
woman in the background. Here is the new video:

Model Reasoning

Figure 1. Language-driven video inpainting. It contains two
sub-tasks based on the expression types. The referring video inpainting task takes simple referring expressions as input, while interactive video inpainting receives chat-style conversations. The
conversation may encounter implicit requests, and the model needs
to reason for a correct understanding.

Perhaps a more natural way to perform video inpainting is through natural language, as shown in Fig. 1. The
task would become much easier if we could leverage natural language descriptions to specify the inpainting areas,
like “woman on the left,” thereby preventing the need for
pixel-level manual annotations. Importantly, the languagedriven setting can benefit from the flexibility of natural language. For example, with richer sentences, one can easily
refer to multiple or abstract objects, which is much more
effective than labeling masks. Extending from this notion,
one could divide the task into two subtasks, namely “Referring Video Inpainting” and “Interactive Video Inpainting.”
The former takes simple referring expressions as inputs, and
the latter considers more complex conversation-like interactions to accomplish the inpainting task.
To establish a model for the proposed tasks, it is essential
to have an appropriate dataset for both training and evaluation. Currently, no publicly available dataset comprises
the triplets of original videos, removal expressions, and inpainted videos. In response to this gap, we build a new

12501

