This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Objectives of Vector-Quantized Tokenizers for Image Synthesis
Yuchao Gu1 , Xintao Wang2 , Yixiao Ge2 , Ying Shan2 , Mike Zheng Shou1 *
1

Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
https://github.com/TencentARC/BasicVQ-GEN

Abstract
Vector-Quantized (VQ-based) generative models usually
consist of two basic components, i.e., VQ tokenizers and
generative transformers. Prior research focuses on improving the reconstruction fidelity of VQ tokenizers but rarely
examines how the improvement in reconstruction affects the
generation ability of generative transformers. In this paper, we surprisingly find that improving the reconstruction
fidelity of VQ tokenizers does not necessarily improve the
generation. Instead, learning to compress semantic features within VQ tokenizers significantly improves generative transformers’ ability to capture textures and structures.
We thus highlight two competing objectives of VQ tokenizers for image synthesis: semantic compression and details preservation. Different from previous work that prioritizes better details preservation, we propose SemanticQuantized GAN (SeQ-GAN) with two learning phases to
balance the two objectives. In the first phase, we propose
a semantic-enhanced perceptual loss for better semantic
compression. In the second phase, we fix the encoder and
codebook, but enhance and finetune the decoder to achieve
better details preservation. Our proposed SeQ-GAN significantly improves VQ-based generative models for both unconditional and conditional image generation. Specifically,
SeQ-GAN achieves a Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) of
6.25 and Inception Score (IS) of 140.9 on 256×256 ImageNet generation, which is a remarkable improvement over
VIT-VQGAN (714M), which obtains 11.2 FID and 97.2 IS.

1. Introduction
In recent years, remarkable progress has been made in
image synthesis using likelihood-based generative methods, such as diffusion models [11, 45], autoregressive
(AR) [15, 43, 56, 57], and non-autoregressive (NAR) [6, 18]
transformers. These models offer stable training and better diversity compared to Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [29, 30]. However, unlike GANs, which can gener* Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Visualizing impact of VQ tokenizers on generative
transformers with α trade-off between details preservation and semantic compression in VQ tokenizer training.

ate high-resolution (e.g., 2562 and 5122 ) images at one forward pass, likelihood-based methods usually require multiple forward passes by sequential decoding [15, 56] or iterative refinement [6, 18]. Consequently, early works [7, 23,
39], which maximize likelihood on pixel space, are limited
in their ability to synthesize high-resolution images due to
the high computational cost and slow decoding speed.
Instead of directly modeling the underlying distribution
in the pixel space, recent vector-quantized (VQ-based) generative models [50] construct a discrete latent space for generative transformers. There are two basic components in
VQ-based generative models, i.e., VQ tokenizers and generative transformers. VQ tokenizers learn to quantize images into discrete codes, and then decode the codes to recover the input images, which process is termed as reconstruction. Then, a generative transformer is trained to learn
the underlying distribution in the discrete latent space constructed by the VQ tokenizer. Once trained, the generative
transformer can be used to sample images from the underlying distribution, and this process is termed as generation.
Thanks to the discrete latent space, VQ-based generative

7631

