This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIOD: Self-Distillation Meets Object Discovery
Sandra Kara

Hejer Ammar

Julien Denize

Florian Chabot

Quoc-Cuong Pham

Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France
{firstname.lastname}@cea.fr

Abstract
Instance segmentation demands substantial labeling resources. This has prompted increased interest to explore
the object discovery task as an unsupervised alternative. In
particular, promising results were achieved in localizing instances using motion supervision only. However, the motion signal introduces complexities due to its inherent noise
and sparsity, which constrains the effectiveness of current
methodologies. In the present paper we propose DIOD
(self DIstillation meets Object Discovery), the first method
that places the motion-guided object discovery within a
framework of continuous improvement through knowledge
distillation, providing solutions to existing limitations (i)
DIOD robustly eliminates the noise present in the exploited motion maps providing accurate motion-supervision
(ii) DIOD leverages the discovered objects within an iterative pseudo-labeling framework, enriching the initial
motion-supervision with static objects, which results in a
cost-efficient increase in performance. Through experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets, we demonstrate the benefits of bridging the gap between object discovery and distillation, by significantly improving the stateof-the-art. This enhancement is also sustained across other
demanding metrics so far reserved for supervised tasks.
https://github.com/CEA-LIST/DIOD

1. Introduction
Successful supervised deep learning methods assume the
availability of large annotated datasets. However, acquiring
human annotations can be costly and time-consuming, especially for dense tasks such as segmentation. This has motivated researchers to propose alternative tasks to supervised
approaches, aimed at reducing dependency on annotated
data. These methods range from the use of easier-to-get
annotations, also known as weak supervision [8, 16], to unsupervised methods leveraging self-supervised pre-training
[37, 44], or low-level signals that could be acquired auto-

matically [9, 21].

Input image

Bao et al. [2]

BMOD [18]

DIOD (ours)

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of DIOD with previous methods. The illustration shows several difficult cases (small or/and
static objects) that are correctly segmented in DIOD only. Other
improvements such as precise object boundaries, noise suppression in non-object regions, can also be seen from the visualization.

Among these tasks, object discovery focuses on the localization, without human annotations, of objects present in
the scene. The ambition to resolve this task in the image
modality was challenged by the lack of a clear definition
of objects [19, 41]. The transition to video data was then
presented as a way of overcoming this problem by specifying the nature of the targeted objects: objects capable
of moving [2]. Efforts were focused within this modality,
and all aligned to explore the slot-attention paradigm [29],
originally presented as the deep-learning based version of
the k-means clustering algorithm [28]. The slot-attention
architecture operates as an auto-encoder, utilizing attention
mechanisms in the latent space to decompose input images
into distinct components. These components aim to represent objects within the scene, encapsulated by embedding
vectors called slots.
Variants of the slot-attention have subsequently emerged.
These include scaling the model’s capacity to adapt to increasing complexity [2, 21], and reconstructing low-level
signals closer to the targeted segmentation [9]. Recently,

3975

