This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient Reweighting: Towards Imbalanced Class-Incremental Learning
Learned classes
New classes

Jiangpeng He
he416@purdue.edu

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, USA

Abstract
Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) trains a model to continually recognize new classes from non-stationary data
while retaining learned knowledge. A major challenge of
CIL arises when applying to real-world data characterized
by non-uniform distribution, which introduces a dual imbalance problem involving (i) disparities between stored exemplars of old tasks and new class data (inter-phase imbalance), and (ii) severe class imbalances within each individual task (intra-phase imbalance). We show that this dual
imbalance issue causes skewed gradient updates with biased weights in FC layers, thus inducing over/under-fitting
and catastrophic forgetting in CIL. Our method addresses it
by reweighting the gradients towards balanced optimization
and unbiased classifier learning. Additionally, we observe
imbalanced forgetting where paradoxically the instancerich classes suffer higher performance degradation during
CIL due to a larger amount of training data becoming unavailable in subsequent learning phases. To tackle this, we
further introduce a distribution-aware knowledge distillation loss to mitigate forgetting by aligning output logits proportionally with the distribution of lost training data. We
validate our method on CIFAR-100, ImageNetSubset, and
Food101 across various evaluation protocols and demonstrate consistent improvements compared to existing works,
showing great potential to apply CIL in real-world scenarios with enhanced robustness and effectiveness.

1. Introduction
The ever-evolving and unpredictable nature of real-world
environments drives the imperative to develop ClassIncremental Learning (CIL) systems with the capability of
acquiring knowledge continuously from non-stationary data
where new classes appear sequentially over time. The advantage of CIL resides in both memory and computational
efficiency which eliminates the requirement of storing all
Code is available at: https://github.com/JiangpengHe/
imbalanced_cil

Learned classes
New classes

intra-phase imbalance

Fc layer
Feature extractor

number of
training data

memory
budget

exemplar set

training

inter-phase imbalance

Figure 1. The illustration of imbalanced class-incremental with a
dual imbalance issue including the intra-phase imbalance within
each new task T and inter-phase imbalance between old tasks exemplars and new task training data. Mt refers to the model after
learning the new task T t .

previously learned data or retraining the model from scratch
entirely, making CIL applicable to various practical applications such as on-device learning [17]. However, deep neural network suffers from catastrophic forgetting [32] when
learning new classes, where the performance on learned
classes decreases significantly due to the unavailability of
old training data. Moreover, conventional CIL methodologies typically tackle this challenge by assuming a balanced
data distribution, where each class has roughly the same
number of training samples. Nevertheless, this assumption is misaligned with real-world scenarios where data is
usually long-tail distributed with significant disparity between instance-rich (head) classes and instance-rare (tail)
classes. Such imbalance presents unique challenges that
conventional CIL methods cannot adequately address, thus
reducing their effectiveness and broader applicability.
As shown in Figure 1, CIL with imbalanced data introduces a dual challenge encompassing both inter-phase and
intra-phase imbalances. Conventional CIL approaches primarily address the inter-phase imbalance while the intraphase imbalance emerges distinctly in the context of imbalanced CIL. In general, the inter-phase imbalance arises
from the disparities between new class data and the learned
task data preserved in the exemplar set for knowledge replay [29, 37]. Such imbalances can skew the learning process of the classifier between new and old classes[11, 16]
(e.g., the learned weights in the FC layer are heavily biased [46, 53]), leading to biased predictions towards the

16668

