This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dr.Bokeh: DiffeRentiable Occlusion-aware Bokeh Rendering
Yichen Sheng1 Zixun Yu2 Lu Ling1 Zhiwen Cao3 Xuaner Zhang3
Xin Lu4 Ke Xian5 Haiting Lin3 Bedrich Benes1
1
Purdue University 2 Google 3 Adobe 4 Typeface
5
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

(a) SteReFo [2]

(b) BokehMe [40]

(c) MPIB [41]

(d) Dr.Bokeh (ours)

Figure 1. Being occlusion-aware, Dr.Bokeh renders realistic bokeh effects from the bokeh rendering process without post-processing.
Compared with the scattering/gathering-based method SteReFo and learning-based method BokehMe, Dr.Bokeh renders natural partial
occlusion (red parts). MPIB learns to render a partial occlusion effect but breaks on unseen data (blue parts). Dr.Bokeh is more robust than
learning-based methods given the same inputs because the rendering process is physically grounded. Best viewed by zooming in.

Abstract
Bokeh is widely used in photography to draw attention
to the subject while effectively isolating distractions in the
background. Computational methods can simulate bokeh
effects without relying on a physical camera lens, but the
inaccurate lens modeling in existing filtering-based methods leads to artifacts that need post-processing or learningbased methods to fix. We propose Dr.Bokeh, a novel rendering method that addresses the issue by directly correcting the defect that violates physics in the current filteringbased bokeh rendering equation. Dr.Bokeh first preprocesses the input RGBD to obtain a layered scene representation. Dr.Bokeh then takes the layered representation

and user-defined lens parameters to render photo-realistic
lens blur based on the novel occlusion-aware bokeh rendering method. Experiments show that the non-learning based
renderer Dr.Bokeh outperforms state-of-the-art bokeh rendering algorithms in terms of photo-realism. In addition,
extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations show that
the more accurate lens model pushes the limit of depthfrom-defocus.

1. Introduction
Bokeh is a physical effect produced by a camera lens system. It refers to the shape and quality of out-of-focus areas
in an image. Bokeh brings focus to the in-focus subject and

4515

