This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object Recognition as Next Token Prediction
Kaiyu Yue12 * Bor-Chun Chen1
1

Meta

2

University of Maryland

Jonas Geiping3
3

Hengduo Li1

Tom Goldstein2

ELLIS Institute & MPI-IS Tübingen

4

Ser-Nam Lim4

University of Central Florida

Abstract
We present an approach to pose object recognition as next
token prediction. The idea is to apply a language decoder
that auto-regressively predicts the text tokens from image
embeddings to form labels. To ground this prediction process in auto-regression, we customize a non-causal attention mask for the decoder, incorporating two key features:
modeling tokens from different labels to be independent,
and treating image tokens as a prefix. This masking mechanism inspires an efficient method one-shot sampling
to simultaneously sample tokens of multiple labels in parallel and rank generated labels by their probabilities during
inference. To further enhance the efficiency, we propose a
simple strategy to construct a compact decoder by simply
discarding the intermediate blocks of a pretrained language
model. This approach yields a decoder that matches the
full model’s performance while being notably more efficient.
The code is available at github.com/kaiyuyue/nxtp.

1. Introduction
This paper delves into a fundamental problem in computer
vision object recognition translating an image into object labels. Generally speaking, the recognition framework
comprises an image encoder and a decoder. The image encoder, either in the form of a convolutional neural network
(CNN) [43, 60, 72, 106, 110] or a vision transformer (ViT)
[28, 93, 120], produces image embeddings, while the decoder propagates them to predict object labels.
If the decoder is a linear classifier [28, 43, 60, 72, 106, 110],
it needs to be initialized with fixed object concepts. ResNet
[43], for instance, initializes its final linear layer with 1K
embeddings, a.k.a. weights, to represent 1K objects in ImageNet [25]. Such static weights, however, limit the model’s
ability to recognize any object. This limitation can be mitigated using a language model [26, 114] as the decoder to
generate a flexible set of object embeddings from input descriptions. For example, CLIP [93] encodes the object descriptions into dynamic weights by prompting with “a photo
of a {L}”, where L could be any object name, and matches
these weights with image embeddings to recognize objects.
* Work done during an internship at Meta AI. kaiyuyue@cs.umd.edu.

Auto-Regression
so fa
cat
blank et

Generative Decoder

Image Token Embeddings

Probability

Figure 1. Object recognition as next token prediction using a
generative decoder such as a transformer-based language model to
auto-regressively predict object labels. Photo authorized with CC BY 4.0.

Note that CLIP predefines the gallery with a fixed number
of object descriptions prior to inference. This requirement
reveals that CLIP’s object embeddings cover only a portion
of the textual space in practical scenarios, rather than its entirety. Additionally, enlarging the gallery has been shown
to diminish its performance [19]. Given these observations,
a question arises: Can we eliminate the predefined object
labels or descriptions?
A direct strategy could use a generative model, particularly
a large language model (LLM) [11, 87, 91, 92, 112–114],
to decode labels from image embeddings. For instance,
Flamingo [1, 3] employs a LLM to transform image embeddings into textual outputs for various vision tasks such
as object recognition, image captioning, and visual question answering (VQA). But producing the desired results
for a specific task needs several reference samples as fewshot prompts for the model. In other words, it requires predefined reference pivots to refine and align its predictions
more precisely with the target task.
The most straightforward alternative is to skip any predefining procedure and align the LLM with the recognition task
directly. This approach hinges on the fact that a LLM’s token embeddings represent the entire textual space, including all object labels. This is as opposed to predefining subsets, i.e., query galleries or reference pivots, of this space
that potentially constrains the model’s capability.
Building on this concept, we propose a simple method that
employs a language decoder to auto-regressively decode
object labels token-by-token from image embeddings, as depicted in Figure 1. We operate a pretrained CLIP image encoder [93] to produce image embeddings, already aligned
with text, and linearly transform them to match the language
decoder’s embedding dimension.

16645

