This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parameter Efficient Self-Supervised Geospatial Domain Adaptation
Linus Scheibenreif1
Michael Mommert2,1
Damian Borth1
1
2
University of St. Gallen, Switzerland
Stuttgart University of Applied Sciences, Germany
{linus.scheibenreif, damian.borth}@unisg.ch

michael.mommert@hft-stuttgart.de

Abstract
As large-scale foundation models become publicly available for different domains, efficiently adapting them to individual downstream applications and additional data modalities has turned into a central challenge. For example, foundation models for geospatial and satellite remote sensing
applications are commonly trained on large optical RGB or
multi-spectral datasets, although data from a wide variety
of heterogeneous sensors are available in the remote sensing domain. This leads to significant discrepancies between
pre-training and downstream target data distributions for
many important applications. Fine-tuning large foundation models to bridge that gap incurs high computational
cost and can be infeasible when target datasets are small.
In this paper, we address the question of how large, pretrained foundational transformer models can be efficiently
adapted to downstream remote sensing tasks involving different data modalities or limited dataset size. We present a
self-supervised adaptation method that boosts downstream
linear evaluation accuracy of different foundation models
by 4-6% (absolute) across 8 remote sensing datasets while
outperforming full fine-tuning when training only 1-2% of
the model parameters. Our method significantly improves
label efficiency and increases few-shot accuracy by 6-10%
on different datasets1 .

1. Introduction
Remote sensing data, such as satellite imagery and aerial
photographs, have become ubiquitously available in recent
years. Governmental programs such as Landsat [44] and
Copernicus [11] produce vast amounts of high quality data
and make them publicly available. Important environmental and societal problems can now be addressed by applying methods from computer vision to remote sensing
data [41]. These include the monitoring of biodiversity [27],
extraction of socioeconomic indicators [45] or the estimation of greenhouse gas emissions [31]. Public remote sens1 Code available at github.com/HSG-AIML/GDA

Figure 1. Average performance (colored bars) and number of
trainable parameters (gray bars) for different visual foundation
models across 8 remote sensing datasets. Our Scaled Low-Rank
(SLR) adapter method achieves significant performance improvements across datasets and models with no (SLR Linear) and as
little as 1-2% (SLR fine-tuned) additional trainable parameters.

ing archives provide high quality data with global coverage, while private fleets of smaller satellites already provide data at high spatial and temporal resolutions, which
enables applications that depend on timely observations or
high resolution imagery, such as mapping of natural disasters [18], monitoring of marine traffic [12], or precision
agriculture [34].
The remote sensing field is characterized by a high heterogeneity of available data sources. Most satellite instruments are custom-designed to monitor specific phenomena enabling the satellite’s scientific or commercial mission. Commonly collected data modalities include optical
data such as RGB images, multi-spectral data (e.g., nearinfrared or short-wave infrared), hyperspectral data, or synthetic aperture radar (SAR). Accordingly, computer vision
approaches for remote sensing data are highly fragmented
into specialized sub-fields defined by the different modalities or the application of interest (see [49] for a review).

27841

