This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Plasticity in Online Continual Learning via Collaborative Learning
Maorong Wang1

Nicolas Michel2

Ling Xiao1

Toshihiko Yamasaki1

1

The University of Tokyo 2 Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM
{ma wang, ling, yamasaki}@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, nicolas.michel@univ-eiffel.fr

Abstract
Online Continual Learning (CL) solves the problem of
learning the ever-emerging new classification tasks from a
continuous data stream. Unlike its offline counterpart, in
online CL, the training data can only be seen once. Most
existing online CL research regards catastrophic forgetting
(i.e., model stability) as almost the only challenge. In this
paper, we argue that the model’s capability to acquire new
knowledge (i.e., model plasticity) is another challenge in
online CL. While replay-based strategies have been shown
to be effective in alleviating catastrophic forgetting, there is
a notable gap in research attention toward improving model
plasticity. To this end, we propose Collaborative Continual Learning (CCL), a collaborative learning based strategy to improve the model’s capability in acquiring new concepts. Additionally, we introduce Distillation Chain (DC),
a collaborative learning scheme to boost the training of the
models. We adapt CCL-DC to existing representative online
CL works. Extensive experiments demonstrate that even if
the learners are well-trained with state-of-the-art online CL
methods, our strategy can still improve model plasticity dramatically, and thereby improve the overall performance by
a large margin. The source code of our work is available at
https://github.com/maorong-wang/CCL-DC.

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) [10, 13, 32, 43] aims to incrementally learn a sequence of tasks and enhance the neural network’s performance on the current tasks, without forgetting
previously learned knowledge. CL can be done in two different manners [4, 43]: offline and online. In offline CL, the
learner can have infinite access to all the training data of the
current task that it trains on and may go through the data
for any epoch. Contrary to offline CL, in online CL, the
training data for each task also comes continually in a data
stream, and the learner can only see the training data once.
Apart from the learning approach, there are also three different CL scenarios [23, 29, 42]: Task-Incremental Learning (TIL), Domain-Incremental Learning (DIL), and Class-

Incremental learning (CIL). In this paper, we focus on the
CIL setting in online CL.
Various online CL methods [6, 7, 19, 20, 31, 35, 44]
have been proposed to help the models learn continually on
one-epoch data stream, with alleviated forgetting. Among
them, replay-based methods have shown remarkable success, and current state-of-the-art methods rely heavily on
memory replay to mitigate catastrophic forgetting [17, 30].
However, while most existing online CL research primarily
only focuses on improving model stability (i.e., alleviating
catastrophic forgetting) to achieve better overall accuracy,
the importance of model plasticity (i.e., the capability to acquire new knowledge) is often overlooked. While in offline
CL, it is possible to gain high plasticity by iterating several
epochs on the current task before proceeding to the subsequent task, acquiring plasticity in online CL tends to be
more challenging because the training data is only available
once. As shown in Fig. 1, compared to learning without
memory replay, the replay-based methods implicitly alleviate the low plasticity issue to some extent. Also, plasticity can be improved by employing a technique involving
multiple updates on incoming samples [3]. However, the
combination of memory replay and multiple updates fails
to bridge the existing plasticity gap between online and offline CL, and the use of multiple updates can lead to increased catastrophic forgetting. Overall, the plasticity gap
adversely affects the performance of online CL methods.
In this paper, we argue that plasticity is particularly crucial and challenging to acquire in online CL, and even more
so than in offline CL. Thus, we shed light on how model
plasticity and stability will impact the overall performance.
Furthermore, we propose a quantitative link between plasticity, stability, and final accuracy, showing that the plasticity gap between offline and online must be reduced to
improve overall performance.
Guided by the quantitative relationship, we focus ourselves on the previously overlooked plasticity perspective.
Inspired by the ability of collaborative learning to accelerate the convergence in non-continual scenarios [5], we
have incorporated collaborative learning in online CL and
observed a similar phenomenon. Consequently, we pro-

23460

