This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniViD: A Generative Framework for Universal Video Understanding
Junke Wang1,2 , Dongdong Chen3 , Chong Luo4 , Bo He5 , Lu Yuan3 , Zuxuan Wu1,2† , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Cloud + AI, 4 Microsoft Research Asia, 5 University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
The core of video understanding tasks, such as recognition, captioning, and tracking, is to automatically detect objects or actions in a video and analyze their temporal evolution. Despite sharing a common goal, different
tasks often rely on distinct model architectures and annotation formats. In contrast, natural language processing
benefits from a unified output space, i.e., text sequences,
which simplifies the training of powerful foundational language models, such as GPT-3, with extensive training corpora. Inspired by this, we seek to unify the output space
of video understanding tasks by using languages as labels
and additionally introducing time and box tokens. In this
way, a variety of video tasks could be formulated as videogrounded token generation. This enables us to address various types of video tasks, including classification (such as
action recognition), captioning (covering clip captioning,
video question answering, and dense video captioning), and
localization tasks (such as visual object tracking) within a
fully shared encoder-decoder architecture, following a generative framework. Through comprehensive experiments,
we demonstrate such a simple and straightforward idea is
quite effective and can achieve state-of-the-art or competitive results on seven video benchmarks, providing a novel
perspective for more universal video understanding. Code
is available at https://github.com/wangjk666/OmniVid.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the proliferation of video content across various applications, such as online education and live streaming, has profoundly impacted our daily lives. Videos have
evolved into a captivating and immersive medium for information delivery, emphasizing the pressing demand for
the development of automated algorithms capable of understanding the actions [46], events [49], and moving objects [81] within video sequences. As a result, the field
† Corresponding author.

of video understanding has undergone significant expansion and encompassed a diverse range of tasks, including
action recognition [3, 33, 60, 64, 80, 103], video captioning [16, 36, 61], and object tracking [4, 20, 95, 116].
For a long period, research in video understanding has
often adopted a task-specific paradigm, i.e., designing specialized architectures and loss functions to cater to the
unique requirements of different tasks and benchmarks [10,
46, 69, 107]. Despite the promising results with highcapacity deep neural networks, these methods [30, 82, 104,
113] are tailored for a particular objective and less adaptable to deployment in scenarios of diverse needs. To mitigate this issue, video foundation models [92, 93, 101, 105],
have gained emerging attention for their impressive performance across a broad spectrum of video tasks and potential in realizing the vision of Artificial General Intelligence
(AGI). However, while generic spatial-temporal representations can be learned with these models, adapting them to
different downstream tasks oftentimes requires carefully designing and fine-tuning task-specific heads.
In this paper, we posit such limitation originates from
the diversified annotations for different video tasks, e.g., a
set of action categories for action recognition [12, 80, 103],
sentences for captioning [36, 61], and continuous segments
(coordinates) for events (object) localization [20, 23, 71].
This naturally necessitates task-specific designs for better
optimization. In contrast, different tasks in natural language
processing (NLP) enjoy a sharable output space, i.e., text
sequences, which promotes the development of large language models, such as GPT [77, 78] and Llama [45, 83, 84].
Drawing inspiration from this, we leverage word tokens in
natural languages to represent semantic information that is
important for coarse-grained tasks like action recognition,
video captioning, and video question answering, and additionally introduce special time tokens and box tokens that
provide localization capabilities in both spatial and temporal dimensions, particularly useful for fine-grained tasks
like dense video captioning and visual object tracking. With
such an enriched vocabulary that consists of word, time, and
box tokens, the output format, as well as training objectives

18209

