This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VGGSfM: Visual Geometry Grounded Deep Structure From Motion
Jianyuan Wang1,2
1

Nikita Karaev 1,2

Christian Rupprecht1

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

David Novotny2
2

Meta AI

https://vggsfm.github.io

Abstract
Structure-from-motion (SfM) is a long-standing problem
in the computer vision community, which aims to reconstruct the camera poses and 3D structure of a scene from
a set of unconstrained 2D images. Classical frameworks
solve this problem in an incremental manner by detecting
and matching keypoints, registering images, triangulating
3D points, and conducting bundle adjustment. Recent research efforts have predominantly revolved around harnessing the power of deep learning techniques to enhance specific elements (e.g., keypoint matching), but are still based
on the original, non-differentiable pipeline. Instead, we
propose a new deep pipeline VGGSfM, where each component is fully differentiable and thus can be trained in an endto-end manner. To this end, we introduce new mechanisms
and simplifications. First, we build on recent advances in
deep 2D point tracking to extract reliable pixel-accurate
tracks, which eliminates the need for chaining pairwise
matches. Furthermore, we recover all cameras simultaneously based on the image and track features instead of gradually registering cameras. Finally, we optimise the cameras
and triangulate 3D points via a differentiable bundle adjustment layer. We attain state-of-the-art performance on three
popular datasets, CO3D, IMC Phototourism, and ETH3D.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the camera parameters and the 3D structure of a scene from a set of unconstrained 2D images is
a long-standing problem in the computer vision community. Among many other applications [8, 27, 29, 53, 79], it
has recently emerged as an important component of learning neural fields [10, 28, 34, 37, 48, 76]. The problem is
usually solved via the Structure-from-Motion (SfM) framework which estimates the 3D point cloud (Structure) and
the parameters of each camera (Motion) in the scene. Stateof-the-art methods [25, 39] follow the incremental SfM
paradigm whose origins can be traced back to the early
2000s [23, 58]. It usually begins with a small set of

Figure 1. Reconstruction of In-the-wild Photos with VGGSfM,
displaying estimated point clouds (in blue) and cameras (orange).

correspondence-rich images as initialization, and gradually
adds more views into the reconstruction, through keypoint
detection, matching, verification, image registration, triangulation, bundle adjustment (BA), and so on [2, 20, 26, 59].
Recent research efforts have predominantly revolved
around leveraging the power of deep learning techniques to

21686

