This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D4 M: Dataset Distillation via Disentangled Diffusion Model
Duo Su1,5,6,†

Junjie Hou2,5,6,†

Weizhi Gao3

Yingjie Tian4,5,6,7,∗

Bowen Tang8

1

2
School of Computer Science and Technology, UCAS
Sino-Danish College, UCAS
3
4
Department of Computer Science, NCSU
School of Economics and Management, UCAS
5
Research Center on Fictitious Economy and Data Science, CAS
6
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS
7
MOE Social Science Laboratory of Digital Economic Forecasts and Policy Simulation, UCAS
8
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
https://junjie31.github.io/D4M/

Abstract
Dataset distillation offers a lightweight synthetic dataset
for fast network training with promising test accuracy. To
imitate the performance of the original dataset, most approaches employ bi-level optimization and the distillation
space relies on the matching architecture. Nevertheless,
these approaches either suffer significant computational
costs on large-scale datasets or experience performance
decline on cross-architectures. We advocate for designing an economical dataset distillation framework that is
independent of the matching architectures. With empirical observations, we argue that constraining the consistency of the real and synthetic image spaces will enhance
the cross-architecture generalization. Motivated by this,
we introduce Dataset Distillation via Disentangled Diffusion Model (D4 M), an efficient framework for dataset distillation. Compared to architecture-dependent methods,
D4 M employs latent diffusion model to guarantee consistency and incorporates label information into category prototypes. The distilled datasets are versatile, eliminating the
need for repeated generation of distinct datasets for various
architectures. Through comprehensive experiments, D4 M
demonstrates superior performance and robust generalization, surpassing the SOTA methods across most aspects.

1. Introduction
The rapid growth in machine learning, resulting in large
models and vast datasets, poses a challenge to researchers
due to the escalating computational and storage demands.
Can the ’Divide-and-Conquer’ algorithm [1] mitigate this
† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

Model

Prediction

Model

Prediction

Model

Soft Label

Model

Prediction

Model

Soft Label

Model

Prediction

Model
(a) Synthesis-Time Matching
Synthesis-Time
Model
(b) Dual-Time Matching

&

D! M

(c) Training-Time Matching
Synthesis-Time
Real Image

Label Text

Training-Time
General
Synthetic Image

Architecture-Specific
Synthetic Image

Matching
Process

Figure 1. Comparison of various matching strategies in dataset
distillation. (a) The bi-level optimization implements data matching at synthesis time. (b) Dual-Time Matching strategy decouples
the bi-level optimization process into synthesis time and training
time to save computational overhead. (c) D4 M utilizes multimodal features (image and texts) to synthesize high-quality images. D4 M does not require matching process at Synthesis-Time.

challenge? From the perspective of dataset, recent research
extends the coreset selection [3, 7, 39] to distillation techniques aimed at reducing dataset scales. Dataset Distillation (DD) aims to synthesize a small dataset S from the
original large-scale dataset T , where |S| ≪ |T |. The information in T is condensed into a small dataset through DD.
Initially, the DD framework uses the bi-level optimization
to generate datasets where the inner loop updates the network used for testing the classification performance and the
outer loop synthesizes images according to matching strategies, such as gradient [24, 51, 53], distribution [40, 52] or
trajectory [4, 8].

5809

