This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoST: Motion Style Transformer between Diverse Action Contents
Boeun Kim1,2,3
1

Jungho Kim1

Korea Electronics Technology Institute

2

Hyung Jin Chang3

Seoul National University

Jin Young Choi2
3

University of Birmingham

Abstract
While existing motion style transfer methods are effective
between two motions with identical content, their performance significantly diminishes when transferring style between motions with different contents. This challenge lies
in the lack of clear separation between content and style
of a motion. To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel
motion style transformer that effectively disentangles style
from content and generates a plausible motion with transferred style from a source motion. Our distinctive approach
to achieving the goal of disentanglement is twofold: (1) a
new architecture for motion style transformer with ‘partattentive style modulator across body parts’ and ‘Siamese
encoders that encode style and content features separately’;
(2) style disentanglement loss. Our method outperforms existing methods and demonstrates exceptionally high quality,
particularly in motion pairs with different contents, without
the need for heuristic post-processing. Codes are available
at https://github.com/Boeun-Kim/MoST.

1. Introduction
Motion style transfer has received considerable attention
for its potential to generate character animations reflecting human personalized characteristics in applications such
as games, metaverse, and robotics. Our goal is to transfer stylistic characteristics from a source motion sequence
(style motion) to a target motion sequence (content motion)
without manually providing style labels. Performing this
style transfer between motion sequences is a considerably
more challenging task [1, 14, 20, 28] compared to generating motion when both content and style labels are manually
provided [2, 25].
The most significant challenge is transfer failure, where
the generated motion loses content of the content motion or
does not reflect style of the style motion. Transfer failure
often occurs when the contents of the style motion and content motion differ from each other, e.g. kick and punch. Certainly, its complexity arises from the significant variation in

Figure 1. Frequent failure cases in existing methods: (a) A result of
MotionPuzzle [14] replicating style motion. (b) A result of Aberman et al. [1] showing complete failure with twisted motion. The
character for the visualization is sourced from Mixamo [13].

style expression between different parts of the body for distinct contents. Despite the practical importance of transferring styles between different content, existing approaches
have not primarily addressed these cases, nor have they been
comprehensively evaluated, either qualitatively or quantitatively. Fig. 1 illustrates representative failure cases in existing methods. They fail to clearly disentangle style from
source content and appropriately transfer it to the target content. Fig. 1 (a) illustrates the result of MotionPuzzle [14],
where the generated motion, intended to be a jump, instead
displays a kick. This method tends to replicate the motion
pattern of the style motion rather than effectively transferring disentangled style. In Fig. 1 (b), Aberman et al. [1]
utterly fails to generate a plausible motion. Aberman et al.
recognized this issue, acknowledging that their method is
less effective in motions other than walking and running.
The additional notable limitation found in recent studies [1, 14, 20, 28] is the requirement for heavy postprocessing. These methods generate only the body pose of

1705

