This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pose-Guided Self-Training with Two-Stage Clustering for Unsupervised
Landmark Discovery
Siddharth Tourani1,2
1

Ahmed Alwheibi1

Arif Mahmood3
2

Muhammad Haris Khan1
3

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, University of Heidelberg, Information Technology University

tourani.siddharth@gmail.com, muhammad.haris@mbzuai.ac.ae, arif.mahmood@itu.edu.pk

Figure 1. (Left) Visual comparison of proposed D-ULD++ with SOTA. (Middle) Mapping of various SOTA methods to NME space.
(Right) D-ULD++ obtains minimum errors across yaw-angle ranges on AFLW Dataset. (Awan et al. [2], Jakab et al.[17], Mallis et al. [32],
Sanchez et al.[42], Zhang et al. [64]). The NME metrics are explained in Sec. 4.

Abstract
Unsupervised landmarks discovery (ULD) for an object
category is a challenging computer vision problem. In pursuit of developing a robust ULD framework, we explore the
potential of a recent paradigm of self-supervised learning
algorithms, known as diffusion models. Some recent works
have shown that these models implicitly contain important
correspondence cues. Towards harnessing the potential of
diffusion models for the ULD task, we make the following
core contributions. First, we propose a ZeroShot ULD baseline based on simple clustering of random pixel locations
with nearest neighbour matching. It delivers better results
than existing ULD methods. Second, motivated by the ZeroShot performance, we develop a ULD algorithm based on
diffusion features using self-training and clustering which
also outperforms prior methods by notable margins. Third,
we introduce a new proxy task based on generating latent
pose codes and also propose a two-stage clustering to facilitate effective pseudo-labeling, resulting in a significant performance improvement. Overall, our approach consistently
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on four challenging
benchmarks AFLW, MAFL, CatHeads and LS3D by significant margins. Code and models are available at: https:

//github.com/skt9/pose-proxy-uld/.

1. Introduction
Background: A large body of work approaches landmark
detection for specific object categories in a fully-supervised
setting [5, 12, 18, 24, 34, 55]. They assume the availability
of sufficiently annotated ground truth data. Common object
categories for landmark detection include human faces or
bodies as they offer an adequate quantity of images annotated with landmarks [42]. However, akin to other computer
vision problems, acquiring a large collection of annotated
images for detecting landmarks in an arbitrary object category might be very costly [32]. Therefore, in this paper, we
aim to discover object landmarks in an unsupervised way.
Challenges: Unsupervised learning of object landmarks
poses significant challenges due to several reasons. Although landmarks are indexed with spatial coordinates, they
convey high-level semantic information about object parts
which is inherently difficult to learn without human supervision [2, 42]. Detected landmarks should be invariant
to different viewpoints, occlusions, and other appearance
variations and also capture the shape perception of non-

23041

