This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond First-Order Tweedie: Solving Inverse Problems using Latent Diffusion
Litu Rout1,2,⇤ Yujia Chen1 Abhishek Kumar3
Constantine Caramanis2 Sanjay Shakkottai2 Wen-Sheng Chu1
1
Google, 2 UT Austin, 3 Google DeepMind
{litu.rout,constantine,sanjay.shakkottai}@utexas.edu {yujiachen,abhishk,wschu}@google.com

Figure 1. Image inversion and editing with latent diffusion: Our method, termed STSL, provides efficient inversion while enhancing
the quality of reconstructed images, especially when addressing corruptions (e.g., blurriness, low resolution, noise). We show its versatility
in various inversion tasks (left figure): motion deblurring, super-resolution, gaussian deblurring, and inpainting. In addition, STSL extends
to text-guided image editing with corrupted images (right), surpassing the performance of NTI [35], a prominent method in this domain.

Abstract
Sampling from the posterior distribution in latent diffusion models for inverse problems is computationally
challenging. Existing methods often rely on Tweedie’s
first-order moments that tend to induce biased results
[32]. Second-order approximations are computationally
prohibitive, making standard reverse diffusion processes intractable for posterior sampling. We present Second-order
Tweedie sampler from Surrogate Loss (STSL), a novel sampler offering efficiency comparable to first-order Tweedie
while enabling tractable reverse processes using secondorder approximation. Theoretical results reveal that our approach establishes a lower bound through a surrogate loss
and enables a tractable reverse process using the trace of
the Hessian with only O(1) compute. We show STSL outperforms SoTA solvers PSLD [43] and P2L [10] by reducing neural function evaluations by 4X and 8X, respectively,
while enhancing sampling quality on FFHQ, ImageNet, and
COCO benchmarks. Moreover, STSL extends to text-guided
image editing, effectively mitigating residual distortions in
corrupted images. To our best knowledge, this is the first
work to offer an efficient second-order approximation for
solving inverse problems using latent diffusion, which further enables editing real-world images with corruptions.

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on solving inverse problems using pretrained latent diffusion models. The goal of linear inverse
problem solvers is to find an image x 2 Rd that satisfies y = Ax + n, n ⇠ N 0, y2 Id 1 , where A 2
Rk⇥d is a known measurement operator and y 2 Rk is
a noisy observation with unknown y2 . This gives rise
to a sampling challenge, where the objective is to sample
the posterior p(X|Y = y). Diffusion models are gaining popularity as priors (pt (Xt )) for solving inverse problems [7, 8, 10, 43, 49]. However, the likelihood term
(pt (y|Xt )) is only available for time t = 0, but not for
t > 0, making posterior sampling inconsistent with the
Bayesian posterior. One way to address this issue is training a noise conditional likelihood model, yet this is limited by training costs and the need for re-training when
the measurement operator A changes [13]. State-of-theart methods, such as PSLD [43] and P2L [10], resort to alternatives for computing pt (y|Xt ). Among these methods,
1 Notations. Bold capital letter X, bold small letter x, normal capital
letter X, and normal small letter x denote a matrix, a vector, a vectorvalued random variable, and a scalar respectively. The dimension of the
identity matrix I should be apparent from the context.
⇤ This work was done during an internship at Google.

9472

