This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuGaR: Surface-Aligned Gaussian Splatting for
Efficient 3D Mesh Reconstruction and High-Quality Mesh Rendering
Antoine Guédon
Vincent Lepetit
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
https://anttwo.github.io/sugar/

Figure 1. We introduce a method that extracts accurate and editable meshes from 3D Gaussian Splatting representations within minutes
on a single GPU. The meshes can be edited, animated, composited, etc. with very realistic Gaussian Splatting rendering, offering new
possibilities for Computer Graphics. Note for example that we changed the posture of the robot between the captured scene on the bottom
left and the composited scene on the right. The supplementary material provides more examples, including a video illustrating our results.

Abstract
We propose a method to allow precise and extremely fast
mesh extraction from 3D Gaussian Splatting [15]. Gaussian Splatting has recently become very popular as it yields
realistic rendering while being significantly faster to train
than NeRFs. It is however challenging to extract a mesh
from the millions of tiny 3D Gaussians as these Gaussians
tend to be unorganized after optimization and no method
has been proposed so far. Our first key contribution is a
regularization term that encourages the Gaussians to align
well with the surface of the scene. We then introduce a
method that exploits this alignment to extract a mesh from
the Gaussians using Poisson reconstruction, which is fast,
scalable, and preserves details, in contrast to the Marching Cubes algorithm usually applied to extract meshes from
Neural SDFs. Finally, we introduce an optional refinement
strategy that binds Gaussians to the surface of the mesh,
and jointly optimizes these Gaussians and the mesh through
Gaussian splatting rendering. This enables easy editing,
sculpting, animating, and relighting of the Gaussians by
manipulating the mesh instead of the Gaussians themselves.
Retrieving such an editable mesh for realistic rendering is
done within minutes with our method, compared to hours
with the state-of-the-art method on SDFs, while providing a
better rendering quality.

1. Introduction
After NeRFs [22], 3D Gaussian Splatting [15] has recently
become very popular for capturing a 3D scene and rendering it from novel points of view. 3D Gaussian Splatting
optimizes the positions, orientations, appearances (represented as spherical harmonics), and alpha blending of many
tiny 3D Gaussians on the basis of a set of training images
of the scene to capture the scene geometry and appearance.
Because rendering the Gaussians is much faster than rendering a neural field, 3D Gaussian Splatting is much faster
than NeRFs and can capture a scene in a few minutes.
While the Gaussians allow very realistic renderings of
the scene, it is still however challenging to extract the surface of the scene from them: As shown in Figure 3, after
optimization by 3D Gaussian Splatting, the Gaussians do
not take an ordered structure in general and do not correspond well to the actual surface of the scene. In addition to
the surface itself, it is also often desirable to represent the
scene as a mesh, which remains the representation of choice
in many pipelines: A mesh-based representation allows for
powerful tools for editing, sculpting, animating, and relighting the scene. Because the Gaussians after Gaussian Splatting are unstructured, it is very challenging to extract a mesh
from them. Note that this is also challenging with NeRFs
albeit for different reasons.

5354

