This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Your Student is Better Than Expected:
Adaptive Teacher-Student Collaboration for Text-Conditional Diffusion Models
Nikita Starodubcev

Dmitry Baranchuk
Artem Fedorov
Yandex Research

Artem Babenko

https://github.com/yandex-research/adaptive-diffusion

Figure 1. Left: Overview of the proposed approach. Right: Side-by-side comparison of SDv1.5 and SDXL with their few-step distilled
versions. The distilled models surpass the original ones in a noticeable number of samples for the same text prompts and initial noise.

Abstract
Knowledge distillation methods have recently shown to be
a promising direction to speedup the synthesis of large-scale
diffusion models by requiring only a few inference steps.
While several powerful distillation methods were recently
proposed, the overall quality of student samples is typically
lower compared to the teacher ones, which hinders their
practical usage. In this work, we investigate the relative
quality of samples produced by the teacher text-to-image
diffusion model and its distilled student version. As our
main empirical finding, we discover that a noticeable portion of student samples exhibit superior fidelity compared to
the teacher ones, despite the “approximate” nature of the
student. Based on this finding, we propose an adaptive collaboration between student and teacher diffusion models for
effective text-to-image synthesis. Specifically, the distilled

model produces an initial image sample, and then an oracle decides whether it needs further improvements with the
teacher model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the
designed pipeline surpasses state-of-the-art text-to-image
alternatives for various inference budgets in terms of human
preference. Furthermore, the proposed approach can be
naturally used in popular applications such as text-guided
image editing and controllable generation.

1. Introduction
Large-scale diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have recently shown remarkable success in text-conditional image
generation [32, 34, 38, 41] that aims to produce high quality
images closely aligned with the user-specified text prompts.
However, DPMs pose sequential synthesis leading to high
inference costs opposed to feed-forward alternatives, e.g.,

9275

