This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Imagine Before Go: Self-Supervised Generative Map for Object Goal Navigation
Sixian Zhang1,2 , Xinyao Yu1,2 , Xinhang Song1,2 , Xiaohan Wang1 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2,3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing, 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
3

Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou, CAS

{sixian.zhang, xinyao.yu, xinhang.song, xiaohan.wang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
The Object Goal navigation (ObjectNav) task requires
the agent to navigate to a specified target in an unseen environment. Since the environment layout is unknown, the
agent needs to infer the unknown contextual objects from
partially observations, thereby deducing the likely location
of the target. Previous end-to-end RL methods capture contextual relationships through implicit representations while
they lack notion of geometry. Alternatively, modular methods construct local maps for recording the observed geometric structure of unseen environment, however, lacking
the reasoning of contextual relation limits the exploration
efficiency. In this work, we propose the self-supervised
generative map (SGM), a modular method that learns the
explicit context relation via self-supervised learning. The
SGM is trained to leverage both episodic observations and
general knowledge to reconstruct the masked pixels of a
cropped global map. During navigation, the agent maintains an incomplete local semantic map, meanwhile, the
unknown regions of the local map are generated by the pretrained SGM. Based on the generated map, the agent sets
the predicted location of the target as the goal and moves towards it. Experiments on Gibson, MP3D and HM3D show
the effectiveness of our method. The code is available at
https://github.com/sx-zhang/SGM .
d


fid


n
 d


1. Introduction
Navigating to specified targets [27, 44, 45, 55] is an essential capability for embodied AI systems to effectively manipulate and interact with real-world entities. Consequently,
the visual object goal navigation (ObjectNav) task has recently gained widespread attention. In ObjectNav task, the
agent is placed in an unseen and unmapped environment,
and is tasked to navigate to an object of the user-specific category (e.g. couch) based on the visual observations. Since
the environment is unseen, when the target is invisible, the
agent needs to infer the likely location of the target. This

Goal: nd couch

Image the
unobserved regions

couch

SGM
Self-supervise
training

Croppe
an
resized

Reconstructio
loss
Global maps

Randomly masked

Sub-maps

Episodic
observations
General
knowledge

Input

SGM

Generated map

Figure 1. Agents employ SGM to ‘imagine’ details of unobserved
regions during navigation. The SGM is trained in a self-supervised
manner by predicting pixels in masked regions of sub-maps to capture contextual relations. The SGM leverages both episodic observations and general knowledge for map reconstruction.

requires the agent to learn and understand the contextual relationships between objects (e.g. couches typically appear
with cushions and coffee tables), which enables it to deduce
the target’s location based on observed visual clues.
To learn the contextual relations, end-to-end reinforcement learning (RL) methods embed pre-constructed object
relation graph [52, 54, 59] into the end-to-end navigation
models, or learn object associations directly via the RL
[14, 15, 33]. These pre-learned priors are implicitly encoded within the policy. However, since the priors are
episode-agnostic and lack geometric memory of current environment, the end-to-end RL methods exhibit limited generalization in unseen environments [32, 60]. Alternatively,
modular methods [5–7] construct an explicit semantic local map, merging observed geometry and semantics of the
unseen environment. The agent can disregard the observed

16414

