This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Realistic Scene Generation with LiDAR Diffusion Models
Haoxi Ran
Carnegie Mellon University

Vitor Guizilini
Toyota Research Institute

Yue Wang
University of Southern California

ranhaoxi@cmu.edu

vitor.guizilini@tri.global

yue.w@usc.edu

Reference

Point-based DMs (LiDARGen)
Throughput↑: 0.015 samples/sec (×1)

Patch-based DMs (Latent Diffusion)
Throughput↑: 2.171 samples/sec (×145)

Curve-based DMs (Ours)
Throughput↑: 1.603 samples/sec (×107)

Figure 1. Our method (LiDM) steps towards LiDAR-realistic scene generation by preserving curve-like structures and objects with greater
resemblance to real-world data (Reference), and marks a milestone for conditional LiDAR scene generation from different input modalities.

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) excel in photo-realistic image
synthesis, but their adaptation to LiDAR scene generation
poses a substantial hurdle. This is primarily because DMs
operating in the point space struggle to preserve the curvelike patterns and 3D geometry of LiDAR scenes, which consumes much of their representation power. In this paper,
we propose LiDAR Diffusion Models (LiDMs) to generate LiDAR-realistic scenes from a latent space tailored to
capture the realism of LiDAR scenes by incorporating geometric priors into the learning pipeline. Our method targets three major desiderata: pattern realism, geometry realism, and object realism. Specifically, we introduce curvewise compression to simulate real-world LiDAR patterns,
point-wise coordinate supervision to learn scene geometry, and patch-wise encoding for a full 3D object context.
With these three core designs, our method achieves competitive performance on unconditional LiDAR generation
in 64-beam scenario and state of the art on conditional
LiDAR generation, while maintaining high efficiency compared to point-based DMs (up to 107× faster). Furthermore, by compressing LiDAR scenes into a latent space, we
enable the controllability of DMs with various conditions
such as semantic maps, camera views, and text prompts.

Our code and pretrained weights are available at https:
//github.com/hancyran/LiDAR-Diffusion.

1. Introduction
Recent years have observed a surge of conditional generative models that are capable of generating visually appealing and highly realistic images. Among them, diffusion
models (DMs) have emerged as one of the most popular
methods, thanks to its unexceptionable performance. To enable generation with arbitrary conditions, Latent Diffusion
Models (LDMs) [44] combine the cross-attention mechanism with a convolutional autoencoder to generate highresolution images. Its subsequent extensions (e.g., Stable Diffusion [2], Midjourney [1], ControlNet [60]) further
boosted its potential for conditional image synthesis.
This success leads us to inquire: can we apply controllable DMs to LiDAR scene generation for autonomous driving and robotics? For instance, given a collection of bounding boxes, can these models synthesize corresponding LiDAR scenes, thus turning these bounding boxes into highquality and expensive labeled data? Alternatively, is it possible to generate a 3D scene solely from a set of images?
Or even more ambitiously, can we design a language-driven
LiDAR generator for controllable simulation? To answer

14738

