This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpticalDR: A Deep Optical Imaging Model for Privacy-Protective
Depression Recognition
Yuchen Pan, Junjun Jiang*, Kui Jiang, Zhihao Wu, Keyuan Yu, Xianming Liu
Harbin Institute of Technology

Abstract
Depression Recognition (DR) poses a considerable challenge, especially in the context of the growing concerns
surrounding privacy. Traditional automatic diagnosis of
DR technology necessitates the use of facial images, undoubtedly expose the patient identity features and poses
privacy risks. In order to mitigate the potential risks associated with the inappropriate disclosure of patient facial images, we design a new imaging system to erase the
identity information of captured facial images while retain disease-relevant features. It is irreversible for identity
information recovery while preserving essential diseaserelated characteristics necessary for accurate DR. More
specifically, we try to record a de-identified facial image
(erasing the identifiable features as much as possible) by
a learnable lens, which is optimized in conjunction with
the following DR task as well as a range of face analysis related auxiliary tasks in an end-to-end manner. These
aforementioned strategies form our final Optical deep Depression Recognition network (OpticalDR). Experiments on
CelebA, AVEC 2013, and AVEC 2014 datasets demonstrate
that our OpticalDR has achieved state-of-the-art privacy
protection performance with an average AUC of 0.51 on
popular facial recognition models, and competitive results
for DR with MAE/RMSE of 7.53/8.48 on AVEC 2013 and
7.89/8.82 on AVEC 2014, respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/divertingPan/OpticalDR.

1. Introduction
Automated depression diagnosis (ADD) approaches
have emerged based on various biometric features, including acoustics, expressions, and electroencephalogram
[1, 8, 31, 41]. Among these approaches, facial-based ADD
has become mainstream [10,11,26], offering the advantages
of easy access and non-contact assessment. However, facial
images from depression patients are particularly sensitive,
as they inherently encompass biometric identifiers and pose
* Correspondence author: Junjun Jiang (junjunjiang@hit.edu.cn)

Client

Server
(a)

RGB image

Prediction

Regular camera
(b)

RGB image

Biometric features Prediction

(c)

Privacy camera

RGB image
(privacy-free)

Prediction

Figure 1. Different DR approaches: (a) conventional facial
recognition with no privacy preservation, (b) facial features-based
approaches with limited privacy preservation, and (c) our full
privacy-preserving approach that doesn’t generate facial images.
The DR approaches with regular cameras could be at the risk
of sensitive information access by attackers after the images are
captured. However, with our approach, no sensitive information
would be captured or stored, whether on the client or the server.

privacy risk. Consequently, it is of paramount importance to
address the safeguarding of facial information when developing ADD systems to uphold medical privacy and security.
To minimize these risks, previous studies [10, 11, 26]
introduce facial image anonymization techniques. Rather
than the full facial images, facial biometric features
(identity-protected) such as facial landmarks are used for
DR (Fig. 1). These endeavors, however, are still dependent
on the presence of visually accessible images for feature extraction, which poses a significant threat to privacy. Therefore, it is crucial to develop a more secure and robust facial
imaging approach at the initial stage of data collection.
In the field of Deep Optics [32], the lens can be parameterized to a distinct layer within the deep learning model.
Inspired by this, in this paper we integrate the Deep Optics into deep learning network and advises an Optical deep
DR network – which we term a OpticalDR – that provides

1303

