This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-View Attentive Contextualization for Multi-View 3D Object Detection
Xianpeng Liu1 , Ce Zheng2 , Ming Qian3 , Nan Xue3 , Chen Chen2 , Zhebin Zhang4 , Chen Li4 , Tianfu Wu1
1
North Carolina State University 2 University of Central Florida
3
Ant Group 4 OPPO U.S. Research Center
https://xianpeng919.github.io/mvacon

Abstract
We present Multi-View Attentive Contextualization
(MvACon), a simple yet effective method for improving 2Dto-3D feature lifting in query-based multi-view 3D (MV3D)
object detection. Despite remarkable progress witnessed
in the field of query-based MV3D object detection, prior
art often suffers from either the lack of exploiting highresolution 2D features in dense attention-based lifting, due
to high computational costs, or from insufficiently dense
grounding of 3D queries to multi-scale 2D features in
sparse attention-based lifting. Our proposed MvACon hits
the two birds with one stone using a representationally
dense yet computationally sparse attentive feature contextualization scheme that is agnostic to specific 2D-to-3D feature lifting approaches. In experiments, the proposed MvACon is thoroughly tested on the nuScenes benchmark, using
both the BEVFormer and its recent 3D deformable attention
(DFA3D) variant, as well as the PETR, showing consistent
detection performance improvement, especially in enhancing performance in location, orientation, and velocity prediction. It is also tested on the Waymo-mini benchmark using BEVFormer with similar improvement. We qualitatively
and quantitatively show that global cluster-based contexts
effectively encode dense scene-level contexts for MV3D object detection. The promising results of our proposed MvACon reinforces the adage in computer vision – “(contextualized) feature matters”.

1. Introduction
Camera-based 3D object detection is a pivotal area of research in computer vision, particularly owing to its appealing applications in cost-effective autonomous systems, such
as autonomous driving and robot autonomy. Recently, significant progress has been witnessed in the field of multiview 3D (MV3D) object detection, especially with the advent of end-to-end MV3D detection approaches [38]. One
crucial component in the end-to-end MV3D detection system is the 2D-to-3D feature lifting module, which converts

(a) Projected BEV anchor

(b) BEVFormer [25]

(c) Learned clusters

(d) Our MvACon

Figure 1. The effects of our proposed MvACon in the 2D-to-3D
feature lifting. Consider a point (red) on the car in (a), which is
projected from a 3D BEV anchor point. In lifting 2D features to
ground the 3D BEV anchor point, vanilla BEVFormer [25] utilizes
a predefined number of deformable points, with offsets learned
through a 6-layer cross-attention module relative to the projection point. (b) shows the deformed points after the final crossattention layer, most of which have low attention weights, indicating the model’s uncertainty or inability to consolidate contributions effectively for good lifting. Our MvACon tackles this issue with clustering-based attention, as visualized in (c). (d) shows
the deformed points, where we observe not only high-confidence
points on the car but also on the building. We further observe
that the points on the building remain stable across encoding layers (see Fig. 4) and consecutive frames (see suppl.). With those
high-confident deformed points in a spatiotemporally stable configuration, our MvACon may induce a local object-context aware
coordinate system that helps the overall performance, especially
the estimation of velocity and orientation, as we quantitatively observed in experiments. See text for details.

perspective 2D multi-view image feature maps to 3D feature representation. It aims to counter the complete loss
of depth information in individual 2D images by exploiting
multi-view clues. However, a significant challenge in practical applications like autonomous driving is the often insufficient field-of-view overlap across views, making it difficult to effectively address the loss of depth information.
To perform 2D-to-3D feature lifting, recent methods

16688

