This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Correlation-aware Coarse-to-fine MLPs for Deformable
Medical Image Registration
Mingyuan Meng1,2, Dagan Feng1, Lei Bi2, Jinman Kim1
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia.
2
Institute of Translational Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
1

mmen2292@uni.sydney.edu.au,{dagan.feng,jinman.kim}@sydney.edu.au,lei.bi@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deformable image registration is a fundamental step for
medical image analysis. Recently, transformers have been
used for registration and outperformed Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs). Transformers can capture longrange dependence among image features, which have been
shown beneficial for registration. However, due to the high
computation/memory loads of self-attention, transformers
are typically used at downsampled feature resolutions and
cannot capture fine-grained long-range dependence at the
full image resolution. This limits deformable registration
as it necessitates precise dense correspondence between
each image pixel. Multi-layer Perceptrons (MLPs) without
self-attention are efficient in computation/memory usage,
enabling the feasibility of capturing fine-grained longrange dependence at full resolution. Nevertheless, MLPs
have not been extensively explored for image registration
and are lacking the consideration of inductive bias crucial
for medical registration tasks. In this study, we propose the
first correlation-aware MLP-based registration network
(CorrMLP) for deformable medical image registration.
Our CorrMLP introduces a correlation-aware multiwindow MLP block in a novel coarse-to-fine registration
architecture, which captures fine-grained multi-range
dependence to perform correlation-aware coarse-to-fine
registration. Extensive experiments with seven public
medical datasets show that our CorrMLP outperforms
state-of-the-art deformable registration methods.

1. Introduction
Medical image registration is a fundamental requirement
for medical image analysis and has been an active research
focus for decades [1, 2]. It spatially aligns medical images
acquired from different patients, times, or scanners, which
serves as a crucial step for various clinical tasks, such as
tumor growth monitoring and group analysis [3]. Due to
pathological changes or anatomy variations among patients,
medical images carry many non-linear local deformations,
especially for complex organs such as the brain’s cerebral
cortex [4]. Therefore, different from the common natural

9645

image registration tasks (e.g., panorama stitching [5]) that
aim to remove the global misalignments caused by parallax,
medical image registration heavily relies on deformable
registration, and this motivates the current research focus
[2, 6]. For example, many medical image registration
studies assume that the images can be globally aligned after
affine registration and mainly focus on deformable
registration with non-linear local deformations [7-16].
Deformable image registration aims to find a dense nonlinear spatial transformation between a pair of images so
that the two images can be spatially aligned with each other.
Traditional image registration methods usually formulate
deformable registration as a time-consuming iterative
optimization problem [17, 18]. Recently, deep registration
methods based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
or transformers have been widely used to perform fast endto-end registration [3, 6]. These methods learn a mapping
from image pairs to spatial transformations based on a set
of training data, which have shown superior registration
performance than traditional methods [7-16].
The Visual transformer (ViT) [19] and its window-based
variant, Swin transformer [20], have been widely adopted
in various vision tasks for their great capability to capture
long-range dependence via self-attention. This capability
has been shown beneficial for deformable registration as it
can enlarge the receptive field to model large deformations
between images [12-15]. Nevertheless, due to the high
computation and memory loads of self-attention operations,
transformers are usually employed at downsampled feature
resolutions [12-15], which prevents them from processing
the subtle textural information and capturing fine-grained
long-range dependence at the full image resolution. This
limitation is catastrophic for deformable medical image
registration, as the full-resolution textural information is
crucial to identify subtle anatomy in medical images and
find precise pixel-wise spatial correspondence between the
anatomical structures. To compensate for this limitation,
convolutional layers were employed at the full/half image
resolutions in state-of-the-art hybrid CNN-transformer
registration networks [12, 14, 15, 21, 22]. Unfortunately,
convolutional layers have difficulties in capturing the finegrained long-range dependence at high resolutions, which
results in sub-optimal registration performance.

