This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Subspace-Constrained Tyler’s Estimator
and its Applications to Structure from Motion *
Feng Yu †
University of Minnesota

Teng Zhang
University of Central Florida

Gilad Lerman ‡
University of Minnesota

fyu@umn.edu

teng.zhang@ucf.edu

lerman@umn.edu

Abstract
We present the subspace-constrained Tyler’s estimator (STE)
designed for recovering a low-dimensional subspace within a
dataset that may be highly corrupted with outliers. STE is a
fusion of the Tyler’s M-estimator (TME) and a variant of the fast
median subspace. Our theoretical analysis suggests that, under
a common inlier-outlier model, STE can effectively recover the
underlying subspace, even when it contains a smaller fraction of
inliers relative to other methods in the field of robust subspace
recovery. We apply STE in the context of Structure from Motion
(SfM) in two ways: for robust estimation of the fundamental
matrix and for the removal of outlying cameras, enhancing
the robustness of the SfM pipeline. Numerical experiments
confirm the state-of-the-art performance of our method in these
applications. This research makes significant contributions to
the field of robust subspace recovery, particularly in the context
of computer vision and 3D reconstruction.

1. Introduction
In many applications, data has been collected in large quantities
and dimensions. It is a common practice to represent such data
within a low-dimensional subspace that preserves its essential
information. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is frequently
employed to identify this subspace. However, PCA faces
challenges when dealing with data contaminated by outliers.
Consequently, the field of Robust Subspace Recovery (RSR)
aims to develop a framework for outlier-robust PCA. RSR is
particularly relevant to problems in computer vision, such as
fundamental matrix estimation, which involves recovering a
hidden subspace associated with “good correspondence pairs”
among highly corrupted measurements.
Various algorithms have been proposed to address RSR, employing methods such as projection pursuit [1, 5, 14, 23, 29, 35,
38], subspace energy minimization (in particular least absolute
* This work was supported by NSF DMS awards 2124913 and 2318926.
† Supplementary code: https://github.com/alexfengg/STE
‡ Corresponding author. All authors equally contributed.

deviations and its relaxations) [9, 24, 27, 33, 34, 42, 43, 51],
robust covariance estimation [50], filtering-based methods
[4, 8, 49] and exhaustive subspace search methods [10, 16]. An
in-depth exploration and comprehensive overview of robust subspace recovery and its diverse algorithms can be found in [25].
Methods based on robust covariance estimators, such as the
Tyler’s M-estimator (TME), offer additional useful information
on the shape of the data within the subspace, similarly to PCA
in the non-robust setting. They also offer maximum-likelihood
interpretation, which is missing in many other methods.
Application of the TME [47] to RSR has been shown to be
successful on basic benchmarks [25, 50]. Moreover, under a
model of inliers in a general position on a subspace and outliers
in general position in the complement of the subspace, TME
was shown to recover the subspace within a desirable fraction
of inliers [50]. Below this fraction it was proved to be Small
Set Expansion (SSE) hard to solve the RSR problem [16].
One may still succeed with solving the RSR problem with a
computationally efficient algorithm when the fraction of inliers
is lower than the one required by [16], considering a more
restricted data model or violating other assumptions made in
[16]. For example, some special results in this direction are
discussed in [32]. Also, [33] proposes the generalized haystack
model of inliers and outliers to demonstrate the possibility of
handling lower fractions of inliers by an RSR algorithm. This
model extends the limited standard haystack model [27], where
basic methods (such as PCA filtering) can easily work with low
fractions of outliers. Nevertheless, it is unclear how practical
the above theoretical ideas are for applied settings.
One practical setting that requires a fraction of inliers significantly lower than the one stated in [16] arises in the problem
of robust fundamental (or essential) matrix estimation. The
fundamental matrix encompasses the epipolar geometry of two
views in stereo vision systems. It is typically computed using
point correspondences between the two projected images. This
computation requires finding an 8-dimensional subspace within
a 9-dimensional ambient space. In this setting, the theoretical
framework of [16] requires that the fraction of inliers be at least
8/9⇡88.9%, which is clearly unreasonable to require.
To date, the RANdom Sample Consensus (RANSAC)

14575

