This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IPoD: Implicit Field Learning with Point Diffusion for
Generalizable 3D Object Reconstruction from Single RGB-D Images
Yushuang Wu1,2 * Luyue Shi1,2 Junhao Cai4 Weihao Yuan3 Lingteng Qiu1,2
Zilong Dong3 Liefeng Bo3 Shuguang Cui2,1 Xiaoguang Han2,1†
1

SSE, CUHKSZ

2

3

FNii, CUHKSZ

Abstract
Generalizable 3D object reconstruction from single-view
RGB-D images remains a challenging task, particularly
with real-world data. Current state-of-the-art methods develop Transformer-based implicit field learning, necessitating an intensive learning paradigm that requires dense
query-supervision uniformly sampled throughout the entire
space. We propose a novel approach, IPoD, which harmonizes implicit field learning with point diffusion. This
approach treats the query points for implicit field learning as a noisy point cloud for iterative denoising, allowing for their dynamic adaptation to the target object shape.
Such adaptive query points harness diffusion learning’s capability for coarse shape recovery and also enhances the
implicit representation’s ability to delineate finer details.
Besides, an additional self-conditioning mechanism is designed to use implicit predictions as the guidance of diffusion learning, leading to a cooperative system. Experiments
conducted on the CO3D-v2 dataset affirm the superiority of
IPoD, achieving 7.8% improvement in F-score and 28.6% in
Chamfer distance over existing methods. The generalizability of IPoD is also demonstrated on the MVImgNet dataset.
Our project page is at https://yushuang-wu.github.io/IPoD.

Alibaba Group

4

IPoD

HKUST

…

…

Noisy points
Condition

Denoise

…

UDF value

Denoise

…

big → small

Input image

Partial points

Reconstructed point cloud

Unproject

Unproject

Figure 1. Our work focuses on the task of generalizable 3D object
reconstruction from a single RGB-D image. The proposed method
conducts implicit field learning with point diffusion that iteratively
denoises a point cloud as adaptive query points for better implicit
field learning, which leads to high reconstruction quality on both
the global shape and fine details.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from a single-view image is a challenging problem that with widespread implications in fields
such as robotics, autonomous driving, and AR/VR. Recent
efforts have been directed towards developing a generalizable model for object reconstruction from real RGB-D
data [28, 61]. It aims to learn a category-agnostic network
to recover an accurate and complete shape from a singleview object RGB-D image but with only imperfect groundtruth (GT) supervision, which are usually point clouds reconstructed from multiple views inevitably containing noise
and incompleteness as in real 3D datasets [46].
*
†

Work done during internship supervised by Weihao Yuan at Alibaba.
Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn.

To tackle this problem, the state-of-the-art methods
MCC [61] and NU-MCC [28] develop Transformer-based
networks to learn an implicit field for reconstruction. These
methods involve an intensive learning paradigm that demands dense query-supervision sampled uniformly in a predefined bounded space. Simultaneously, denoising diffusion models, notable for their emergent role in generative
modeling, have achieved remarkable outcomes in a variety of 2D and 3D tasks [12, 19, 23, 27, 29, 45, 48, 55].
The diffusion models prove powerful in generation especially given large amounts of data for training. Consequently, with the development of large-scale, realistic 3D
datasets [46, 65], the integration of diffusion models into

20432

