This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Outdoor Scene Extrapolation with
Hierarchical Generative Cellular Automata
Dongsu Zhang1 *

Francis Williams2

Sanja Fidler2,3,4
1

Seoul National University

Input

Zan Gojcic2

Young Min Kim1
2

NVIDIA

3

Vector Institute

Karsten Kreis2

Amlan Kar2, 3, 4
4

University of Toronto

Completion

Input point cloud Completion

Input

Completion

Figure 1. Geometry generation from hGCA (blue) from five accumulated LiDAR scans (yellow spheres) on real-world Waymo-open dataset.
hGCA is a conditional 3D generative model that can generate geometry beyond occlusions (vehicles, facades) and input field of view (roofs,
trees, poles), from sparse and noisy LiDAR scans. Our method is also spatially scalable, completing this whole scene (120 meters) at high
resolution on a single 24GB GPU without additional tricks.

Abstract
We aim to generate fine-grained 3D geometry from largescale sparse LiDAR scans, abundantly captured by autonomous vehicles (AV). Contrary to prior work on AV scene
completion, we aim to extrapolate fine geometry from unlabeled and beyond spatial limits of LiDAR scans, taking a
step towards generating realistic, high-resolution simulationready 3D street environments. We propose hierarchical Generative Cellular Automata (hGCA), a spatially scalable conditional 3D generative model, which grows geometry recursively with local kernels following [46, 47], in a coarseto-fine manner, equipped with a light-weight planner to induce global consistency. Experiments on synthetic scenes
show that hGCA generates plausible scene geometry with
higher fidelity and completeness compared to state-of-the-art
baselines. Our model generalizes strongly from sim-to-real,
qualitatively outperforming baselines on the Waymo-open
dataset. We also show anecdotal evidence of the ability to
create novel objects from real-world geometric cues even
when trained on limited synthetic content. More results and
details can be found on our project page.

1. Introduction
How can we scalably build large-scale, diverse and realistic
digital worlds for applications in simulation for autonomous
vehicles (AV) or gaming and entertainment? Manually authoring a realistic scene requires significant effort in creating
individual objects and positioning them in realistic spatial
configurations. Procedural models are a promising alternative which back recent AAA games such as No Man’s Sky.
However, authoring procedural models of objects and environments are usually time consuming manual tasks. Densely
scanning the world is now an increasingly popular and more
scalable option, using Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) based
approaches. However, these reconstruction methods typically don’t capture content beyond what is observed. Sparse
LiDAR scans from autonomous vehicles – a by-product
of their development and deployment – also provide cues
to the geometry of street environments in the world. Our
work aims to use these sparse LiDAR scans as input to a
* Work started during Dongsu’s internship at NVIDIA

20145

