This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PLGSLAM: Progressive Neural Scene Represenation with Local to Global
Bundle Adjustment
Tianchen Deng1 , Guole Shen1 , Tong Qin1 , Jianyu Wang1 , Wentao Zhao1 ,
Jingchuan Wang1 , Danwei Wang2 , Weidong Chen1 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Nanyang Technological University

Figure 1. Large-scale indoor scene 3D Reconstruction with different methods. We depict the final mesh and camera tracking trajectory error
(Absolute Trajectory Error) of different methods. The color bar on the right shows the relative scaling of color. PLGSLAM outperforms
others in both scene reconstruction and pose estimation.

Abstract
Neural implicit scene representations have recently
shown encouraging results in dense visual SLAM. However,
existing methods produce low-quality scene reconstruction
and low-accuracy localization performance when scaling
up to large indoor scenes and long sequences. These limitations are mainly due to their single, global radiance field
with finite capacity, which does not adapt to large scenarios. Their end-to-end pose networks are also not robust enough with the growth of cumulative errors in large
scenes. To this end, we introduce PLGSLAM, a neural visual SLAM system capable of high-fidelity surface reconstruction and robust camera tracking in real-time. To handle large-scale indoor scenes, PLGSLAM proposes a progressive scene representation method which dynamically allocates new local scene representation trained with frames
within a local sliding window. This allows us to scale up to
larger indoor scenes and improves robustness (even under
pose drifts). In local scene representation, PLGSLAM utilizes tri-planes for local high-frequency features with multilayer perceptron (MLP) networks for the low-frequency feature, achieving smoothness and scene completion in unobserved areas. Moreover, we propose local-to-global bundle
adjustment method with a global keyframe database to address the increased pose drifts on long sequences. Experi* represents corresponding author.

mental results demonstrate that PLGSLAM achieves stateof-the-art scene reconstruction results and tracking performance across various datasets and scenarios (both in small
and large-scale indoor environments).

1. Introduction
Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
has been a fundamental computer vision problem with
wide applications such as autonomous driving, remote sensing [6], and virtual/augmented reality. Many traditional
methods have been introduced in the past years, such as
ORB-SLAM [19, 20], VINS [24], and so on. They can estimate the camera pose and construct sparse point cloud maps
in real-time with accurate localization performance. However, the sparse point cloud maps cannot meet the further
perception needs of the robot. Recent attention has turned
to learning-based methods for dense scene reconstruction.
Kinectfusion [11], BAD-SLAM[25] reconstruct meaningful global 3D maps and show reasonable but limited reconstruction accuracy with deep learning networks.
Nowadays, with the proposal of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF), there are many following works on different areas [8]. iMAP [27] is the first work to use a single multilayer perceptron (MLP) to represent the entire scene in
SLAM system. NICE-SLAM [41] improves the scene representation method with feature grids. ESLAM [12] and
Co-SLAM [31] further improve the scene representation

19657

