This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Your Image is My Video: Reshaping the Receptive Field via Image-To-Video
Differentiable AutoAugmentation and Fusion
Sofia Casarin1 , Cynthia I. Ugwu1 , Sergio Escalera2,3 , Oswald Lanz1
1
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy
2
Computer Vision Center, Barcelona, Spain
3
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
{scasarin, cugwu, olanz}@unibz.it, sergio@maia.ub.es

Abstract
The landscape of deep learning research is moving towards innovative strategies to harness the true potential of
data. Traditionally, emphasis has been on scaling model
architectures, resulting in large and complex neural networks, which can be difficult to train with limited computational resources. However, independently of the model
size, data quality (i.e. amount and variability) is still a major factor that affects model generalization. In this work, we
propose a novel technique to exploit available data through
the use of automatic data augmentation for the tasks of image classification and semantic segmentation. We introduce the first Differentiable Augmentation Search method
(DAS) to generate variations of images that can be processed as videos. Compared to previous approaches, DAS
is extremely fast and flexible, allowing the search on very
large search spaces in less than a GPU day. Our intuition
is that the increased receptive field in the temporal dimension provided by DAS could lead to benefits also to the spatial receptive field. More specifically, we leverage DAS to
guide the reshaping of the spatial receptive field by selecting
task-dependant transformations. As a result, compared to
standard augmentation alternatives, we improve in terms of
accuracy on ImageNet, Cifar10, Cifar100, Tiny-ImageNet,
Pascal-VOC-2012 and CityScapes datasets when pluggingin our DAS over different light-weight video backbones.

1. Introduction
Creating models with significantly increased capacity, in an
attempt to achieve incremental performance improvements,
has been the prevailing approach in designing Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) classifiers. As a result, CNNs
with increased depth [16, 40, 45, 60], and Vision Transformers (ViTs) [13] were proposed over the years. Specifically, ViT has demonstrated promising results on a wide
variety of computer vision tasks including image classifi-

(a) Conceptual representation of the proposed approach. We reshape the
Receptive Field (RF) by applying affine transformations optimized through
our Differentiable Augmentation Search (DAS). On the top right you can
see how fusing with random transformation would not lead to benefits as,
when concatenating in time, the employed shift mechanism would fuse
features related to random parts. On the bottom, the augmentations guided
by DAS obtain specific shapes of the RF so that more context is kept.

rotate

translate

zoom

found by DAS

(b) RF visualization (ResNet-50, with GSF fusion) when different single
or composed transformations are applied. The last column shows our DAS
selected operation for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, which combines translation, rotation and zoom. More details in Tab. 4.

Figure 1. 1a overviews our approach and 1b shows a real example of obtained receptive fields. The employed transformations are
fundamental to shape the receptive field, as shown in 1b. The augmented images with DAS (Sec. 3.1) are concatenated in time, and
processed through a video network that partially shifts and fuses
the features (Sec. 3.2).

cation and semantic segmentation [13, 36, 48, 56]. However, while these techniques have demonstrated remarkable
success, it is noteworthy that these high-capacity models
necessitate increased computational resources for effective
training and inference, making them economically impractical for training and deployment within practical application scenarios. Moreover, the over-parametrization of ViT
and Deep CNNs makes the networks prone to overfitting,

5829

