This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Prompt Learning in Vision Language Models
Jihwan Bang1
KAIST1

Sumyeong Ahn2
Jae-Gil Lee1⇤
Michigan State University2

{jihwan.bang, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr, sumyeong@msu.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained Vision Language Models (VLMs) have
demonstrated notable progress in various zero-shot tasks,
such as classification and retrieval. Despite their performance, because improving performance on new tasks requires task-specific knowledge, their adaptation is essential. While labels are needed for the adaptation, acquiring
them is typically expensive. To overcome this challenge, active learning, a method of achieving a high performance by
obtaining labels for a small number of samples from experts, has been studied. Active learning primarily focuses
on selecting unlabeled samples for labeling and leveraging them to train models. In this study, we pose the question, “how can the pre-trained VLMs be adapted under the
active learning framework?” In response to this inquiry,
we observe that (1) simply applying a conventional active
learning framework to pre-trained VLMs even may degrade
performance compared to random selection because of the
class imbalance in labeling candidates, and (2) the knowledge of VLMs can provide hints for achieving the balance
before labeling. Based on these observations, we devise a
novel active learning framework for VLMs, denoted as PCB.
To assess the effectiveness of our approach, we conduct experiments on seven different real-world datasets, and the
results demonstrate that PCB surpasses conventional active
learning and random sampling methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/kaist-dmlab/pcb.

1. Introduction
In the past, as emerging research in deep neural networks
(DNNs) progressed, there was a substantial focus on studying specific types of datasets, including image/video (vision) [1, 10, 16], natural language [5, 54, 55], graph [63], table [58], and more. However, recent research has raised the
question: “can we develop DNNs capable of understanding multiple types of datasets interactively?” Among various candidates for multi-modality models, vision language
⇤ indicates corresponding author.

models (VLMs) [31–33, 46, 59] have garnered significant
attention due to not only to their wide domain knowledge
but also to their superior performance on various tasks.
Most of VLMs, for instance CLIP [46], comprises two
encoders: image and text encoders. They have consistently
shown impressive zero-shot performance across a wide
range of tasks without fine-tuning. For example, CLIP is
well-known for its remarkable zero-shot classification performance on various benchmarks, even if the model has not
encountered the datasets previously. Despite these notable
zero-shot performances, many researchers are focusing on
developing adaptation methods for new target tasks because
of necessity to make the model aware of the target tasks.
Since updating all parameters can be computationally expensive, a key research focus lies in reducing the adaptation computing cost [23, 66, 67]. For example, CoOp [66]
takes the approach of freezing both encoders and only allowing a small number of trainable parameters (with a size
ranging from 4 to 16) to serve as prompts. This strategy
has demonstrated substantial improvements in classification
performance with only a small number of trainable parameters and a limited amount of data for each class.
Even though we can reduce the adpation cost, the barrier
of high labeling costs still persists. To mitigate this inefficiency, there have been extensive studies in an area of active
learning [48, 51]. The central objective of active learning
is to select samples for labeling so that the model performance is significantly improved, making a noticebale gap
compared to random samples of the same quantity. These
active learning methods can be roughly divided into two categories: (1) uncertainty-based sampling [12, 18, 19, 25, 47]
and (2) diversity-based sampling [43, 50] which leverages
feature embeddings from the image encoder. In a hybrid
perspective, BADGE [2] was introduced by combining uncertainty and diversity through the use of k-means++ clustering within the gradient embedding space.
Under these two researches, our initial inquiry pertains
to the determination of whether the implementation simply combining active learning with VLMs can effectively
lead to enhanced classification performance. If it does not
result in such improvement, what constitutes the critical in-

27004

