This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Identifying Important Group of Pixels using Interactions
Kosuke Sumiyasu1

Kazuhiko Kawamoto2
Hiroshi Kera3 *
Chiba University, Japan
1
kosuke.sumiyasu@gmail.com, 2 kawa@faculty.chiba-u.jp, 3 kera@chiba-u.jp,

Abstract
To better understand the behavior of image classifiers,
it is useful to visualize the contribution of individual pixels to the model prediction. In this study, we propose a
method, MoXI (Model eXplanation by Interactions), that
efficiently and accurately identifies a group of pixels with
high prediction confidence. The proposed method employs
game-theoretic concepts, Shapley values and interactions,
taking into account the effects of individual pixels and
the cooperative influence of pixels on model confidence.
Theoretical analysis and experiments demonstrate that our
method better identifies the pixels that are highly contributing to the model outputs than widely-used by Grad-CAM,
Attention rollout, and Shapley value. While prior studies have suffered from the exponential computational cost
in the computation of Shapley value and interactions, we
show that this can be reduced to quadratic cost for our
task. The code is available at https://github.com/
KosukeSumiyasu/MoXI.

1. Introduction
Visualization of important image pixels has been widely
used to understand machine learning models in computer
vision tasks such as image classification [1, 3, 18, 20, 23,
31]. To this end, visualization methods compute the contribution of each pixel to model decisions. For example, GradCAM [23] measures the contribution using a weighted sum
of the feature maps of convolutional layers, where weights
are determined by the gradient of confidence score for any
target class with respect to the feature map entries. Attention rollout [1] measures it based on the attention weight of
encoders of a Vision Transformer.
Several recent studies revealed that a game-theoretic
concept, Shapley values [24], is a powerful indicator of
pixel contribution [8, 16, 18]. In multi-player games, Shapley values measures the contribution of each player from the
average change in the total game reward with his/her pres* Corresponding Author.

ence versus absence. When applied to an image classifier,
the pixels of an image are the players, which work cooperatively for the model output (e.g., confidence score). Unlike Grad-CAM and Attention rollout, Shapley values compute the contribution of pixels to the model output more
directly. The former methods use feature maps or attention
weights, the magnitude of whose entries are not necessarily
well-aligned with their contributions to the model output,
whereas the latter uses logits or confidence scores. Indeed,
Fig. 1 shows that the pixels with high Shapely values have a
significantly larger impact on confidence scores than those
determined by Grad-CAM or Attention rollout in both (a)
insertion case and (b) deletion case.
A crucial caveat of the aforementioned methods is that
they identify a group of important pixels by the individual
contribution of each pixel and overlook the collective contribution of multiple pixels. For example, Fig. 1(a) shows
that the three methods only highlight the class object (i.e.,
duck) and do not indicate the background (i.e., sea) as an informative factor. However, the set of pixels with the highest
contributions (e.g., highest Shapley values) does not imply
the most informative pixel set as a whole because the information overlap among pixels is not considered. Indeed,
the bottom row of Fig. 1(a) shows that the class object and
background greatly impact in synergy the confidence score.
In this paper, we propose an efficient game-theoretic
visualization method of image pixels with a high impact
on the prediction of an image classifier. Besides Shapley
values, we exploit interactions, a game-theoretical concept
that reflects the average effect of the cooperation of pixels. Namely, unlike prior methods, including Grad-CAM,
Attention rollout, and Shapley values, the proposed method
takes into account the cooperative contribution of pixels and
identifies the image pixels as a whole. In Fig. 1(a), the proposed method identifies a pixel set on which the classifier
puts high classification confidence. Similarly, in Fig. 1(b),
it identifies a minimal pixel set without which the classification fails. Notably, we define self-context variants of
Shapley values and interactions, and reduce the number of
forward passes from exponential to quadratic times, which
resolves the fundamental challenge of game-theoretic ap-

6017

