This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOIST-Former: Hand-held Objects Identification, Segmentation, and Tracking
in the Wild
Supreeth Narasimhaswamy1 , Huy Anh Nguyen1 , Lihan Huang1 , and Minh Hoai1,2
1
Stony Brook University, USA, 2 VinAI Research, Vietnam

Figure 1. Identification, segmentation, and tracking of hand-held objects.

Abstract
We address the challenging task of identifying, segmenting, and tracking hand-held objects, which is crucial for
applications such as human action segmentation and performance evaluation. This task is particularly challenging
due to heavy occlusion, rapid motion, and the transitory
nature of objects being hand-held, where an object may be
held, released, and subsequently picked up again. To tackle
these challenges, we have developed a novel transformerbased architecture called HOIST-Former. HOIST-Former is
adept at spatially and temporally segmenting hands and objects by iteratively pooling features from each other, ensuring that the processes of identification, segmentation, and
tracking of hand-held objects depend on the hands’ positions and their contextual appearance. We further refine
HOIST-Former with a contact loss that focuses on areas
where hands are in contact with objects. Moreover, we also
contribute an in-the-wild video dataset called HOIST, which
comprises 4,125 videos complete with bounding boxes, segmentation masks, and tracking IDs for hand-held objects.
Through experiments on the HOIST dataset and two additional public datasets, we demonstrate the efficacy of
HOIST-Former in segmenting and tracking hand-held objects. Project page: https://supreethn.github.
io/research/hoistformer/index.html

1. Introduction
Humans primarily use their hands to interact with their surroundings, making the ability to segment and track handheld objects crucial for understanding and interpreting human interactions with the environment. From monitoring a
factory worker navigating through assembly tasks to evaluating the skill set of a resident doctor performing intricate
medical operations, the dynamic interplay between hands
and objects forms the core of many activities. Segmenting
hand-held objects allows computer vision systems to identify the focal points of action, while tracking these objects
over time provides a coherent understanding of sequential
and complex actions. This combined capability is particularly crucial in scenarios involving multiple similar objects,
as it requires the system to differentiate and monitor the path
of each item to deliver contextually rich, actionable insights.
In this paper, we study the problem of jointly segmenting and tracking objects that are held and moved by hands in
unconstrained videos, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Specifically,
given an input video composed of a sequence of frames,
we consider all portable objects that are held by hands at
any point within these frames. Suppose there are a number
of such object instances. For each object instance, our objective is to produce a series of binary segmentation masks
corresponding to each frame, such that the mask for a particular frame is empty if the object instance is not being

2351

