This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Insect-Foundation: A Foundation Model and Large-scale 1M Dataset for
Visual Insect Understanding
Hoang-Quan Nguyen1 *, Thanh-Dat Truong1 *, Xuan Bac Nguyen1 , Ashley Dowling2 , Xin Li3 , Khoa Luu1
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Arkansas, AR
2
Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, University of Arkansas, AR
3
Department of Computer Science, SUNY Albany, NY
{hn016, tt032, xnguyen, adowling, khoaluu}@uark.edu, xli48@albany.edu
https://uark-cviu.github.io/projects/insect_foundation.html

Abstract
In precision agriculture, the detection and recognition
of insects play an essential role in the ability of crops to
grow healthy and produce a high-quality yield. The current machine vision model requires a large volume of data
to achieve high performance. However, there are approximately 5.5 million different insect species in the world.
None of the existing insect datasets can cover even a fraction of them due to varying geographic locations and acquisition costs. In this paper, we introduce a novel “Insect1M” dataset, a game-changing resource poised to revolutionize insect-related foundation model training. Covering
a vast spectrum of insect species, our dataset, including 1
million images with dense identification labels of taxonomy
hierarchy and insect descriptions, offers a panoramic view
of entomology, enabling foundation models to comprehend
visual and semantic information about insects like never
before. Then, to efficiently establish an Insect Foundation
Model, we develop a micro-feature self-supervised learning method with a Patch-wise Relevant Attention mechanism capable of discerning the subtle differences among insect images. In addition, we introduce Description Consistency loss to improve micro-feature modeling via insect
descriptions. Through our experiments, we illustrate the
effectiveness of our proposed approach in insect modeling and achieve State-of-the-Art performance on standard
benchmarks of insect-related tasks. Our Insect Foundation
Model and Dataset promise to empower the next generation
of insect-related vision models, bringing them closer to the
ultimate goal of precision agriculture.

1. Introduction
Insects are the most diverse and abundant eukaryotic organisms on the planet. They inhabit all terrestrial and aquatic
* Co-first authors

Figure 1. Our Proposed Patch-wise Relevant Attention. Given
masked insect images and separated image patches, our model can
discriminate these patches that have small differences via relevant
scores computed between masked images and image patches.

habitats and play a significant role within their community,
habitat, and ecosystem as contributors to nutrient cycling,
maintenance of plant and animal communities, disease cycling, and overall ecosystem health. Therefore, in the agricultural revolution, the detection and identification of insects plays a key role in ensuring healthy crop growth and
high-quality production. Prior methods [2, 3, 6, 32, 55, 66]
often fine-tuned the pre-trained ImageNet models on insect
data for specific insect-related tasks, e.g., Insect Classification [2, 6, 13, 66], Insect Detection [66]. However, these
methods remained limited since the models pre-trained on
ImageNet [12, 15, 16, 20, 50, 52] could not model the micro
features of insects, e.g., tiny texture and details of insects,
as ImageNet [12] is the generic object dataset.
Recent foundation models [7–9, 17–19, 40, 43, 69, 70]
pre-trained on large-scale datasets have revolutionized vision models with solid performance on downstream applications. These models are designed to model general or
specific properties of images or videos that can later be generalized to downstream tasks and unseen data. The capability of the foundation model is often implemented with

21945

