This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incremental Nuclei Segmentation from Histopathological Images via
Future-class Awareness and Compatibility-inspired Distillation
Huyong Wang1 , Huisi Wu1 *, Jing Qin2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
1

2210273011@email.szu.edu.cn, hswu@szu.edu.cn, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
We present a novel semantic segmentation approach for
incremental nuclei segmentation from histopathological images, which is a very challenging task as we have to incrementally optimize existing models to make them perform
well in both old and new classes without using training samples of old classes. Yet, it is an indispensable component of
computer-aided diagnosis systems. The proposed approach
has two key techniques. First, we propose a new future-class
awareness mechanism by separating some potential regions
for future classes from background based on their similarities to both old and new classes in the representation space.
With this mechanism, we can not only reserve more parameter space for future updates but also enhance the representation capability of learned features. We further propose
an innovative compatibility-inspired distillation scheme to
make our model take full advantage of the knowledge
learned by the old model. We conducted extensive experiments on two famous histopathological datasets and the
results demonstrate the proposed approach achieves much
better performance than state-of-the-art approaches. The
code is available at https://github.com/why19991/InSeg.

1. Introduction
Cellular nuclei segmentation aims to accurately delineate
various cell nuclei from histopathological images, which
is of great importance for cancer diagnosis, treatment,
and prognosis prediction [37]. Recent years, deep learning models have achieved remarkable performance in this
task [8, 20, 32, 34, 40], significantly promoting the development of computer-aided diagnosis systems. Despite these
progresses, most existing models are incapable of maintaining the performance on previously learned classes when it is
required to incrementally learn new classes, which is common in clinical practice [35]. This phenomenon is called
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Pathological images typically contain numerous objects
from different categories that have very similar appearances. For
instance, epithelia (represented by red objects) and lymphocytes
(represented by yellow objects) look quite alike. However, in the
1-1 setting at step 0, epithelia are labeled as new classes, whereas
lymphocytes are seen as background. Our approach aims to mine
such future classes in an unsupervised way and learn them in advance.

catastrophic forgetting [24], which is a long-standing challenge and prohibits these models from being deployed in
clinical settings. A common solution is to rebuild the training dataset containing annotations of all classes and retrain
the model. However, the cost of collecting histopathological images with pixel-level annotations for segmentation is
extremely laborious and time-consuming. Besides, access
to previous data is usually limited by patient privacy. In this
regard, we often have to incrementally optimize existing
models to make them perform well in both old classes and
new classes without using training samples of old classes.
Incremental learning is proposed to solve the problem
of catastrophic forgetting, and semantic segmentation based
on incremental learning is known as incremental semantic
segmentation (ISS). In scenarios where previous data can
be reused, some studies [22, 45] select samples to help the
model review and reinforce knowledge, greatly alleviating
catastrophic forgetting. However, when privacy or storage issues make old data unavailable, which is common

11408

