This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DistriFusion: Distributed Parallel Inference for High-Resolution Diffusion Models
Muyang Li1 *
Tianle Cai2 * Jiaxin Cao3 Qinsheng Zhang4 Han Cai1
Junjie Bai3 Yangqing Jia3 Kai Li2 Song Han1,4
1

MIT 2 Princeton 3 Lepton AI 4 NVIDIA
https://github.com/mit-han-lab/distrifuser
Original
MACs: 907T
Latency: 12.3s

Naïve Patch (4 Devices)
MACs Per Device: 190T (4.8× Less)
Latency: 3.14s (3.9× Faster)

Ours (4 Devices)
MACs Per Device: 227T (4.0× Less)
Latency: 4.16s (3.0× Faster)

Prompt: Ethereal fantasy concept art of an elf, magnificent, celestial, ethereal, painterly, epic, majestic, magical, fantasy art, cover art, dreamy.

Figure 1. We introduce DistriFusion, a training-free algorithm to harness multiple GPUs to accelerate diffusion model inference without
sacrificing image quality. Naïve Patch (Figure 2(b)) suffers from the fragmentation issue due to the lack of patch interaction. Our
DistriFusion removes artifacts and avoids the communication overhead by reusing the features from the previous steps. Setting: SDXL
with 50-step Euler sampler, 1280 × 1920 resolution. Latency is measured on A100s.

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved great success in synthesizing high-quality images. However, generating highresolution images with diffusion models is still challenging
due to the enormous computational costs, resulting in a prohibitive latency for interactive applications. In this paper,
we propose DistriFusion to tackle this problem by leveraging
parallelism across multiple GPUs. Our method splits the
model input into multiple patches and assigns each patch to
a GPU. However, naïvely implementing such an algorithm
breaks the interaction between patches and loses fidelity,
while incorporating such an interaction will incur tremendous communication overhead. To overcome this dilemma,
we observe the high similarity between the input from adjacent diffusion steps and propose displaced patch parallelism,
which takes advantage of the sequential nature of the diffusion process by reusing the pre-computed feature maps
from the previous timestep to provide context for the current
step. Therefore, our method supports asynchronous communication, which can be pipelined by computation. Extensive
experiments show that our method can be applied to recent
Stable Diffusion XL with no quality degradation and achieve
up to a 6.1× speedup on eight A100 GPUs compared to one.
* indicates equal contributions.

1. Introduction
The advent of AI-generated content (AIGC) represents a
seismic shift in technological innovation. Tools like Adobe
Firefly, Midjourney and recent Sora showcase astonishing capabilities, producing compelling imagery and designs from
simple text prompts. These achievements are notably supported by the progression in diffusion models [13, 57]. The
emergence of large text-to-image models, including Stable
Diffusion [51], Imgen [53], eDiff-I [2], DALL·E [3, 45, 46]
and Emu [6], further expands the horizons of AI creativity.
Trained on diverse open-web data, these models can
generate photorealistic images from text descriptions alone.
Such technological revolution unlocks numerous synthesis
and editing applications for images and videos, placing new
demands on responsiveness: by interactively guiding and
refining the model output, users can achieve more personalized and precise results. Nonetheless, a critical challenge
remains – high resolution leading to large computation. For
example, the original Stable Diffusion [51] is limited to
generating 512 × 512 images. Later, SDXL [43] expands
the capabilities to 1024 × 1024 images. More recently, Sora
further pushes the boundaries by enabling video generation
at 1080 × 1920 resolution. Despite these advancements,
the increased latency of generating high-resolution images

7183

