This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IIRP-Net: Iterative Inference Residual Pyramid Network for Enhanced Image
Registration
Tai Ma, Suwei Zhang, Jiafeng Li, Ying Wen*
School of Communication and Electronic Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
{51194506028,51255904033,51205904113}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn;ywen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning-based image registration (DLIR) methods have achieved remarkable success in deformable image registration. We observe that iterative inference can
exploit the well-trained registration network to the fullest
extent. In this work, we propose a novel Iterative Inference
Residual Pyramid Network (IIRP-Net) to enhance registration performance without any additional training costs. In
IIRP-Net, we construct a streamlined pyramid registration
network consisting of a feature extractor and residual flow
estimators (RP-Net) to achieve generalized capabilities in
feature extraction and registration. Then, in the inference
phase, IIRP-Net employs an iterative inference strategy to
enhance RP-Net by iteratively reutilizing residual flow estimators from coarse to fine. The number of iterations
is adaptively determined by the proposed IterStop mechanism. We conduct extensive experiments on the FLARE and
Mindboggle datasets and the results verify the effectiveness
of the proposed method, outperforming state-of-the-art deformable image registration methods. Our code is available
at https://github.com/Torbjorn1997/IIRPNet.

1. Introduction
Deformable image registration is an important task in computer vision, focusing on establishing non-linear dense correspondences between two n-D images. It has widespread
applications, particularly in medical image analysis [6, 29,
32] and remote sensing [9]. Traditional deformable registration methods usually formulate image registration as an
optimization task and attempt to minimize the energy function in an iterative manner. Common intensity-based optimization methods [5, 33, 37] utilize the intensity differences between images as the energy function. However, in
regions with weak texture, the gradient tends to be small,
leading to optimization falling into local minima [20]. To
* Corresponding author (e-mail: ywen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn)

address this issue, feature-based optimization methods are
proposed, which utilize various feature representation functions such as graph spectral representation [21], structure
tensor [35], and Gabor features [28, 36]. These methods extend the image intensity information into more comprehensive feature information, enhancing the capability to handle
areas where intensity-based methods might struggle. Traditional optimization registration methods treat the registration task as an independent iterative optimization problem.
When the target image pairs exhibit significant anatomical
appearance variations, the registration time increases dramatically [25].
In recent years, some deep learning-based methods [3, 4,
13, 25] have been proposed for deformable image registration. These methods utilize Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) to directly estimate the displacement field for registering a pair of input images. Unlike the traditional optimization methods that optimize an independent registration
function for each image pair, deep learning image registration (DLIR) methods optimize the parameters of a neural
network to minimize the loss function across a dataset [3].
The DLIR methods can be divided into two phases: training
and inference. In the training phase, the DLIR methods utilize a large number of image pairs from the dataset to learn
a generalized registration network. In the inference phase,
the trained registration network is used to predict the corresponding deformation field for a particular image pair. Current DLIR methods [3, 10, 13, 40] achieve fast and accurate
registration during inference, but they show inferior performance in handling complicated large deformation problems
and fine structure registration. One effective solution to deal
with the limited alignment capability of a single registration network is to introduce a recursive cascading strategy
[7, 26, 27, 31, 38]. The recursive cascading method utilizes multiple registration networks to break down the registration task into a series of recursive subtasks, which significantly enhances registration accuracy. Another solution
employs the feature pyramid strategy [12, 14, 17, 24] to obtain multi-scale features and align feature pairs from coarse
to fine, thus capturing inter-image correlations over various

11546

