This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIFU: Side-view Conditioned Implicit Function for Real-world Usable
Clothed Human Reconstruction
Zechuan Zhang
Zongxin Yang†
Yi Yang
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
{zechuan, yangzongxin, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

“Van Gogh Style”

Building Scenes with SIFU
Reconstructed
Humans
4

7

6

Mesh

Input Image

Texture

7

Edited

Diffusion Enhanced Texturing & Editing
Realistic
Texture

4

3

6

5

2

Mesh Reconstructed by SIFU

High Accuracy for 3D Printing

1
Extreme Loose
Clothing

2

3

1

Challenging
Pose

5

Figure 1. With just a single image, SIFU is capable of reconstructing a high-quality 3D clothed human model, making it well-suited
for practical applications such as 3D printing and scene creation. At the heart of SIFU is a novel Side-view Conditioned Implicit
Function, which is key to enhancing feature extraction and geometric precision. Furthermore, SIFU introduces a 3D Consistent Texture
Refinement process, greatly improving texture quality and facilitating texture editing with the help of text-to-image diffusion models.
Notably proficient in dealing with complex poses and loose clothing, SIFU stands out as an ideal solution for real-world applications.

Abstract
Creating high-quality 3D models of clothed humans from
single images for real-world applications is crucial. Despite recent advancements, accurately reconstructing humans in complex poses or with loose clothing from inthe-wild images, along with predicting textures for unseen
areas, remains a significant challenge. A key limitation
of previous methods is their insufficient prior guidance
in transitioning from 2D to 3D and in texture prediction.
In response, we introduce SIFU (Side-view Conditioned
Implicit Function for Real-world Usable Clothed Human
Reconstruction), a novel approach combining a Side-view
Decoupling Transformer with a 3D Consistent Texture Refinement pipeline. SIFU employs a cross-attention mechanism within the transformer, using SMPL-X normals as
queries to effectively decouple side-view features in the pro† Zongxin Yang is the corresponding author.

cess of mapping 2D features to 3D. This method not only
improves the precision of the 3D models but also their robustness, especially when SMPL-X estimates are not perfect. Our texture refinement process leverages text-to-image
diffusion-based prior to generate realistic and consistent
textures for invisible views. Through extensive experiments,
SIFU surpasses SOTA methods in both geometry and texture
reconstruction, showcasing enhanced robustness in complex scenarios and achieving an unprecedented Chamfer
and P2S measurement. Our approach extends to practical applications such as 3D printing and scene building,
demonstrating its broad utility in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
High-quality 3D models of clothed humans are crucial in
diverse sectors, including augmented and virtual reality
(AR/VR), 3D printing, scene assembly, and filmmaking.
The traditional process of creating these models not only

9936

