This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VRetouchEr: Learning Cross-frame Feature Interdependence with Imperfection
Flow for Face Retouching in Videos

1

Wen Xue1 , Le Jiang1 , Lianxin Xie1 , Si Wu1,2,3* , Yong Xu1,2,3 and Hau San Wong4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 PAZHOU LAB
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{csxuewen, csjiangle, cslianxin.xie}@mail.scut.edu.cn
{cswusi, yxu}@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Face Video Retouching is a complex task that often requires labor-intensive manual editing. Conventional image
retouching methods perform less satisfactorily in terms of
generalization performance and stability when applied to
videos without exploiting the correlation among frames. To
address this issue, we propose a Video Retouching transformEr to remove facial imperfections in videos, which is
referred to as VRetouchEr. Specifically, we estimate the
apparent motion of imperfections between two consecutive
frames, and the resulting displacement vectors are used to
refine the imperfection map, which is synthesized from the
current frame together with the corresponding encoder features. The flow-based imperfection refinement is critical for
precise and stable retouching across frames. To leverage
the temporal contextual information, we inject the refined
imperfection map into each transformer block for multiframe masked attention computation, such that we can capture the interdependence between the current frame and
multiple reference frames. As a result, the imperfection regions can be replaced with normal skin with high fidelity,
while at the same time keeping the other regions unchanged.
Extensive experiments are performed to verify the superiority of VRetouchEr over state-of-the-art image retouching
methods in terms of fidelity and stability.

1. Introduction
With the development of digital media enhancement,
face retouching in videos plays an important role in improving the facial appearance of persons in dynamic sequences.
There are a wide range of applications, from professional
video production to the burgeoning field of live-streaming
and virtual conferencing. These applications require the
meticulous removal of visual imperfections. On the other

Figure 1. An example to demonstrate the superiority of VRetouchEr over the main competing methods. (Upper row) The
quantitative results of the methods in terms of PSNR. (Middle row)
Imperfection detection results of BPFRe. (Bottom row) Imperfection detection results of VRetouchEr.

hand, the enhancements should be imperceptible to preserve
the subject’s natural appearance.
Recent video enhancement methods [23–25] fall short in
the context of face video retouching due to their inability to
accurately model and track the movement of facial imperfections over time. For instance, the optical flow technique
utilized in ProPainter [51] lacks the necessary precision for
facial flaw localization. The image-to-image translation
methods [21, 33, 48] and GAN-based methods [17, 45, 47]
are designed for static image retouching, and fall short in
maintaining the performance and stability when addressing
image sequences. The deficiency of paired training data further impedes the progress in this domain. Hence, there is
a significant gap in current methodologies to perform face
video retouching, underscoring the need for handling the

9141

