This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency-Adaptive Dilated Convolution for Semantic Segmentation
Linwei Chen1
Lin Gu2,3
1
Beijing Institute of Technology
chenlinwei@bit.edu.cn

lin.gu@riken.jp

Dezhi Zheng1
Ying Fu1∗
2
3
RIKEN
The University of Tokyo
zhengdezhi@bit.edu.cn

fuying@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Dilated convolution, which expands the receptive field by
inserting gaps between its consecutive elements, is widely
employed in computer vision. In this study, we propose
three strategies to improve individual phases of dilated convolution from the perspective of spectrum analysis. Departing from the conventional practice of fixing a global dilation rate as a hyperparameter, we introduce FrequencyAdaptive Dilated Convolution (FADC), which dynamically
adjusts dilation rates spatially based on local frequency
components. Subsequently, we design two plug-in modules to directly enhance effective bandwidth and receptive
field size. The Adaptive Kernel (AdaKern) module decomposes convolution weights into low-frequency and highfrequency components, dynamically adjusting the ratio between these components on a per-channel basis. By increasing the high-frequency part of convolution weights, AdaKern captures more high-frequency components, thereby improving effective bandwidth. The Frequency Selection
(FreqSelect) module optimally balances high- and lowfrequency components in feature representations through
spatially variant reweighting. It suppresses high frequencies in the background to encourage FADC to learn a
larger dilation, thereby increasing the receptive field for
an expanded scope. Extensive experiments on segmentation and object detection consistently validate the efficacy
of our approach. The code is made publicly available at
https://github.com/ying-fu/FADC.

1. Introduction
Dilated convolution inserts gaps between the filter values
at a dilation rate (D) to expand the receptive field without
significantly increasing computational load. This technique
is widely used in computer vision tasks, such as semantic
segmentation [9, 82] and object detection [56].
While effective in expanding the receptive field size
with a large dilation rate, it comes at the expense of high*Corresponding Author

Patch 1

Patch 2

Patch 1

Patch 2

(a) Image

(b) Feature map

(c) Frequency spectrum

(d) Dilation map

Figure 1. For the input image (a), its extracted features (b) exhibit
spatial variation. Patch 1 contains more high-frequency information, whereas the frequency of patch 2 is predominantly concentrated in low frequency (c). Consequently, assigning a small dilation rate for patch 1 is essential to preserve a high effective bandwidth, while a larger dilation rate, with limited effective bandwidth, is sufficient for patch 2, benefiting the achievement of a
larger receptive field (d).

frequency component response [82]. Increasing the dilation
rate from 1 to D is equivalent to expanding the convolution
kernel through zero-insertion by a factor of D. According to
the scaling property of Fourier Transforms [52, 57], both the
frequency response curve and the bandwidth of the convo1
lution kernel will be scaled to D
. As illustrated in Figure 1,
the bandwidth of the red curve for D = 4 is only a quarter of
the one for D = 1 in blue. The reduced bandwidth significantly limits the layer’s ability to process high-frequency
components. For instance, gridding artifacts occur when a
feature map has higher-frequency content than the sampling
rate of the dilated convolution [69, 82].
In this paper, we introduce Frequency-Adaptive Dilated Convolution (FADC) to enhance dilated convolution
through the lens of spectrum analysis. As illustrated in Figure 2, FADC comprises three key strategies, i.e., Adaptive
Dilation Rate (AdaDR), Adaptive Kernel (AdaKern), and
Frequency Selection (FreqSelect), aimed at enhancing the
individual phases of vanilla dilated convolution. AdaDR

3414

