This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TTA-EVF: Test-Time Adaptation for Event-based Video Frame Interpolation via
Reliable Pixel and Sample Estimation
Hoonhee Cho, Taewoo Kim, Yuhwan Jeong, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST
{gnsgnsgml,intelpro,jeongyh98,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

No Adaptation

Video Frame Interpolation (VFI), which aims at generating high-frame-rate videos from low-frame-rate inputs, is
a highly challenging task. The emergence of bio-inspired
sensors known as event cameras, which boast microsecondlevel temporal resolution, has ushered in a transformative
era for VFI. Nonetheless, the application of event-based
VFI techniques in domains with distinct environments from
the training data can be problematic. This is mainly because event camera data distribution can undergo substantial variations based on camera settings and scene conditions, presenting challenges for effective adaptation. In this
paper, we propose a test-time adaptation method for eventbased VFI to address the gap between the source and target
domains. Our approach enables sequential learning in an
online manner on the target domain, which only provides
low-frame-rate videos. We present an approach that leverages confident pixels as pseudo ground-truths, enabling
stable and accurate online learning from low-frame-rate
videos. Furthermore, to prevent overfitting during the continuous online process where the same scene is encountered
repeatedly, we propose a method of blending historical samples with current scenes. Extensive experiments validate the
effectiveness of our method, both in cross-domain and continuous domain shifting setups. The code is available at
https://github.com/Chohoonhee/TTA-EVF.

1. Introduction
Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) is a well-established problem in the field of computer vision, aiming to enhance
the temporal resolution of videos. In recent times, deep
learning-based VFI approaches [2, 3, 15, 20–22, 33, 35, 37,
38, 50, 60] have achieved remarkable performances across
various benchmark datasets. However, accurate motion estimation becomes challenging in scenes with complex and
non-linear motions due to the lack of information, often resulting in the generation of erroneous inter frames.

Time

Abstract

Test-Time Adaptation

Frame 297

Frame 297

Frame 441

Frame 441

Frame 596

Frame 596

Pre-trained

TTA-EVF

Figure 1. TTA-EVF efficiently produces high-quality results by
adapting the network to the target domain in an online manner, alleviating the need for offline data supply and addressing the performance degradation observed when applying a well-trained eventbased VFI network to a domain with a different distribution.

To address the inherent lack of intermediate information
in frame cameras, recent researches [16, 24, 51, 52, 56] have
explored the potential of event cameras as a promising solution for VFI, especially in scenarios involving complex
motion. Event cameras sense dynamic changes in pixel intensity, triggering an event when the change surpasses a predefined threshold. The incorporation of event cameras as
additional devices in VFI mitigates the challenges associated with modeling complex motion.
Typically, frame-based VFI methods [17, 33, 38]
are evaluated on test datasets (e.g., SNU-FILM [12],
X4K1000FPS [43]) with distributions different from their
training dataset (e.g., Vimeo90K [61]). Frame-based VFI
demonstrates a certain level of generalization ability even
without additional modules, providing evidence that it can
be applied to real scenario applications, such as dealing with
changes in camera devices. These device and environment

25701

