This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Building Optimal Neural Architectures using Interpretable Knowledge
Keith G. Mills1,2 Fred X. Han2 Mohammad Salameh2 Shengyao Lu1
Chunhua Zhou3 Jiao He3 Fengyu Sun3 Di Niu1
1
Dept. ECE, University of Alberta 2 Huawei Technologies Canada 3 Huawei Kirin Solution, China
{kgmills, shengyao, dniu}@ualberta.ca

sunfengyu@hisilicon.com

{fred.xuefei.han1, mohammad.salameh, zhouchunhua, hejiao4}@huawei.com

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search is a costly practice. The
fact that a search space can span a vast number of design
choices with each architecture evaluation taking nontrivial
overhead makes it hard for an algorithm to sufficiently explore candidate networks. In this paper, we propose AutoBuild, a scheme which learns to align the latent embeddings
of operations and architecture modules with the groundtruth performance of the architectures they appear in. By
doing so, AutoBuild is capable of assigning interpretable
importance scores to architecture modules, such as individual operation features and larger macro operation sequences such that high-performance neural networks can
be constructed without any need for search. Through experiments performed on state-of-the-art image classification,
segmentation, and Stable Diffusion models, we show that
by mining a relatively small set of evaluated architectures,
AutoBuild can learn to build high-quality architectures directly or help to reduce search space to focus on relevant
areas, finding better architectures that outperform both the
original labeled ones and ones found by search baselines.
Code available at https://github.com/AscendResearch/AutoBuild

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is an AutoML technique
for neural network design and has been widely adopted in
computer vision. Given a task, most NAS methods involve
exploring a vast search space of candidate architectures,
e.g., [6, 24, 31, 41], using a search algorithm, to find the
best architecture in terms of predefined performance and
hardware-friendly metrics. However, NAS is a costly procedure mainly due to two reasons. First, the search space
is formed by varying the operation configurations in each
layer and is thus exponential to the number of configurations per layer in scale, which can easily exceed 1010 architectures [4, 19], making it hard to thoroughly explore the

search space. Second, there is a large cost associated with
each architecture evaluation, which requires full training before assessing performance on a validation set.
Several methods have been proposed in the literature to
reduce the evaluation cost in NAS. For example, Once-forAll (OFA) [4] trains a weight-sharing supernetwork that
can represent any architecture in the search space. Recently, SnapFusion [16], which is adopted by Qualcomm’s
latest Snapdragon 8 Gen 3 Mobile Platform, applies a robust
training procedure to Stable Diffusion models, so that the
U-Net is trained to be robust to architectural permutations
and block pruning, which enables it to find a pruned efficient U-Net that speeds up text-to-image generation significantly. In fact, these methods still pay an initial, very high
one-time computational cost to train the supernetworks or
robust U-Net (which requires a tremendous investment into
GPUs), such that during search individual candidate architectures can be assessed by pulling weights from the supernetwork. Another limitation is that supernetwork training
is specific to the dataset used, e.g., ImageNet [7], and retraining may incur a significant cost. As foundational models [16, 29, 33] grow in complexity, NAS is becoming infeasible for organizations with limited computing resources.
In this paper, we propose AutoBuild, a method for automatically constructing optimal neural architectures from
high-valued architecture building blocks discovered from
only a handful of random architectures that have been evaluated. Unlike traditional NAS that considers how to best
traverse a vast search space, AutoBuild focuses on discovering the features, operations and multi-layered subgraphs as well as their configurations–in general, interpretable knowledge–that are important to performance in
order to directly construct architectures. The intuition is that
although the size of the search space is exponential large,
the actual number of configurations per layer can be small.
We ask the question–could there be a method that learns
how to build a good architecture rather than searching for
one, thus circumventing the formidable search cost?
Specifically, we learn the importance of architecture

5726

