This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoCha-Stereo: Motif Channel Attention Network for Stereo Matching
Ziyang Chen1 * Wei Long1 * He Yao1 * Yongjun Zhang1†
Bingshu Wang2 Yongbin Qin1 Jia Wu1
1†
College of Computer Science and Technology, The State Key Laboratory of Public Big Data,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Guizhou University
2
College of Software, Northwest Polytechnical University
ziyangchen2000@gmail.com; zyj6667@126.com†

Figure 1. Motivation. Addressing the issue of geometric structure loss in feature channels arising from deep learning. (From left to
right: Input image, visualization of a Normal Channel, visualization of a Motif [39] Channel.) Due to the fuzziness of geometric edges in
certain channels, achieving accurate matching of stereo image edges is a challenging problem. MoCha-Stereo guides ordinary channels to
focus on edge features through motif channels, achieving more accurate detail matching. Motif Channel refers to channel that composed
of repeatedly occurring geometric contours. The regions delineated by the yellow border represent the magnified details.

Abstract
Learning-based stereo matching techniques have made
significant progress. However, existing methods inevitably
lose geometrical structure information during the feature
channel generation process, resulting in edge detail mismatches. In this paper, the Motif Channel Attention Stereo
Matching Network (MoCha-Stereo) is designed to address
this problem. We provide the Motif Channel Correlation
Volume (MCCV) to determine more accurate edge matching costs. MCCV is achieved by projecting motif channels, which capture common geometric structures in feature channels, onto feature maps and cost volumes. In addition, edge variations in the reconstruction error map also
affect details matching, we propose the Reconstruction Error Motif Penalty (REMP) module to further refine the fullresolution disparity estimation. REMP integrates the frequency information of typical channel features from the reconstruction error. MoCha-Stereo ranks 1st on the KITTI2015 and KITTI-2012 Reflective leaderboards. Our structure also shows excellent performance in Multi-View Stereo.
* Co-first author.
† Corresponding author.

Code is avaliable at MoCha-Stereo.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching remains a foundational challenge in
computer vision, bearing significant relevance to autonomous driving, virtualization, rendering, and related sectors [40]. The primary goal of the assignment is to establish
a pixel-wise displacement map, or disparity, which can be
used to identify the depth of the pixels in the scene. Edge
performance of disparity maps is particularly vital in techniques requiring pixel-level rendering, such as virtual reality and augmented reality, where precise fitting between the
scene model and image mapping is essential [23]. This underscores the need for a close alignment between the edges
of the disparity map and the original RGB image.
Traditional stereo matching relies on global [8], semiglobal [13], or local [2] grayscale relationships between left
and right view pixels. These methods struggle to fully leverage scene-specific prior knowledge. Achieving optimal results often involves human observation, this tuning process
can be resource-intensive in scenes with complex images

27768

