This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian Shadow Casting for Neural Characters
Luis Bolanos1
Shih-Yang Su1
1
The University of British Columbia

Helge Rhodin1,2
2
Bielefeld University

Figure 1. Gaussian Shadow Casting (GSC): Our method is able to reconstruct 3D neural characters from a sparse set of videos in settings
with strong directional illumination. GSC uses a sum of Gaussians density model to cast secondary shadow rays efficiently with an analytic
formula. Our method learns to remove shadows from the neural color field, allowing us to relight in novel illuminations. All faces are
blurred for anonymity.

Abstract
Neural character models can now reconstruct detailed
geometry and texture from video, but they lack explicit shadows and shading, leading to artifacts when generating novel
views and poses or during relighting. It is particularly difficult to include shadows as they are a global effect and the
required casting of secondary rays is costly. We propose
a new shadow model using a Gaussian density proxy that
replaces sampling with a simple analytic formula. It supports dynamic motion and is tailored for shadow computation, thereby avoiding the affine projection approximation
and sorting required by the closely related Gaussian splatting. Combined with a deferred neural rendering model, our
Gaussian shadows enable Lambertian shading and shadow
casting with minimal overhead. We demonstrate improved
reconstructions, with better separation of albedo, shading,
and shadows in challenging outdoor scenes with direct sun
light and hard shadows. Our method is able to optimize
the light direction without any input from the user. As a
result, novel poses have fewer shadow artifacts, and relighting in novel scenes is more realistic compared to the
state-of-the-art methods, providing new ways to pose neural characters in novel environments, increasing their applicability. Code available at: https://github.com/
LuisBolanos17/GaussianShadowCasting

1. Introduction
It is now possible to reconstruct animatable 3D neural
avatars from video but methods do not account for accurate
lighting and shadows. They have to rely on recordings that
have soft uniform lighting, which precludes recording outdoors in direct sun light and on film sets with spotlights, and
most are unable to relight characters in novel environments,
limiting their applicability in content creation.
The most recent body models [17,20,28,36,37,40] which
are based on neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [26], approximate the light transport by casting primary rays between the
camera and the scene, sampling the underlying neural network dozens of times along each ray to obtain the density
and color. As they do not include an illumination model, the
color that the NeRF learns includes lighting, shadow, and
view-dependent effects. Learning a body model in a challenging scene with a strong directional light source, such as
the sun, leads to the neural field overfitting to the observed
shadows. It does not generalize to novel poses, as the cast
shadows are global effects where movement of a joint could
affect the appearance of other distant areas of the body. Figure 1 shows such setting. This is in contrast to local shading effects such as wrinkles in clothing which current body
models can successfully reconstruct.

20997

