This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeCustom: Tuning-Free Customized Image Generation
for Multi-Concept Composition
Ganggui Ding, Canyu Zhao, Wen Wang, Zhen Yang, Zide Liu, Hao Chen, Chunhua Shen

cat

dog
sunglasses
necklace

phone

Thanos
beard
flowers

man

”a dog with flowers around the neck”

”Thanos with beard holding flowers”

”a dog wearing sunglasses and a cross necklace”

”a man with curly hair”

girl

”a girl wearing a hat and a scarf”

sunglasses

”a dog wearing sunglasses and a hat”

curly hair

girl
hat
scarf

dog

dog
sunglasses
hat

flowers

Zhejiang University, China

”a cat holding a phone”

”a girl wearing sunglasses”

Figure 1. Results of customized multi-concept composition. Our method excels at rapidly generating high-quality images with multiple
concept combinations, without any model parameter tuning. The identity of each concept is remarkably preserved. Furthermore, our
method exhibits great versatility and robustness when dealing with different categories of concepts. This versatility allows users to generate
customized images that involve diverse combinations of concepts, catering to their specific needs and preferences. Best viewed on screen.

Abstract
Benefiting from large-scale pre-trained text-to-image
(T2I) generative models, impressive progress has been
achieved in customized image generation, which aims to
generate user-specified concepts. Existing approaches have
extensively focused on single-concept customization and
still encounter challenges when it comes to complex scenarios that involve combining multiple concepts. These approaches often require retraining/fine-tuning using a few
images, leading to time-consuming training processes and
impeding their swift implementation. Furthermore, the reliance on multiple images to represent a singular concept
increases the difficulty of customization.
To this end, we propose FreeCustom, a novel tuningfree method to generate customized images of multi-concept
composition based on reference concepts, using only one
image per concept as input. Specifically, we introduce a
new multi-reference self-attention (MRSA) mechanism and
a weighted mask strategy that enables the generated image
to access and focus more on the reference concepts. In addition, MRSA leverages our key finding that input concepts
∗ GD, CZ, and WW contributed equally. Correspondence should be
addressed to HC and CS.

are better preserved when providing images with context interactions. Experiments show that our method’s produced
images are consistent with the given concepts and better
aligned with the input text. Our method outperforms or performs on par with other training-based methods in terms of
multi-concept composition and single-concept customization, but is simpler. Codes can be found here.

1. Introduction
With the joint scaling of data, computational resources,
and model size, large-scale pre-trained diffusion models [9, 14, 26, 31, 34] have made unprecedented progress in
text-to-image generation. Benefiting from the capacity of
pre-trained models, customized generation, i.e., generating
user-specified objects, becomes possible and has achieved
increasing attention due to its wide applications, such as advertisement production, virtual try-on, and art creation.
Existing methods for customization, such as DreamBooth [32], Textual Inversion [10], and BLIP Diffusion [19]
have shown significant progress in single-concept customization [1], however, they encounter difficulties when
dealing with more complex scenarios involving multiple
concepts [18, 35]. In such cases, these methods are prone

9089

