This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuRAD: Neural Rendering for Autonomous Driving
Adam Tonderski†,1,4 Carl Lindström†,1,2 Georg Hess†,1,2
William Ljungbergh1,3 Lennart Svensson2 Christoffer Petersson1,2
1

Zenseact

2

3

Chalmers University of Technology

Linköping University

4

Lund University

{firstname.lastname}@{zenseact.com, chalmers.se}

Figure 1. NeuRAD is a neural rendering method tailored to dynamic automotive scenes. With it, we can alter the pose of the ego vehicle
and other road users as well as freely add and/or remove actors. These capabilities make NeuRAD suitable to serve as the foundation in
components such as sensor-realistic closed-loop simulators or powerful data augmentation engines.

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have gained popularity
in the autonomous driving (AD) community. Recent methods show NeRFs’ potential for closed-loop simulation, enabling testing of AD systems, and as an advanced training data augmentation technique. However, existing methods often require long training times, dense semantic supervision, or lack generalizability. This, in turn, hinders
the application of NeRFs for AD at scale. In this paper,
we propose NeuRAD, a robust novel view synthesis method
tailored to dynamic AD data. Our method features simple
network design, extensive sensor modeling for both camera and lidar – including rolling shutter, beam divergence
and ray dropping – and is applicable to multiple datasets
out of the box. We verify its performance on five popular
AD datasets, achieving state-of-the-art performance across
the board. To encourage further development, we openly
release the NeuRAD source code.

1. Introduction
In Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) a model is trained to
learn a 3D representation from which sensor realistic data
can be rendered from new viewpoints [23]. Such techniques
have been shown to be useful for a multitude of applications, such as view synthesis [3], generative modeling [11],
or pose and shape estimation [37].
Autonomous Driving (AD) is a field where NeRFs may
become very useful. By creating editable digital clones of
traffic scenes, safety-critical scenarios can be explored in a
scalable manner and without risking physical damage. For
example, practitioners can investigate the behavior of the
system for harsh braking on a highway or aggressive merging in city traffic. Furthermore, a NeRF-powered closedloop simulator can be used for the targeted generation of
corner-case training data.
Multiple works have applied NeRFs to automotive
data [17, 26, 29, 31, 39, 41, 42]. Neural Scene Graphs [26]
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

14895

