This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physical Backdoor: Towards Temperature-based Backdoor Attacks in the
Physical World
Wen Yin1,3 , Jian Lou4 , Pan Zhou1 *, Yulai Xie1,2,3 ∗ , Dan Feng2,3 ,
Yuhua Sun1 , Tailai Zhang1,3 , Lichao Sun5
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Jinyinhu Laboratory 4 Zhejiang University 5 Lehigh University
{wenyin, panzhou, ylxie, dfeng, natsun, tl zhang}@hust.edu.cn
jian.lou@zju.edu.cn, james.lichao.sun@gmail.com

Abstract
Backdoor attacks have been well-studied in visible light
object detection (VLOD) in recent years. However, VLOD
can not effectively work in dark and temperature-sensitive
scenarios. Instead, thermal infrared object detection
(TIOD) is the most accessible and practical in such environments. In this paper, our team is the first to investigate the
security vulnerabilities associated with TIOD in the context
of backdoor attacks, spanning both the digital and physical realms. We introduce two novel types of backdoor attacks on TIOD, each offering unique capabilities: Objectaffecting Attack and Range-affecting Attack. We conduct
a comprehensive analysis of key factors influencing trigger design, which include temperature, size, material, and
concealment. These factors, especially temperature, significantly impact the efficacy of backdoor attacks on TIOD.
A thorough understanding of these factors will serve as a
foundation for designing physical triggers and temperature
controlling experiments. Our study includes extensive experiments conducted in both digital and physical environments. In the digital realm, we evaluate our approach using
benchmark datasets for TIOD, achieving an Attack Success
Rate (ASR) of up to 98.21%. In the physical realm, we test
our approach in two real-world settings: a traffic intersection and a parking lot, using a thermal infrared camera.
Here, we attain an ASR of up to 98.38%.

1. Introduction
Thermal infrared object detection (TIOD) have several
unique advantages over visible light object detection
(VLOD). It excels in detecting objects under low visible
* Corresponding author.

light, smoky, heavy rain, and intense snow environments,
making it less affected by glare and light mutation, all while
retaining its sensitivity to thermal changes in objects [15].
Consequently, TIOD becomes increasingly indispensable in
a variety of application scenarios, from security monitoring
and autonomous driving in the dark to temperature measurement during a pandemic. The security vulnerabilities of
VLOD are thoroughly examined for both adversarial attacks
[14, 17] and backdoor attacks [18, 34, 45]. Backdoor attacks manipulate both a small portion of contaminated training samples and testing samples with the backdoor trigger.
Then, the trained detector will have backdoor effects at the
testing time when encountering samples with the backdoor
trigger, while remaining normal when fed with clean testing samples. In real-world scenarios, backdoor attacks pose
a serious security threat to deep neural networks (DNNs)
[31, 52, 53] due to their stealthiness.
Unlike VLOD field [13, 59], the security vulnerabilities
of TIOD remain largely unexplored and current efforts are
focused merely on adversarial attacks rather than backdoor
attacks. For instance, Zhu et al. design adversarial patterns
and manufacture an adversarial shirt made of aerogel material [63]. Wei et al. introduce the method of aggregation
regularization to optimize the adversarial infrared patch,
making the patch easier to implement physically [50]. Both
works suggest that extra considerations are required to design effective adversarial examples for TIOD, mainly due to
the unique characteristics of thermal infrared imaging compared to visible light imaging. These new adversarial attacks ring the alarm that TIOD demands the same level of
scrutiny as VLOD to expose all types of potential security
threats. However, the security vulnerabilities of TIOD to
backdoor attacks remain unexplored.
TIOD combines object detection technology with thermal infrared imaging technology, allowing it to recognize

12733

