This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LeftRefill: Filling Right Canvas based on Left Reference through
Generalized Text-to-Image Diffusion Model
Chenjie Cao1,2 *, Yunuo Cai1 , Qiaole Dong1 , Yikai Wang1 , Yanwei Fu1†
1
Fudan University, 2 Alibaba Group

Right:
Target

LeftRefill

Left:
Reference

Right:
Generation

Simple form

Left:
Reference

(b) Novel view synthesis
New Reference
Discard

(a) Reference-guided inpainting

Final Result

Generalized form

Masking

(c) Inpainting one target view through multiple references

(d) Generating multiple targets from single view

Figure 1. LetRefill addresses the generation on the right canvas conditioned by left references. We can re-formulate several existing tasks in
the LeftRefill manner, including (a) reference-guided inpainting, (b) novel view synthesis. The reference and target can be further extended
to multi-view scenes, forming (c) multi-view reference inpainting and (d) multi-view synthesis, respectively. Green frames indicate stitched
inputs. Reference views are placed on the left side, while masked target views are placed on the right side. Violet frames only show enlarged
right-side generations produced by LeftRefill. Note that we omit some input details in (c) and (d) for simplicity.

Abstract
This paper introduces LeftRefill, an innovative approach
to efficiently harness large Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion
models for reference-guided image synthesis. As the name
implies, LeftRefill horizontally stitches reference and target views together as a whole input. The reference image occupies the left side, while the target canvas is positioned on the right. Then, LeftRefill paints the rightside target canvas based on the left-side reference and
specific task instructions. Such a task formulation shares
some similarities with contextual inpainting, akin to the
actions of a human painter. This novel formulation efficiently learns both structural and textured correspondence
between reference and target without other image encoders
* Dr. Chenjie Cao is at Alibaba Group. This work was accomplished
while Dr. Chenjie Cao was at Fudan University.
† Corresponding author: yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn
Other emails: {cjcao20,yncai20,qldong18,yikaiwang19}@fudan.edu.cn

or adapters. We inject task and view information through
cross-attention modules in T2I models, and further exhibit
multi-view reference ability via the re-arranged self-attention
modules. These enable LeftRefill to perform consistent
generation as a generalized model without requiring testtime fine-tuning or model modifications. Thus, LeftRefill
can be seen as a simple yet unified framework to address
reference-guided synthesis. As an exemplar, we leverage
LeftRefill to address two different challenges: referenceguided inpainting and novel view synthesis, based on the
pre-trained StableDiffusion. Codes&models are released at
https://github.com/ewrfcas/LeftRefill.

1. Introduction
Imagine you are a right-handed painter with a task that requires you to draw or modify a target image based on a
reference picture. How would you approach it? Intuitively,

7705

