This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Normalizing Flows on the Product Space of SO(3) Manifolds
for Probabilistic Human Pose Modeling
Olaf Dünkel12 , Tim Salzmann3 , Florian Pfaff 4
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 2 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
3
Technical University of Munich, 4 University of Stuttgart
oduenkel@mpi-inf.mpg.de, tim.salzmann@tum.de, pfaff@ias.uni-stuttgart.de
1

Abstract
Normalizing flows have proven their efficacy for density estimation in Euclidean space, but their application
to rotational representations, crucial in various domains
such as robotics or human pose modeling, remains underexplored. Probabilistic models of the human pose can benefit from approaches that rigorously consider the rotational
nature of human joints. For this purpose, we introduce
HuProSO3, a normalizing flow model that operates on a
high-dimensional product space of SO(3) manifolds, modeling the joint distribution for human joints with three degrees of freedom. HuProSO3’s advantage over state-of-theart approaches is demonstrated through its superior modeling accuracy in three different applications and its capability to evaluate the exact likelihood. This work not only
addresses the technical challenge of learning densities on
SO(3) manifolds, but it also has broader implications for
domains where the probabilistic regression of correlated
3D rotations is of importance. Code will be available at
https://github.com/odunkel/HuProSO.

1. Introduction
Modeling uncertainties in high-dimensional Euclidean
product spaces is a well-explored research problem [5–
7, 12, 13, 24]. However, these methods often fall short
in representing problems with an inherent rotational nature.
This limitation is evident in scenarios like correlated object
rotations in a scene or the orientation of animals in swarm
behaviors, where the problems are modeled by a product
space of SO(3) manifolds. A particularly relevant example
is human pose modeling, a problem of multiple correlated
joint rotations. Accurately modeling human poses as densities on the Cartesian product of such joint rotations holds
significant value for various fields, including computer vision and robotics.
A probabilistic model defined on SO(3) manifolds rep-

Figure 1. Application of the normalizing flow for occcluded joints.
Left: A normalizing flow defined on SO(3) manifolds enables the
learning of expressive human pose distributions, incorporating a
context vector c for conditioning. Right: Renderings of probable
poses given condition c, which is the observation of the human
with the left arm occluded. The right arm’s pose is estimated with
high certainty, while the left arm demonstrates varied but realistic
poses due to the occlusion.

resenting joint rotation distributions is relevant for human
pose and motion estimation. This model acts as a reliable
prior in scenarios with unclear, noisy, incomplete, or absent
observations [3, 14, 15, 29, 32], with an example being depicted in Fig. 1. Additionally, such a model is crucial in
human-robot interaction for implementing risk-aware planning and control, necessitating the representation of human
movements as normalized probabilistic densities [21].
Normalizing flows are recognized for their capability
to learn normalized densities. Yet, their application has
predominantly been in learning joint densities within Euclidean spaces, not fully addressing the properties of human pose, which is significantly influenced by the rotational
nature of the human joints. Although some previous approaches in probabilistic human pose modeling have employed normalizing flows to learn distributions parameterized by rotational measures [14, 36], they fall short in learning normalized densities on the SO(3). This is due to their
Euclidean space-based approaches, which lack a continuous
bijective mapping to SO(3).
To overcome these shortcomings, we introduce a normalizing flow defined on the product space of SO(3) man-

2285

