This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Test-Time Adaptation of Vision-Language Models
Adilbek Karmanov1 * Dayan Guan2 * Shijian Lu1,2† Abdulmotaleb El Saddik1,3 Eric Xing1,4
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 2 Nanyang Technological University
3
University of Ottawa 4 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Test-time adaptation with pre-trained vision-language
models has attracted increasing attention for tackling distribution shifts during the test time. Though prior studies have achieved very promising performance, they involve intensive computation which is severely unaligned
with test-time adaptation. We design TDA, a training-free
dynamic adapter that enables effective and efficient testtime adaptation with vision-language models. TDA works
with a lightweight key-value cache that maintains a dynamic queue with few-shot pseudo labels as values and
the corresponding test-sample features as keys. Leveraging the key-value cache, TDA allows adapting to test data
gradually via progressive pseudo label refinement which is
super-efficient without incurring any backpropagation. In
addition, we introduce negative pseudo labeling that alleviates the adverse impact of pseudo label noises by assigning
pseudo labels to certain negative classes when the model
is uncertain about its pseudo label predictions. Extensive
experiments over two benchmarks demonstrate TDA’s superior effectiveness and efficiency as compared with the
state-of-the-art. The code has been released in https:
//kdiaaa.github.io/tda/.

Selection

Image
Encoder
CLIP Predictions

Augmented
Test Images
Cat
Panda

Learnable +
Prompt

Text
Encoder

Dog

Prediction

Bird
Class

Backpropagation

(a) Test-time Prompt Tuning [9, 35]

Image
Encoder
Test Image

Keys
Update

Values
Dynamic Adapter

CLIP Prediction
Cat

Hand-crafted +
Prompt

Panda
Dog

Text
Encoder

Bird

Adapted Prediction

Class

(b) Training-free Dynamic Adapter (Ours)

1. Introduction
Recent advances in vision-language models [19, 31, 43]
have opened a new door for integrating human language
into various computer vision tasks. Take CLIP [31] as an
example. It can enable zero-shot image classification by
leveraging a shared embedding space that is learnt from
web-scale image-text pairs. Within this shared space, images can be directly recognized by matching their features
with the text embeddings of CLIP classes. At the other end,
CLIP often faces challenges while handling various specific
downstream images, especially when the downstream images have clear domain and distribution shifts as compared
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Comparison of our proposed Training-free Dynamic
Adapter (TDA) with Test-time Prompt Tuning TPT [35] and its
enhancement DiffTPT [9]: both TPT and DiffTPT require significant computational resources to optimize the learnable prompt
via backpropagation; TDA is a dynamic cache that is trainingfree without any backpropagation, making it efficient for test-time
adaptation in various real-world scenarios.

with the CLIP training images.
Several recent studies [2, 3, 40] introduce a new
paradigm called test-time adaptation for mitigating the domain shift. The idea of test-time adaptation is well aligned
with real-world scenarios where a model needs to adapt to
new environments quickly. Despite its great research and

14162

