This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRSP: Neural 3D Reconstruction for Reflective Objects with
Sparse Polarized Images
Yufei Han1† Heng Guo1†∗
1
2
3

Koki Fukai2† Hiroaki Santo2 Boxin Shi3,4 Fumio Okura2
Zhanyu Ma1 Yunpeng Jia1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
4

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
{hanyufei, guoheng, mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn

shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

{santo.hiroaki, okura, fukai.koki}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

xibei156@163.com

Abstract
We present NeRSP, a Neural 3D reconstruction technique for Reflective surfaces with Sparse Polarized images.
Reflective surface reconstruction is extremely challenging
as specular reflections are view-dependent and thus violate
the multiview consistency for multiview stereo. On the other
hand, sparse image inputs, as a practical capture setting,
commonly cause incomplete or distorted results due to the
lack of correspondence matching. This paper jointly handles the challenges from sparse inputs and reflective surfaces by leveraging polarized images. We derive photometric and geometric cues from the polarimetric image formation model and multiview azimuth consistency, which jointly
optimize the surface geometry modeled via implicit neural
representation. Based on the experiments on our synthetic
and real datasets, we achieve the state-of-the-art surface
reconstruction results with only 6 views as input.

1. Introduction
Multiview 3D reconstruction is a fundamental problem in
computer vision (CV) and has been extensively studied for
many years [14]. With the advancement of implicit surface
representation [27, 28] and neural radiance fileds [22], recent multiview 3D reconstruction methods [5, 33, 38, 41]
have made tremendous progress. Despite the compelling
shape recovery results, most multiview stereo (MVS) methods still rely heavily on finding correspondence between
views, which is particularly challenging for reflective surfaces and sparse input views.
For reflective surfaces, the view-dependent surface ap† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

S-VolSDF [35]

PANDORA [9]

NeRSP (Ours)

Figure 1. Shape recoveries of a reflective surface from 6 sparse
polarized images capturing (top rows). Our NeRSP achieves a
better shape reconstruction result compared to existing methods
that either address sparse inputs (S-VolSDF [35]) or reflective reflectance (PANDORA [9]).

pearance breaks the photometric consistency assumption
used in the correspondence estimation in MVS. To address
this problem, recent neural 3D reconstruction methods (e.g.,
Ref-NeuS [13], NeRO [19], and PANDORA [9]) explicitly model the reflectance and simultaneously estimate the
reflectance and environment maps via inverse rendering.
However, dense image acquisition under diverse views is required to faithfully handle the additional unknowns besides
shape, such as albedo, roughness, and environment map.
From sparse input views, it is often challenging to find

Project page: https://yu-fei-han.github.io/NeRSP-project/

11821

