This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DUDF: Differentiable Unsigned Distance Fields with Hyperbolic Scaling
Miguel Fainstein1

Viviana Siless1

Emmanuel Iarussi1,2

miguelon.f98@gmail.com

viviana.siless@utdt.edu

emmanuel.iarussi@utdt.edu

1

Universidad Torcuato Di Tella, 2 CONICET

1. Introduction
Surface representation is a fundamental aspect in the
field of 3D geometry processing, with explicit methods such
as meshes, point clouds, and voxelized representations being traditional choices. Implicit surface representations, on
the other hand, have been an integral part of the graphics
pipeline for many decades. They encapsulate surfaces as the
zero-level set of a function, providing a compact and continuous geometry representation. The novelty in recent years
has emerged from parameterizing these implicit functions
with Neural Networks (NNs), combining their learning capabilities with the advantages of implicit representations.

SIREN (SDF)
CAP-UDF
DUDF (Ours)

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in
training Neural Networks to approximate Unsigned Distance Fields (UDFs) for representing open surfaces in the
context of 3D reconstruction. However, UDFs are nondifferentiable at the zero level set which leads to significant errors in distances and gradients, generally resulting in fragmented and discontinuous surfaces. In this paper, we propose to learn a hyperbolic scaling of the unsigned distance field, which defines a new Eikonal problem
with distinct boundary conditions. This allows our formulation to integrate seamlessly with state-of-the-art continuously differentiable implicit neural representation networks,
largely applied in the literature to represent signed distance
fields. Our approach not only addresses the challenge of
open surface representation but also demonstrates significant improvement in reconstruction quality and training
performance. Moreover, the unlocked field’s differentiability allows the accurate computation of essential topological
properties such as normal directions and curvatures, pervasive in downstream tasks such as rendering. Through extensive experiments, we validate our approach across various data sets and against competitive baselines. The results
demonstrate enhanced accuracy and up to an order of magnitude increase in speed compared to previous methods.

Ground Truth

Abstract

Figure 1. Distance field cross-sections comparative. First row displays ground truth unsigned distance fields. Methods based on
signed distances, like SIREN [35], mistakenly fill gaps in open
surfaces. While methods based on unsigned distances such as
CAP-UDF [45] can represent non-watertight surfaces, the learned
distance field do not approximate the true function. DUDF’s differentiable formulation successfully overcomes these challenges.

Signed Distance Functions (SDFs) have traditionally
been the chosen formulation for implicit surface representation [8, 25] due to their well-defined gradients and the ease
they offer for computing constructive solid geometry operations and mesh reconstruction. However, they are inherently
limited to closed surfaces (Fig. 1), which poses a signifi-

4484

