This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TiNO-Edit: Timestep and Noise Optimization
for Robust Diffusion-Based Image Editing
Sherry X Chen* 1 , Yaron Vaxman2 , Elad Ben Baruch2 , David Asulin2 , Aviad Moreshet2 ,
Kuo-Chin Lien3 , Misha Sra1 , and Pradeep Sen1
1.

University of California, Santa Barbara

2.

Cloudinary

Despite many attempts to leverage pre-trained text-toimage models (T2I) like Stable Diffusion (SD) [25] for controllable image editing, producing good predictable results
remains a challenge. Previous approaches have focused
on either fine-tuning pre-trained T2I models on specific
datasets to generate certain kinds of images (e.g., with a
specific object or person), or on optimizing the weights,
text prompts, and/or learning features for each input image in an attempt to coax the image generator to produce
the desired result. However, these approaches all have
shortcomings and fail to produce good results in a predictable and controllable manner. To address this problem,
we present TiNO-Edit, an SD-based method that focuses on
optimizing the noise patterns and diffusion timesteps during editing, something previously unexplored in the literature. With this simple change, we are able to generate
results that both better align with the original images and
reflect the desired result. Furthermore, we propose a set
of new loss functions that operate in the latent domain of
SD, greatly speeding up the optimization when compared
to prior losses, which operate in the pixel domain. Our
method can be easily applied to variations of SD including Textual Inversion [13] and DreamBooth [27] that encode new concepts and incorporate them into the edited results. We present a host of image-editing capabilities enabled by our approach. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/SherryXTChen/TiNO-Edit.

“sandwich” → “cake”

+ “a magenta hat”
Stroke-guided image editing
Original User input Result
Original User input

+ “a sunflower”
Original User input

+ “a scarecrow”

Result

+ “curtains”

Image composition
Result
Original User input

Result

“white” → “yellow plaid”

Image editing with DreamBooth (DB) or Textual Inversion (TI)
Original
DB
Result
Original
TI
Result

“photo” → ⟨concept⟩

Computer-generated image synthesis has been studied
for decades for its wide range of applications including content creation, marketing and advertising, visualization/simulation, entertainment, and storytelling. Re-

Layer AI

Pure text-guided & Reference-guided image editing
Original
Ref
w/o ref
w/ref

Abstract

1. Introduction

3.

“sky” → ⟨concept⟩

Figure 1. Overview of capabilities enabled by TiNO-Edit.
TiNO-Edit offers various image-editing capabilities and can be run
with DreamBooth (DB) [27] or Textual Inversion (TI) [13]. By
leveraging diffusion timestep and noise optimization techniques,
it can generate realistic and high quality outputs.

* Corresponding author email: xchen774@ucsb.edu

6337

