This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-Aware Group Quantization for Vision Transformers
Jaehyeon Moon1,2

Dohyung Kim1
Junyong Cheon1
Bumsub Ham1 *
2
1
Yonsei University
Articron
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/IGQ-ViT/

Abstract

Channels

ViT

Post-training quantization (PTQ) is an efﬁcient model
compression technique that quantizes a pretrained fullprecision model using only a small calibration set of unlabeled samples without retraining. PTQ methods for convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide quantization results comparable to full-precision counterparts. Directly
applying them to vision transformers (ViTs), however, incurs severe performance degradation, mainly due to the differences in architectures between CNNs and ViTs. In particular, the distribution of activations for each channel vary
drastically according to input instances, making PTQ methods for CNNs inappropriate for ViTs. To address this, we introduce instance-aware group quantization for ViTs (IGQViT). To this end, we propose to split the channels of activation maps into multiple groups dynamically for each input instance, such that activations within each group share
similar statistical properties. We also extend our scheme to
quantize softmax attentions across tokens. In addition, the
number of groups for each layer is adjusted to minimize the
discrepancies between predictions from quantized and fullprecision models, under a bit-operation (BOP) constraint.
We show extensive experimental results on image classiﬁcation, object detection, and instance segmentation, with
various transformer architectures, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Transformers [34] can capture long-range dependencies
across sequential inputs, which is of central importance
in natural language processing, aggregating contextual information and providing discriminative feature representations. Recently, vision transformers (ViTs) [10] has demonstrated the effectiveness of transformers for images, providing state-of-the-art results on various visual recognition
tasks, including image classiﬁcation [24, 33], object detection [24, 40], and semantic segmentation [24, 32, 38]. However, a series of fully-connected (FC) and self-attention lay* Corresponding author.

Image

Group #1

Channels

ViT

Group #2

Group #3
Group #1

Group #2

Group #3

ViT

(a) Group quantization

(b) IGQ-ViT

Figure 1. Visual comparison of group quantization and IGQ-ViT.
(a) Conventional group quantization techniques [7, 31] divide consecutive channels uniformly into a number of groups without considering their dynamic ranges. The distribution of activations in
each group varies signiﬁcantly for individual input instances. (b)
To alleviate this problem, IGQ-ViT proposes an instance-aware
grouping technique that splits the channels of activation maps and
softmax attentions across tokens dynamically for each input instance at runtime.

ers in ViTs requires a substantial amount of memory and
computational cost, making it challenging to deploy them
on devices with limited resources (e.g., drones and mobile
phones). The growing demand for ViTs to operate on the
resource-constrained devices has led to increased interest in
developing network quantization techniques for ViTs.
Network quantization generally reduces bit-widths of
weights and activations of a model for an efﬁcient inference process, which can be categorized into two groups:
Quantization-aware training (QAT) and post-training quantization (PTQ). QAT methods [11, 41, 42] train fullprecision models, while simulating the quantization process by inserting discretizers into networks to quantize, such
that the discrepancy between the full-precision and quantized models is minimized in terms of accuracy. This suggests that QAT methods require entire training samples, and
they are computationally expensive, making them impractical for the prompt deployment of neural networks. PTQ
methods [19, 26, 36], on the other hand, calibrate quantization parameters (e.g., quantization intervals, zero-points)
from pretrained full-precision models, enabling faster quantization of networks compared to QAT methods with only a

16132

