This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge-Enhanced Dual-stream Zero-shot Composed Image Retrieval
Yucheng Suo Fan Ma Linchao Zhu† Yi Yang
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University, China
†

Corresponding author

Abstract
We study the zero-shot Composed Image Retrieval (ZSCIR) task, which is to retrieve the target image given a reference image and a description without training on the triplet
datasets. Previous works generate pseudo-word tokens by
projecting the reference image features to the text embedding space. However, they focus on the global visual representation, ignoring the representation of detailed attributes,
e.g., color, object number and layout. To address this
challenge, we propose a Knowledge-Enhanced Dual-stream
zero-shot composed image retrieval framework (KEDs).
KEDs implicitly models the attributes of the reference images by incorporating a database. The database enriches
the pseudo-word tokens by providing relevant images and
captions, emphasizing shared attribute information in various aspects. In this way, KEDs recognizes the reference
image from diverse perspectives. Moreover, KEDs adopts
an extra stream that aligns pseudo-word tokens with textual
concepts, leveraging pseudo-triplets mined from image-text
pairs. The pseudo-word tokens generated in this stream
are explicitly aligned with fine-grained semantics in the text
embedding space. Extensive experiments on widely used
benchmarks, i.e. ImageNet-R, COCO object, Fashion-IQ
and CIRR, show that KEDs outperforms previous zero-shot
composed image retrieval methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/suoych/KEDs.

1. Introduction
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) is a task first introduced
by Vo et al. [71], which involves retrieving the target image
given a reference image and a modification description. Different from traditional image-based retrieval [10, 19, 59, 64]
or text-based retrieval [63, 72] tasks, composed image retrieval requires the model to interpret both visual and text
modality information. In practical scenarios, CIR allows
users to specify fine-grained styles and content details in
the queries, enabling flexibility and customization.
With the rise of image-text pre-training models like CLIP
[61], significant improvements are achieved in the com-

Image-only Contrastive Learning

Image feature

Pseudo-word

Pic2word

Image

Image-only Contrastive Learning KEDs(Ours)

Image-caption pair

Knowledge
Enhancement

Database

white fluffy dogs
sitting in a row

Textual Concept Alignment

Figure 1. Comparison between existing methods and KEDs.
Pic2word [65] learns the mapping network using image-only contrastive learning and generates pseudo work ϕM token v. We propose to augment the pseudo-word token with external knowledge.
In addition, we introduce an extra branch ϕA sharing architecture
with ϕM for textual concept alignment. Note that fv and ft indicate frozen CLIP visual encoder and text encoder respectively.

posed image retrieval field [2, 11, 50]. Previous supervised methods work on designing networks to generate
compositional features based on the reference image and
text. Training and evaluation are conducted on the triplet
datasets in various domains, e.g. Fashion-IQ [73] on the
fashion clothes domain, CIRR [50] on real-world images.
Despite the impressive performance achieved by these supervised methods, two major limitations remain. Firstly,
these approaches require extensive triplet data annotations,
which are labor-intensive and time-consuming. Secondly,
supervised methods train a tailored model for each dataset,
thereby reducing the flexibility and generalization ability.
Recent studies [3, 65] introduce zero-shot approaches for
composed image retrieval to address the above limitations.
Pic2word is the pioneering work that learns a mapping layer
that projects the image features into the text embedding
space. This is achieved by self-supervised learning using
a contrastive loss between the mapped features and original image features as the training objective. A frozen CLIP
text encoder then generates the hybrid feature for inference.

26951

