This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Visibility Field for Uncertainty-Driven Active Mapping
Shangjie Xue

Jesse Dill

Pranay Mathur Frank Dellaert Panagiotis Tsiotra
Georgia Institute of Technology

Danfei Xu

{xsj, jdill33, pranay.mathur, frank.dellaert, tsiotras, danfei}@gatech.edu

Abstract
This paper presents Neural Visibility Field (NVF), a
novel uncertainty quantification method for Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) applied to active mapping. Our key
insight is that regions not visible in the training views lead
to inherently unreliable color predictions by NeRF at this
region, resulting in increased uncertainty in the synthesized
views. To address this, we propose to use Bayesian Networks
to composite position-based field uncertainty into ray-based
uncertainty in camera observations. Consequently, NVF naturally assigns higher uncertainty to unobserved regions, aiding robots to select the most informative next viewpoints.
Extensive evaluations show that NVF excels not only in uncertainty quantification but also in scene reconstruction for
active mapping, outperforming existing methods. More details can be found at https://sites.google.com/
view/nvf-cvpr24/.

NVF (Ours)

NeRF Rendering

Uncertainty Map
High
Uncertainty

Region Occluded in
Training Views

Low
Uncertainty

Region Visible to
Training Views

NVF (Ours)

NeRF Rendering

1. Introduction
Active 3D reconstruction plays a pivotal role in robotics. The
challenge lies in enabling the robot to precisely reconstruct a
target using the fewest views possible. Consider the example,
illustrated in Figure 1, where the agent’s objective is to thoroughly explore an unknown object (the Hubble telescope).
To achieve this, the robot assesses the uncertainty of potential views, choosing actions that significantly diminish this
uncertainty. A crucial aspect of this process is the representation of the scene. It should not only facilitate high-quality
reconstruction but also be cognizant of uncertainties.
Recently, implicit scene representations, notably
NeRF [30] have shown remarkable ability in high-quality
scene reconstructions. The result has motivated applying
NeRF for active reconstruction [33, 49, 51]. However, due
to the opaque nature of neural networks, estimating the
uncertainty of NeRF remains challenging. Previous works
have developed various proxy measurements to represent
the uncertainty in NeRF, in which they aim to maximize the
NeRF’s reconstruction accuracy and geometric faithfulness
to the scene. However, these approaches neglect a crucial

Prior Work

Prior Work

Uncertainty Map

Figure 1. Neural Visibility Field (NVF) is an uncertainty estimation
framework for NeRF that accounts for visibility: whether a region
is covered by the training views of a NeRF. Visible regions should
have low uncertainty (bottom row), and unobserved should have
high uncertainty (top row). In this paper, we show that many existing methods in NeRF uncertainty quantification can be viewed
as special cases of our framework, and NVF outperforms them
empirically in uncertainty quantification and active mapping tasks.

factor to optimize for, namely, visual coverage.
In active reconstruction, an agent makes a tradeoff between exploring new areas of a scene and revisiting previously explored ones. Since NeRF is a multiview reconstruction method, a natural strategy is to explore regions that have
not been observed by previous views and have these regions
hold a high degree of uncertainty. Surprisingly, prior methods
have largely failed to account for visibility and instead focus on estimating uncertainty via density or NeRF-predicted
position-based RGB variance. Another gap in prior research
is the integration of position-based uncertainty factors (e.g.,
emitted color, opacity, and visibility) into ray-based obser-

18122

