This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cooperation Does Matter: Exploring Multi-Order Bilateral Relations for
Audio-Visual Segmentation
Qi Yang1,2 Xing Nie1,2 Tong Li3 Pengfei Gao3 Ying Guo3
Cheng Zhen3 Pengfei Yan3 Shiming Xiang1,2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA) 3 Meituan

Abstract

Temporal Entanglement

AVSBench [ECCV'22]
AVS-BiGen [Arxiv'23]

Recently, an audio-visual segmentation (AVS) task has
been introduced, aiming to group pixels with sounding objects within a given video. This task necessitates a firstever audio-driven pixel-level understanding of the scene,
posing significant challenges. In this paper, we propose
an innovative audio-visual transformer framework, termed
COMBO, an acronym for COoperation of Multi-order Bilateral relatiOns. For the first time, our framework explores three types of bilateral entanglements within AVS:
pixel entanglement, modality entanglement, and temporal
entanglement. Regarding pixel entanglement, we employ
a Siam-Encoder Module (SEM) that leverages prior knowledge to generate more precise visual features from the foundational model. For modality entanglement, we design a
Bilateral-Fusion Module (BFM), enabling COMBO to align
corresponding visual and auditory signals bi-directionally.
As for temporal entanglement, we introduce an innovative
adaptive inter-frame consistency loss according to the inherent rules of temporal. Comprehensive experiments and
ablation studies on AVSBench-object (84.7 mIoU on S4,
59.2 mIou on MS3) and AVSBench-semantic (42.1 mIoU on
AVSS) datasets demonstrate that COMBO surpasses previous state-of-the-art methods. Project page is available at
https://yannqi.github.io/AVS-COMBO.

1. Introduction
Human visual attention is often hear-guided, i.e., we
tend to focus on the object with sounds [4]. For example,
when we hear a cat meow, we pay more attention to the
cat than other objects due to the strong association between
the meow and the cat. Inspired by this potential interaction of auditory and visual signals, the cross-modal studies
of vision and hearing have attracted numerous researchers,
such as the audio-visual correspondence [1, 2], which only
aims to match visual images and audio signals to the same

CATR [ACM MM'23]
ECMVAE [ICCV'23]
Ours: COMBO

AV-SAM [Arxiv'23]
AVSegFormer [Arxiv'23]
BAVS [Arxiv'23]
Hear2Seg [Arxiv'23]
Modality Entanglement

CSMF [Arxiv'23]
Pixel Entanglement

Figure 1. Comparison between the proposed COMBO and existing state-of-the-art methods. Our COMBO is the first work to
simultaneously explore multi-order bilateral relations in modality,
temporal and pixel levels.

scene, and sound source localization [5, 18, 34] which further seeks to locate the vocal visible regions. However,
they have only focused on audio-visual tasks at the image
or region levels, lacking pixel-level annotations. Recently,
AVSBench [44, 45] integrates audio signals into video segmentation, called Audio-Visual Segmentation (AVS), which
comprises two benchmarks: 1) AVSBench-object, which
includes single source sound segmentation (S4) and multiple sound sources segmentation (MS3); 2) AVSBenchsemantic, which further extends audio-visual semantic segmentation (AVSS) based on AVSBench-object.
Given that audio-visual segmentation is a burgeoning
field that spans both audio and visual modalities, it presents
a non-trivial task. Generally, when performing AVS, a
cross-modal segmentation task involving video, there are
mainly three challenges: (1) AVS contains audio and visual
modalities, thus demanding explicit alignment of sequential
audio features to spatial pixel-level activations; (2) AVS involves temporal information where the state of the current
frame is dynamically affected by historical frames, therefore, exploring the correlation between adjacent frames is

27134

