This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

THRONE: An Object-based Hallucination Benchmark for
the Free-form Generations of Large Vision-Language Models
Prannay Kaul1 * Zhizhong Li2† Hao Yang 2 Yonatan Dukler 2
Ashwin Swaminathan 2 C. J. Taylor 2 Stefano Soatto 2
VGG, University of Oxford1 AWS AI Labs2
prannay@robots.ox.ac.uk {lzhizhon,haoyng,dukler,swashwin,taylorcj,soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
Mitigating hallucinations in large vision-language models (LVLMs) remains an open problem. Recent benchmarks
do not address hallucinations in open-ended free-form responses, which we term “Type I hallucinations”. Instead,
they focus on hallucinations responding to very specific
question formats—typically a multiple-choice response regarding a particular object or attribute—which we term
“Type II hallucinations”. Additionally, such benchmarks
often require external API calls to models which are subject to change. In practice, we observe that a reduction in
Type II hallucinations does not lead to a reduction in Type
I hallucinations but rather that the two forms of hallucinations are often anti-correlated. To address this, we propose THRONE, a novel object-based automatic framework
for quantitatively evaluating Type I hallucinations in LVLM
free-form outputs. We use public language models (LMs) to
identify hallucinations in LVLM responses and compute informative metrics. By evaluating a large selection of recent
LVLMs using public datasets, we show that an improvement
in existing metrics do not lead to a reduction in Type I hallucinations, and that established benchmarks for measuring
Type I hallucinations are incomplete. Finally, we provide a
simple and effective data augmentation method to reduce
Type I and Type II hallucinations as a strong baseline.

1

Introduction

This paper proposes a benchmark to evaluate hallucinations
by large vision-language models (LVLMs) when generating free-form responses, specifically detailed descriptions,
based on a given image.
The rapid advancement in large language models
(LLMs) [52] has pushed the development of large visionlanguage models (LVLMs). [1, 6, 7, 17, 24, 25, 30, 36, 44,
48, 54] LVLMs take input text and images and generate
text responses to enable multi-modal perception and com* Work conducted during an internship at Amazon
† Corresponding author

prehension.
LVLMs are largely built on LLMs and therefore inherit
both their advantages and their disadvantages. LLMs have
been shown to produce hallucinations [47, 51], generated
text responses that are coherent and plausible but factually
incorrect. LVLMs echo this behavior with generated text
contradicting with the visual or text input [53]. Hallucinations prevent the use of LVLMs in safety-critical situations and therefore evaluating and mitigating hallucinations
in LVLMs is crucial for their deployment in such settings.
Determining the presence and cause of hallucinations in
LVLMs remains an open question [45, 53].
We divide LVLM hallucinations into two types. Type
I hallucinations occur in response to open-ended questions
with a very large set of possible responses —e.g. What is
happening in this image?. Type II hallucinations are incorrect responses to a factual question regarding a specific concept about the image with a fixed set of options
such as yes/no—e.g. Is there a traffic light in this
image? Fig. 3 illustrates the difference between these two
types of hallucination. Reducing hallucinations in both
cases is required for useful, multi-purpose LVLMs. However, later in Fig. 4 we observe that the same LVLM can
give contradicting answers when being evaluated for Type I
vs. Type II hallucinations. This implies that measuring and
reducing one type does not necessarily reduce the other.
Existing works to evaluate LVLMs often avoid direct
quantification of hallucinations and instead develop comprehensive benchmarks that judge various other desirable
abilities such as: optical character recognition, fine-grained
recognition and attribute detection [14, 22, 32]. The extent of hallucinations in these benchmarks is obfuscated,
since it is only one of many factors influencing other metrics. It requires human effort to inspect individual predictions. There are two major established works which specifically develop a benchmark for evaluating hallucinations
in vision-language models: POPE [26] and CHAIR [40],
which we discuss in detail in Sec. 2. However, we observe
they both have shortcomings in effectively evaluating hallucinations:

27228

