This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Modern Image Manipulation Localization:
A Large-Scale Dataset and Novel Methods
Chenfan Qu1 , Yiwu Zhong2,* , Chongyu Liu1 , Guitao Xu1 , Dezhi Peng1 , Fengjun Guo3 ,
Lianwen Jin1,4,*
1
South China University of Technology, 2 University of Wisconsin,
3
INTSIG Information Co., Ltd
4
INTSIG-SCUT Joint Lab on Document Analysis and Recognition
202221012612@mail.scut.edu.cn, yzhong52@wisc.edu, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn

In recent years, image manipulation localization has attracted increasing attention due to its pivotal role in guaranteeing social media security. However, how to accurately
identify the forged regions remains an open challenge. One
of the main bottlenecks lies in the severe scarcity of highquality data, due to its costly creation process. To address
this limitation, we propose a novel paradigm, termed as
CAAA, to automatically and precisely annotate the numerous manually forged images from the web at the pixel level.
We further propose a novel metric QES to facilitate the automatic filtering of unreliable annotations. With CAAA and
QES, we construct a large-scale, diverse, and high-quality
dataset comprising 123,150 manually forged images with
mask annotations. Besides, we develop a new model APSCNet for accurate image manipulation localization. According to extensive experiments, our dataset significantly improves the performance of various models on the widelyused benchmarks and such improvements are attributed to
our proposed effective methods. The dataset and code are
publicly available at https://github.com/qcf-568/MIML.

Constrained
Image
Manipulation
Localization

Previous
Methods:
Category
Unaware

SPG
Our
Method:
Category
Aware

Our
Dataset:
Image
Manipulation
Localization
Previous
Dataset:

Unlabeled
manually
forged data

Inaccurate
Result 

Model

Classifier

SDG

Manually forged
data in large size

Generalization ☺

Manually forged
data in tiny size

Overfitting 

Synthetic data
in large size

Overfitting 

Model
for SPG

Accurate
Result ☺

Model
for SDG

Accurate
Result ☺

Automatic
Annotation

Performance

Abstract

CASIAv1

Coverage

w.o. Our Dataset

NIST16

IMD20

w/ Our Dataset

Figure 1. We propose a novel paradigm for constrained image manipulation localization, which treats images in SPG and SDG separately. We also propose to employ it for auto-annotation and construct a large-scale, high-quality dataset that noticeably enhances
the generalization of image manipulation localization models.
Manipulation by copying a region
(mouse) and pasting it into other
images.

Authentic image

Shared Donor Group

(SDG)

Manipulated image

Manipulated region

Manipulation by adding elements
(person / fire) to this image.
Shared Probe Group

(SPG)

Manipulated image

Manipulated region

1. Introduction
The rapid development of modern image editing techniques, such as PhotoShop and GIMP, has greatly enriched people’s visual world. However, the abuse of manipulated images may lead to fraud and the spread of rumors,
posing significant risks to social media security [6, 13].
Consequently, Image Manipulation Localization (IML) has
emerged as an important research topic in recent years [11].
It is crucial to develop effective techniques for IML.
The key challenge for IML is the scarcity of manually forged images [35]. Tons of training data are essential
for models to prevent overfitting. Unfortunately, the pro*: Corresponding author

Figure 2. The definition of ’SPG’ and ’SDG’. This definition applies to an image pair consisting of a real and a forged image.

cess of elaborately manipulating images and annotating the
forged regions at pixel-level is extremely exhaustive and
time-consuming. Although synthetic data is utilized to overcome the data scarcity [12, 17], it often exhibits a significant
domain gap between real-world manipulations, leading to

10781

