This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PromptCoT: Align Prompt Distribution via Adapted Chain-of-Thought
Junyi Yao∗1 , Yijiang Liu∗2 , Zhen Dong3 , Mingfei Guo4 , Helan Hu1 ,
Kurt Keutzer3 , Li Du2† , Daquan Zhou5 , Shanghang Zhang1
1
Peking University, 2 Nanjing University
3
University of California, Berkeley, 4 Stanford University, 5 Bytedance

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models have exhibited remarkable capability in the production of high-fidelity visual content such as images and videos. However, their performance
is significantly contingent upon the quality of textual inputs, commonly referred to as "prompts". The process of
traditional prompt engineering necessitates empirical expertise and poses challenges for inexperienced users. In this
paper, we introduce PromptCoT, an innovative enhancer
that autonomously refines prompts for users. PromptCoT is
designed based on the observation that prompts, which resemble the textual information of high-quality images during
training, lead to superior generation performance. Therefore, we fine-tune the Large Language Models (LLM) using
a curated text dataset that comprises descriptions of highquality visual content. Consequently, the LLM can capture
the distribution of high-quality texts, enabling it to boost the
original texts. Nonetheless, one drawback of LLMs is their
tendency to generate irrelevant information. We employ a
tailored Chain-of-Thought (CoT) mechanism to address the
problem. Our CoT can extract and amalgamate crucial information from the prompt candidates, enabling a reasonable
process based on the contextual cues to produce a more comprehensive and nuanced output. Considering computational
efficiency, instead of allocating a dedicated LLM to each
individual model or dataset, we integrate adapters that facilitate task-specific adaptation, leveraging a shared LLM as
the foundation for this process. With independent fine-tuning
of adapters, we can adapt PromptCoT to new datasets while
minimally increasing training costs and memory usage. We
evaluate the effectiveness of PromptCoT by assessing on
widely-used latent diffusion models for visual generation.
The results demonstrate significant improvements in key per* Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author.
† Author with the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, and the Interdisciplinary Research Center for Future Intelligent Chips, Nanjing University, Suzhou.

Figure 1. Multidimensional performance across key metrics. Our PromptCoT outperforms the baseline and various aligners we proposed in several key areas, including user preference
(PickScore), aesthetics (Aesthetic Score), semantics (CLIP Score),
fidelity (FID), and diversity (IS). Values are sourced from Table 2,
and have been normalized to 1.0 for clarity.

formance metrics.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep generative models have made notable advancements, specifically with the introduction of
diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs). These models have
exhibited exceptional capabilities in generating a wide range
of visually compelling and high-fidelity contents, such as
images and videos, as evidenced by notable contributions
in [7, 13, 32, 33, 35, 40–42]. By utilizing textual inputs
as conditional guidance, diffusion models have the ability
to generate visual outputs that align with the corresponding input text, employing an iterative denoising procedure.
This technological advancement has paved the way for revolutionary applications, including notable examples such as
DALL-E 2 [32], Stable Diffusion [33], MagicVideo [57],
and more.

7027

