This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Clustering Propagation for Universal Medical Image Segmentation
Yuhang Ding1 , Liulei Li1 , Wenguan Wang2 , Yi Yang2 *
1

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney 2 ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/dyh127/S2VNet

Abstract
Prominent solutions for medical image segmentation are
typically tailored for automatic or interactive setups, posing
challenges in facilitating progress achieved in one task to
another. This also necessitates separate models for each task,
duplicating both training time and parameters. To address
above issues, we introduce S2VNet, a universal framework
that leverages Slice-to-Volume propagation to unify automatic/interactive segmentation within a single model and
one training session. Inspired by clustering-based segmentation techniques, S2VNet makes full use of the slice-wise
structure of volumetric data by initializing cluster centers
from the cluster results of previous slice. This enables knowledge acquired from prior slices to assist in the segmentation of the current slice, further efficiently bridging the communication between remote slices using mere 2D networks.
Moreover, such a framework readily accommodates interactive segmentation with no architectural change, simply
by initializing centroids from user inputs. S2VNet distinguishes itself by swift inference speeds and reduced memory
consumption compared to prevailing 3D solutions. It can
also handle multi-class interactions with each of them serving to initialize different centroids. Experiments on three
benchmarks demonstrate S2VNet surpasses task-specified
solutions on both automatic/interactive setups.

1. Introduction
In the realm of medical imaging, the practice of precisely
revealing anatomical or pathological structure changes in
a pixel observation holds the promise to substantially advance diagnostic efficiency [1]. Depending on the presence
of user interactions, it can be categorized into automatic or
interactive medical image segmentation (AMIS/IMIS) [2],
with the latter involving active user engagement (e.g., click,
scribble) throughout the segmentation process[3, 4].
Benefiting from the rapid development of deep learning techniques, both AMIS and IMIS have witnessed great
progress in their respective field. For AMIS, the emerging
* Corresponding author: Yi Yang.

Figure 1. (a-b) Existing volume-wise and slice-wise solutions. (c)
Our slice-to-volume solution that bridges distant slices by cluster
center propagation and further unifies automatic/interactive segmentation under the same model with 2D segmentation networks.

of seminal work[5] leads the research efforts towards developing stronger backbones[6–8], harnessing multi-scale features [9–11] or incorporating attention mechanism [12–14],
etc. Conversely, IMIS centers its primary focus on effectively integrating user inputs into segmentation models [15,
16], yielding remarkable performance. Nevertheless, such a
tailored paradigm for each task greatly diffuses the research
endeavors, impeding the seamless transfer of advancement
made in one task to another due to the fundamental differences in model architecture and training strategy. Moreover,
when working with the same dataset, current solutions necessitate the developing of two separate models for AMIS
and IMIS, respectively. This results in a duplication in terms
of both training time and network parameters.
In this work, we aim to formulate a universal segmentation framework capable of addressing both AMIS and IMIS
within one unified model and a single training session. Towards this, we first initiate a thorough exploration on the
limitations commonly observed in current AMIS and IMIS
solutions: i) the top-leading approaches for volume segmentation rely heavily on 3D networks which suffer from
slow inference [9] and present significant challenges in deploying on hospital devices that usually exhibit limited parallel computation capabilities, ii) they prove inefficient in
bridging remote slices due to the usage of sliding window
inference to handle large memory consumption, which further hinders the broadcast of user inputs to entire volumes,

3357

