This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unleashing Channel Potential: Space-Frequency Selection Convolution for
SAR Object Detection
Ke Li, Di Wang*, Zhangyuan Hu, Wenxuan Zhu, Shaofeng Li*, Quan Wang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
{like0413, wxzhu, krudy0323}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {wangdi, lishaofeng, qwang}@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) have
achieved remarkable performance in synthetic aperture
radar (SAR) object detection, but this comes at the cost of
tremendous computational resources, partly due to extracting redundant features within a single convolutional layer.
Recent works either delve into model compression methods or focus on the carefully-designed lightweight models,
both of which result in performance degradation. In this
paper, we propose an efficient convolution module for SAR
object detection, called SFS-Conv, which increases feature
diversity within each convolutional layer through a shuntperceive-select strategy. Specifically, we shunt input feature
maps into space and frequency aspects. The former perceives the context of various objects by dynamically adjusting receptive field, while the latter captures abundant frequency variations and textural features via fractional Gabor transformer. To adaptively fuse features from space and
frequency aspects, a parameter-free feature selection module is proposed to ensure that the most representative and
distinctive information are preserved. With SFS-Conv, we
build a lightweight SAR object detection network, called
SFS-CNet. Experimental results show that SFS-CNet outperforms state-of-the-art (SoTA) models on a series of SAR
object detection benchmarks, while simultaneously reducing both the model size and computational cost.

1. Introduction
Synthetic aperture radar (SAR) is an active microwave
imaging remote sensing device that can capture the Earth’s
surface around the clock and in all weather conditions. Due
to the unique imaging mechanism and rich electromagnetic
scattering characteristics, SAR images are widely used in
ocean monitoring, resource exploration, land cover classification and disaster investigation [3, 38, 39, 44]. With
the development of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
* Corresponding author

Heat map
(ordinary)

Input image

Heat map
(ours)

Figure 1. Visualization of feature maps. On the left are the input
image and attention heat maps for ordinary convolution and SFSConv. Numerous feature maps from ordinary convolutions exhibit
much pattern similarities, where four similar feature map group
examples are annotated with the same-colored boxes (above). In
contrast, the feature maps of SFS-Conv demonstrate greater diversity and distinctiveness (blow).

(DCNNs) and the maturity of SAR imaging technology, an
increasing number of DCNN-based methods have demonstrated excellent performance in SAR object detection task.
However, their success heavily relies on intensive computing and storage resources, which poses serious challenges
to their deployment in resource-limited environment.
To address these challenges, researchers have explored
various types of model compression strategies and network
designs to improve the efficiency of SAR object detection
[34, 39, 45]. The former includes network pruning, knowledge distillation, low-rank decomposition, and parameter
sparsity. These compression techniques are identified as
post-processing methods, thus their performance is typically limited by the quality of the original model. Network design is another approach aimed at reducing the inherent redundancy of dense model parameters and developing a lightweight network. Recent works attempt to use

17323

