This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RAVE: Randomized Noise Shuffling for Fast and Consistent Video Editing with
Diffusion Models
Ozgur Kara1 *

Bariscan Kurtkaya2 *†
Hidir Yesiltepe4
James M. Rehg1,3
Pinar Yanardag4
2
3
4
Georgia Tech
KUIS AI Center
UIUC
Virginia Tech

1

okara7@gatech.edu, bkurtkaya23@ku.edu.tr, hidir@vt.edu, jrehg@uiuc.edu, pinary@vt.edu

Project Webpage: https://rave-video-edit.github.io

Input

Input

"a white cat"

"an ancient
Egyptian
pharaoh is
typing"

"a bear"

"a zombie"

"a dinosaur"

"a man
wearing a
glitter
jacket is
typing"

Figure 1. RAVE is a lightweight and fast video editing method that enhances temporal consistency in video edits, utilizing pre-trained
text-to-image diffusion models. It is capable of modifying local attributes, like changing a person’s jacket (bottom right), and can also
handle complex shape transformations, such as turning a wolf into a dinosaur (bottom left).

Abstract
Recent advancements in diffusion-based models have
demonstrated significant success in generating images from
text. However, video editing models have not yet reached
the same level of visual quality and user control. To address
this, we introduce RAVE, a zero-shot video editing method
that leverages pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models
without additional training. RAVE takes an input video and
a text prompt to produce high-quality videos while preserving the original motion and semantic structure. It employs
* Joint co-author
† B. Kurtkaya worked on this project as an intern at Virginia Tech.

a novel noise shuffling strategy, leveraging spatio-temporal
interactions between frames, to produce temporally consistent videos faster than existing methods. It is also efficient in
terms of memory requirements, allowing it to handle longer
videos. RAVE is capable of a wide range of edits, from local
attribute modifications to shape transformations. In order
to demonstrate the versatility of RAVE, we create a comprehensive video evaluation dataset ranging from objectfocused scenes to complex human activities like dancing
and typing, and dynamic scenes featuring swimming fish
and boats. Our qualitative and quantitative experiments
highlight the effectiveness of RAVE in diverse video editing
scenarios compared to existing methods. Our code, dataset

6507

