This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TUMTraf V2X Cooperative Perception Dataset
Gerhard Arya Wardana1 ID
Suren Sritharan1 ID
Walter Zimmer1 ID
Xingcheng Zhou1 ID
Rui Song1,2 ID
Alois C. Knoll1 ID
1

Technical University of Munich

2

Fraunhofer IVI

https://tum-traffic-dataset.github.io/tumtraf-v2x
Vehicle camera

Roadside camera

Roadside camera

Roadside camera
Registered Point Cloud

Car

Vehicle LiDAR

Truck
Trailer
Van
Motorcycle
Bus
Pedestrian

Roadside
LiDAR

Bicycle

Roadside
cameras

Figure 1. Visualization of 3D box labels and tracks in our TUMTraf V2X Cooperative Perception Dataset. The top part shows the
labels projected into the four camera images. The part below shows a point cloud from two LiDARs with 3D box labels of the same scene.

Abstract
Cooperative perception offers several benefits for enhancing the capabilities of autonomous vehicles and improving road safety. Using roadside sensors in addition to
onboard sensors increases reliability and extends the sensor
range. External sensors offer higher situational awareness
for automated vehicles and prevent occlusions. We propose
CoopDet3D, a cooperative multi-modal fusion model, and
TUMTraf-V2X, a perception dataset, for the cooperative 3D
object detection and tracking task. Our dataset contains
2,000 labeled point clouds and 5,000 labeled images from
five roadside and four onboard sensors. It includes 30k 3D
boxes with track IDs and precise GPS and IMU data. We labeled nine categories and covered occlusion scenarios with
challenging driving maneuvers, like traffic violations, nearmiss events, overtaking, and U-turns. Through multiple experiments, we show that our CoopDet3D camera-LiDAR fusion model achieves an increase of +14.36 3D mAP compared to a vehicle camera-LiDAR fusion model. Finally, we
make our dataset, model, labeling tool, and devkit publicly
available on our website.

1 . Introduction
Cooperative perception involves the fusion of onboard sensor data and roadside sensor data, and it offers several advantages for enhancing the capabilities of autonomous vehicles and improving road safety. Using data from multiple
sources makes the perception more robust to sensor failures
or adverse environmental conditions. Roadside sensors provide an elevated view that helps to detect obstacles early.
Moreover, they are also beneficial for precise vehicle localization and reduce the computational load of automated vehicles by offloading some perception tasks to the roadside
sensors. Roadside sensors provide a global perspective of
the traffic and offer a comprehensive situational awareness
when fused with onboard sensor data. There are also fewer
false positives or negatives because cooperative perception
cross-validates the information from different sensors.
Infrastructure sensors can share perception-related information with vehicles through V2X. Due to minimal delay,
and real-time capabilities, the infrastructure-based perception systems can further enhance the situational awareness
and decision-making processes of vehicles.
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) like the Testbed

22668

