This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Spatial Adaptation and Temporal Coherence in Diffusion Models
for Video Super-Resolution*

†

Zhikai Chen† , Fuchen Long§ , Zhaofan Qiu§ , Ting Yao§ , Wengang Zhou† , Jiebo Luo‡ , and Tao Mei§
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
‡
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY USA § HiDream.ai Inc.
czk654@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {longfuchen, qiuzhaofan, tiyao}@hidream.ai
zhwg@ustc.edu.cn, jluo@cs.rochester.edu, tmei@hidream.ai

Abstract
Diffusion models are just at a tipping point for image
super-resolution task. Nevertheless, it is not trivial to capitalize on diffusion models for video super-resolution which
necessitates not only the preservation of visual appearance
from low-resolution to high-resolution videos, but also the
temporal consistency across video frames. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach, pursuing Spatial Adaptation and
Temporal Coherence (SATeCo), for video super-resolution.
SATeCo pivots on learning spatial-temporal guidance from
low-resolution videos to calibrate both latent-space highresolution video denoising and pixel-space video reconstruction. Technically, SATeCo freezes all the parameters
of the pre-trained UNet and VAE, and only optimizes two
deliberately-designed spatial feature adaptation (SFA) and
temporal feature alignment (TFA) modules, in the decoder
of UNet and VAE. SFA modulates frame features via adaptively estimating affine parameters for each pixel, guaranteeing pixel-wise guidance for high-resolution frame synthesis. TFA delves into feature interaction within a 3D local
window (tubelet) through self-attention, and executes crossattention between tubelet and its low-resolution counterpart
to guide temporal feature alignment. Extensive experiments
conducted on the REDS4 and Vid4 datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
In recent years, diffusion models [11, 36, 37, 55] have
shown great progress in revolutionizing image generation. In between, a series of image super-resolution works
[36, 46, 52] benefit from leveraging knowledge prior embedded in diffusion models to upscale low-resolution (LR)
images into high-resolution (HR) ones. Compared to 2D
images, videos have one more time dimension, bringing
* This work was performed at HiDream.ai.

Frame t

Frame t+1

Low Resolution

VRT

StableSR

SATeCo

Figure 1. An illustration of video super-resolution by using different approaches of StableSR [46], VRT [23] and our SATeCo to
generate two adjacent frames. The region in the same local position is presented in the zoom-in view.

more challenges when capitalizing on diffusion models for
video super-resolution (VSR). One natural way is to utilize
the pre-trained diffusion models for image super-resolution
(ISR), e.g., StableSR [46], to magnify each video frame.
The representative advances [46, 52] manifest that diffusion models for ISR could synthesize more details than traditional regression models, e.g., VRT [23]. As depicted in
Figure 1, the edges of the windows in the building produced
by StableSR are much clearer than those generated by VRT.
Nevertheless, the inherent stochasticity of diffusion models
might jeopardize the spatial fidelity and hallucinate some
extra visual content. Moreover, the independent frame-wise
super-resolution overlooks the relation across consecutive
frames, resulting in the issue of frame inconsistency in the
high-resolution videos. For instance, the traffic signs in Figure 1 are totally different between the two adjacent frames
generated by StableSR.
In general, the difficulty of exploring diffusion models
for video super-resolution originates from two aspects: 1)
how to alleviate the stochasticity in diffusion process to pre-

9232

