This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Simple Recipe for Contrastively Pre-training Video-First Encoders
Beyond 16 Frames

Justin Chiu

Pinelopi Papalampidi*
Skanda Koppula*
Shreya Pathak*
Joe Heyward
Viorica Patraucean
Jiajun Shen
Antoine Miech
Andrew Zisserman
Aida Nematzdeh
Google DeepMind
{pinelopi,skandak,shreyapa}@google.com

Step 2: Video-to-Text Fine-tuning

Abstract
Understanding long, real-world videos requires modeling of long-range visual dependencies. To this end, we
explore video-first architectures, building on the common
paradigm of transferring large-scale, image–text models to
video via shallow temporal fusion. However, we expose two
limitations to the approach: (1) decreased spatial capabilities, likely due to poor video–language alignment in standard video datasets, and (2) higher memory consumption,
bottlenecking the number of frames that can be processed.
To mitigate the memory bottleneck, we systematically analyze the memory/accuracy trade-off of various efficient
methods: factorized attention, parameter-efficient imageto-video adaptation, input masking, and multi-resolution
patchification. Surprisingly, simply masking large portions
of the video (up to 75%) during contrastive pre-training
proves to be one of the most robust ways to scale encoders
to videos up to 4.3 minutes at 1 FPS. Our simple approach
for training long video-to-text models, which scales to 1B
parameters, does not add new architectural complexity and
is able to outperform the popular paradigm of using much
larger LLMs as an information aggregator over segmentbased information on benchmarks with long-range temporal dependencies (YouCook2, EgoSchema).

1. Introduction
Long-video understanding requires modeling of the temporal dynamics and long-range visual dependencies of realworld scenes [63, 64]. However, capturing long-range visual content is challenging, even when equipped with large
language models. In this paper, we overcome hardware
memory limitations and demonstrate how to extend video
encoders to directly process minutes-long visual content using language grounding, and simple, established techniques
* Equal contribution.

<output summary>
Perceiver
Resampler

Pretrained LM 🥶
Cross-attention

Temporal Pooling

Cross-attention
Cross-attention

Step 1: Two-stage Contrastive Pre-training
(a) image-to-short video, (b) short-to-long video
video
representation
Video ViT

(Joint Space-Time Attention)
(a) 🔥→(b) semi-🥶

NCE Loss

caption
representation
Text Encoder (BERT)
(a) 🔥→(b) 🥶

<caption>
<long video>

used during pre-training

Figure 1. Two main training steps: (1) training a video encoder
via Noise Contrastive Estimation and (2) using this frozen video
encoder with a pre-trained, frozen LM and visual adapter layers
for video-to-text generation (e.g., video summarization and Q/A).

without additional architectural complexity [24, 64]. We focus on long videos through the lens of language, assessing
our models on the widely applicable tasks of visual summarization and question-answering.
Recent work on vision–language models have yielded
impressive results, predominantly focusing on understanding images or short clips of 16 frames or less [1, 13, 30,
72, 73]. This work recycles strong pre-trained image encoders, performs late temporal fusion [1, 71, 73], and employs mostly-frozen, powerful LLMs. The lack of videofirst encoders, equipped with early temporal aggregation,
may handicap the ability to process complex visual dependencies, and this is usually reflected in prior work’s focus
on short video benchmarks (< 30 seconds) in which sixteen
frames are sufficient for competitive performance [4, 29].
In this work, we systematically explore video-first models starting from a standard image–language recipe using

14386

