This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometry Transfer for Stylizing Radiance Fields
Hyunyoung Jung1∗
Seonghyeon Nam2
Nikolaos Sarafianos2
Sungjoo Yoo1
Alexander Sorkine-Hornung2
Rakesh Ranjan2
1

2

Seoul National University

Meta Reality Labs

https://hyblue.github.io/geo-srf

3D Scenes

Stylized Novel View

Stylized Novel View

Figure 1. Given a reference 3D scene and a pair of style guides: an RGB image and a depth map, we coherently stylize both the scene’s
appearance and shape to best express the given style.

Abstract
Shape and geometric patterns are essential in defining
stylistic identity. However, current 3D style transfer methods predominantly focus on transferring colors and textures, often overlooking geometric aspects. In this paper, we
introduce Geometry Transfer, a novel method that leverages
geometric deformation for 3D style transfer. This technique
employs depth maps to extract a style guide, subsequently
applied to stylize the geometry of radiance fields. Moreover, we propose new techniques that utilize geometric cues
from the 3D scene, thereby enhancing aesthetic expressiveness and more accurately reflecting intended styles. Our extensive experiments show that Geometry Transfer enables a
broader and more expressive range of stylizations, thereby
significantly expanding the scope of 3D style transfer.

1. Introduction
With the increasing demand for content creation for virtual
and augmented reality, style transfer [17] has emerged as an
innovative technique that bridges the beauty of art with the
precision of technology. At its core, style transfer involves
*This work was conducted during an internship at Meta

rendering one image in the stylistic manner of another, producing a new image that combines the foundational structure of the former with the aesthetic qualities of the latter.
In its early phases, style transfer was primarily applied to 2D images [9, 34, 40, 49] and later extended to
videos [24, 41, 76, 80] to achieve temporally consistent stylization across image sequences. Recent works have tackled the 3D style transfer problem, by applying styles to 3D
models, such as point clouds [25, 54] and meshes [23, 44].
They stand apart from 2D methods, aiming to ensure a cohesive style across multiple camera angles and enabling
free-viewpoint rendering. Due to the error-prone geometry stemming from the required 3D reconstruction of them,
the stylization of radiance fields [53] has been actively explored. Methods have incorporated global [55] and local [83] constraints, utilized stylized reference views [86],
and enhanced diversity through hash encoding and semantic matching [56]. Zero-shot approaches [45] have also been
developed to circumvent tedious optimization.
These works focus on transferring aesthetic qualities in
terms of colors, texture, and brushstrokes from style images
to enhance stylization, effectively applying these attributes
to 3D scenes. However, the potential benefits of geometry
remain largely unexplored and neglected. Even though 3D

8565

