This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Object Detection with Foundation Models
Guangxing Han
Columbia University

Ser-Nam Lim
University of Central Florida

guangxinghan@gmail.com

sernam@ucf.edu

Abstract

Class 1

Class N

Visual Feature
Backbone (DINOv2)

…

Visual Feature
Backbone (DINOv2)

Few-Shot
Classification
(Large Language
Model)

Detections

Learning to recognize and localize unseen classes without large-scale of training is crucial to achieve humanlevel vision intelligence. Few-shot object detection (FSOD)
[3, 17, 22, 66, 69], aiming to detect novel objects with only
a few visual training examples, serves as a valuable benchmark for these endeavors. However, the development of
FSOD models has been slow recently and the performance
are far worse than data-abundant models. In contrast, some
other open-set object detection settings, especially openvocabulary object detection [13, 27, 33, 57, 65] has made
significant progress, evolving from traditional strictly defined zero-shot models to modern open-vocabulary models
capable of detecting any object defined by natural language
description. Recently, these models have achieved performance comparable to data-abundant models.
We argue that the key to the success of open-vocabulary

Class-aware Proposal
Generator (DETR)

…

1. Introduction

Visual Feature
Backbone (DINOv2)

…
Support

Few-shot object detection (FSOD) aims to detect objects
with only a few training examples. Visual feature extraction
and query-support similarity learning are the two critical
components. Existing works are usually developed based on
ImageNet pre-trained vision backbones and design sophisticated metric-learning networks for few-shot learning, but
still have inferior accuracy. In this work, we study few-shot
object detection using modern foundation models. First,
vision-only contrastive pre-trained DINOv2 model is used
for the vision backbone, which shows strong transferable
performance without tuning the parameters. Second, Large
Language Model (LLM) is employed for contextualized fewshot learning with the input of all classes and query image
proposals. Language instructions are carefully designed to
prompt the LLM to classify each proposal in context. The
contextual information include proposal-proposal relations,
proposal-class relations, and class-class relations, which
can largely promote few-shot learning. We comprehensively
evaluate the proposed model (FM-FSOD) in multiple FSOD
benchmarks, achieving state-of-the-arts performance.

Query

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed model. The diagram shows
the high-level framework of our model for FSOD. The visual feature backbone and query-support few-shot classification network
are the two critical components for FSOD. In this work, we study
FSOD with Foundation Models, and propose to use the frozen selfsupervised DINOv2 as the visual backbone and leverage the strong
in-context learning capability of Large Language Model for contextualized few-shot proposal classification. Our model achieves
strong FSOD performance and reduces human effort to design sophisticated few-shot learning models.

object detection is the intensive use of pre-trained largescale vision-language models, like CLIP [40], which can
learn aligned feature representations for both the vision
and language modalities. While the majority of previous
FSOD works utilize ImageNet pre-trained models, most
of the efforts are dedicated to the development of better
few-shot fine-tuning techniques (e.g., contrastive learning
[35, 43], feature/data augmentation [60, 68]), and sophisticated human-designed metric-learning networks (e.g., complicated query-support feature fusion networks [3, 5, 12, 14,
16, 17, 20, 69] with alignment/GCN/Transformers). Although some recent works, like MM-FSOD [15] and DEViT [69] propose to use modern foundation models, like
CLIP [40] or DINOv2 [37] in their models, they do not
provide comprehensive evaluations or analyses across different foundation models, and more importantly, both of
them have heavily designed few-shot classification networks. The insufficient utilization of modern foundation
models hinders further improvement for FSOD models.
In this work, we study FSOD using modern foundation

28608

