This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Preserving Fairness Generalization in Deepfake Detection
Li Lin1 , Xinan He2 , Yan Ju3 , Xin Wang4 , Feng Ding2 , Shu Hu1 *
1
Purdue University {lin1785, hu968}@purdue.edu
2
Nanchang University {shahur, fengding}@ncu.edu.cn
3
University at Buffalo, State University of New York yanju@buffalo.edu
4
University at Albany, State University of New York xwang56@albany.edu
Ori

Abstract
Although effective deepfake detection models have been
developed in recent years, recent studies have revealed that
these models can result in unfair performance disparities
among demographic groups, such as race and gender. This
can lead to particular groups facing unfair targeting or exclusion from detection, potentially allowing misclassified
deepfakes to manipulate public opinion and undermine trust
in the model. The existing method for addressing this problem is providing a fair loss function. It shows good fairness
performance for intra-domain evaluation but does not maintain fairness for cross-domain testing. This highlights the significance of fairness generalization in the fight against deepfakes. In this work, we propose the first method to address
the fairness generalization problem in deepfake detection by
simultaneously considering features, loss, and optimization
aspects. Our method employs disentanglement learning to
extract demographic and domain-agnostic forgery features,
fusing them to encourage fair learning across a flattened loss
landscape. Extensive experiments on prominent deepfake
datasets demonstrate our method’s effectiveness, surpassing state-of-the-art approaches in preserving fairness during cross-domain deepfake detection. The code is available
at https://github.com/Purdue-M2/FairnessGeneralization.

1. Introduction
Deepfakes, a portmanteau of “deep learning” and “fake,”
have emerged as a captivating yet concerning facet of contemporary technology. These are AI-generated or manipulated media (e.g., images, videos) through deep neural networks (e.g., variational autoencoder [1], generative adversarial networks [2], diffusion models [3]) that appear startlingly
genuine, often featuring individuals engaged in actions they
never partook in or uttering words they never spoke. While
deepfakes have opened doors to creative content and enter* Corresponding author

DAW-FDD

Ours

(Ju et al. 2023)

...
Whole
features
Detector

FemaleBlack

...

MaleAsian

Whole
features

FemaleBlack

...

Domainagnostic
forgery
features

MaleAsian

Demographic
features

Flattening
loss
landscape

Fair loss

Fair loss

Fake/Real

Fake/Real

Fake/Real

Intra- Crossdomain domain

Intra- Crossdomain domain

Intra- Crossdomain domain

Unfair

Unfair

Fair

Unfair

Fair

Fair

Figure 1. Comparison between our method and existing deepfake
detection baselines. (Left) The Ori represents the conventional
method without any fair characters. (Middle) The DAW-FDD [6]
is an intra-domain fair deepfake detection method. However, this
method fails in cross-domain fair detection. (Right) Our method
succeeds in achieving both intra-domain and cross-domain fair
detection by exposing domain-agnostic forgery features and demographic features and then fusing them for fair learning across a
flattened loss landscape.

tainment, malicious use of deepfakes can lead to misinformation, privacy breaches, and even political manipulation,
eroding trust and generating confusion [4, 5].
To counteract the spread of deceptive deepfakes, there
is a burgeoning field of deepfake detection methods that
are data-driven and deep-learning based [7–25]. However,
recent research and reports [26–30] have brought to light
fairness issues within current deepfake detection methods.
One significant concern revolves around the inconsistency in
performance when assessing different demographic groups,
including gender, age, and ethnicity [27]. For example, some
of the most advanced detectors exhibit higher accuracy when
evaluating deepfakes featuring individuals with lighter skin
tones compared to those with darker skin tones [26, 31].

16815

