This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedUV: Uniformity and Variance for Heterogeneous Federated Learning
Ha Min Son
University of California, Davis

Moon-Hyun Kim
Hippo T&C

Chao Huang
University of California, Davis

Abstract
Federated learning is a promising framework to train
neural networks with widely distributed data. However,
performance degrades heavily with heterogeneously distributed data. Recent work has shown this is due to the final
layer of the network being most prone to local bias, some
finding success freezing the final layer as an orthogonal
classifier. We investigate the training dynamics of the classifier by applying SVD to the weights motivated by the observation that freezing weights results in constant singular values. We find that there are differences when training in IID
and non-IID settings. Based on this finding, we introduce
two regularization terms for local training to continuously
emulate IID settings: (1) variance in the dimension-wise
probability distribution of the classifier and (2) hyperspherical uniformity of representations of the encoder. These regularizations promote local models to act as if it were in an
IID setting regardless of the local data distribution, thus offsetting proneness to bias while being flexible to the data. On
extensive experiments in both label-shift and feature-shift
settings, we verify that our method achieves highest performance by a large margin especially in highly non-IID cases
in addition to being scalable to larger models and datasets.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [31] is a distributed learning
framework that allows the training of deep neural networks
with data in decentralized locations. FL is especially appealing because it achieves similar performance to centralized training in specific settings while also negating the cost
of collecting data into a centralized location and allowing
effective parallelization across devices [42]. However, because devices participating in FL use locally collected data
for training, it is realistic to expect that the collective data

Tai-Myoung Chung
Hippo T&C

Xin Liu
University of California, Davis

across all devices are not independent and identically distributed (non-IID). This severely degrades overall performance. Local devices optimize their copy of the model towards local optima. In non-IID settings, however, it is likely
that local optima across devices are in disagreement with
the true optimum of the IID setting. Thus, the direction of
the gradient causes dissonance and degraded performance.
This phenomena is referred to as client drift in the FL literature.
To combat client drift, a number of methods [1, 19, 20]
introduced the idea of using the global model as a basis for
regularization. More recently, some work showed it may be
effective to focus on certain layers which are more prone to
bias. In particular, [29] found that the final layer, referred to
as the classifier, is the most biased in non-IID settings. They
introduce a method to calibrate the classifier to offset this
bias. Other work [32] used augmentation techniques [49] to
regularize the classifier, while another work [34] randomly
initialized and froze the weights of the classifier. Since random vectors in high dimension space are likely to be orthogonal, the output of the penultimate layer, referred to as
the representations or activations of the encoder, are trained
to fit these orthogonal classifiers, thus offsetting bias.
However, we note previous work have approached the
non-IID problem by regularizing local models to be less biased, rather than directly regularizing local models to emulate the IID setting. In addition, many work have not been
tested in a feature-shift setting, often only using the Dirichlet distribution to simulate a label-shift setting. Furthermore, while providing important insight for FL, these work
generally do not take into account efficiency and scalability. State-of-the-art methods such as FedProx [20], SCAFFOLD [15], and FedDyn [1] require distances calculations
of weights between all layers of multiple models at every
batch. MOON [19] and FedAlign [32] require extra forward
passes at every batch. Computation and memory constraints
certainly become issues as the size of models and datasets

5863

