This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPIN: Simultaneous Perception, Interaction and Navigation
Shagun Uppal

Ananye Agarwal
Haoyu Xiong
Kenneth Shaw
Carnegie Mellon University

Deepak Pathak

Figure 1. Learning to SPIN: Our robot learns to simultaneously perceive, manipulate, and navigate cluttered unstructured environments
in a whole-body fashion. The robot has an actuated camera with a limited field of view that it must control to get information about its
environment. The motion and perception problem are tightly coupled since what the robot knows about the environment influences how it
can move and vice versa. We show results in a large variety of scenarios both indoors and outdoors with different obstacles like boxes and
furniture. Our robot can pick up different objects like cups, and utensils. Video demos at https://spin-robot.github.io

Abstract
While there has been remarkable progress recently in
the fields of manipulation and locomotion, mobile manipulation remains a long-standing challenge. Compared to
locomotion or static manipulation, a mobile system must
make a diverse range of long-horizon tasks feasible in unstructured and dynamic environments. While the applications are broad and interesting, there are a plethora of challenges in developing these systems such as coordination between the base and arm, reliance on onboard perception for
perceiving and interacting with the environment, and most
importantly, simultaneously integrating all these parts together. Prior works approach the problem using disentangled modular skills for mobility and manipulation that are
trivially tied together. This causes several limitations such

as compounding errors, delays in decision-making, and no
whole-body coordination. In this work, we present a reactive mobile manipulation framework that uses an active
visual system to consciously perceive and react to its environment. Similar to how humans leverage whole-body
and hand-eye coordination, we develop a mobile manipulator that exploits its ability to move and see, more specifically – to move in order to see and to see in order to
move. This allows it to not only move around and interact
with its environment but also, choose “when” to perceive
“what” using an active visual system. We observe that such
an agent learns to navigate around complex cluttered scenarios while displaying agile whole-body coordination using only ego-vision without needing to create environment
maps. Videos are available at https://spin-robot.github.io

18133

