This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIMAT: Decentralized Iterative Merging-And-Training
for Deep Learning Models
Nastaran Saadati1

Minh Pham2

Nasla Saleem1

Joshua R. Waite1

nsaadati@iastate.edu

mp5847@nyu.edu

nasla@iastate.edu

jrwaite@iastate.edu

Aditya Balu1

Zhanong Jiang1

Chinmay Hegde2

Soumik Sarkar1

baditya@iastate.edu

zhjiang@iastate.edu

chinmay.h@nyu.edu

soumiks@iastate.edu

1

Iowa State University, Ames; 2 New York University, New York
Abstract
A

Recent advances in decentralized deep learning algorithms have demonstrated cutting-edge performance on
various tasks with large pre-trained models. However,
a pivotal prerequisite for achieving this level of competitiveness is the significant communication and computation
overheads when updating these models, which prohibits the
applications of them to real-world scenarios. To address
this issue, drawing inspiration from advanced model merging techniques without requiring additional training, we introduce the Decentralized Iterative Merging-And-Training
(DIMAT) paradigm—a novel decentralized deep learning
framework. Within DIMAT, each agent is trained on their
local data and periodically merged with their neighboring
agents using advanced model merging techniques like activation matching until convergence is achieved. DIMAT
provably converges with the best available rate for nonconvex functions with various first-order methods, while
yielding tighter error bounds compared to the popular existing approaches. We conduct a comprehensive empirical analysis to validate DIMAT’s superiority over baselines
across diverse computer vision tasks sourced from multiple datasets. Empirical results validate our theoretical
claims by showing that DIMAT attains faster and higher initial gain in accuracy with independent and identically distributed (IID) and non-IID data, incurring lower communication overhead. This DIMAT paradigm presents a new opportunity for the future decentralized learning, enhancing
its adaptability to real-world with sparse and light-weight
communication and computation.

1. Introduction
Faced with various large-scale deep learning tasks [5, 19,
40], researchers and practitioners have made considerable

Pre-Training

B

Merging
Training
Merging
Training

C

E

D

Figure 1. Illustration of DIMAT with ring topology for 5 agents.
Agents, denoted by capital letters, undergo pre-training on two
unique classes from CIFAR-10 each (solid lines). Subsequently,
adjacent agents merge, forming tri-colored nodes (dashed lines).
Updated agents then train on the original datasets (solid lines) with
a slight increase in dataset colors. This merging and training cycle
repeats for specified iterations until final fine-tuning.

efforts to advance numerous decentralized training algorithms [6]. These also benefit from the rapid development of hardware technologies [13, 41]. Decentralized
deep learning algorithms have demonstrated compellingly
cutting-edge performance, nearly matching their centralized
counterparts [17, 26, 47, 59]. The most popular decentralized learning algorithms are first-order methods such as decentralized stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [10, 25, 46],

27517

