This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffAvatar: Simulation-Ready Garment Optimization
with Differentiable Simulation
Yifei Li∗2 Hsiao-yu Chen1 Egor Larionov1 Nikolaos Sarafianos1 Wojciech Matusik2 Tuur Stuyck1
1

Meta Reality Labs

2

MIT CSAIL

DiffAvatar

𝜕𝐿
𝜃!"# = 𝑓( , 𝜃$%& )
𝜕𝜃
𝜃𝒃𝒐𝒅𝒚
𝜃𝒅𝒓𝒆𝒔𝒔 𝒑𝒂𝒕𝒕𝒆𝒓𝒏
𝜃𝒎𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒓𝒊𝒂𝒍

initial asset

3D Scan Images

Target Mesh Reconstruction

optimized

Asset Optimization with Differentiable Simulation

Clothed Avatar Retargeting

Figure 1. We present DiffAvatar, an automated computational method to recover simulation-ready garment and body assets. Starting from
a multi-view capture, we reconstruct a semantically segmented 3D mesh. The segmented clothing geometry acts as a target shape for our
optimization pipeline. Our method recovers body shape and pose, clothing pattern and clothing material parameters from a single scan.
We optimize a clothing template in 2D pattern space to reproduce the captured clothing in 3D in a physical way. We compute gradients of
required parameters using a differentiable simulation approach.

Abstract
The realism of digital avatars is crucial in enabling
telepresence applications with self-expression and customization. While physical simulations can produce realistic motions for clothed humans, they require high-quality
garment assets with associated physical parameters for
cloth simulations. However, manually creating these assets and calibrating their parameters is labor-intensive
and requires specialized expertise. Current methods focus on reconstructing geometry, but don’t generate complete assets for physics-based applications. To address
this gap, we propose DiffAvatar, a novel approach that
performs body and garment co-optimization using differentiable simulation. By integrating physical simulation
into the optimization loop and accounting for the complex nonlinear behavior of cloth and its intricate interaction with the body, our framework recovers body and garment geometry and extracts important material parameters
in a physically plausible way. Our experiments demonstrate that our approach generates realistic clothing and
body shape suitable for downstream applications. We provide additional insights and results on our webpage: people.csail.mit.edu/liyifei/publication/diffavatar.

*This work was conducted during an internship at Meta Reality Labs

1. Introduction
Virtual avatars are increasingly gaining importance as
they serve as a digital extensions of users, enabling novel
social and professional interactions. The physical realism
of avatars, including realistic clothing and accurate body
shape, is crucial for such applications. This need for realism
extends beyond visual aesthetics but also includes dynamic
interactions and motion obtained by accurate physical simulation of clothing and body dynamics. Physical simulation
and rendering techniques can be used as tools to achieve
physical realism in the virtual world. However, this requires
the creation of high-quality clothing assets for individual
users, which presents a substantial challenge. The conventional approach requires meticulous manual design by
artists, a process that is exceedingly time-consuming. This
manual approach is fundamentally unfeasible for individualized avatar clothing, especially considering the continuously growing user base of telepresence applications. The
notion of having an artist create a unique virtual outfit for
every user is simply impractical. This scenario underscores
the pressing need for automated solutions for scalable and
personalized avatar asset creation and optimization. Recent
advancements in computer vision and graphics have accelerated the automation of avatar asset creation from user images or scans. However, the predominant focus has been on
geometry reconstruction, with limited focus on generating

4368

