This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noisy-Correspondence Learning for Text-to-Image Person Re-identification
Yang Qin1

Yingke Chen2

Dezhong Peng1,4,5

Xi Peng1

Joey Tianyi Zhou3

Peng Hu1 *

1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610095, China.
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST, UK.
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR) and Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), A*STAR, Singapore.
4
Sichuan Newstrong UHD Video Technology Co., Ltd., Chengdu 610095, China.
5
Chengdu Ruibei Yingte Information Technology Company Ltd., Chengdu 610065, China.
2

The man is walking with a
black bag. He
wears a bright jacket and
a pair of black trousers. His
shoes is dark
tanned.

A man with black
hair, dressed in a
grey and black coat, black trousers and white canvas shoes, was
walking happily
with his hands in
his pockets

(a) Clean correspondence

(b) Noisy correspondence

Abstract
Text-to-image person re-identification (TIReID) is a
compelling topic in the cross-modal community, which aims
to retrieve the target person based on a textual query. Although numerous TIReID methods have been proposed and
achieved promising performance, they implicitly assume the
training image-text pairs are correctly aligned, which is not
always the case in real-world scenarios. In practice, the
image-text pairs inevitably exist under-correlated or even
false-correlated, a.k.a noisy correspondence (NC), due to
A man
the low quality of the images and annotation errors. To adwearing a
dress this problem, we propose a novel Robust Dual Embedand (RDE) that can learn robust visual-semantic
dingblue
method
white
stripe
associations
even with NC. Specifically, RDE consists of
tank
top,
a
two main components:
1) A Confident Consensus Division
pair
of
green
(CCD) module that leverages the dual-grained decisions of
and a modulesAto man
dualpants
embedding
obtain a consensus set of clean
wearing
a to learn correct and
training
data,
which enables
the model
pair of
pink
and
reliable
visual-semantic blue
associations.
2) A Triplet Alignshoes.
ment Loss (TAL) relaxes the
conventional Triplet Ranking
white stripe
loss with the hardest negative
samples
tank top,
a to a log-exponential
upper bound over all pair
negative
of ones,
green thus preventing the
model collapse under NC
andand
cana also focus on hardpants
negative samples for promising
performance.
We conduct
pair of pink
extensive experiments on three public benchmarks, namely
shoes.
CUHK-PEDES, ICFG-PEDES, and RSTPReID, to evaluate
the performance and robustness of our RDE. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art results both with and without synthetic noisy correspondences on all three datasets. Code is
available at https://github.com/QinYang79/RDE.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image person re-identification (TIReID) [21, 24,
38] aims to understand the natural language descriptions
* Corresponding author: Peng Hu (penghu.ml@gmail.com).

Figure 1. The illustration of noisy correspondence. The figure shows an example of the NC problem, which occurs when
the image-text pairs are wrongly aligned, i.e., false positive pairs
(FPPs). Since the model does not know which pairs are noisy in
practice, they will unavoidably degrade the performance by incorrect supervision information. As seen in the figure, (a) the clean
image-text pair is semantically matched, while (b) the noisy pair is
not, which would cause the cross-modal model to learn erroneous
visual-textual associations. Note that both examples in (a) and (b)
are from and actually exist in the RSTPReid dataset [50].

to retrieve the matched person image from a large gallery
set. This task has received increasing attention from
both academic and industrial communities recently, e.g.,
finding/tracking suspect/lost persons in a surveillance system [10, 40]. However, TIReID remains a challenging
task due to the inherent heterogeneity gap across different
modalities and appearance attribute redundancy.
To tackle these challenges, most of the existing methods
explore global- and local-matching alignment to learn accurate similarity measurements for person re-identification.
To be specific, some global-matching methods [38, 41, 48]
leverage vision/language backbones to extract modalityspecific features and employ contrastive learning to achieve
global visual-semantic alignments. To capture fine-grained
information, some local-matching methods [22, 29, 35,
39] explicitly align local body regions to textually described entities/objectives to improve the discriminability
of pedestrian features. Recently, some works [16, 21, 42]

27197

