This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AttriHuman-3D: Editable 3D Human Avatar Generation with Attribute
Decomposition and Indexing
Fan Yang1

Tianyi Chen2 Xiaosheng He1 Zhongang Cai1,3
Lei Yang3 Si Wu2 Guosheng Lin1 *
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
3
SenseTime Research
fan007@e.ntu.edu.sg,csttychen@mail.scut.edu.cn, gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Editable 3D-aware generation, which supports userinteracted editing, has witnessed rapid development recently. However, existing editable 3D GANs either fail to
achieve high-accuracy local editing or suffer from huge
computational costs. We propose AttriHuman-3D, an editable 3D human generation model, which address the
aforementioned problems with attribute decomposition and
indexing. The core idea of the proposed model is to generate
all attributes (e.g. human body, hair, clothes and so on) in
an overall attribute space with six feature planes, which are
then decomposed and manipulated with different attribute
indexes. To precisely extract features of different attributes
from the generated feature planes, we propose a novel attribute indexing method as well as an orthogonal projection regularization to enhance the disentanglement. We also
introduce a hyper-latent training strategy and an attributespecific sampling strategy to avoid style entanglement and
misleading punishment from the discriminator. Our method
allows users to interactively edit selected attributes in the
generated 3D human avatars while keeping others fixed.
Both qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate
that our model provides a strong disentanglement between
different attributes, allows fine-grained image editing and
generates high-quality 3D human avatars.

1. Introduction
As the increasing demand for digital content creation in
various domains such as gaming, virtual reality and ecommerce, the need for realistic and customizable 3D human avatars has grown significantly. Traditional 2D editable generation models control the generation style with

the manipulation of high-level style latent codes [18–20],
which is ambiguous and hard to achieve precise local editing, limiting its application in the real-world scenario. Recently, several approaches have been proposed to enable
user manipulation on the free-view generation results of 3Daware GANs for rigid objects [22, 34, 35] (e.g. human faces
and cars). However, editable 3D-aware generation for human avatars could be more challenging due to its high variance in human geometry and appearance.
Some existing editable 3D-aware GANs for human portraits represent the overall regions of the generated objects
with a single NeRF and perform local editing by asking
users to manually edit the generated semantic masks [34,
35]. Although being very efficient, these methods suffer
from the high variance of human shapes, poses and outfits. Directly manipulating the semantic masks requires
strong painting skills for the users and involve a lot of tedious manual works, making it hard to be applied in the
real-world scenarios. One possible solution is to model and
manipulate different semantic regions independently. CNeRF [22] proposes to model each semantic region with different generators. Although generating different semantic
parts independently, training several deep generators in parallel will extremely increase the memory footprint, hindering their applications in real-world scenarios. Moreover,
currently available human datasets are limited and almost
all of them suffer from the style entanglement between different attributes, which means the style of one attribute may
be highly influenced by the style of another attribute. For
example, some pairs always show in the existing datasets:
dresses always with high-heel shoes, t-shirts always with
sports shoes. Men rarely with dresses. Such correlation
may also be learned by the discriminator, leading to misleading punishment in the training process and artifacts in
the editing stage.
To address these problems, we propose AttriHuman-

* Guosheng Lin is the corresponding author.

10596

