This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CPR: Retrieval Augmented Generation for Copyright Protection
Aditya Golatkar Alessandro Achille Luca Zancato
Yu-Xiang Wang Ashwin Swaminathan Stefano Soatto
AWS AI Labs
{agolatka,aachille,zancato,yuxiangw, swashwin,soattos}@amazon.com
Abstract
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) is emerging as
a flexible and robust technique to adapt models to private
users data without training, to handle credit attribution, and
to allow efficient machine unlearning at scale. However,
RAG techniques for image generation may lead to parts of
the retrieved samples being copied in the model’s output. To
reduce risks of leaking private information contained in the
retrieved set, we introduce Copy-Protected generation with
Retrieval (CPR), a new method for RAG with strong copyright protection guarantees in a mixed-private setting for
diffusion models. CPR allows to condition the output of diffusion models on a set of retrieved images, while also guaranteeing that unique identifiable information about those
example is not exposed in the generated outputs. In particular, it does so by sampling from a mixture of public (safe)
distribution and private (user) distribution by merging their
diffusion scores at inference. We prove that CPR satisfies
Near Access Freeness (NAF) which bounds the amount of
information an attacker may be able to extract from the
generated images. We provide two algorithms for copyright protection, CPR-KL and CPR-Choose. Unlike previously proposed rejection-sampling-based NAF methods,
our methods enable efficient copyright-protected sampling
with a single run of backward diffusion. We show that our
method can be applied to any pre-trained conditional diffusion model, such as Stable Diffusion or unCLIP. In particular, we empirically show that applying CPR on top of unCLIP improves quality and text-to-image alignment of the
generated results (81.4 to 83.17 on TIFA benchmark), while
enabling credit attribution, copy-right protection, and deterministic, constant time, unlearning.

1. Introduction
Foundation model users may need to adapt large-scale Diffusion Models to their use cases, like personalization, editing, content creation etc. However, fine-tuning the model
on the user data is often not an option. This is in part due to
the steep cost of fine-tuning models, but also because user

data is a mutable entity: new data is constantly added, and
low-quality data may often be filtered out. Moreover, data
owners may, at any point, change their mind and demand
that their data be removed.
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) has emerged as
a promising method to handle these situations. Rather than
using the user data to fine-tune the model, supporting samples are retrieved from it at inference time to guide the generation of new samples. Data may be easily added or removed from the retrieval data store without changes to the
model, and users may access different subsets of the data
based on their access-right. However, RAG methods are
double edged, direct access to retrieved reference images
often significantly improves the quality of generated samples but as we depict in Fig. 1, RAG models are prone
to copy information from the retrieved examples into the
model output, potentially resulting in significant leak of private information. We formalize this observation in Sec. 5
and we show that applying RAG on top of a public model,
while retrieving private user data at inference time, cannot
satisfy even the weaker notion of privacy.
To remedy this, we introduce Copy-Protected Generation with Retrieval (CPR). CPR retrieves multiple private
examples from the private user data pool. Information from
all these samples is combined to generate a “private” diffusion flow which uses common information of those samples
while discarding any unique and identifiable information.
The resulting private flow is then optimally combined with
the “public” flow generated by the base model to generate
new outputs which still benefit from the retrieved samples,
but minimize the risk of information leak.
In particular, we show that our method satisfies the recently proposed notion of copyright protection using Near
Access Freeness (NAF) [62], a relaxation of differential privacy aimed at protecting specific attribute of the training
data. Differently from previously proposed methods like
[62] that realize NAF with a computationally expensive rejection sampling method, CPR does so by construction during the generation. Hence making our method significantly
faster than the previous baselines and while also keeping

12374

