This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffLoc: Diffusion Model for Outdoor LiDAR Localization
Wen Li1 Yuyang Yang1 Shangshu Yu2 Guosheng Hu3 Chenglu Wen1 Ming Cheng1 Cheng Wang1 *
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University 3 Oosto

Abstract
Absolute pose regression (APR) estimates global pose
in an end-to-end manner, achieving impressive results in
learn-based LiDAR localization. However, compared to
the top-performing methods reliant on 3D-3D correspondence matching, APR’s accuracy still has room for improvement. We recognize APR’s lack of robust features learning and iterative denoising process leads to suboptimal results. In this paper, we propose DiffLoc, a novel framework that formulates LiDAR localization as a conditional
generation of poses. First, we propose to utilize the foundation model and static-object-aware pool to learn robust
features. Second, we incorporate the iterative denoising
process into APR via a diffusion model conditioned on the
learned geometrically robust features. In addition, due to
the unique nature of diffusion models, we propose to adapt
our models to two additional applications: (1) using multiple inferences to evaluate pose uncertainty, and (2) seamlessly introducing geometric constraints on denoising steps
to improve prediction accuracy. Extensive experiments conducted on the Oxford Radar RobotCar and NCLT datasets
demonstrate that DiffLoc outperforms better than the stateof-the-art methods. Especially on the NCLT dataset, we
achieve 35% and 34.7% improvement on position and orientation accuracy, respectively. Our code is released at
https://github.com/liw95/DiffLoc.

1. Introduction
LiDAR localization is a crucial task for navigation planning,
with a wide range of applications in computer vision, e.g.,
autonomous driving [16], and augmented reality [6]. The
goal of LiDAR localization is to take scanned point clouds
as input and output its 6-DoF pose.
Contemporary state-of-the-art LiDAR localization methods are structure-based methods, which match points in the
query point cloud to 3D world coordinates. Such 3D-3D
correspondences are established either through scene coordinate regression [17] or feature matching [34, 41]. These
* Corresponding author.

(a) APR

(b) SCR

(c) DiffLoc

Input

Input

Input

Encoder

Encoder

Encoder

Pool

FC

Pool

RANSAC

Diffusion Model

FC

6-DoF pose

෡
𝑻𝑲

෡
𝑻𝒌

Scoring
&
Selection

6-DoF pose

෡
𝑻𝟎

෡
𝑻𝑲

෡
𝑻𝒌

෡
𝑻𝒌−𝟏

෡
𝑻𝟎

6-DoF pose

Figure 1. (a) Absolute pose regression (APR) directly estimates
the poses in a forward pass. (b) Scene coordinate regression (SCR)
predicts correspondences and applies iterative denoising to estimate poses. (c) DiffLoc introduces diffusion models to incorporate the same inherent spirit of iterative denoising into APR. Here,
T̂k represents the noisy pose of the kth denoising step.

correspondences are then used to estimate LiDAR pose by
RANSAC [8]. However, these methods are usually costly
in both time and memory [40]. Another approach is absolute pose regression (APR), which directly estimates global
poses through a deep regression network without relying on
preconstructed maps. Therefore, APR becomes favored due
to its low computation and store cost [39].
Despite the initial success, the localization accuracy
of APR is still behind the 3D correspondence matching
method. To illustrate this point, we analyze a recently proposed state-of-the-art method, SGLoc [17], to uncover the
reasons. SGLoc is a LiDAR scene coordinate regression
method, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). It decouples the localization process into two distinct stages: correspondence regression and pose estimation through RANSAC. (1) SGLoc
emphasizes that APR lacks scene geometry features, which
are robust and crucial for localization. (2) When comparing the fundamental differences between SGLoc and
APR methods, we note that APR performs localization in

15045

