This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Monocular 3D Detection with a Single-View Image
Xueying Jiang1 Sheng Jin1 Lewei Lu2 Xiaoqin Zhang3 Shijian Lu1 *
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Sensetime Research
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology

Abstract
Monocular 3D detection (M3D) aims for precise 3D object localization from a single-view image which usually
involves labor-intensive annotation of 3D detection boxes.
Weakly supervised M3D has recently been studied to obviate the 3D annotation process by leveraging many existing 2D annotations, but it often requires extra training data
such as LiDAR point clouds or multi-view images which
greatly degrades its applicability and usability in various
applications. We propose SKD-WM3D, a weakly supervised
monocular 3D detection framework that exploits depth information to achieve M3D with a single-view image exclusively without any 3D annotations or other training data.
One key design in SKD-WM3D is a self-knowledge distillation framework, which transforms image features into 3Dlike representations by fusing depth information and effectively mitigates the inherent depth ambiguity in monocular scenarios with little computational overhead in inference. In addition, we design an uncertainty-aware distillation loss and a gradient-targeted transfer modulation
strategy which facilitate knowledge acquisition and knowledge transfer, respectively. Extensive experiments show that
SKD-WM3D surpasses the state-of-the-art clearly and is
even on par with many fully supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D detection (M3D) has emerged as one key
component in the area of autonomous driving and computer
vision. Its primary target is to recognize objects and obtain
their 3D localization from single-view images. Thanks to its
low deployment cost, M3D [5, 34] has attracted increasing
attention in both academic and industrial sectors, achieving
very impressive progress in recent years. On the other hand,
most existing studies [21, 33, 37, 39] adopt a fully supervised setup which have been facing increasing scalability
concern as large-scale 3D boxes are often labor-intensive
* Corresponding author.

to collect. Effective M3D training without 3D annotations
has become a critical issue while handling M3D problems
in various research and practical tasks.
Weakly supervised M3D (WM3D) [34] has recently
been explored for learning effective 3D detectors without
3D box annotations, aiming to exploit 2D annotations to
make up for the absence of 3D information. For example, WeakM3D [34] exploits LiDAR point clouds to infer 3D information as illustrated in Figure 1(a). However,
it requires costly and complicated LiDAR sensors to collect point clouds which limits its applicability and usability
greatly. WeakMono3D [42] employs 2D information only
by either leveraging multi-view stereo with images from
multiple cameras or constructing pseudo-multi-view perspective from sequential video frames as illustrated in Figure 1(b). However, collecting multi-view images is complicated, and resorting to a pseudo multi-view perspective degrades the detection performance clearly. With the advance
of single-view depth estimation, WM3D with depth from
a single-view image presents a potential solution for compensating the absence of 3D annotations. On the other hand,
direct integration of such depth into existing frameworks often necessitates complex network architectures which further incurs significant computational costs. This gives rise
to a pertinent question: When not using additional LiDAR
point clouds or multi-view image pairs, is it possible to harness the depth from off-the-shelf depth estimators without
introducing much computational overhead in inference?
We design SKD-WM3D, a novel weakly supervised
monocular 3D object detection method that is exclusively
grounded on single-view images. One key design in SKDWM3D is a self-knowledge distillation framework which
consists of a Depth-guided Self-teaching Network (DSN)
and a Monocular 3D Detection Network (MDN). As illustrated in Figure 1(c), SKD-WM3D utilizes depth information obtained from an off-the-shelf depth estimator [17] to
enhance the 3D localization ability of DSN and transfers
such ability to MDN via self-knowledge distillation. Such
self-distillation design enables MDN to unearth the intrinsic
depth information from single-view images independently,

10508

