This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLHetBench: Benchmarking Device and State Heterogeneity in
Federated Learning
Junyuan Zhang2∗ Shuang Zeng1∗ Miao Zhang3 Runxi Wang2 Feifei Wang1
Yuyin Zhou5 Paul Pu Liang4 Liangqiong Qu1†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Beihang University 3 New York University
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 UC Santa Cruz
Abstract

There are three main types of heterogeneity in FL: (1)
data heterogeneity, referring to varying data distribution
across clients, (2) device heterogeneity, characterized by diverse device capacities among clients [6, 30, 52], and (3)
state heterogeneity, involving inconsistent client availability [49, 60]. Considerable research has been conducted to
understand and address data heterogeneity in FL, including
a range of simulated and real-world FL datasets [10, 29, 60],
efficient assessment metrics for quantifying data heterogeneity [29, 39], and various efficient data heterogeneity
optimization methods [5, 34, 37, 38, 50, 64, 65, 67, 68]. In
contrast, efforts to investigate device and state heterogeneity are limited due to the lack of benchmarks and evaluation metrics reflecting these dimensions of heterogeneity in
the real world. Prior studies either use simulated environments [8, 18, 26, 62] or are limited to a small set of real
datasets [10, 29, 60]. This leads to a critical, yet unanswered question: What happens to different FL algorithms
when they are employed in real-world FL environments with
varying degrees of device and state heterogeneity?

Federated learning (FL) is a powerful technology that enables collaborative training of machine learning models
without sharing private data among clients. The fundamental challenge in FL lies in learning over extremely heterogeneous data distributions, device capacities, and device
state availabilities, all of which adversely impact performance and communication efficiency. While data heterogeneity has been well-studied in the literature, this paper
introduces FLHetBench, the first FL benchmark targeted
toward understanding device and state heterogeneity. FLHetBench comprises two new sampling methods to generate real-world device and state databases with varying heterogeneity and new metrics for quantifying the success of
FL methods under these real-world constraints. Using FLHetBench, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of existing methods and find that they struggle under these settings,
which inspires us to propose BiasPrompt+, a new method
employing staleness-aware aggregation and fast weights to
tackle these new heterogeneity challenges. Experiments on
various FL tasks and datasets validate the effectiveness of
our BiasPrompt+ method and highlight the value of FLHetBench in fostering the development of more efficient and robust FL solutions under real-world device and state constraints.

FLHetBench: Device and state evaluation benchmark.
To answer this key question, we introduce FLHetBench,
the first real-world device and state heterogeneity evaluation
benchmark in FL. As shown in Fig. 1, our FLHetBench consists of: (1) Two innovative Dirichlet process-based sampling methods - Dirichlet Process Gaussian Mixture Model
(DPGMM) for continuous device data and Dirichlet Process
Construction-Based Sampling Method (DPCSM) for discrete state data. DPGMM and DPCSM are capable of generating real-world device and state databases with diverse
heterogeneity, as validated by our theoretical and empirical
results. (2) Several isolated and interplay metrics, based on
Monte Carlo (MC) simulations and clients’ successful participating ratio, to assess device/state heterogeneity in FL.
Our sampling methods and metrics enable FL practitioners
to evaluate existing FL methods and inspire future work under real-world device and state constraints.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a cutting-edge technology that
enables collaborative training of deep learning models
across multiple clients without sharing their local data,
thereby protecting users’ sensitive information and mitigating the risk of data leaks [26, 27, 61]. Despite its potential, the large-scale adoption of FL is challenged by various dimensions of heterogeneity, which can impede federated computation and lead to decreased performance and
increased communication costs [3, 6, 29, 30, 60].
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

Benchmarking existing FL methods with FLHetBench.
We then conduct the first comprehensive evaluation of existing FL methods using our FLHetBench and identify two
key findings: (1) Most methods perform well under mild
device/state heterogeneity, but struggle with increased het-

† Corresponding author. Email: liangqqu@hku.hk

This work was conducted when J. Zhang and R. Wang were interns at
HKU.

12098

