This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLMs are Good Sign Language Translators
Jia Gong1† Lin Geng Foo1† Yixuan He1† Hossein Rahmani2 Jun Liu1‡
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 Lancaster University
{jia gong,lingeng foo,yixuan he}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg,
h.rahmani@lancaster.ac.uk, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Sign Language Translation (SLT) is a challenging task
that aims to translate sign videos into spoken language. Inspired by the strong translation capabilities of large language models (LLMs) that are trained on extensive multilingual text corpora, we aim to harness off-the-shelf LLMs
to handle SLT. In this paper, we regularize the sign videos
to embody linguistic characteristics of spoken language,
and propose a novel SignLLM framework to transform sign
videos into a language-like representation for improved
readability by off-the-shelf LLMs. SignLLM comprises two
key modules: (1) The Vector-Quantized Visual Sign module
converts sign videos into a sequence of discrete characterlevel sign tokens, and (2) the Codebook Reconstruction
and Alignment module converts these character-level tokens
into word-level sign representations using an optimal transport formulation. A sign-text alignment loss further bridges
the gap between sign and text tokens, enhancing semantic
compatibility. We achieve state-of-the-art gloss-free results
on two widely-used SLT benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Sign languages, which are visual signals expressed through
hand, body, and facial movements, serve as the primary
means of communication within the hearing-impaired community. In an effort to facilitate effective communication
with this community, much attention has been directed towards developing techniques to tackle the Sign Language
Translation (SLT) task [10, 11, 69, 72, 73], where the goal
is to translate sign videos into spoken language. SLT is a
challenging task that requires cross-modality understanding
of visual and linguistic cues [69, 72, 73], and the challenge
is exacerbated by the limited availability of paired sign-text
data [11, 13, 68, 69, 72]. Despite the notable advancements
in terms of network architectures [10, 11, 37], visual sign
representations (e.g., with keypoint estimators [14, 74]),
† Equal contribution; ‡ Corresponding author

and training methods [22, 69, 72], how to effectively tackle
the challenging cross-modal SLT task with limited paired
sign-text data largely remains an open question.
On the other hand, large language models (LLMs) – referring to language models that have been trained on a large
web-scale text corpus – have recently received a lot of attention. Since LLMs are trained over a very large corpus across multiple languages with distinct syntax and lexicon, they possess rich semantic understanding and powerful linguistic abilities [9, 15, 58]. At the same time,
LLMs have also demonstrated an impressive capability to
translate across multiple languages [9, 15], even showing a
strong potential for translating languages with limited data
[66, 76]. The foundation for this translation proficiency
lies in the shared linguistic properties of syntax, lexicon,
and morphology that many languages hold, which is particularly evident within language families [3]. Therefore,
when faced with a new language with limited data, LLMs
can draw upon the wealth of knowledge acquired from previously learned languages, leveraging any shared properties
of syntax, lexicon and morphology with previous languages
to effectively generate translations for new languages with
remarkable accuracy and fluency [66, 76].
Inspired by the impressive translation capabilities of
LLMs, we aim to harness off-the-shelf LLMs to handle
the challenging SLT task. However, training LLMs directly on the relatively small SLT dataset can potentially
lead to forgetting of their rich knowledge [12, 29] and a decline in performance, thus we follow previous LLM-based
works [24, 43, 54] to keep the off-the-shelf LLM frozen,
which preserves the rich knowledge acquired during its pretraining on a vast multilingual corpus. Consequently, our
focus shifts towards making the sign videos compatible and
readable for the off-the-shelf and frozen LLM to perform
SLT. Specifically, in this paper, we explore the following
question: Can we treat the sign video as a form of language,
and leverage an off-the-shelf and frozen LLM to translate
them? Notably, this is not a straightforward task because directly encoding features from sign videos with a pre-trained
feature extractor [28, 64] will result in a large gap between

18362

