This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Kernel Adaptive Convolution for Scene Text Detection via
Distance Map Prediction

1

Jinzhi Zheng1,2 , Heng Fan3 , Libo Zhang1,2 *
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
libo@iscas.ac.cn

3

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton, USA
heng.fan@unt.edu

Abstract
Segmentation-based scene text detection algorithms that
are accurate to the pixel level can satisfy the detection of
arbitrary shape scene text and have received widespread
attention. On the one hand, due to the complexity and diversity of the scene text, the convolution with a fixed kernel
size has some limitations in extracting the visual features
of the scene text. On the other hand, most of the existing
segmentation-based algorithms only segment the center of
the text, losing information such as the edges and directions of the text, with limited detection accuracy. There
are also some improved algorithms that use iterative corrections or introduce other multiple information to improve
text detection accuracy but at the expense of efficiency. To
address these issues, this paper proposes a simple and effective scene text detection method, the Kernel Adaptive Convolution, which is designed with a Kernel Adaptive Convolution Module for scene text detection via predicting the
distance map. Specifically, first, we design an extensible
kernel adaptive convolution module (KACM) to extract visual features from multiple convolutions with different kernel sizes in an adaptive manner. Secondly, our method predicts the text distance map under the supervision of a priori information (including direction map, and foreground
segmentation map) and completes the text detection from
the predicted distance map. Experiments on four publicly
available datasets prove the effectiveness of our algorithm,
in which the accuracy and efficiency of both the Total-Text
and TD500 outperform the state-of-the-art algorithm. The
algorithm efficiency is improved while the accuracy is competitive on ArT and CTW1500.

* Corresponding author: Libo Zhang (libo@iscas.ac.cn)

Figure 1. Performance comparison of several recent scene text detection methods on the Total-Text dataset. Our method achieves a
new ideal tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency compared
to current state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection, as an important research of computer vision, has a wide range of applications in fields such
as scene parsing, blind assistance, automatic driving, and
product recommendation [14, 25, 27, 44]. Therefore, it has
received extensive attention for a long time. With the development of artificial intelligence technology, some excellent
scene text algorithms [19, 20, 37, 41, 42] have achieved impressive progress. However, the complexity and diversity of
the scene text [45], such as the variability of the size, the uncertainty of the direction, the arbitrariness of the shape, the
randomness of the fonts, and the complexity of the background, make the scene text detection still challenging.
Segmentation-based algorithms are able to achieve pixellevel accuracy and are suitable for arbitrary shape text detection, and thus have received increasing attention [15, 19,

5957

