This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhanced Motion-Text Alignment for Image-to-Video Transfer Learning
Wei Zhang1,2 *, Chaoqun Wan2 , Tongliang Liu3 , Xinmei Tian1,4†, Xu Shen2†, Jieping Ye2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Alibaba Cloud, 3 The University of Sydney
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
zw0819@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn
{qionglong.wcq, shenxu.sx, jieping.yjp}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Extending large image-text pre-trained models (e.g.,
CLIP) for video understanding has made significant advancements. To enable the capability of CLIP to perceive
dynamic information in videos, existing works are dedicated
to equipping the visual encoder with various temporal modules. However, these methods exhibit “asymmetry” between
the visual and textual sides, with neither temporal descriptions in input texts nor temporal modules in text encoder.
This limitation hinders the potential of language supervision emphasized in CLIP, and restricts the learning of temporal features, as the text encoder has demonstrated limited
proficiency in motion understanding. To address this issue,
we propose leveraging “MoTion-Enhanced Descriptions”
(MoTED) to facilitate the extraction of distinctive temporal features in videos. Specifically, we first generate discriminative motion-related descriptions via querying GPT4 to compare easy-confusing action categories. Then, we
incorporate both the visual and textual encoders with additional perception modules to process the video frames and
generated descriptions, respectively. Finally, we adopt a
contrastive loss to align the visual and textual motion features. Extensive experiments on five benchmarks show that
MoTED surpasses state-of-the-art methods with convincing
gaps, laying a solid foundation for empowering CLIP with
strong temporal modeling.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable achievements in
contrastive language-image pre-training models [9, 25, 36,
60, 87, 88], with CLIP [60] emerging as the front-runner.
Through language supervision with a vast collection of 400
million image-text pairs, CLIP has achieved exceptional image comprehension and unprecedented zero-shot general* This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a research intern.
† Corresponding author.

Align

1. slapping
2. clapping
3. applauding
···

Align

Video
Frames

Video
Embed

Text
Embed

Video
Frames

Spatial
Embed

Text
Embed

Align

Category
Names
Video
Frames

(a) Previous methods

Temporal
Embed

Text
Embed

1. slapping
2. clapping
3. applauding
···

Category
Names

1. a quick hand movement
striking against something.
2. striking both hands
together rapidly.
…

Motion-Enhanced
Descriptions

(b) MoTED (ours)

Conceptual Motion
Description

Discriminative Motion
Description

Description Prompts that define the motion concept

Description Prompts that distinguish similar classes

Example Q: What is the motion concept of [slapping]?
Prompt A:

Q: What are the useful motion features for
Example
distinguishing the original class [slapping]
Prompt
from the similar class [clapping]? A:

GPT-4
Output

a quick hand movement striking against
something.

GPT-4
Output

Direction of motion; Hand position; Contact
surface; Number of hands involved; Force
applied

(c) Motion-Enhanced Descriptions

Figure 1. (a) Previous methods [27, 49, 75, 78] align the visual
embeddings with the textual embeddings derived from category
names. (b) Our work symmetrically aligns the spatial/temporal
visual embeddings with class descriptions and motion descriptions
correspondingly. (c) The descriptions generated by large language
modes (e.g., GPT-4 [50]) enhance the conceptual definitions and
discriminative details of motions.

ization. This breakthrough has opened up new possibilities
for leveraging the power of large-scale pre-trained models to comprehend videos. It has also introduced a new
paradigm [26, 40, 49, 52, 58, 75, 80] that endows imagebased CLIP to effectively perceive dynamic information for
video recognition.
To equip CLIP with motion perception, existing works
propose to incorporate various temporal modules into the
visual encoder. These temporal modules are additional tunable parameters, including designed efficient units between
pre-trained transformer blocks [49, 75], and parallel structures to disentangle the temporal modeling out of the spatial modeling [40, 58]. However, while considerable effort
has been put into capturing temporal visual features from
videos, these methods have paid little attention to the in-

18504

