This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point2CAD: Reverse Engineering CAD Models from 3D Point Clouds
Yujia Liu
ETH Zürich

Anton Obukhov
ETH Zürich

Jan Dirk Wegner
University of Zürich

Konrad Schindler
ETH Zürich

Figure 1. Point2CAD is a pipeline for reconstructing complex CAD models, including freeform surfaces, from 3D point clouds. A raw
point cloud is segmented into clusters corresponding to CAD faces, and each face is fitted either with a geometric primitive or with a
parametric freeform surface, using a novel, implicit neural representation. Due to the analytic representation the surfaces can be extended
and intersected, such that topology emerges, which is then used to clip the surface primitives.

Abstract
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) model reconstruction
from point clouds is an important problem at the intersection of computer vision, graphics, and machine learning; it saves the designer significant time when iterating
on in-the-wild objects. Recent advancements in this direction achieve relatively reliable semantic segmentation
but still struggle to produce an adequate topology of the
CAD model. In this work, we analyze the current state
of the art for that ill-posed task and identify shortcomings of existing methods. We propose a hybrid analyticneural reconstruction scheme that bridges the gap between
segmented point clouds and structured CAD models and
can be readily combined with different segmentation backbones. Moreover, to power the surface fitting stage, we propose a novel implicit neural representation of freeform surfaces, driving up the performance of our overall CAD reconstruction scheme. We extensively evaluate our method
on the popular ABC benchmark of CAD models and set a
new state-of-the-art for that dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/YujiaLiu76/point2cad.

1. Introduction
The task of reverse engineering CAD models from 3D point
clouds has gained increasing attention in recent years due
to the rapid development of 3D scanning technologies. Reverse engineering involves transforming a physical object
into a digital model in an editing-friendly format, which can
be used for analysis, visualization, and manufacturing.
Most approaches to reverse engineering CAD models
follow a typical sequence of steps. First, data capture and
pre-processing are carried out to obtain point cloud data
sampled densely from the object’s surface. Subsequently,
the point cloud is segmented to identify individual regions
of interest. The regions are then classified to differentiate
between different types of surfaces and features. Analytical representations are generated based on the identified regions, followed by the reconstruction of the model’s topology. Commercial software systems offer interactive tools
and functions for each step, such as a dedicated segmentation or shape-fitting tool. Similarly, research that aims to automate the process has focused chiefly on individual steps,
whereas little work covers the complete workflow of CAD
model reconstruction. Furthermore, most existing work is
either limited to case studies of a few models or is still quite

3763

