This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pixel Aligned Language Models
Jiarui Xu1,2∗ Xingyi Zhou1 Shen Yan1 Xiuye Gu1
Anurag Arnab1 Chen Sun1 Xiaolong Wang2 Cordelia Schmid1
1
2
Google Research
UC San Diego
https://jerryxu.net/PixelLLM/
Pixel-aligned Image Captioning

a cat reaches up
a paw to touch a
dog on a
television screen

image only

image + text

PixelLLM

The black dog on the screen

Referring
Localization
a cat holding
its paw up to
a tv screen.

image + location
[281, 100, 624, 488]

Location-conditioned
Captioning

Figure 1. We propose Pixel-Aligned Language Model (PixelLLM) to equip large language models with localization capability. The model
is pre-trained on localized image captioning data [38], where each word is labeled with a pixel location, to learn the alignment between
words and image pixels. PixelLLM can be applied to various localization tasks, for example, location-conditioned captioning when taking
location as input, and referring localization when generating locations as outputs.

Abstract
Large language models have achieved great success in
recent years, so as their variants in vision. Existing visionlanguage models can describe images in natural languages,
answer visual-related questions, or perform complex reasoning about the image. However, it is yet unclear how localization tasks, such as word grounding or referring localization, can be performed using large language models. In
this work, we aim to develop a vision-language model that
can take locations, for example, a set of points or boxes,
as either inputs or outputs. When taking locations as inputs, the model performs location-conditioned captioning,
which generates captions for the indicated object or region.
When generating locations as outputs, our model regresses
pixel coordinates for each output word generated by the
language model, and thus performs dense word grounding. Our model is pre-trained on the Localized Narrative
dataset, which contains pixel-word-aligned captioning from
human attention. We show our model can be applied to
various location-aware vision-language tasks, including referring localization, location-conditioned captioning, and
dense object captioning, archiving state-of-the-art performance on RefCOCO and Visual Genome.
*Work done during a Google internship.

{jiaruixu, zhouxy}@google.com

1. Introduction
Imagine a baby waving their hands, pointing to the colorful toys, and yelling the toy names. Pointing and naming is a natural and convenient way to describe the visual world, and provide dense visual-language alignment
that is synchronized over time. Can we design an intelligent model [15, 35, 40, 42] that leverages such information to obtain vision-language alignment? Prior research [2, 10, 14, 25, 26, 32, 44, 57] has tried to align visual information to the pre-trained LLMs for various visionlanguage tasks such as producing long and detailed descriptions [32] or conversation [26]. However, most of these
works take the entire image as input, and produce all outputs in text. Detailed understanding of specific regions and
objects, and their exact locations, is not well-studied in the
context of LLMs. We aim to propose a new architecture and
a training procedure that can achieve the goal, which helps
us answer the important research question: can large language models achieve spatial understanding and reasoning
from the visual world? If so, how?
To this end, we introduce PixelLLM, a vision-language
model with fine-grained localization ability by densely
aligning each output word to a pixel location. We realize
this by adding a small MLP on top of the word features of a

13030

