This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

YolOOD: Utilizing Object Detection Concepts
for Multi-Label Out-of-Distribution Detection
Alon Zolfi1 , Guy Amit1 , Amit Baras1 , Satoru Koda2 , Ikuya Morikawa2 , Yuval Elovici1 , Asaf Shabtai1
1

Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel

{zolfi,guy5,barasa}@post.bgu.ac.il,{elovici,shabtaia}@bgu.ac.il
2

Fujitsu Limited, Japan

{koda.satoru,morikawa.ikuya}@fujitsu.com

1. Introduction
Machine learning and particularly deep learning-based networks have become a state-of-the-art solution for computer
vision tasks, such as image classification [8, 16], object detection [27, 29], and image segmentation [3, 4]. However,
it has been shown that these models can produce overconfident predictions on samples that are not within the distribution they were trained on, i.e., out-of-distribution (OOD)
samples [26].
In the last few years, many solutions have been proposed
to address this problem, most of which focus on the separation of in-distribution and OOD data [1, 13, 17, 18]. How-

Out-of-distribution

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has attracted a
large amount of attention from the machine learning research community in recent years due to its importance in
deployed systems. Most of the previous studies focused on
the detection of OOD samples in the multi-class classification task. However, OOD detection in the multi-label
classification task, a more common real-world use case,
remains an underexplored domain. In this research, we
propose YolOOD – a method that utilizes concepts from
the object detection domain to perform OOD detection in
the multi-label classification task. Object detection models
have an inherent ability to distinguish between objects of
interest (in-distribution data) and irrelevant objects (OOD
data) in images that contain multiple objects belonging to
different class categories. These abilities allow us to convert a regular object detection model into an image classifier with inherent OOD detection capabilities with just minor changes. We compare our approach to state-of-the-art
OOD detection methods and demonstrate YolOOD’s ability
to outperform these methods on a comprehensive suite of
in-distribution and OOD benchmark datasets.

In-distribution

Abstract

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Examples of (a) in-distribution (top) and OOD (bottom)
images with the (b) corresponding YolOOD confidence heatmap,
and (c) heatmap placed on top of the image.

ever, these studies only proposed solutions for the multiclass classification task, in which an input is associated with
a single class category. The problem of OOD detection in
the multi-label classification domain has been overlooked
and remains underexplored. Despite its importance, only
two studies specifically addressed this problem [11, 34].
Multi-label image classification and object detection are
two closely related tasks. The former involves assigning
multiple labels to an image, while the latter goes a step further by not only recognizing the objects present in an image
but also localizing them with bounding boxes. Therefore,
object detectors have the inherent ability to distinguish between objects of interest and irrelevant objects [22, 27, 29].
This ability, along with object detection’s similarity to
multi-label classification, can be leveraged to create an
OOD detection mechanism for the multi-label setting.
In this paper, we propose YolOOD, a multi-label classifier that utilizes the main concepts of state-of-the-art object detectors, and specifically, the YOLO object detector [2, 14, 27]. To convert YOLO’s network into an image
classifier, we simply replace the last layer of each detection

5788

