This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modular Blind Video Quality Assessment
Wen Wen1 , Mu Li2 , Yabin Zhang3 , Yiting Liao3 , Junlin Li3 , Li Zhang3 , and Kede Ma1 *
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
ByteDance Inc.
wwen29-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, limuhit@gmail.com
{zhangtao.ceb, liaoyiting, lijunlin.li, lizhang.idm}@bytedance.com
kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk
https://github.com/winwinwenwen77/ModularBVQA

Abstract
Blind video quality assessment (BVQA) plays a pivotal
role in evaluating and improving the viewing experience of
end-users across a wide range of video-based platforms and
services. Contemporary deep learning-based models primarily analyze video content in its aggressively subsampled
format, while being blind to the impact of the actual spatial
resolution and frame rate on video quality. In this paper, we
propose a modular BVQA model and a method of training
it to improve its modularity. Our model comprises a base
quality predictor, a spatial rectifier, and a temporal rectifier, responding to the visual content and distortion, spatial
resolution, and frame rate changes on video quality, respectively. During training, spatial and temporal rectifiers are
dropped out with some probabilities to render the base quality predictor a standalone BVQA model, which should work
better with the rectifiers. Extensive experiments on both
professionally-generated content and user-generated content video databases show that our quality model achieves
superior or comparable performance to current methods.
Additionally, the modularity of our model offers an opportunity to analyze existing video quality databases in terms
of their spatial and temporal complexity.

1. Introduction
We undoubtedly reside in an era that exposes us to a diverse
array of exponentially growing video data on a daily basis. Such growth is accompanied by advancements in video
recording equipment and display devices, leading to high
spatial resolution, high frame rate, high dynamic range, and
wide color gamut video content. As a result, understanding how multifaceted video attributes together affect video
quality is crucial to measure and improve the viewing expe* Corresponding author.

rience of end-users. Over the years, researchers have collected numerous supporting evidence from psychophysical
and perceptual studies [11, 18, 22, 23, 27, 47, 49] that a
higher spatial resolution and higher frame rate contribute
positively to video quality, with exact perceptual gains depending on the video content.
In response to these subjective findings, early
knowledge-driven BVQA models directly take spatial
resolution and frame rate parameters as part of input for
quality prediction of compressed videos [30]. Despite
the simplicity, these video attribute parameters, being
independent of content and distortion, are less relevant
to perceived video quality. Consequently, simple content
complexity features like spatial information1 and temporal
information2 , along with simple natural scene statistics
derived from the pixel domain [26], the 3D discrete
cosine transform domain [34], and the wavelet domain [3]
are computed at the actual spatial resolution and frame
rate [11]. Nevertheless, operating on the full-size video
sequence is computationally daunting. Korhonen [13]
proposed a two-level approach, extracting low-complexity
features from each spatially downsampled frame and
high-complexity features from key frames at the actual
spatial resolution. An alternative approach is to work with
spatiotemporal chips [6], which are spatial-time localized
cuts of the full-size video in local motion flow directions.
In general, knowledge-driven BVQA models perform
marginally due to the limited expressiveness of manually
crafted features.
The computational issues faced by deep learning-based
data-driven BVQA methods are more pronounced. There
are few attempts [16, 17] to assess full-size videos, which
come with significant computational demands, especially
1 Spatial information is computed as the root mean squares of the gradient magnitudes of each frame.
2 Temporal information is computed as the root mean squares of the
differences of consecutive frames.

2763

