This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COTR: Compact Occupancy TRansformer for Vision-based
3D Occupancy Prediction
Qihang Ma1,∗ , Xin Tan1,2,∗ , Yanyun Qu3 , Lizhuang Ma1 , Zhizhong Zhang1,† , Yuan Xie1,2
1
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, Chongqing, China
3
Xiamen University, Fujian, China
qhma@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {xtan,zzzhang,yxie}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

47
45

1. Introduction
Vision-based 3D Occupancy Prediction aims to estimate
the occupancy state of 3D voxels surrounding the egovehicle which provides a comprehensive 3D scene understanding [10, 32, 33, 37, 41]. By dividing the whole space
into voxels and predicting its occupancy and semantic information, the 3D occupancy network endows a universal
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.

w/o COTR

8.7%

43

(a) BEV representation

(b) TPV representation

mIoU (%)

The autonomous driving community has shown significant interest in 3D occupancy prediction, driven by its exceptional geometric perception and general object recognition capabilities. To achieve this, current works try to construct a Tri-Perspective View (TPV) or Occupancy (OCC)
representation extending from the Bird-Eye-View perception. However, compressed views like TPV representation
lose 3D geometry information while raw and sparse OCC
representation requires heavy but redundant computational
costs. To address the above limitations, we propose Compact Occupancy TRansformer (COTR), with a geometryaware occupancy encoder and a semantic-aware group decoder to reconstruct a compact 3D OCC representation.
The occupancy encoder first generates a compact geometrical OCC feature through efficient explicit-implicit view
transformation. Then, the occupancy decoder further enhances the semantic discriminability of the compact OCC
representation by a coarse-to-fine semantic grouping strategy. Empirical experiments show that there are evident performance gains across multiple baselines, e.g., COTR outperforms baselines with a relative improvement of 8%-15%,
demonstrating the superiority of our method. The code is
available at https://github.com/NotACracker/COTR.

w COTR

13.2%

41
39
37

14.9%

35
33
(c) OCC representation

(d) Compact OCC

Figure 1. Left: Different representation for 3D perception. Right:
The 3D Occupancy prediction results of different baselines with
COTR on nuScenes [32]. COTR outperforms baselines with a relative improvement of 8%-15%, demonstrating the superiority of
our method.

object representation ability, where out-of-vocabulary objects and abnormity can be easily represented as [occupied;
unknown].
3D vision perception is now transitioning from BirdEye-View (BEV) perception [9, 18, 21, 24, 26, 35] to
Occupancy (OCC) perception [10, 25, 34, 37, 41]. The
BEV perception excels in 3D object detection tasks due
to their unified representation abilities for multi-camera inputs, where the obstruction problem is extremely alleviated
in the BEV plane. However, its deficiency in collapsing
the height dimensions poses a challenge in preserving the
requisite geometric information for a holistic understanding
of the 3D scene. To alleviate this issue, [10] proposes a
Tri-Perspective View (TPV) representation to delineate 3D
scenes. Unfortunately, this introduces a new problem in
that the compression along the horizontal dimension leads
to significant object overlap.
From previous empirical studies, it appears that the compression on a specific dimension of 3D representations
would lose substantial 3D geometry information. Thus the
idea of 3D OCC representation is quite intriguing. It is

19936

