This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EASE-DETR: Easing the Competition among Object Queries
Yulu Gao1,2 Yifan Sun3 Xudong Ding1,2 Chuyang Zhao3 Si liu1,2†
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
2
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University 3 Baidu VIS
{gyl97, zy2342107, liusi}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper views the DETR’s non-duplicate detection
ability as a competition result among object queries.
Around each object, there are usually multiple queries,
within which only a single one can win the chance to become the final detection. Such a competition is hard: while
some competing queries initially have very close prediction scores, their leading query has to dramatically enlarge
its score superiority after several decoder layers. To help
the leading query stands out, this paper proposes EASEDETR, which eases the competition by introducing bias that
favours the leading one. EASE-DETR is very simple: in every intermediate decoder layer, we identify the “leading /
trailing” relationship between any two queries, and encode
this binary relationship into the following decoder layer
to amplify the superiority of the leading one. More concretely, the leading query is to be protected from mutual
query suppression in the self-attention layer and encouraged to absorb more object features in the cross-attention
layer, therefore accelerating to win. Experimental results
show that EASE-DETR brings consistent and remarkable
improvement to various DETRs.

1. Introduction
The non-duplicate detection ability is an important characteristic shared by DEtection Transformer (DETR) [3] and
its variants [6, 18, 21, 26, 30, 34, 35, 38, 39, 42]. More concretely, DETR uses plenty of queries (e.g., 300 in DETR
[3] and 900 in DINO [39]) in the decoder to search for the
objects. Though the queries are redundant, the predictions
made by them are expected to be non-duplicate, i.e., only
one query predicts each ground-truth object. This characteristic is known as being related to the one-to-one label assignment, which sets up the training objective. In contrast,
we are interested in the mechanism DETR employs to reach
this objective.
† Corresponding author.

{zhaochuyang,sunyifan01}@baidu.com

This paper views the non-duplicate detection ability of
DETR as the result of a competition among object queries.
We explain this viewpoint through a revisit into the DETR
decoder. Before the first decoder layer, there are multiple queries around each object, as shown in Figure 1.
Some queries become even closer after the first decoder,
because they are attracted by the same object through crossattention. Such closeness regards not only the position,
but also the predicted scores. Within these close queries,
only a single one can win the chance of detecting the object and makes high prediction score at the final decoder
layer. All the other competing queries are suppressed as the
background and make low prediction scores. Therefore, a
leading query (that usually has only subtle superiority at the
beginning) has to dramatically enlarge its score gap against
the trailing queries after several decoder layers.
We argue that helping the leading query to win the above
competition easier can benefit the training efficiency and
improve the detection accuracy. To achieve this, we propose
EASE-DETR, which eases the competition by introducing
bias that favours the leading query. EASE-DETR is very
simple: given any two competing queries in the intermediate decoder layers, we identify their relationship of “leading
/ trailing” and further amplify the superiority of the leading
query in the following layer. The superiority amplification
can be conducted in both the following self-attention and
cross-attention layers.
• The self-attention layer facilitates global interaction
among all queries for suppressing duplicate detections [14,
26]. However, any two queries in the self-attention are in
symmetric position, and both receive suppression from each
other. We aim to decay the suppression upon the leading
query while maintaining the suppression upon the trailing
queries, so as to enlarge their gap. Instead of hand-crafted
decay, we encode the binary “leading / trailing” relationship
into a decay weight through a trainable projection (MLP, in
practice). Empirically, we find the learned decay weights
protect the leading query from mutual suppression and thus
enlarge its superiority against the trailing one.
• The cross-attention layer enables each query to absorb

17282

