This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LEAP-VO: Long-term Effective Any Point Tracking for Visual Odometry
Weirong Chen1,2 * Le Chen3 Rui Wang4 Marc Pollefeys4
1
TU Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning 3 MPI for Intelligent Systems 4 Microsoft

Abstract
Visual odometry estimates the motion of a moving camera based on visual input. Existing methods, mostly focusing on two-view point tracking, often ignore the rich temporal context in the image sequence, thereby overlooking the
global motion patterns and providing no assessment of the
full trajectory reliability. These shortcomings hinder performance in scenarios with occlusion, dynamic objects, and
low-texture areas. To address these challenges, we present
the Long-term Effective Any Point Tracking (LEAP) module. LEAP innovatively combines visual, inter-track, and
temporal cues with mindfully selected anchors for dynamic
track estimation. Moreover, LEAP’s temporal probabilistic
formulation integrates distribution updates into a learnable
iterative refinement module to reason about point-wise uncertainty. Based on these traits, we develop LEAP-VO, a
robust visual odometry system adept at handling occlusions
and dynamic scenes. Our mindful integration showcases a
novel practice by employing long-term point tracking as the
front-end. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed pipeline significantly outperforms existing baselines
across various visual odometry benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Visual odometry (VO) calculates the camera’s position and
movement from an image sequence. It is widely used in various fields including robotics [46], mixed reality [23], and
autonomous driving [15]. The performance of VO highly
depends on the accuracy of its point tracking front-end,
which recovers relative camera motion between consecutive frames using projective geometry. It further requires
the point correspondences to be static, as dynamic points
can lead to inaccurate motion estimation and pose recovery.
Despite significant advances in feature tracking and optical flow estimation, most existing VO methods mainly focus on the two-view case, i.e., computing feature correspondences between a pair of images. However, these methods
* Work done at Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Lab Zurich for a Master’s
degree.

Figure 1. Comparison between two-view approach and multiview approach for visual odometry. (a) In the two-view approach, correspondences are derived for every image pair and concatenated. Managing occlusion becomes challenging without the
temporal context. (b) In the multi-view approach, long-term point
trajectories can be obtained all at once, enabling the detection of
occlusion and tracking points under partial occlusions.

are limited as they rely solely on pairwise relative motion,
thus neglecting the valuable temporal information in image
sequences. Consequently, they often struggle with capturing dynamic motion patterns in tracks. Another challenge
arises from the need to handle occlusions. In two-view
scenarios, occlusion is not explicitly modeled, leading to
misidentification of occluded points as incorrect matches.
To address these challenges effectively, we propose to introduce a long-term point tracker, which can recover the trajectories of specific points across the image sequence given a
sparse set of these query points. Its capability of leveraging
temporal context and reliably tracking queries over multiple frames even under occlusion, makes it highly suitable
for VO applications (refer to Figure 1).
Recently, Persistent Independent Particles (PIPs) [16]
proposes a novel pipeline that brings the idea of iterative
refinement into the long-term point tracking task, with the
local correlation evidence to maintain feasible computation.
While it is proficient in leveraging the temporal context
present in the image sequence, it ignores the inter-track information in the image sequence and processes each query
point independently. Consequently, PIPs struggles to cap-

19844

