This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detours for Navigating Instructional Videos
Kumar Ashutosh1,2 , Zihui Xue1,2 , Tushar Nagarajan2 , Kristen Grauman1,2
1
UT Austin, 2 FAIR, Meta

Abstract
We introduce the video detours problem for navigating
instructional videos. Given a source video and a natural
language query asking to alter the how-to video’s current
path of execution in a certain way, the goal is to find a related “detour video” that satisfies the requested alteration.
To address this challenge, we propose VidDetours, a novel
video-language approach that learns to retrieve the targeted
temporal segments from a large repository of how-to’s using video-and-text conditioned queries. Furthermore, we
devise a language-based pipeline that exploits how-to video
narration text to create weakly supervised training data.
We demonstrate our idea applied to the domain of how-to
cooking videos, where a user can detour from their current
recipe to find steps with alternate ingredients, tools, and
techniques. Validating on a ground truth annotated dataset
of 16K samples, we show our model’s significant improvements over best available methods for video retrieval and
question answering, with recall rates exceeding the state of
the art by 35%.

1. Introduction
Instructional or “how-to” videos are a compelling
medium for people to share and learn new skills. From
everyday home fix-it projects, cooking, sports, to aspirational goals like playing piano beautifully, there are so many
things that people of all ages and backgrounds want to learn
or do a bit better. Indeed, online how-to’s are among the
top few dominating categories of all content on YouTube,
alongside entertainment and music. Advances in computer
vision for keystep recognition [6, 21, 45, 55, 56, 90, 91],
procedural task understanding [11, 12, 89], and video summarization [5, 60] have the potential to make such content
more searchable and accessible.
However, while today’s how-to content is a vast resource, it is nonetheless disconnected. Human learners access how-to’s in doses of one video at a time, studying the
advice and visual demonstrations of one expert at a time.
Website: https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/detours

How to make Chicken Quesadillas
Query : How to do this
without an electric grill?
126s

Response:

180s

225s

Detour window:

Figure 1. An example video detour. In the Chicken Quesadillas
recipe, the source video Vs (top) shows the use of an electric grill
at time instant ts . A user watching this video does not have a grill
and asks a query Q “how to do this without an electric grill?”. In
response, the system identifies a detour video Vd and timepoint Td
showing a similar recipe but using a heating pan instead of a grill.

While there are thousands and thousands of videos addressing, for example, “how to repair a bike” or “how to make
a samosa”, any given video offers only a single execution
of a task using a fixed set of ingredients, tools, approach,
and assuming a certain skill level. When those criteria do
not align, users face a dilemma whether to improvise, risking “breaking” the final output, or to find and watch another
video hoping it better matches their constraints. Manually
synthesizing the information across videos is time consuming if not prohibitively taxing.
What if the wealth of knowledge in online instructional
videos was not an array of isolated lessons, but instead an
interconnected network of information? What would it take
to transform a pile of videos into a how-to knowledge base?
Towards this vision, we explore how to intelligently navigate between related how-to videos, conditioned on a natural language query. Suppose a user watching a given video
discovers they do not have the desired ingredients, tools,
or skill-level. They may ask, “can I do this step without
a wrench?” or “I am on a diet, can I skip adding cheese
here?” or “how could I prepare the mix from scratch instead of using a pre-made one?” or “is there a simpler way
to do the corners?” and so on. Conditioned on the content watched so far in the source video, the goal is to identify a detour video—and a temporal segment within it—that

18804

