This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ExtraNeRF: Visibility-Aware View Extrapolation of
Neural Radiance Fields with Diffusion Models
Meng-Li Shih1

Wei-Chiu Ma1,2 Lorenzo Boyice3 Aleksander Holynski3,4 Forrester Cole3
Brian Curless1,3 Janne Kontkanen3
1
University of Washington 2 Cornell University 3 Google Research 4 UC Berkeley

BaseNeRF (View 1)

BaseNeRF (View 2)

ExtraNeRF (View 1)

ExtraNeRF (View 2)

Figure 1. BaseNeRF vs ExtraNeRF: We train a BaseNeRF model and our ExtraNeRF model on six input views and render the scene
from extrapolated viewpoints. Using our visibility-aware, diffusion-guided inpainting and enhancement modules, we are able to synthesize
sharp content in disoccluded regions, whereas the BaseNeRF suffers from blurry results (see the red boxes, green boxes, and the close-up
insets).

Abstract
We propose ExtraNeRF, a novel method for extrapolating the range of views handled by a Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF). Our main idea is to leverage NeRFs to model
scene-specific, fine-grained details, while capitalizing on
diffusion models to extrapolate beyond our observed data.
A key ingredient is to track visibility to determine what portions of the scene have not been observed, and focus on reconstructing those regions consistently with diffusion models. Our primary contributions include a visibility-aware
diffusion-based inpainting module that is fine-tuned on the
input imagery, yielding an initial NeRF with moderate quality (often blurry) inpainted regions, followed by a second
diffusion model trained on the input imagery to consistently
enhance, notably sharpen, the inpainted imagery from the
first pass. We demonstrate high-quality results, extrapolating beyond a small number of (typically six or fewer) input
views, effectively outpainting the NeRF as well as inpainting newly disoccluded regions inside the original viewing
volume. We compare with related work both quantitatively
and qualitatively and show significant gains over prior art.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing a scene from photographs is an important
and long-standing problem in computer vision. Recent
advances, following the introduction of Neural Radiance

Fields (NeRF) [29] have led to an explosion of progress.
Nevertheless, a limitation of NeRF in its base form is that it
is far better at interpolating than extrapolating, and requires
dense views for the interpolation. But what if you want to
take just a few views, a practical constraint in a live capture
setting, and extrapolate beyond them to enable a bit more
freedom in viewing the scene? While there has been significant progress in scene-level sparse NeRF reconstruction,
the progress on NeRF-based view extrapolation is primarily limited to object-centric scenarios. Advances in generative techniques, particularly diffusion models, have demonstrated unforeseen capabilities to synthesize previously unseen imagery. This presents an opportunity to expand the
operating range of NeRF more broadly to view extrapolation.
Our core strategy employs neural radiance fields
(NeRF [29]) to capture scene-specific, fine-grained details
and utilizes 2D diffusion models [40] to extend the scene
beyond the limits of observed data. A straightforward fusion of these technologies initially results in NeRF-rendered
images that appear blurry and detail-deficient. This is primarily due to the discord between 2D diffusion priors when
applied to a 3D scene from varying perspectives, particularly evident in scene-level view extrapolation where intricate details (such as leaves and branches) are significantly
diminished.
To address these challenges, we develope a multi-stage

20385

