This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diversified and Personalized Multi-rater Medical Image Segmentation
Yicheng Wu1( ),* , Xiangde Luo2,∗ , Zhe Xu3 , Xiaoqing Guo4 , Lie Ju1 , Zongyuan Ge1 ,
Wenjun Liao2 , Jianfei Cai1
1
2
Monash University, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 4 University of Oxford

1. Introduction
Abstract
Annotation ambiguity due to inherent data uncertainties
such as blurred boundaries in medical scans and different
observer expertise and preferences has become a major obstacle for training deep-learning based medical image segmentation models. To address it, the common practice is
to gather multiple annotations from different experts, leading to the setting of multi-rater medical image segmentation. Existing works aim to either merge different annotations into the “groundtruth” that is often unattainable
in numerous medical contexts, or generate diverse results,
or produce personalized results corresponding to individual expert raters. Here, we bring up a more ambitious
goal for multi-rater medical image segmentation, i.e., obtaining both diversified and personalized results. Specifically, we propose a two-stage framework named D-Persona
(first Diversification and then Personalization). In Stage
I, we exploit multiple given annotations to train a Probabilistic U-Net model, with a bound-constrained loss to improve the prediction diversity. In this way, a common latent space is constructed in Stage I, where different latent
codes denote diversified expert opinions. Then, in Stage
II, we design multiple attention-based projection heads to
adaptively query the corresponding expert prompts from
the shared latent space, and then perform the personalized
medical image segmentation. We evaluated the proposed
model on our in-house Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma dataset
and the public lung nodule dataset (i.e., LIDC-IDRI). Extensive experiments demonstrated our D-Persona can provide diversified and personalized results at the same time,
achieving new SOTA performance for multi-rater medical
image segmentation. Our code will be released at https:
//github.com/ycwu1997/D-Persona.

∗ Equal Contribution. Correspondence to yicheng.wu@monash.edu.
This research is supported by the Monash FIT Start-up Grant.

To build up a powerful computer-aided diagnosis (CAD)
system, automatic medical image segmentation is an indispensable step in providing quantitative measurements for
interested medical targets [13]. Despite deep-learning based
medical image segmentation methods have achieved great
progress [9, 12, 46], their deployment in clinical settings
[4] remains skeptical since it is still hard for them to accurately segment challenging targets such as the primary gross
tumor volume (GTVp) [26, 28], blurred lesions [6, 47] and
complex anatomical structures [10, 22].
One key reason lies in the “annotation ambiguity”,
which mainly comes from two aspects: data-level uncertainties and observer-level preferences. The first aspect
refers to the inherent uncertainties in the data such as irregular shapes and varied locations of a medical target (e.g., MS
lesions [6]) due to its great variability, and blurred boundaries around the target regions caused by limited imaging
resolutions in medical scans. These inherent data uncertainties unavoidably affect the process of expert annotations
[30], resulting in inconsistent training labels that are likely
to confound data-driven segmentation models. The second
aspect refers to the diversity in domain expertise and personal preferences among annotators, which leads to a range
of interpretations for a single target. In other words, there
is no “absolutely correct label”, which we call meta segment in this work. It has been shown in numerous medical
contexts that the meta segment is unattainable [24].
To mitigate the “annotation ambiguity”, a standard practice in medical settings is to gather multiple annotations
from different observers [28, 34], leading to multi-rater
medical image segmentation [15] (see Fig. 1 Top-left). The
existing works dealing with medical multi-rater annotations
can be generally categorized into three groups: crowdsourcing methods, generation methods, and personalization
methods, each aligning with a different objective: becoming meta expert, implicit experts, or explicit experts (Fig. 1
Top-right). In particular, the crowdsourcing methods [44]
(Fig. 1 Middle-left) assume there exists one and only one
meta segment and combining multiple annotations can ap-

11470

