This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LQMFormer: Language-aware Query Mask
Transformer for Referring Image Segmentation
Nisarg A. Shah
Vibashan VS
Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
snisarg812@gmail.com, {vvishnu2, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) aims to segment objects from an image based on a language description. Recent
advancements have introduced transformer-based methods
that leverage cross-modal dependencies, significantly enhancing performance in referring segmentation tasks. These
methods are designed such that each query predicts different masks. However, RIS inherently requires a single-mask
prediction, leading to a phenomenon known as Query Collapse, where all queries yield the same mask prediction. This
reduces the generalization capability of the RIS model for
complex or novel scenarios. To address this issue, we propose a Multi-modal Query Feature Fusion technique, characterized by two innovative designs: (1) Gaussian enhanced
Multi-Modal Fusion, a novel visual grounding mechanism
that enhances overall representation by extracting rich local
visual information and global visual-linguistic relationships,
and (2) A Dynamic Query Module that produces a diverse
set of queries through a scoring network where the network
selectively focuses on queries for objects referred to in the
language description. Moreover, we show that including an
auxiliary loss to increase the distance between mask representations of different queries further enhances performance
and mitigates query collapse. Extensive experiments conducted on four benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness
of our framework.

1. Introduction
Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) is a challenging multimodal task aimed at segmenting specific objects in an image
based on a textual description. This description often includes details about the object’s actions, category, color, or
position, as noted by [8, 21]. Compared to traditional semantic and instance segmentation, RIS requires a precise
understanding of object locations and involves a comprehensive modeling of the visual-linguistic relationships within
the global context. Additionally, RIS demands the extrac-

ReLA

Figure 1. [Top] Heatmap visualization of cosine similarity between
different query mask predictions of ReLA and LQMFormer , where
the yellow region indicates a similarity near 1, and the dark blue
region signifies a similarity of 0. [Bottom] Sample query mask
prediction visualizations for ReLA and LQMFormer .

tion of high-quality visual features at a local level. The
potential applications of RIS are extensive, particularly in
language-driven human-computer interaction domains.
Traditional RIS methods have employed linear fusion
approaches and Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) for
feature learning in RIS tasks [21, 33]. However, the recent advancement of attention mechanisms has shifted the
focus towards extracting richer visual-language representation, with recent techniques demonstrating the effectiveness of Transformers. These models excel at modelling
long-distance dependencies, making them suitable for crossmodal fusion [45, 55]. Further, Vision Transformer (ViT)
methods such as VLT [13], EFN [16], and LAVT [54], which
are based on [14], have shown significant improvements in
RIS performance. Their ability to capture the nuances of
cross-modal dependencies is crucial, and through a series of
attention mechanisms, these models efficiently process and
integrate both visual and language inputs for precise object
segmentation.
Despite their advantages, transformer-based approaches
exhibit shortcomings in RIS mask prediction, with a notable
problem being query collapse. This phenomenon occurs

12903

LQMFormer

