This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training Diffusion Models Towards Diverse Image Generation with
Reinforcement Learning
Zichen Miao1 , Jiang Wang2 , Ze Wang1 , Zhengyuan Yang2 , Lijuan Wang2 , Qiang Qiu1 , Zicheng Liu3
Purdue University1 Microsoft Corporation2 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.3
{miaoz, zewang, qqiu}@purdue.edu

{jiangwang, zhengyang, lijuanw}@microsoft.com

zicheliu@amd.com

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated unprecedented capabilities in image generation. Yet, they incorporate and
amplify the data bias (e.g., gender, age) from the original training set, limiting the diversity of generated images. In this paper, we propose a diversity-oriented finetuning method using reinforcement learning (RL) for diffusion models under the guidance of an image-set-based reward function. Specifically, the proposed reward function,
denoted as Diversity Reward, utilizes a set of generated images to evaluate the coverage of the current generative distribution w.r.t. the reference distribution, represented by
a set of unbiased images. Built on top of the probabilistic method of distribution discrepancy estimation, Diversity Reward can measure the relative distribution gap with
a small set of images efficiently. We further formulate the
diffusion process as a multi-step decision-making problem
(MDP) and apply policy gradient methods to fine-tune diffusion models by maximizing the Diversity Reward. The proposed rewards are validated on a post-sampling selection
task, where a subset of the most diverse images are selected
based on Diversity Reward values. We also show the effectiveness of our RL fine-tuning framework on enhancing the
diversity of image generation with different types of diffusion models, including class-conditional models and textconditional models, e.g., StableDiffusion.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling on different modalities has been an
active research area [5, 8, 34]. Empowered by large-scale
models and datasets, the diffusion model develops remarkable capabilities in modeling high-dimensional, complex
distributions, which enables photo-realistic conditional image generation under various types of guidance, e.g., classifier guidance [8] and textual guidance [29].
However, diffusion models inherit and amplify data bias
from the large-scale, uncurated training data [3], showing
undesired behaviors under specific conditions. For instance,

Figure 1. Illustration of non-diverse & biased images generated
with both class-conditional and text-conditional diffusion models.
Our diversity-oriented RL fine-tuning framework can tune both
models for diverse & unbiased image generation.

text-to-image diffusion models show significant gender bias
for particular occupations. Given the text prompt, ‘a photo
of a programmer’, StableDiffusion [29] generates almost all
males, whereas female programmers are dramatically underrepresented, which is shown in Figure 1. This ‘conditional mode collapse’ also happens in class-conditional diffusion models [8], where generated images show high uniformity under high guidance scales.
To advance diverse class-conditional image generation,
[27] retrains diffusion models with a re-weighted loss function, while [33] proposes a classifier-based diversity guidance. Meanwhile, both text prompt engineering [9, 26] and
text prompt tuning [40] methods have been proposed for
unbiased text-to-image generation. However, they all adopt
task-specific designs that lack the generalizability to other
types of diffusion models.
In this paper, we propose a general fine-tuning framework to further enhance the generation diversity of diffusion
models under the guidance of a small set of unbiased reference images. Specifically, we design a class of reward functions, denoted as Diversity Reward, that estimate the coverage of the generative distribution w.r.t. the reference distribution, where each population is represented by a small
set of images. To fine-tune diffusion models with Diversity

10844

