This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SecondPose: SE(3)-Consistent Dual-Stream Feature Fusion
for Category-Level Pose Estimation
Yamei Chen1,∗ , Yan Di1,∗ , Guangyao Zhai1,2,† , Fabian Manhardt3 , Chenyangguang Zhang4 ,
Ruida Zhang4 , Federico Tombari1,3 , Nassir Navab1 and Benjamin Busam1,2,5
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning
3
Google 4 Tsinghua University 5 3dwe.ai
https://github.com/NOrangeeroli/SecondPose.git

Abstract
Category-level object pose estimation, aiming to predict
the 6D pose and 3D size of objects from known categories,
typically struggles with large intra-class shape variation.
Existing works utilizing mean shapes often fall short of capturing this variation. To address this issue, we present SecondPose, a novel approach integrating object-specific geometric features with semantic category priors from DINOv2. Leveraging the advantage of DINOv2 in providing SE(3)-consistent semantic features, we hierarchically
extract two types of SE(3)-invariant geometric features to
further encapsulate local-to-global object-specific information. These geometric features are then point-aligned with
DINOv2 features to establish a consistent object representation under SE(3) transformations, facilitating the mapping from camera space to the pre-defined canonical space,
thus further enhancing pose estimation. Extensive experiments on NOCS-REAL275 demonstrate that SecondPose
achieves a 12.4% leap forward over the state-of-the-art.
Moreover, on a more complex dataset HouseCat6D which
provides photometrically challenging objects, SecondPose
still surpasses other competitors by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Category-level pose estimation involves estimating the
complete 9 degrees-of-freedom (DoF) object pose, encompassing 3D rotation, 3D translation, and 3D metric size, for
arbitrary objects within a known set of categories. This task
has garnered significant research interest due to its essential role in various applications, including the AR/VR industry [30, 38, 40, 55], robotics [51, 52, 54], and scene un∗ Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author (e-mail: guangyao.zhai@tum.de).

Figure 1. Categorical SE(3)-consistent features. We visualize
our fused features by PCA. Colored points highlight the most corresponding parts, where our proposed feature achieves consistent
alignment cross instances (left vs. middle) and maintains consistency on the same instance of different poses (middle vs. right).

derstanding [1, 7, 53]. In contrast to traditional instancelevel pose estimation methods [6,21], which rely on specific
3D CAD models for each target object, the category-level
approach necessitates greater adaptability to accommodate
inherent shape diversity within each category. Effectively
addressing intra-class shape variations has thus become a
central focus, crucial for real-world applications where objects within a category may exhibit significant differences
in shape while sharing the same general category label.
Mean Shape vs. Semantic Priors. One common approach to handle intra-class shape variation involves using explicit mean shapes as prior knowledge [24, 39, 57].
These methods typically consist of two functional modules:
one for reconstructing the target object by slightly deforming the mean shape and another for regressing the 9D pose
based on the reconstructed object [24,39] or enhanced inter-

9959

