This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Depth Information Assisted Collaborative Mutual Promotion Network for Single
Image Dehazing
Yafei Zhang∗ Shen Zhou∗ Huafeng Li†
Faculty of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Recovering a clear image from a single hazy image is
an open inverse problem. Although significant research
progress has been made, most existing methods ignore the
effect that downstream tasks play in promoting upstream dehazing. From the perspective of the haze generation mechanism, there is a potential relationship between the depth
information of the scene and the hazy image. Based on
this, we propose a dual-task collaborative mutual promotion framework to achieve the dehazing of a single image. This framework integrates depth estimation and dehazing by a dual-task interaction mechanism and achieves
mutual enhancement of their performance. To realize the
joint optimization of the two tasks, an alternative implementation mechanism with the difference perception is developed. On the one hand, the difference perception between the depth maps of the dehazing result and the ideal
image is proposed to promote the dehazing network to pay
attention to the non-ideal areas of the dehazing. On the
other hand, by improving the depth estimation performance
in the difficult-to-recover areas of the hazy image, the dehazing network can explicitly use the depth information
of the hazy image to assist the clear image recovery. To
promote the depth estimation, we propose to use the difference between the dehazed image and the ground truth
to guide the depth estimation network to focus on the dehazed unideal areas. It allows dehazing and depth estimation to leverage their strengths in a mutually reinforcing manner. Experimental results show that the proposed
method can achieve better performance than that of the
state-of-the-art approaches. The source code is released at
https://github.com/zhoushen1/DCMPNet.

1. Introduction
Single image dehazing refers to restoring a clear image
from a given hazy image. This technology has attracted
wide attention due to its critical role in downstream com∗ Yafei Zhang and Shen Zhou contribute equally to this work.
† Huafeng Li (lhfchina99@kust.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Idea of dual task collaboration and mutual promotion.
HI denotes the hazy image. DM-HI, DM-GT and DM-DI denote
the depth maps of hazy image, ground truth and dehazed image,
respectively.

puter vision tasks [12, 14, 19, 38, 46]. Mathematically, the
atomization process is commonly simulated by employing
the atmospheric scattering model [25, 27, 28]:
  \bm I(x) = \bm J(x) \bm T(x) + (1 - \bm T(x))\bm A(x) \label {eq:important} 

(1)

where x represents the pixel position, I(x) denotes the
hazy image, J (x) denotes the clear image, T (x) indicates
the transmission map, and A(x) represents the atmospheric
light. The transmission map T (x) can also be expressed as:
  \bm T(x) = {e^{-\beta \bm d(x)}} \label {eq:important} 

(2)

where β is the scattering coefficient, and d(x) is the scene
depth.
From Eq.(1), we can see that image dehazing methods
based on the atmospheric scattering model necessitate the
estimation of both T (x) and A(x). However, most studies claim that T (x) primarily contributes to generating haze
within images. Consequently, the most existing Eq.(1)based methods focus on estimating the transmission map
T (x). For A(x), the maximum pixel value is taken as its
value [39]. In practice, the maximum pixel value in an image may originate from the brightest object rather than representing atmospheric light. To address this issue, the methods in [2, 17, 37] consider the estimation of both T (x) and

2846

