This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Each Test Image Deserves A Specific Prompt: Continual Test-Time Adaptation
for 2D Medical Image Segmentation
Ziyang Chen1 Yongsheng Pan1† Yiwen Ye1 Mengkang Lu1 Yong Xia1,2,3†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen, China
3
Ningbo Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
1

zychen@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, yspan@nwpu.edu.cn, ywye@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
lmk@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, yxia@nwpu.edu.cn

Source Model 𝑓𝑓𝜃𝜃

Test
Input

Domain 1

′
ℒ𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 → ℒ𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠

Domain 2

Domain 4

Domain 3

Domain N
Freeze

…

Test
Input

Adapted
Output

𝑓𝑓𝜃𝜃′ → 𝑓𝑓𝜃𝜃

Test
Input

Adapted
Output

ℒ𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 → ℒ𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝

Fine-tune
Prompt
Adapted
Output

Terrible
Passable

(a) Loss Optimization
EA:
CF:

(b) Model Resetting/Regularizer
EA:
CF:

(c) Our VPTTA
EA:
CF:

Good

Figure 1. Comparison between our VPTTA and existing solutions under the CTTA setup. Our VPTTA avoids both error accumulation
(EA) and catastrophic forgetting (CF) by freezing model parameters and achieves adaptation by training a prompt for each test image. The
′
commonly used self-supervised loss and the optimized one are denoted by Lself and Lself , respectively.

Abstract
Distribution shift widely exists in medical images acquired from different medical centres and poses a significant
obstacle to deploying the pre-trained semantic segmentation model in real-world applications. Test-time adaptation
has proven its effectiveness in tackling the cross-domain
distribution shift during inference. However, most existing methods achieve adaptation by updating the pre-trained
models, rendering them susceptible to error accumulation
and catastrophic forgetting when encountering a series of
distribution shifts (i.e., under the continual test-time adaptation setup). To overcome these challenges caused by updating the models, in this paper, we freeze the pre-trained
model and propose the Visual Prompt-based Test-Time
Adaptation (VPTTA) method to train a specific prompt for
each test image to align the statistics in the batch normalization layers. Specifically, we present the low-frequency
prompt, which is lightweight with only a few parameters

and can be effectively trained in a single iteration. To enhance prompt initialization, we equip VPTTA with a memory bank to benefit the current prompt from previous ones.
Additionally, we design a warm-up mechanism, which mixes
source and target statistics to construct warm-up statistics,
thereby facilitating the training process. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our VPTTA over other
state-of-the-art methods on two medical image segmentation benchmark tasks. The code and weights of pre-trained
source models are available at https://github.com/ChenZiyang/VPTTA.

† Yong Xia and Yongsheng Pan are the corresponding authors. This
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62171377, in part by STI2030-Major Project
under Grants 2022ZD0213100, in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grants JCYJ20220530161616036, and in part by
the Ningbo Clinical Research Center for Medical Imaging under Grant
2021L003 (Open Project 2022LYKFZD06).

11184

