This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relightful Harmonization: Lighting-aware Portrait Background Replacement
Mengwei Ren12∗ Wei Xiong2 Jae Shin Yoon2 Zhixin Shu2
Jianming Zhang2 HyunJoon Jung2 Guido Gerig1 He Zhang2
1
2
New York University
Adobe

Figure 1. Relightful Harmonization on four real-world images. Each set shows a direct composition (upper left) of the foreground subject
onto a new backgound (lower left), and our harmonized result (right) that accounts for both lighting and color.

Abstract
Portrait harmonization aims to composite a subject into
a new background, adjusting its lighting and color to ensure harmony with the background scene. Existing harmonization techniques often only focus on adjusting the global
color and brightness of the foreground and ignore crucial
illumination cues from the background such as apparent
lighting direction, leading to unrealistic compositions. We
introduce Relightful Harmonization, a lighting-aware diffusion model designed to seamlessly harmonize sophisticated
lighting effect for the foreground portrait using any background image. Our approach unfolds in three stages. First,
we introduce a lighting representation module that allows
our diffusion model to encode lighting information from target image background. Second, we introduce an alignment
network that aligns lighting features learned from image
background with lighting features learned from panorama
* Work done during an internship at Adobe.

environment maps, which is a complete representation for
scene illumination. Last, to further boost the photorealism
of the proposed method, we introduce a novel data simulation pipeline that generates synthetic training pairs from a
diverse range of natural images, which are used to refine
the model. Our method outperforms existing benchmarks
in visual fidelity and lighting coherence, showing superior
generalization in real-world testing scenarios, highlighting
its versatility and practicality.

1. Introduction
Portrait harmonization [59, 63] stands as a crucial element
in both photography and creative image editing, seeking
to seamlessly composite a subject into a new background
while maintaining realism and aesthetic uniformity in terms
of lighting and color. The process initiates with the segmentation of the subject from its original image, followed
by the composition into a new background. To enhance visual consistency, the subsequent step entails meticulous ad-

6452

