This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MR-VNet: Media Restoration using Volterra Networks
Siddharth Roheda, Amit Unde, Loay Rashid
Samsung Research Institute
Bengaluru, India
{sid.roheda, amit.unde, loay.rashid}@samsung.com

Abstract
This research paper presents a novel class of restoration
network architecture based on the Volterra series formulation. By incorporating non-linearity into the system response function through higher order convolutions instead
of traditional activation functions, we introduce a general
framework for image/video restoration. Through extensive experimentation, we demonstrate that our proposed
architecture achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance
in the field of Image/Video Restoration. Moreover, we establish that the recently introduced Non-Linear Activation
Free Network (NAF-NET) can be considered a special case
within the broader class of Volterra Neural Networks. These
findings highlight the potential of Volterra Neural Networks
as a versatile and powerful tool for addressing complex
restoration tasks in computer vision.

1. Introduction
In our increasingly visual-oriented world, media such as
images and videos play a crucial role in conveying information, expressing emotions, and preserving memories. However, images/videos are susceptible to distortions during the
process of capturing (eg. sensor noise, blur, zoom, bad exposure), saving/sharing (eg. compression, down-sampling),
and editing (eg. un-natural artefacts). It is crucial to restore such degraded images so as to prevent loss of information and ensure that the best visual quality is delivered
to users. This is done through techniques such as image
de-noise, de-blur, compression reduction, super-resolution,
etc. Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) coupled with ample training data and computational resources
has driven remarkable progress in image restoration algorithms [5, 7, 24, 29, 30]. The basic building block in a CNN
is a convolutional layer followed by an activation function.
The convolution operation provides local connectivity and
translational in-variance, while the activation function introduces non-linearity into the network. Following this, Transformer networks that use a more dynamic alternative of self-

Figure 1. Comparison of PSNR (dB) and Computational Complexity (GMACs) of the various models on the GoPro Dataset.

attention were introduced to resolve some of the shortcomings of CNNs. Namely, instead of relying on convolutional
filters that have static weights and cannot adapt to input content, self-attention allows calculation of response at a given
pixel by weighted sum of all other positions. The drawback
of such methods is that they are extremely heavy and difficult to train. This also makes the analysis and tractability of
such networks elusive. More recently, there was an interest
shown in activation free networks [4] that are lighter and
more powerful than the traditional CNNs. In our work we
explore introduction of non-linearity in the network through
interaction between the pixels of an image. This is done
by performing higher order convolutions to augment linear
convolutions. We utilize the well-established Volterra Series [21] to accomplish this task.
Contributions: In this paper we propose a novel architecture tailored for image and video restoration that utilizes
the recently proposed Volterra layers [18] to optimally introduce non-linearities in the restoration process. We design
a U-Net like architecture integrated with Volterra layers to
achieve high quality reconstruction while minimizing computational overhead. Our study demonstrates that using the
Volterra formulation with the proposed lossless/lossy approximation results in significantly reduced network com-

6098

