This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

pixelSplat: 3D Gaussian Splats from Image Pairs
for Scalable Generalizable 3D Reconstruction

1

David Charatan1
Sizhe Lester Li1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Andrea Tagliasacchi2
Vincent Sitzmann1
Simon Fraser University, University of Toronto

2

{charatan, sizheli, sitzmann}@mit.edu

andrea.tagliasacchi@sfu.ca

Abstract
We introduce pixelSplat, a feed-forward model that learns
to reconstruct 3D radiance fields parameterized by 3D Gaussian primitives from pairs of images. Our model features
real-time and memory-efficient rendering for scalable training as well as fast 3D reconstruction at inference time. To
overcome local minima inherent to sparse and locally supported representations, we predict a dense probability distribution over 3D and sample Gaussian means from that
probability distribution. We make this sampling operation
differentiable via a reparameterization trick, allowing us to
back-propagate gradients through the Gaussian splatting
representation. We benchmark our method on wide-baseline
novel view synthesis on the real-world RealEstate10k and
ACID datasets, where we outperform state-of-the-art light
field transformers and accelerate rendering by 2.5 orders
of magnitude while reconstructing an interpretable and editable 3D radiance field. Additional materials can be found
on the project website. 1

1. Introduction
We investigate the problem of generalizable novel view
synthesis from sparse image observations. This line of
work has been revolutionized by differentiable rendering [29, 40, 41, 50] but has also inherited its key weakness: training, reconstruction, and rendering are notoriously
memory- and time-intensive because differentiable rendering requires evaluating dozens or hundreds of points along
each camera ray [58].
This has motivated light-field transformers [10, 37, 43,
47], where a ray is rendered by embedding it into a query token and a color is obtained via cross-attention over image tokens. While significantly faster than volume rendering, such
methods are still far from real-time. Additionally, they do
not reconstruct 3D scene representations that can be edited
or exported for downstream tasks in vision and graphics.
1 dcharatan.github.io/pixelsplat

Figure 1. Overview. Given a pair of input images, pixelSplat reconstructs a 3D radiance field parameterized via 3D Gaussian primitives. This yields an explicit 3D representation that is renderable in
real time, remains editable, and is cheap to train.

Meanwhile, recent work on single-scene novel view synthesis has shown that it is possible to use 3D Gaussian primitives to enable real-time rendering with little memory cost
via rasterization-based volume rendering [19].
We present pixelSplat, which brings the benefits of
a primitive-based 3D representation—fast and memoryefficient rendering as well as interpretable 3D structure—
to generalizable view synthesis. This is no straightforward
task. First, in real-world datasets, camera poses are only
reconstructed up to an arbitrary scale factor. We address
this by designing a multi-view epipolar transformer that reliably infers this per-scene scale factor. Next, optimizing
primitive parameters directly via gradient descent suffers
from local minima. In the single-scene case, this can be
addressed via non-differentiable pruning and division heuristics [19]. In contrast, in the generalizable case, we need
to back-propagate gradients through the representation and
thus cannot rely on non-differentiable operations. We thus
propose a method by which Gaussian primitives can implicitly be spawned or deleted during training, avoiding local minima, but which nevertheless maintains gradient flow.
Specifically, we parameterize the positions (i.e., means) of
Gaussians implicitly via dense probability distributions predicted by our encoder. In each forward pass, we sample

19457

