This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Adaptation for Human Pose Estimation via Meta-Optimization
Shengxiang Hu1 , Huaijiang Sun1 ,* Bin Li2 , Dong Wei1 , Weiqing Li1 , Jianfeng Lu1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Tianjin AiForward Science and Technology Co., Ltd., Tianjin, China
{hushengxiang,sunhuaijiang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain shift is a challenge for supervised human pose
estimation, where the source data and target data come
from different distributions. This is why pose estimation
methods generally perform worse on the test set than on the
training set. Recently, test-time adaptation has proven to be
an effective way to deal with domain shift in human pose
estimation. Although the performance on the target domain
has been improved, existing methods require a large number
of weight updates for convergence, which is time-consuming
and brings catastrophic forgetting. To solve these issues, we
propose a meta-auxiliary learning method to achieve fast
adaptation for domain shift during inference. Specifically,
we take human pose estimation as the supervised primary
task, and propose body-specific image inpainting as a selfsupervised auxiliary task. First, we jointly train the primary
and auxiliary tasks to get a pre-trained model on the source
domain. Then, meta-training correlates the performance of
the two tasks to learn a good weight initialization. Finally,
meta-testing adapts the meta-learned model to the target
data through self-supervised learning. Benefiting from the
meta-learning paradigm, the proposed method enables fast
adaptation to the target domain while preserving the source
domain knowledge. The carefully designed auxiliary task
better pays attention to human-related semantics in a single
image. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our test-time fast adaptation.

1. Introduction
Monocular 2D human pose estimation, which aims to locate
body joints in images or videos, has attracted widespread
attention as a fundamental task in computer vision. With the
development of deep learning [30, 37, 43] and the advent of
large-scale datasets [1, 11, 48], human pose estimation has
made steady progress over the past few years. In supervised
learning, the learned model relies heavily on the training
* Corresponding author.

data, which is fragile to the domain shift that is common in
practical applications. Due to the limited amount of samples
and the coarse division of datasets, it is inevitable that the
training and test sets have differences in data distribution.
Therefore, most pose estimation methods do not perform
as well on the test set as they do on the training set. To
solve this problem, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
[6, 10, 27] is proposed to improve the performance of the
source model on the target domain. There are usually two
requirements in practical applications, which have not been
paid enough attention in the current research. Firstly, the
high overhead of accessing the source domain at test time
is unacceptable. Secondly, domain adaptation is expected to
be completed as soon as possible. Hence, there is a pressing
need for test-time fast adaptation to deal with domain shift
in human pose estimation.
Test-time adaptation [34, 38, 41], i.e. source-free domain
adaptation, adapts the source model to the unlabeled target
data during inference. Recently, TTP [20] has successfully
applied test-time adaptation to 2D human pose estimation
to customize the model for specific instances. Concretely,
TTP builds a correlation between human pose estimation
and an auxiliary task (i.e. image rotation prediction [8] or
unsupervised landmark detection [13]) by a shared encoder.
Before performing keypoint localization on the test data, the
network weights are updated by self-supervised learning to
cope with domain shift. Since network optimization during
inference depends entirely on the auxiliary task, test-time
adaptation based on multi-task learning has the following
drawbacks: (1) Directly tuning the pre-trained model leads
to the forgetting of pose estimation knowledge. (2) The
number of iterations required is large and uncertain, which
is difficult for optimization. Therefore, in 2D human pose
estimation, existing methods are time-consuming and their
updated models are sub-optimal.
Meta-learning has become an important means to
achieve source-free domain adaptation in multiple computer
vision fields [3, 23, 25, 31], because meta-learning is able
to learn a good weight initialization for further optimization.
This allows the meta-learned model to be easily adapted to

1792

