This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Depth-Aware Concealed Crop Detection in Dense Agricultural Scenes
Liqiong Wang1,2† , Jinyu Yang3,4† , Yanfu Zhang5 , Fangyi Wang1,2∗ , Feng Zheng3∗
1
Hubei Key Laboratory of Intelligent Vision Based Monitoring for
Hydroelectric Engineering, China Three Gorges University
2
College of Computer and Information Technology, China Three Gorges University
3
Southern University of Science and Technology 4 University of Birmingham
5
Departmental of Computer Science, College of William and Mary
{liqiong.wang11,jinyu.yang96}@outlook.com yzhang105@wm.edu fy wang@ctgu.edu.cn f.zheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Image

Concealed Object Detection (COD) aims to identify objects visually embedded in their background. Existing COD
datasets and methods predominantly focus on animals or
humans, ignoring the agricultural domain, which often contains numerous, small, and concealed crops with severe
occlusions. In this paper, we introduce Concealed Crop
Detection (CCD), which extends classic COD to agricultural domains. Experimental study shows that unimodal
data provides insufficient information for CCD. To address
this gap, we first collect a large-scale RGB-D dataset,
ACOD-12K, containing high-resolution crop images and
depth maps. Then, we propose a foundational framework
named Recurrent Iterative Segmentation Network (RISNet).
To tackle the challenge of dense objects, we employ multiscale receptive fields to capture objects of varying sizes,
thus enhancing the detection performance for dense objects. By fusing depth features, our method can acquire
spatial information about concealed objects to mitigate disturbances caused by intricate backgrounds and occlusions.
Furthermore, our model adopts a multi-stage iterative approach, using predictions from each stage as gate attention to reinforce position information, thereby improving
the detection accuracy for small objects. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our RISNet achieves new
state-of-the-art performance on both newly proposed CCD
and classic COD tasks. All resources will be available at
https://github.com/Kki2Eve/RISNet.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of smart agriculture, there is a
growing interest in integrating computer vision with agri† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.
This work was done during Liqiong Wang visited SUSTech VIP lab.

depth

GT

Ours

FSPNet

Figure 1. Results of FSPNet [28] and our RISNet for CCD. It is
evident that our method is better equipped to tackle the challenges
posed by severe occlusion and densely distributed small objects,
resulting in superior performance.

culture [32]. Driven by economic demands, high-density
planting of crops is becoming inevitable in agricultural production processes. Consequently, the analysis and understanding of dense scenes in agricultural vision problems
[2, 4, 21, 33, 66] assume heightened significance. In these
dense agricultural scenes, numerous small crops are concealed in the surrounding environment, causing significant
interference in monitoring production [14].
Existing COD methodologies [13, 14, 22, 26, 28, 29,
31, 36, 42, 49, 51, 57, 65, 69, 75] primarily emphasize animal camouflage strategies, while CCD shifts its focus to
densely packed small objects heavily occluded within complex scenes. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the state-of-the-art
COD method can only generate inaccurate prediction maps

17201

