This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MatchU: Matching Unseen Objects for 6D Pose Estimation from RGB-D Images
Junwen Huang1,2 Hao Yu1 Kuan-Ting Yu3 Nassir Navab1,2 Slobodan Ilic1 Benjamin Busam1,2,4
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning
3
4
XYZ Robotics
3dwe.ai

Abstract
Recent learning methods for object pose estimation require resource-intensive training for each individual object
instance or category, hampering their scalability in real
applications when confronted with previously unseen objects. In this paper, we propose MatchU, a Fuse-DescribeMatch strategy for 6D pose estimation from RGB-D images.
MatchU is a generic approach that fuses 2D texture and 3D
geometric cues for 6D pose prediction of unseen objects. We
rely on learning geometric 3D descriptors that are rotationinvariant by design. By encoding pose-agnostic geometry,
the learned descriptors naturally generalize to unseen objects and capture symmetries. To tackle ambiguous associations using 3D geometry only, we fuse additional RGB
information into our descriptor. This is achieved through
a novel attention-based mechanism that fuses cross-modal
information, together with a matching loss that leverages
the latent space learned from RGB data to guide the descriptor learning process. Extensive experiments reveal the
generalizability of both the RGB-D fusion strategy as well
as the descriptor efficacy. Benefiting from the novel designs,
MatchU surpasses all existing methods by a significant margin in terms of both accuracy and speed, even without the
requirement of expensive re-training or rendering.

1. Introduction
Object 6D pose estimation is a critical task in computer
vision applications, such as robotic manipulation [39, 64],
augmented reality [1, 36], and autonomous driving [22, 32].
While object 6D pose estimation with object-specific training has achieved impressive results on benchmarks [50],
handling unseen objects still remains a challenge. Approaches like template matching [26], keypoint detection [8,
17, 53], surface mapping [14, 45], and reconstruction-based
frameworks [29, 31, 47] have achieved high accuracy for individual objects [14, 17, 18, 47, 53]. However, these methods are not designed to handle multiple objects or generalize
to objects not presented in the training data.
Dataset-level pose estimation methods [52] can han-

Figure 1. MatchU provides a pipeline to match a previously unseen 3D CAD model of an object to an RGBD image (Top left).
(Fuse) Information from RGB-D and CAD is fused. (Describe)
Consumes fused information and produces generic color-aware
rotation-invariant 3D descriptors. (Match) Further used for establishing correspondences as well as the 6D pose.

dle multiple objects in a dataset but struggle when faced
with new instances. Similarly, category-level pose estimation methods [54] generalize to new instances within the
same category but struggle with new categories. These approaches do not apply to the challenging problem of unseen
object pose estimation in real-world applications where the
3D model is only available during inference time, since
the models are designed to overfit the specific distribution
of one object, category, or dataset. Some one-shot learning methods attempt to align object models using template
matching or capture the structure from motion (SfM) of
unseen objects [44, 47]. However, these approaches often require object-specific preprocessing steps. Classic approaches that target unseen object pose estimation employ
handcrafted features and correspondences between CAD
models and observed RGB-D images [11, 28, 42]. However, these methods introduce many pose hypotheses with
high ambiguity, which require to be rated and refined iteratively, resulting in computational overhead.

10095

