This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JointSQ: Joint Sparsification-Quantization for Distributed Learning
Weiying Xie 1,∗† , Haowei Li 1,∗ , Jitao Ma 1 , Yunsong Li 1 , Jie Lei 2 , Donglai Liu 1 , Leyuan Fang 3
1
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University,
2
University of Technology Sydney, 3 Hunan University
wyxie@xidian.edu.cn {23011210779,21011210271,dlliu 2}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
jie.lei@uts.edu.au ysli@mail.xidian.edu.cn fangleyuan@gmail.com

Co-compression

Abstract
Gradient sparsification and quantization offer a promising prospect to alleviate the communication overhead problem in distributed learning. However, direct combination
of the two results in suboptimal solutions, due to the fact
that sparsification and quantization haven’t been learned
together. In this paper, we propose Joint SparsificationQuantization (JointSQ) inspired by the discovery that sparsification can be treated as 0-bit quantization, regardless
of architectures. Specifically, we mathematically formulate JointSQ as a mixed-precision quantization problem, expanding the solution space. It can be solved by the designed
MCKP-Greedy algorithm. Theoretical analysis demonstrates the minimal compression noise of JointSQ, and extensive experiments on various network architectures, including CNN, RNN, and Transformer, also validate this
point. Under the introduction of computation overhead consistent with or even lower than previous methods, JointSQ
achieves a compression ratio of 1000× on different models
while maintaining near-lossless accuracy and brings 1.4×
to 2.9× speedup over existing methods.

1. Introduction
The assistance of multi-clients distributed learning to
gain deep insights onto the huge data closest to the data
source has further fuelled embeded applications and edge
devices [8, 9, 24, 40]. In such tiny artificial intelligence system, a large number of distributed devices are typically connected via wireless and long-distance connection, so bandwidth is severely limited [20, 36].
So far, gradient compression has indeed paved way for
reducing the amount of communication exchanged between
workers. Sparsification [12, 21, 29, 35] and quantization
[4, 6, 13, 14, 26] are two of the most mainstream gradi∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Gradients

32bit

0bit

Sparsification

Quantization

Layer 1

Layer 1

Layer 1

Layer 2

Layer 2

Layer 2

Layer 3

Layer 3

Layer 3

2bit

8bit

4bit

JointSQ
Gradients

Mixed-precision quantization

Layer 1

Layer 1

Layer 2

Layer 2

Layer 3

Layer 3

Figure 1. Existing Co-compression methods and our JointSQ
framework. Existing Co-compression methods typically apply
sparsification and quantization step by step. Our framework considers sparsification as 0-bit quantization and thus the two-stage
process is transformed into a unified learning framework.

ent compression techniques for efficient distributed learning and communication. Combining the two is often done
in practice [5, 23, 37]. A direct way is to perform a twostage sequential scheme which we called Co-compression:
first sparsifying with a sparsification ratio set manually [5]
or adaptively [23, 37] and then quantizing the retained gradients with a uniform bit-width. Such a two-stage sequential scheme is inadequate due to the limited solution space
it brings, thus resulting in suboptimal solutions. On the
one hand, the two stages (sparsification and quantization)
have not been learned together to maximize their respective strengths through cooperation. On the other hand, the
two-stage sequential scheme varies greatly across different models, making architecture specific compressors nongeneralizable to new architectures. Our subsequent experimental results also validate this point.
In this paper, we propose adaptive Joint SparsificationQuantization (JointSQ) to address the suboptimal solution
bottleneck for communication-efficient distributed learning.

5778

