This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exact Fusion via Feature Distribution Matching for Few-shot Image Generation
Yingbo Zhou
Yutong Ye
Pengyu Zhang
Xian Wei
Mingsong Chen*
MoE Eng. Research Center of SW/HW Co-Design Tech. and App., East China Normal University

Abstract
Few-shot image generation, as an important yet challenging visual task, still suffers from the trade-off between
generation quality and diversity. According to the principle
of feature-matching learning, existing fusion-based methods usually fuse different features by using similarity measurements or attention mechanisms, which may match features inaccurately and lead to artifacts in the texture and
structure of generated images. In this paper, we propose an
exact Fusion via Feature Distribution matching Generative
Adversarial Network (F2DGAN) for few-shot image generation. The rationale behind this is that feature distribution
matching is much more reliable than feature matching to
explore the statistical characters in image feature space for
limited real-world data. To model feature distributions from
only a few examples for feature fusion, we design a novel
variational feature distribution matching fusion module to
perform exact fusion by empirical cumulative distribution
functions. Specifically, we employ a variational autoencoder to transform deep image features into distributions
and fuse different features exactly by applying histogram
matching. Additionally, we formulate two effective losses to
guide the matching process for better fitting our fusion strategy. Extensive experiments compared with state-of-the-art
methods on three public datasets demonstrate the superiority of F2DGAN for few-shot image generation in terms
of generation quality and diversity, and the effectiveness of
data augmentation in downstream classification tasks1 .

1. Introduction
Relying on substantial data, deep generative models [3, 12,
14, 25] have led to a series of breakthroughs in synthesizing high-quality and diverse images. Unfortunately, there
are many scenarios in the real world where it is impossible to obtain large-scale samples of one category for model
training. To adapt to such practical applications, a variety of
few-shot image generation methods have been introduced as
data augmentation techniques [19, 24, 50] to produce more
* Corresponding author (mschen@sei.ecnu.edu.cn)
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/ZYBOBO/F2DGAN

new images with a glance at a few samples of one category.
However, without sufficient training data, few-shot image
generation is still challenging to yield realistic images with
considerable diversity.
In general, prevailing few-shot image generation methods commonly suppose that trained models with the seen
data have a good generalization ability towards unseen samples. Based on this assumption, optimization-based methods [7, 30] are adopted to seek proper initial parameters
to generate images, which neglect to integrate the knowledge of unseen categories and result in a distorted generation without fine-grained details. To effectively capture
the information of unseen samples, transformation-based
methods [9, 28, 51] utilize pre-trained latent spaces of styleseries models on seen data to invert the available unseen images into the latent space. However, since complicated image transformations are not end-to-end training processes,
the generated images usually tend to be biased by the distribution of the seen classes. Consequently, the generation
with little category information of unseen data has subtle
benefits to downstream visual applications [16, 38, 39]. To
let the model “learn to learn” in the training process, fusionbased methods [2, 15, 20, 21, 53] design different fusion
modules with the episodic training mechanism [41]. Technically, current fusion strategies are implemented either on
image pixels or feature representations, which match features inaccurately and result in unsatisfactory images with
artifacts and limited diversity.
To fuse the visual semantics for high-quality image generation, it is crucial to make the model well-informed about
the consistency of global distribution in the fusion process.
In this paper, we concentrate on the shortcomings of current fusion strategies and raise the question, “can we fuse
different features via feature distribution matching for fewshot image generation?” Theoretically, one can fuse different features to match feature mean and standard deviation by assuming that features follow Gaussian distribution.
However, since training one model to learn feature distributions from a few samples of one category is difficult, the
learned feature mean and standard deviation are not representative to match different features exactly. Motivated by
EFDM [49], which applies the exact histogram matching

8383

