This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LTGC: Long-tail Recognition via Leveraging LLMs-driven Generated Content
Qihao Zhao1,2, ,* Yalun Dai3,∗ , Hao Li4 , Wei Hu1 , Fan Zhang1†, Jun Liu2
1
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China

Abstract
Long-tail recognition is challenging because it requires
the model to learn good representations from tail categories
and address imbalances across all categories. In this paper,
we propose a novel generative and fine-tuning framework,
LTGC, to handle long-tail recognition via leveraging generated content. Firstly, inspired by the rich implicit knowledge
in large-scale models (e.g., large language models, LLMs),
LTGC leverages the power of these models to parse and reason over the original tail data to produce diverse tail-class
content. We then propose several novel designs for LTGC
to ensure the quality of the generated data and to efficiently
fine-tune the model using both the generated and original
data. The visualization demonstrates the effectiveness of
the generation module in LTGC, which produces accurate
and diverse tail data. Additionally, the experimental results
demonstrate that our LTGC outperforms existing state-ofthe-art methods on popular long-tailed benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In the real world, data often exhibits a long-tailed distribution, posing significant challenges for computer vision
recognition [44, 54]. These challenges include (1) Class
Imbalance: within the dataset, some classes (termed ”head”
classes) are abundantly represented, while others (termed
”tail” classes) have few samples. This imbalanced distribution during training may cause the model to attend more on
the head classes, neglecting the tail classes [42]. (2) Tail
Data Scarcity: Data scarcity refers to tail classes having extremely limited samples, which lack diversity and are insufficient to effectively train a model [8, 24]. It prevents a
model’s ability to learn the feature invariant, which is necessary to recognize these categories correctly [35].
* Equal contribution.
† The Corresponding author is with the College of Information Science

and Technology and the Interdisciplinary Research Center for Artificial
Intelligence, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China

Figure 1. Top: Here, our LMMs use ChatGPT. For the Trogon
Rufus category, when we asked ChatGPT, ”What species is in the
picture?” we did not get the expected answer due to the complexity
of the question. Middle and Down: In contrast, when we asked
some easy questions for the ChatGPT, ”Please describe the image.”
or ”Please describe the distinctive features of Trogon Rufus.” It
could accurately answer these questions.

To address these challenges, numerous approaches have
emerged within the field of long-tailed recognition, such as
re-sampling [5, 19], loss re-weighting [1, 6, 12, 23, 26, 27,
29, 39, 48], ensemble learning [42, 47, 56], decoupling [20],
and contrastive learning [11, 25, 40, 59]. Their primary objective is to balance the decision boundaries and parameter weights of the model to improve long-tail recognition.

19510

