This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Referring Image Editing: Object-level Image Editing via Referring Expressions
Chang Liu1,2,3
Xiangtai Li2
Henghui Ding1
1
2
Institute of Big Data, Fudan University, China
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore

Abstract
Significant advancements have been made in image editing with the recent advance of the Diffusion model. However, most of the current methods primarily focus on global
or subject-level modifications, and often face limitations
when it comes to editing specific objects when there are
other objects coexisting in the scene, given solely textual
prompts. In response to this challenge, we introduce an
object-level generative task called Referring Image Editing (RIE), which enables the identification and editing of
specific source objects in an image using text prompts. To
tackle this task effectively, we propose a tailored framework
called ReferDiffusion. It aims to disentangle input prompts
into multiple embeddings and employs a mixed-supervised
multi-stage training strategy. To facilitate further research
in this domain, we introduce the RefCOCO-Edit dataset,
comprising images, editing prompts, source object segmentation masks, and reference edited images for training and
evaluation. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in identifying and editing target objects, while conventional general image editing and
region-based image editing methods have difficulties in this
challenging task.

1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation [23], aiming to segment
the target object in the image indicated by an expression,
is one of the most important vision-language problems in
multi-modal information interaction. Among its many applications, one of the most expected is its utility in image
editing. For example, by providing a language expression as
input, the model can automatically pinpoint the region-ofinterest for user to edit. While current models have excelled
in the initial step of this process, i.e., finding the target region, the subsequent step, image editing, lies beyond the
conventional task definition of referring segmentation. In
essence, existing referring segmentation frameworks focus
on identifying the target object, while it lacks the inherent
Corresponding author (henghui.ding@gmail.com).

+

"dog"
↓
"cat"

(a). General Image Editing

+
"a panda"
(b). Region-based Image Editing
"replace
the cow in the
+ back with
a panda"
(c). Referring Image Editing

Figure 1. Comparison of Referring Image Editing (RIE) with other
image editing tasks: (a). General Image Editing, which edits images with a prominent subject or global-level edition instructions,
(b). Region-based Image Editing, which requires masks or bounding boxes to specify the target region, and (c). Referring Image
Editing, which aims to edit only the target object according to referring expressions while preserving the unrelated part unchanged.

generative capability required for editing the image.
On the other hand, the field of generative models has
witnessed remarkable advancements in recent years. The
emergence of text-to-image models like Diffusion [46] has
led to a surge in research on image generation with multiple impressive functionalities. However, to the best of
our knowledge, most of the current efforts in this domain,
including general text-based and instruction-based methods [5, 11, 42] and prompt2prompt methods [4, 19, 21] concentrate on global-level prompts, like “Change the style to
Van Gogh”, or subject-level prompts, e.g. “Replace the cow
to a panda”, as shown in Fig. 1(a). When there are multiple objects in the scene and we only intend to edit some
certain of them, our experiments reveal that these models
struggle to handle such object-level prompts, like “Replace
the :::
cow::::::::::
in the back with a panda”, which aim to edit one
specific object, as shown in Fig. 1(c). While some region-

13128

