This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RCL: Reliable Continual Learning for Unified Failure Detection
Fei Zhu1 , Zhen Cheng2,3 , Xu-Yao Zhang2,3 , Cheng-Lin Liu2,3 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4 *
1
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI-CAS
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{zhufei2018, chengzhen2019, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, {xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks are known to be overconfident for
what they don’t know in the wild, which is undesirable for
decision-making in high-stakes applications. Despite quantities of existing works, most of them focus on detecting outof-distribution (OOD) samples from unseen classes, while
ignoring large parts of relevant failure sources like misclassified samples from known classes. In particular, recent studies reveal that prevalent OOD detection methods
are actually harmful for misclassification detection (MisD),
indicating that there seems to be a tradeoff between those
two tasks. In this paper, we study the critical yet underexplored problem of unified failure detection, which aims to
detect both misclassified and OOD examples. Concretely,
we identify the failure of simply integrating learning objectives of misclassification and OOD detection, and show the
potential of sequence learning. Inspired by this, we propose a reliable continual learning paradigm, whose spirit
is to equip the model with MisD ability first, and then improve the OOD detection ability without degrading the already adequate MisD performance. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method achieves strong unified failure
detection performance. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Impression2805/RCL.

1. Introduction
Modern deep neural networks have made rapid progress
in many fields [31, 35, 43, 44, 49, 52, 66]. Nevertheless,
prediction errors are still inevitable due to the imperfect
generalization ability in complex and open environments.
Therefore, the model is expected to identify “what it does
not know”, i.e., being aware of when it is likely to be
wrong and avoiding catastrophic decisions, especially in
safety-critical scenarios such as medical diagnostics [38],
* Corresponding author.

Training known classes

Unknown class

Pred: Car

Pred: Turn Right

Pred: Road

Accept

Reject

Reject

Figure 1. Illustration of typical failure cases arise when deploying models in real-world applications: misclassified example from
known classes (e.g., recognize Turn Left as Turn Right),
and semantic-shifted OOD example from unknown classes (e.g.,
sheep). A unified failure detector should accept correctly recognized examples and reject both misclassified and OOD examples.

autonomous driving [65] and robot vision [39]. Existing
work has tackled this problem from two perspectives: semantic (new-class) out-of-distribution (OOD) detection and
misclassification detection (MisD). Specifically, OOD detection determines whether an input is from known classes
or unknown class [4, 5, 18–20, 27, 29, 30, 34, 40, 42, 45],
while MisD aims to reject commonly existed misclassified
data from known classes [8, 18, 36, 61–64].
Remarkably, OOD detection and MisD aim to achieve
the same goal of detecting wrong predictions of a classifier.
However, they are studied and evaluated individually nowadays, which is not consistent with the requirement in realworld applications where both misclassified examples and
unknown class data should be detected and rejected [22].
As an example, as shown in Fig. 1, an autonomous driving
car can not classify one type of traffic sign as another, or
recognize an unknown animal as the road. Actually, when
going back to the last century, the problems of OOD detection and MisD have been formulated and studied together
[10, 12] as ambiguity rejection [6] and distance rejection
[12], respectively. Besides, the baseline for reliable prediction in deep learning era also discussed those two tasks

12140

