This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Color Shift Estimation-and-Correction for Image Enhancement
Yiyu Li

Ke Xu

Gerhard Petrus Hancke
Rynson W.H. Lau
City University of Hong Kong

yiyuli.cs@my.cityu.edu.hk, kkangwing@gmail.com, {gp.hancke, rynson.lau}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Images captured under sub-optimal illumination conditions may contain both over- and under-exposures. Current approaches mainly focus on adjusting image brightness, which may exacerbate color tone distortion in underexposed areas and fail to restore accurate colors in overexposed regions. We observe that over- and over-exposed
regions display opposite color tone distribution shifts,
which may not be easily normalized in joint modeling as
they usually do not have “normal-exposed” regions/pixels
as reference. In this paper, we propose a novel method
to enhance images with both over- and under-exposures by
learning to estimate and correct such color shifts. Specifically, we first derive the color feature maps of the brightened and darkened versions of the input image via a UNetbased network, followed by a pseudo-normal feature generator to produce pseudo-normal color feature maps. We then
propose a novel COlor Shift Estimation (COSE) module
to estimate the color shifts between the derived brightened
(or darkened) color feature maps and the pseudo-normal
color feature maps. The COSE module corrects the estimated color shifts of the over- and under-exposed regions
separately. We further propose a novel COlor MOdulation (COMO) module to modulate the separately corrected
colors in the over- and under-exposed regions to produce
the enhanced image. Comprehensive experiments show that
our method outperforms existing approaches. Project webpage: https://github.com/yiyulics/CSEC .

1. Introduction
Real-world scenarios often involve a wide range of illumination, which poses a significant challenge for photographing. Uneven scene illumination may easily produce both
over- and under-exposures. Although cameras have an automatic exposure mode to determine an “ideal” exposure setting based on scene brightness, uniformly adjusting the exposure across the entire image may still result in excessively
bright and excessively dark regions. Such under- and overexposed regions can exhibit obvious color tone distortions.
The relatively high noise level in under-exposed regions al-

(a) Input

(f)

(b) MSEC [1] (c) LCDP [28]

Sampled pixels in MSEC [1]

(d) Ours

(e) GT

(g) Sampled pixels in LCDP [28]

Figure 1. Given images with both over- and under-exposures
(a), SOTA methods [1, 28] may still fail to correct color distortion (b,c). We show PCA results of pixels randomly sampled
from MSEC [1] (images with either over- or under-exposed) (f)
and LCDP [28] (images with both over- and under-exposures)
(g) datasets, and make two observations. First, we observe that
under-exposed pixels (greenish dots) tend to have a reverse distribution shift compared to over-exposed pixels (reddish dots) in both
datasets. Second, unlike MSEC [1] that contains normal-exposed
pixels (bluish dots) in their 0 EV input images, images with both
over- and under-exposures do not have such “reference pixels” as
guidance. These two observations inspire us to estimate and correct such color shifts conditioned on the created pseudo-normal
exposed features. Our method can properly adjust images with
both over- and under-exposures (d).

ters the data distribution to cause shifts in color tone, while
the saturated over-exposed regions lose the original colors.
Hence, enhancing such images typically involves brightness
adjustment and color tone shift correction.
In recent years, numerous endeavors have been made to

25389

