This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GroupContrast: Semantic-aware Self-supervised Representation Learning
for 3D Understanding
Chengyao Wang1 Li Jiang3 Xiaoyang Wu2 Zhuotao Tian4
Bohao Peng1 Hengshuang Zhao2* Jiaya Jia1,4
1

CUHK

2

HKU

3

CUHK(SZ)

4

SmartMore

https://github.com/dvlab-research/GroupContrast

Abstract
Scene

Self-supervised 3D representation learning aims to learn
effective representations from large-scale unlabeled point
clouds. Most existing approaches adopt point discrimination as the pretext task, which assigns matched points in
two distinct views as positive pairs and unmatched points
as negative pairs. However, this approach often results in
semantically identical points having dissimilar representations, leading to a high number of false negatives and
introducing a “semantic conflict” problem. To address
this issue, we propose GroupContrast, a novel approach
that combines segment grouping and semantic-aware contrastive learning. Segment grouping partitions points into
semantically meaningful regions, which enhances semantic
coherence and provides semantic guidance for the subsequent contrastive representation learning. Semantic-aware
contrastive learning augments the semantic information extracted from segment grouping and helps to alleviate the
issue of “semantic conflict”. We conducted extensive experiments on multiple 3D scene understanding tasks. The results demonstrate that GroupContrast learns semantically
meaningful representations and achieves promising transfer learning performance.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised visual representation learning aims to learn
effective representations from large-scale unlabeled data.
The learned representation can boost large amounts of
downstream applications, such as object detection and semantic segmentation. Despite self-supervised learning has
achieved remarkable results in 2D dense prediction tasks,
3D representation learning remains an emerging field. The
predominant approaches for 3D scene recognition rely on
* Corresponding author.

CSC

GC (ours)

Figure 1. Visualization of activation maps depicting cosine similarity to the query point (indicated by a yellow cross) in the scene.
Our approach demonstrates superior effectiveness in discriminating semantically similar points compared to CSC [20].

supervised learning, where models are trained from scratch
on specific datasets and tasks.
Recent studies [20, 43, 47] have explored the application of point discrimination as a pretext task for 3D selfsupervised representation learning. These approaches transform each scene into two distinct views. They consider
matched points between the two views as positive pairs and
unmatched points as negative pairs. Despite decent performance gains observed in downstream tasks fine-tuning,
there is a significant issue in previous point discrimination
works: they focus on the geometric and structural relationships, disregarding the inherent semantic correlations. Consequently, they struggle to generate similar representations
for semantically similar points within the 3D scene. To
illustrate this issue, we visualize the activation map of a
previous point discrimination model, CSC [20], as shown
in Figure 1. The visualization reveals that previous methods fail to effectively capture semantic similarity. Highresponse points are scattered throughout the scene despite
not necessarily possessing semantic similarity with query
points. Conversely, points that are semantically similar to
the query point may exhibit low correlations.

4917

