This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Super-Resolution for Real-time Rendering with Radiance Demodulation
Jia Li1 , Ziling Chen1 , Xiaolong Wu1 , Lu Wang1,* , Beibei Wang2,3,* , Lei Zhang4
1

Shandong University, 2 State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University,
3

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University,
4

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

luwang hcivr@sdu.edu.cn, beibei.wang@nju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Quality comparison between our method and the state-of-the-art methods NSRR [53], BasicVSR++ [5], TTVSR [32] and
RVRT [29]. The upsampling ratio is set as 4 × 4. By radiance demodulation, we perform super-resolution on the smooth lighting
component only, allowing our method to preserve richer scene details after re-modulation with the high-resolution material component.

Abstract
It is time-consuming to render high-resolution images
in applications such as video games and virtual reality,
and thus super-resolution technologies become increasingly popular for real-time rendering. However, it is challenging to preserve sharp texture details, keep the temporal stability and avoid the ghosting artifacts in real-time
super-resolution rendering. To address this issue, we introduce radiance demodulation to separate the rendered
image or radiance into a lighting component and a material component, considering the fact that the light component is smoother than the rendered image so that the highresolution material component with detailed textures can
be easily obtained. We perform the super-resolution on the
lighting component only and re-modulate it with the highresolution material component to obtain the final superresolution image with more texture details. A reliable warping module is proposed by explicitly marking the occluded
* Corresponding author.

regions to avoid the ghosting artifacts. To further enhance
the temporal stability, we design a frame-recurrent neural network and a temporal loss to aggregate the previous
and current frames, which can better capture the spatialtemporal consistency among reconstructed frames. As a result, our method is able to produce temporally stable results in real-time rendering with high-quality details, even
in the challenging 4 × 4 super-resolution scenarios. Code
is available at: https://github.com/Riga2/NSRD.

1. Introduction
Real-time rendering is widely used in various applications,
like video games and virtual reality, where both low time
cost and high resolution images are desired. To achieve such
a goal, super-resolution (SR) rendering technologies have
been popularly adopted by first rendering a low-resolution
(LR) image and then performing SR on it. However, SR
for real-time rendering is challenging since it needs to meet
several requirements: detail-preserving, temporally stable,
artifacts-free, and highly efficient.

4357

