This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamPropeller: Supercharge Text-to-3D Generation with Parallel Sampling
Linqi Zhou1 *
1

Andy Shih1
Chenlin Meng1,2
1
Stanford University, 2 Pika Labs

{linqizhou, andyshih, chenlin, ermon}@stanford.edu, 2 chenlin@pika.art

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [9, 38–40] have seen great success in a variety of domains, including both 2D images [22, 31, 49, 49]
and 3D shapes [21, 37, 49, 49, 50]. Early attempts of applying diffusion frameworks to 3D shape generation require
training separate models for each data category with 3D
training samples. This problem is significantly alleviated
by the use of large-scale text-conditioned 2D diffusion models [31]. Such large-scale foundation models, often trained
on internet-scale data such as LAION-5B [35], have exhibited remarkable semantic understanding of the visual world,
which has inspired their use for creating 3D shapes in openvocabulary settings. Among the most remarkable developments in recent years involves optimizing NeRF [23] scenes
using Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [29] or Score Jacobian Chaining (SJC) [45], which push the 2D rendering
* Work done at Pika Labs.
1 We use batch size 16 for higher-quality generation, which requires

ProlificDreamer [46]

11 minutes

9 hours 28 minutes

2 minutes

2 hours 13 minutes

2 minutes

2 hours 13 minutes

”the leaning tower of Pisa,
aerial view”

”a pineapple”

(Incomplete)
+ DreamPropeller

Recent methods such as Score Distillation Sampling
(SDS) and Variational Score Distillation (VSD) using 2D
diffusion models for text-to-3D generation have demonstrated impressive generation quality. However, the long
generation time of such algorithms significantly degrades
the user experience. To tackle this problem, we propose DreamPropeller, a drop-in acceleration algorithm that
can be wrapped around any existing text-to-3D generation
pipeline based on score distillation. Our framework generalizes Picard iterations, a classical algorithm for parallel sampling an ODE path, and can account for nonODE paths such as momentum-based gradient updates and
changes in dimensions during the optimization process as in
many cases of 3D generation. We show that our algorithm
trades parallel compute for wallclock time and empirically
achieves up to 4.7x speedup with a negligible drop in generation quality for all tested frameworks. Our implementation can be found here.

DreamGaussian [43]
(Complete)

Abstract

longer time.

Stefano Ermon1

Figure 1. We present two representative examples of applying
DreamPropeller. Gray rows denote runtime. Our framework
trades parallel compute for speed and achieves more than 4x
speedup when applied to both DreamGaussian [43]1 and ProlificDreamer [46] while maintaining the generation quality. At the
time when DreamPropeller finishes, the baseline versions (Incomplete) exhibit significantly worse appearance and geometry.

of the 3D models to be more likely under the 2D diffusion prior through gradient-based optimization. More recent developments including Variational Score Distillation
(VSD) [46] further improve the quality of 3D shape generation.
Despite promising results in generation quality, text-to3D methods using SDS/VSD suffer from long generation
time because gradient-based optimization is computation-

4610

