This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transferable and Principled Efficiency for Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
Jingxuan Xu1 , Wuyang Chen2 , Yao Zhao1 , Yunchao Wei1
1
Beijing Jiaotong University 2 Simon Fraser University

Abstract
Recent success of pre-trained foundation vision-language
models makes Open-Vocabulary Segmentation (OVS) possible. Despite the promising performance, this approach
introduces heavy computational overheads for two challenges: 1) large model sizes of the backbone; 2) expensive
costs during the fine-tuning. These challenges hinder this
OVS strategy from being widely applicable and affordable
in real-world scenarios. Although traditional methods such
as model compression and efficient fine-tuning can address
these challenges, they often rely on heuristics. This means
that their solutions cannot be easily transferred and necessitate re-training on different models, which comes at a
cost. In the context of efficient OVS, we target achieving
performance that is comparable to or even better than prior
OVS works based on large vision-language foundation models, by utilizing smaller models that incur lower training
costs. The core strategy is to make our efficiency principled
and thus seamlessly transferable from one OVS framework
to others without further customization. Comprehensive
experiments on diverse OVS benchmarks demonstrate our
superior trade-off between segmentation accuracy and computation costs over previous works. Our code is available on
https://github.com/Xujxyang/OpenTrans

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary segmentation has been developed to address the limitations of traditional semantic segmentation [2, 22, 42, 50], which cannot identify categories beyond its training set, by leveraging human-like recognition
of novel categories using arbitrary text descriptions. This
method enables the segmentation of arbitrary categories from
text inputs, expanding its use in areas like image editing and
human-robot interaction. Early models used cross-modal
alignment between pixel and text embeddings [25, 43, 48],
while recent methods have improved performance with
region-level alignment [10, 15, 19, 28, 44]. These methods learn from base class embeddings and are often paired
with a frozen pre-trained vision-language foundation model,
such as CLIP [37], to assist in re-classification, with strate-

Figure 1. Comparison with popular open-vocabulary segmentation works on Pascal-Context [36] (with Resnet50 as backbone).
The red points represent our works, the orange points stand for
traditional two-stage open-vocabulary segmentation [10, 44], the
blue point stands for single-stage open-vocabulary segmentation
[17], the green denotes a novel dual-channel prediction model with
frozen backbone [47], the purple represent traditional convolutional
segmentation networks [2].

gies that incorporate knowledge distillation or a frozen CLIP
backbone to maintain a generalizable representation while
fine-tuning on known classes.
Despite the promising performance of recent OVS frameworks, these methods introduce heavy computational over-

15814

