This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Restoration by Generation with Constrained Priors
Zheng Ding1† , Xuaner Zhang2 , Zhuowen Tu1 , Zhihao Xia2
1
2
UC San Diego
Adobe

Input

Anchor

CodeFormer [56]

Ours

Figure 1. We harness the generative capacity of a diffusion model for image restoration. By constraining the generative space with a
generative or personal album, we can directly use a pre-trained diffusion model to produce a high-quality and realistic image that is also
faithful to the input identity. Without any assumption on the degradation type, we are able to generalize to real-world images that exhibit
complicated degradation. We compare our restoration result with CodeFormer, a state-of-the-art baseline [56]. Our method generalizes
better to different types of degradation while more faithfully preserving the input identity. Images are best viewed zoomed in on a big screen.

Abstract
The inherent generative power of denoising diffusion models makes them well-suited for image restoration tasks where
the objective is to find the optimal high-quality image within
the generative space that closely resembles the input image. We propose a method to adapt a pretrained diffusion
model for image restoration by simply adding noise to the
input image to be restored and then denoise. Our method
is based on the observation that the space of a generative
model needs to be constrained. We impose this constraint by
finetuning the generative model with a set of anchor images
that capture the characteristics of the input image. With the
constrained space, we can then leverage the sampling strategy used for generation to do image restoration. We evaluate
† Work done during an internship at Adobe.

against previous methods and show superior performances
on multiple real-world restoration datasets in preserving
identity and image quality. We also demonstrate an important and practical application on personalized restoration,
where we use a personal album as the anchor images to
constrain the generative space. This approach allows us
to produce results that accurately preserve high-frequency
details, which previous works are unable to do. Project
webpage: https://gen2res.github.io.

1. Introduction
Image restoration involves recovering a high-quality natural image x from its degraded observation y = H(x) is a
fundamental task in low-level vision. The challenge lies in
finding a solution that 1) matches the observation through a
set of degradation steps; and 2) aligns with the distribution of

2567

