This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Atom-Level Optical Chemical Structure Recognition with Limited Supervision
Martijn Oldenhof1

Edward De Brouwer1,2
Adam Arany1
1
ESAT - STADIUS, KU Leuven, Belgium
2
Yale University, USA

Yves Moreau1

{martijn.oldenhof, edward.debrouwer, adam.arany, yves.moreau}@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Identifying the chemical structure from a graphical representation, or image, of a molecule is a challenging pattern
recognition task that would greatly benefit drug development. Yet, existing methods for chemical structure recognition do not typically generalize well, and show diminished
effectiveness when confronted with domains where data is
sparse, or costly to generate, such as hand-drawn molecule
images. To address this limitation, we propose a new chemical structure recognition tool that delivers state-of-the-art
performance and can adapt to new domains with a limited
number of data samples and supervision. Unlike previous approaches, our method provides atom-level localization, and can therefore segment the image into the different
atoms and bonds. Our model is the first model to perform
OCSR with atom-level entity detection with only SMILES
supervision. Through rigorous and extensive benchmarking, we demonstrate the preeminence of our chemical structure recognition approach in terms of data efficiency, accuracy, and atom-level entity prediction.

1. Introduction
Molecules and chemical reactions represent the tokens of
the language of chemistry, which underlies applications
such as drug or new materials discovery. Molecules can be
represented by a molecular formula (e.g., C8H10N4O2), or
preferably by a more detailed structural formula—a graphical representation showcasing the spatial arrangement of
atoms in the molecule. Isomers, molecules sharing the same
molecular formulas but differing in spatial atom arrangement, typically exhibit distinct chemical and physical properties (as illustrated in Supplementary Material (SM) Section 8). Structural molecular formulas are thus ubiquitous
in chemistry publications, lab notes, patents, or text books.
This prevalence motivates the development of automatic
pipelines to perform chemical structure recognition, parsing structural formulas from images. Such ability promises
more efficient scientific literature browsing, automatic lab

notes transcription, or chemical data mining, among others.
Recent advances in computer vision have allowed the
development of several chemical structure recognition
tools [5, 19, 24]. These tools can be classified into molecular graph predictions methods and atom-level entity prediction methods. Molecular graph prediction methods only use
limited image annotation, such as SMILES, a serial notation of a molecule [5, 24, 33], and only predict the molecular graph. In contrast, atom-level entity prediction methods
leverage richer image annotations for training the model,
such as atom-level entity localization (i.e., individual atoms
and bonds are annotated in the original image) [19, 23].
These methods predict the molecular graph as well as the
localization of the different components of the molecule in
the original image. Figure 1 illustrates the different types of
predictions for these two categories of models.
Previous research has shown that atom-level entity prediction methods typically enjoy better training sample efficiency, requiring less images for achieving the same level
of performance [14]. This class of methods is also more
interpretable. Atom-level entity annotation can indeed help
identify the atoms that will be part of new chemical bond
in a reaction, and can also facilitate human evaluation and
correction when necessary, opening the way for synergistic human-in-the-loop training strategies [23]. Nevertheless,
these advantages are compensated by the necessity to provide rich image annotation in the training data. Unfortunately, such supervision is often unavailable in many data
domains, such as hand-drawn images. Yet, hand-drawn images represent a prevalent format in chemical notations and
sketches. The strict dependency of existing atom-level entity prediction methods on rich image annotation thus prevents their deployment to crucial data domains.
Our research addresses these limitations by introducing
a state-of-the-art chemical structure recognition tool, which
(1) predicts a molecular graph from images, (2) provides
atom-level localization in the original image, and (3) adapts
to new data domain with a limited number of data samples
and supervision. Our architecture relies on a object detection backbone coupled with a graph construction strategy

17669

