This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open Vocabulary Semantic Scene Sketch Understanding
Ahmed Bourouis1
1

Judith E. Fan2

Yulia Gryaditskaya1

Surrey Institute for People-Centered AI and CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK
2
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, USA
https://ahmedbourouis.github.io/Scene Sketch Segmentation/

Abstract
We study the underexplored but fundamental problem of
machine understanding of abstract freehand scene sketches.
We introduce a sketch encoder that ensures a semanticallyaware feature space, which we evaluate by testing its performance on a semantic sketch segmentation task. To train
our model, we rely only on bitmap sketches accompanied
by brief captions, avoiding the need for pixel-level annotations. To generalize to a large set of sketches and categories, we build upon a vision transformer encoder pretrained with the CLIP model. We freeze the text encoder and
perform visual-prompt tuning of the visual encoder branch
while introducing a set of critical modifications. First, we
augment the classical key-query (k-q) self-attention blocks
with value-value (v-v) self-attention blocks. Central to our
model is a two-level hierarchical training that enables efficient semantic disentanglement: The first level ensures
holistic scene sketch encoding, and the second level focuses
on individual categories. In the second level of the hierarchy, we introduce cross-attention between the text and vision branches. Our method outperforms zero-shot CLIP
segmentation results by 37 points, reaching a pixel accuracy of 85.5% on the FS-COCO sketch dataset. Finally, we
conduct a user study that allows us to identify further improvements needed over our method to reconcile machine
and human understanding of freehand scene sketches.

1. Introduction
Even a quick sketch can convey rich information about what
is relevant in a visual scene: what objects there are and how
they are arranged. However, little work has been devoted
to the task of machine scene sketch understanding, largely
due to a lack of data. Understanding sketches with methods designed for images is challenging because sketches
have very different statistics from images – they are sparser
and lack detailed color and texture information. Moreover,
sketches contain abstraction at multiple levels: the holis-

A giraffe and a zebra are
standing on the grass.

A man with a kite and a tree
in the background.

CLIP zero shot
segmentation

CLIP zero shot
segmentation

Our
segmentation

Our
segmentation

Figure 1. Comparison of the segmentation result obtained with
CLIP visual encoder features and features from our model.

tic scene level and the object level. Here we explore the
promise of two main ideas: (1) the use of language to guide
the learning of how to parse scene sketches and (2) a twolevel training network design for holistic scene understanding and individual categories recognition.
Freehand sketches can be represented as a sequence or
cloud of individual strokes, or as a bitmap image. As one
of the first works on scene sketch understanding, we target
a general setting where we assume only the availability of
bitmap representations. We also aim at the method that can
generalize to a large number of scenes and object categories.
To this end, we build our sketch encoder on a Visual Transformer (ViT) encoder pre-trained with a popular CLIP [44]
foundation model (Fig. 1). We propose a two-level hierarchical training of our network, where the two levels (“Holistic” and “Category-level”) share the weights of our visual
encoder. The first level focuses on ensuring that our model
can capture holistic scene understanding (Fig. 2: I. Holistic), while the second level ensures that the encoder can efficiently encode and distinguish individual categories (Fig. 2:
II. Category-level). We avoid reliance on tedious user perpixel annotations by leveraging sketch-caption pairs from
the FS-COCO dataset [9], and aligning the visual tokens of
sketch patches with textual tokens from the sketch captions,
using triplet loss training. We strengthen the alignment by
introducing sketch-text cross-attention in the second level
of the network’s hierarchy (Fig. 2: g.). Additionally, we introduce a modified self-attention computation to the visual

4176

