This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TransLoc4D: Transformer-based 4D Radar Place Recognition
Guohao Peng1 , Heshan Li1 , Yangyang Zhao2 , Jun Zhang1 *,
Zhenyu Wu1 , Pengyu Zheng2 , Danwei Wang1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
1

{guohao.peng, heshan.li, jun.zhangj, zhenyu.wu, edwwang}@ntu.edu.sg,
2

{zhao0417, pzheng002}@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Place recognition is a fundamental component of autonomous navigation systems, especially when operating in
GPS-denied environments. It is typically handled as a retrieval task [3, 36, 50] to provide a good initial value for localization optimization [8, 40, 41] and navigation decisionmaking. Traditional methods relying on 2D images and 3D
point clouds have been extensively studied and become the
mainstream solutions for place recognition. However, the
* Corresponding author

…

Place recognition is crucial for unmanned vehicles in
terms of localization and mapping. Recent years have witnessed numerous explorations in the field, where 2D cameras and 3D LiDARs are mostly employed. Despite their
admirable performance, they may encounter challenges in
adverse weather such as rain and fog. Hopefully, 4D
millimeter-wave radar emerges as a promising alternative,
as its longer wavelength makes it virtually immune to interference from tiny particles of fog and rain. Therefore,
in this work, we propose a novel 4D radar place recognition model, TransLoc4D, based on sparse convolutions and
Transformer structures. Specifically, a MinkLoc4D backbone is first proposed to leverage the multi-modal information from 4D radar scans. Rather than merely capturing geometric structures of point clouds, MinkLoc4D additionally explores their intensity and velocity properties.
After feature extraction, a Transformer layer is introduced
to enhance local features before aggregation, where linear
self-attention captures the long-range dependencies of the
point cloud, alleviating its sparsity and noise. To validate
TransLoc4D, we construct two datasets and set up benchmarks for 4D radar place recognition. Experiments validate the feasibility of TransLoc4D and demonstrate it can
robustly deal with dynamic and adverse environments.

Submap

Query

Database

Figure 1. Schematic of the 4D Radar Place Recognition (4DRPR)
pipeline. Each 4D radar scan of the trajectory is preprocessed and
characterized into a novel 4D point cloud representation, which
is then fed into the TransLoc4D encoding network to generate a
global compact descriptor for instance retrieval.

inherent characteristics of cameras and LiDARs make these
methods vulnerable to challenging weather conditions such
as rain, snow, or fog. This hinders their applicability for
robust place recognition in inclement-weather scenarios.
Recently, 4D millimeter-wave radar [24, 51] has become a promising alternative and garnered growing interest.
Since millimeter waves have longer wavelengths, they are
effective at penetrating raindrops and fog particles. Therefore, compared with 2D cameras and 3D LiDAR, 4D radar
can better adapt to harsh weather conditions and low-light
environments. While existing 2D and 3D methods have to
consider domain adaptation [1, 44, 45] or complementary
sensor fusion [21, 22, 46] to cope with lighting and weather
changes, 4D radar alone is sufficient for robust place recognition in diverse environmental conditions.
Despite the advantages, 4D radar produces sparse point
cloud scans with lower spatial resolution than 3D LiDAR,
as in Fig. 1. This leaves points of a 4D radar scan lacking
context information. Besides, aliasing caused by multipath
echoes may blur the shape of static architectures and dy-

17595

