This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrasting intra-modal and ranking cross-modal hard negatives to enhance
visio-linguistic compositional understanding
Rabiul Awal1 Aishwarya Agrawal1,2,3
Mila - Quebec AI Institute1
Université de Montréal2
Canada CIFAR AI Chair3

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP, exhibit
strong image-text comprehension abilities, facilitating advances in several downstream tasks such as zero-shot image
classification, image-text retrieval, and text-to-image generation. However, the compositional reasoning abilities of
existing VLMs remains subpar. The root of this limitation
lies in the inadequate alignment between the images and captions in the pretraining datasets. Additionally, the current
contrastive learning objective fails to focus on fine-grained
grounding components like relations, actions, and attributes,
resulting in "bag-of-words" representations. We introduce a
simple and effective method to improve compositional reasoning in VLMs. Our method better leverages available
datasets by refining and expanding the standard image-text
contrastive learning framework. Our approach does not
require specific annotations and does not incur extra parameters. When integrated with CLIP, our technique yields
notable improvement over state-of-the-art baselines across
five vision-language compositional benchmarks. 1

1. Introduction
The field of vision-language research has experienced remarkable progress over recent years, thanks to the introduction of vast datasets [14, 56], the adaptation of attention mechanism, and the pioneering objectives such as contrastive learning. Impressively, these models demonstrate
a notable capability in zero-shot generalization, as seen in
areas like Visual Question Answering (VQA) [18], captioning [1, 33, 42], and image-text retrieval [52, 62, 71]. Strong
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP [52], are
even pushing the boundaries in text-to-image generation
(CLIP is used to guide image generation given the input
prompt) [50, 53, 55]. However, despite these advances, a no1We open-source our code at https://github.com/lezhang7/
Enhance-FineGrained.

Training Image-Text Pairs
“A dog and
a cat
playing on
the grass”

Contrastive
Learning

VL Model

“A gray
bear
running in
the woods”

Compositional Reasoning
Evaluation

True Caption:
“The dog is on
the left and
the cat is on
the right”

False Caption :
“The dog is on
the right and
the cat is on
the left”

Our Method

Ⅰ. Learn to differentiate between similar captions
Data
Augmentation

Le Zhang1,2

Text1 :
“A dog and a cat
playing on the grass”
Push
Away

Text2 :
“A bear and a cat
playing on the grass”

Ⅱ. Learn fine-grained alignment

Completely Align

VL
Model
Partially Align

Figure 1. Models trained with standard image-text contrastive
learning lack sufficient compositional reasoning abilities. Our
method teaches the model to better differentiate between similar
captions and learn fine-grained alignment between images and text
to improve compositional reasoning.

table limitation persists: these models often miss the intricate
compositional nuances of relationships, attributes, objects,
and actions [63, 70]. A clear manifestation of this shortcoming is their difficulty in distinguishing between captions with
the same set of words but composed differently like “Horse
is eating the grass” and “Grass is eating the horse” [70] when
paired with relevant images. Such compositional understanding remains a critical frontier for continued advancement in
vision-language integration.
A primary factor impeding compositional understanding
in current VLMs stems from their learning methodology and
training dataset. These models are usually trained on huge
image-text pairs crawled from the web using contrastive
learning [52]. The caption is short and noisy; the imagetext contrastive objective optimizes the model to distinguish
between correct image-text pairs and a vast array of incorrect ones. However, because the incorrect pairs are often
markedly distinct, the model primarily distinguishes them

13774

