This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Face Tracking from 2D Video through Iterative Dense UV to Image Flow
Felix Taubner

Prashant Raina

Mathieu Tuli
Eu Wern Teh
LG Electronics

Chul Lee

Jinmiao Huang

{prashant.raina, mathieu.tuli, euwern.teh, clee.lee}@lge.com

Abstract
When working with 3D facial data, improving fidelity
and avoiding the uncanny valley effect is critically dependent on accurate 3D facial performance capture. Because
such methods are expensive and due to the widespread
availability of 2D videos, recent methods have focused on
how to perform monocular 3D face tracking. However,
these methods often fall short in capturing precise facial
movements due to limitations in their network architecture,
training, and evaluation processes. Addressing these challenges, we propose a novel face tracker, FlowFace, that introduces an innovative 2D alignment network for dense pervertex alignment. Unlike prior work, FlowFace is trained
on high-quality 3D scan annotations rather than weak supervision or synthetic data. Our 3D model fitting module
jointly fits a 3D face model from one or many observations, integrating existing neutral shape priors for enhanced
identity and expression disentanglement and per-vertex deformations for detailed facial feature reconstruction. Additionally, we propose a novel metric and benchmark for
assessing tracking accuracy. Our method exhibits superior
performance on both custom and publicly available benchmarks. We further validate the effectiveness of our tracker
by generating high-quality 3D data from 2D videos, which
leads to performance gains on downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Access to 3D face tracking data lays the foundation for
many computer graphics tasks such as 3D facial animation, 3D human avatar reconstruction, and expression transfer. Obtaining high visual fidelity, portraying subtle emotional cues, and preventing the uncanny valley effect in
these downstream tasks is reliant on high motion capture
accuracy. As a result, a common approach to generating 3D face tracking data is to use 3D scans and visual
markers however, this process is cost-intensive. To alleviate this burden, building computational models to obtain 3D faces from monocular 2D videos and images has
cemented its importance in recent years and seen great
progress [10, 14, 19, 24, 37, 42, 57]. Nevertheless, three

issues persist: First, current methods rely heavily on sparse
landmarks and photometric similarity, which is computationally expensive and ineffective in ensuring accurate face
motion. Second, the monocular face tracking problem is
both ill-posed and contains a large solution space dependent
on camera intrinsics, pose, head shape, and expression [58].
Third, current benchmarks for this task neglect the temporal
aspect of face tracking and do not adequately evaluate facial
motion capture accuracy.
To address the aforementioned issues, we introduce a
novel 3D face tracking model called FlowFace, consisting
of a versatile two-stage pipeline: A 2D alignment network
that predicts the screen-space positions of each vertex of
a 3D morphable model [2] (3DMM) and an optimization
module that jointly fits this model across multiple views
by minimizing an alignment energy function. Unlike traditional methods that rely on sparse landmarks and photometric consistency, FlowFace uses only 2D alignment as
input signal, similar to recent work [42]. This alleviates
the computational burden of inverse rendering and allows
joint reconstruction using a very large number of observations. We enhance previous work in four ways: (1) The
2D alignment network features a novel architecture with a
vision-transformer backbone and an iterative, recurrent refinement block. (2) In contrast to previous methods that use
weak supervision or synthetic data, the alignment network
is trained using high-quality annotations from 3D scans.
(3) The alignment network predicts dense, per-vertex alignment instead of key-points, which enables the reconstruction of finer details. (4) We integrate an off-the-shelf neutral
shape prediction model to improve identity and expression
disentanglement.
In addition, we present the screen-space motion error
(SSME) as a novel face tracking metric. Based on optical
flow, SSME computes and contrasts screen-space motion,
aiming to resolve the limitation observed in existing evaluation methods. These often rely on sparse key points, synthetic annotations, or RGB/3D reconstruction errors, and
lack a thorough and comprehensive measurement of temporal consistency. Using the Multiface [44] dataset, we develop a 3D face tracking benchmark around this metric.
11227

