This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning with Unreliability: Fast Few-shot Voxel Radiance Fields
with Relative Geometric Consistency
Yingjie Xu1,2 * Bangzhen Liu2 * Hao Tang1,3 Bailin Deng4 Shengfeng He1†
1
Singapore Management University 2 South China University of Technology
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 4 Cardiff University

(a) Input Views

(b) Warped Images

(c) w/o Unreliability

(d) Ours

(e) Comparisons on the Realistic Synthetic 360◦ dataset [24]

Figure 1. We present ReVoRF, a voxel-based framework designed to capitalize on the unreliability inherent in warped novel views. (b)
demonstrates the warping outcomes, where black holes signify unmatched pixels from the original view. (c) illustrates the results of training
when these holes are masked out, which unfortunately results in ambiguous geometric structures. In contrast, (d) showcases our approach’s
ability to maintain correct geometric consistency. ReVoRF achieves this by leveraging relational depth prior knowledge within these
unreliable hole regions. Our approach demonstrates the best reconstruction quality while being one of the fastest few-shot approaches in (e).

Abstract
We propose a voxel-based optimization framework,
ReVoRF, for few-shot radiance fields that strategically address the unreliability in pseudo novel view synthesis. Our
method pivots on the insight that relative depth relationships
within neighboring regions are more reliable than the absolute color values in disoccluded areas. Consequently, we
devise a bilateral geometric consistency loss that carefully
navigates the trade-off between color fidelity and geometric
accuracy in the context of depth consistency for uncertain
regions. Moreover, we present a reliability-guided learning
strategy to discern and utilize the variable quality across synthesized views, complemented by a reliability-aware voxel
smoothing algorithm that smoothens the transition between
reliable and unreliable data patches. Our approach allows
for a more nuanced use of all available data, promoting enhanced learning from regions previously considered unsuitable for high-quality reconstruction. Extensive experiments
across diverse datasets reveal that our approach attains
significant gains in efficiency and accuracy, delivering rendering speeds of 3 FPS, 7 mins to train a 360◦ scene, and
* The first two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author (shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg).

a 5% improvement in PSNR over existing few-shot methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/HKCLynn/ReVoRF.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have revolutionized the
fields of novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction by leveraging an implicit function optimized from a collection of
2D images [2, 13, 24, 27]. Despite their remarkable rendering capabilities, NeRFs are hampered by the substantial
cost and time required to gather dense image sets for a given
scene [6,41,47]. This challenge has spurred the development
of Few-shot NeRF, an emerging domain focused on reconstructing 3D scenes with minimal image data [6, 8, 12, 18].
The performance of NeRF in accurately reconstructing
geometry and texture diminishes when faced with sparse
observations, as it tends to overfit the limited views available [8, 49]. To address this issue, there has been a push in
recent studies to fortify NeRF with additional priors [46, 47],
including semantic relations [14], depth cues [49], and entropy constraints [17]. These enhancements strive to extract maximum information from limited data. However,
the reconstructions are inherently limited by the insufficient

20342

