This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hourglass Tokenizer for Efficient Transformer-Based 3D Human Pose Estimation
Wenhao Li1
1

Mengyuan Liu1 * Hong Liu1

Pichao Wang2† Jialun Cai1

Nicu Sebe3

National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School
2
Amazon Prime Video 3 University of Trento
{wenhaoli,liumengyuan,hongliu}@pku.edu.cn
cjl@stu.pku.edu.cn

pichaowang@gmail.com

niculae.sebe@unitn.it

Abstract

PoseFormer [51]
S rided [17]
MHFormer [18]
P-STMO [34]
MixSTE [48]
Mo ionBERT [52]
TPC w. MixSTE (Ours)
TPC w. MotionBERT (Ours)
HoT w. MixSTE (Ours)
HoT w. MotionBERT (Ours)

250

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) from videos has numerous applications, such as action recognition [22, 25, 38],
human-robot interaction [11, 53], and computer animation
[30]. Current video-based 3D HPE methods mainly follow
the pipeline of 2D-to-3D pose lifting [2, 4, 13, 21, 43, 44, 47].
* Corresponding Author.
† The work does not relate to author’s position at Amazon.

200
FLOPs (G)

Transformers have been successfully applied in the field
of video-based 3D human pose estimation. However, the
high computational costs of these video pose transformers
(VPTs) make them impractical on resource-constrained devices. In this paper, we present a plug-and-play pruning-andrecovering framework, called Hourglass Tokenizer (HoT),
for efficient transformer-based 3D human pose estimation
from videos. Our HoT begins with pruning pose tokens of redundant frames and ends with recovering full-length tokens,
resulting in a few pose tokens in the intermediate transformer
blocks and thus improving the model efficiency. To effectively
achieve this, we propose a token pruning cluster (TPC) that
dynamically selects a few representative tokens with high
semantic diversity while eliminating the redundancy of video
frames. In addition, we develop a token recovering attention
(TRA) to restore the detailed spatio-temporal information
based on the selected tokens, thereby expanding the network
output to the original full-length temporal resolution for
fast inference. Extensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets (i.e., Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP) demonstrate that our method can achieve both high efficiency and
estimation accuracy compared to the original VPT models.
For instance, applying to MotionBERT and MixSTE on Human3.6M, our HoT can save nearly 50% FLOPs without
sacrificing accuracy and nearly 40% FLOPs with only 0.2%
accuracy drop, respectively. Code and models are available
at https://github.com/NationalGAILab/HoT.

150
100
50
0
39

40

41
42
MPJPE (mm) ↓

43

44

Figure 1. FLOPs and estimation errors (MPJPE, lower is better)
of different VPTs on Human3.6M dataset. We achieve highly
competitive or even better results while saving FLOPs.

This two-stage pipeline first utilizes an off-the-shelf 2D HPE
model to detect 2D body joints for each video frame and
then employs a separate lifting model to estimate 3D pose
sequences from the detected 2D poses.
Recently, transformer-based architectures [18, 48, 51, 52]
have shown state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in the field
of video-based 3D HPE, since they are effective at modeling
the long-range dependencies among video frames. These
video pose transformers (VPTs) typically regard each video
frame as a pose token and utilize extremely long video sequences to achieve superior performance (e.g., 81 frames in
[51], 243 frames in [34, 48, 52], or 351 frames in [9, 17, 18]).
However, these methods inevitably suffer from high computational demands since the VPT’s self-attention complexity
grows quadratically with respect to the number of tokens
(i.e., frames), hindering the deployment of these heavy VPTs
on devices with limited computing resources.
To achieve efficient VPTs, two crucial factors require
careful consideration: (i) Directly reducing the frame number can boost VPTs’ efficiency, but it results in a small
temporal receptive field that limits the model to capture
richer spatio-temporal information to improve performance

604

