This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CycleINR: Cycle Implicit Neural Representation for Arbitrary-Scale Volumetric
Super-Resolution of Medical Data
Wei Fang1,2 Yuxing Tang1 Heng Guo1,2 Mingze Yuan1,4 Tony C. W. Mok1,2
Ke Yan1,2 Jiawen Yao1,2 Xin Chen3 Zaiyi Liu3 Le Lu1 Ling Zhang1 Minfeng Xu1,2
1

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China
3
Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital
4
Peking University
2

lucas.fw@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In the realm of medical 3D data, such as CT and MRI
images, prevalent anisotropic resolution is characterized
by high intra-slice but diminished inter-slice resolution.
The lowered resolution between adjacent slices poses challenges, hindering optimal viewing experiences and impeding the development of robust downstream analysis algorithms. Various volumetric super-resolution algorithms aim
to surmount these challenges, enhancing inter-slice resolution and overall 3D medical imaging quality. However,
existing approaches confront inherent challenges: 1) often tailored to speciﬁc upsampling factors, lacking ﬂexibility for diverse clinical scenarios; 2) newly generated slices
frequently suffer from over-smoothing, degrading ﬁne details, and leading to inter-slice inconsistency. In response,
this study presents CycleINR, a novel enhanced Implicit
Neural Representation model for 3D medical data volumetric super-resolution. Leveraging the continuity of the
learned implicit function, the CycleINR model can achieve
results with arbitrary up-sampling rates, eliminating the
need for separate training. Additionally, we enhance the
grid sampling in CycleINR with a local attention mechanism and mitigate over-smoothing by integrating cycleconsistent loss. We introduce a new metric, Slice-wise Noise
Level Inconsistency (SNLI), to quantitatively assess interslice noise level inconsistency. The effectiveness of our approach is demonstrated through image quality evaluations
on an in-house dataset and a downstream task analysis on
the Medical Segmentation Decathlon liver tumor dataset.

1. Introduction
Volumetric medical imaging, a cornerstone of diagnostic radiology involving techniques such as computed tomography

Cycle-Consistent Loss
Signal ‫܆‬

෡
Sampled Signal ‫܆‬

INR Fitting

Sampling (blue points)

Sampling (orange points)

Sampled Signal ‫܇‬

INR Fitting

Figure 1. The core concept of CycleINR involves the initial use of
signal X to ﬁt a continuous Implicit Neural Representation (INR)
function (shown in dotted blue curves). Subsequently, new points
(depicted as hollow orange dots) are sampled from this function
to create a new INR function (illustrated by dotted orange curves).
The signal X̂ is then sampled from the new function at the same
positions as X. The construction of a cycle-consistent loss is
achieved by assessing the similarity between X̂ and X.

(CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), preserves the
3D three-dimensional characteristics of the body’s internal structures through the compilation of multiple crosssectional images [47]. While high-resolution volumetric
medical imaging offers detailed anatomical and functional
information enhancing diagnosis, its widespread clinical
adoption is hindered by prolonged acquisition time and elevated storage costs. As a common alternative, anisotropic
volumes, characterized by high resolution within each slice
and lower resolution between slices, have become prevalent [41]. However, this reduced inter-slice resolution introduces challenges: limiting detailed sagittal or coronal
views, complicating lesion observation, and posing difﬁcul-

11631

