This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unexplored Faces of Robustness and Out-of-Distribution:
Covariate Shifts in Environment and Sensor Domains
Eunsu Baek

Keondo Park
Jiyoon Kim
Seoul National University

Hyung-Sin Kim

{beshu9407, gundo0102, iamkjy, hyungkim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Computer vision applications predict on digital images
acquired by a camera from physical scenes through light.
However, conventional robustness benchmarks rely on perturbations in digitized images, diverging from distribution
shifts occurring in the image acquisition process. To bridge
this gap, we introduce a new distribution shift dataset,
ImageNet-ES, comprising variations in environmental and
camera sensor factors by directly capturing 202k images
with a real camera in a controllable testbed. With the
new dataset, we evaluate out-of-distribution (OOD) detection and model robustness. We find that existing OOD detection methods do not cope with the covariate shifts in
ImageNet-ES, implying that the definition and detection of
OOD should be revisited to embrace real-world distribution shifts. We also observe that the model becomes more
robust in both ImageNet-C and -ES by learning environment and sensor variations in addition to existing digital augmentations. Lastly, our results suggest that effective shift mitigation via camera sensor control can significantly improve performance without increasing model
size. With these findings, our benchmark may aid future
research on robustness, OOD, and camera sensor control
for computer vision. Our code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/Edw2n/ImageNet-ES.

1. Introduction
The human vision system processes visual information by
capturing light through the eyes and interpreting it within
the brain. While proper training of our brains is undoubtedly crucial, addressing eyesight or light-related challenges
necessitates equipping ourselves with customized- or sunglasses rather than relying solely on cognitive enhancement.
Similarly, in many computer vision frameworks, as depicted in Figure 1a, a camera serves as the ‘eyes,’ capturing
authentic scenes through the play of light and generating
digital images. These images are then interpreted by a deep
neural network (i.e. the brain), as illustrated in Figure 1b.
Continuous efforts towards improving AI systems to match

(a) Real-world image acquisition process. Variations in the environmental
and camera sensor factors can cause significant covariate shifts in the acquired image.

(b) Real-world image prediction pipeline with existing perturbation benchmarks at each phase. ImageNet-ES first investigates the environment and
sensor domains directly, instead of mimicking via digital perturbation.

Figure 1. Motivation and contribution of ImageNet-ES, the first
benchmark on the necessary but unexplored faces of image covariate shifts: environment and camera sensor domains.

the robustness of the human vision system predominantly
focus on the ‘brain’ component. Existing robustness benchmarks evaluate the resilience of model predictions against
perturbations in digitized images [7, 10, 20, 25]. Various techniques, such as domain generalization/adaptation
and out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, have refined deep
learning models to handle distribution shifts [1, 6, 11, 13,
15, 19, 21, 22, 26, 30, 31, 37, 42, 42].
However, the implications of distribution shifts resulting
from the image acquisition process (i.e. eyes), caused by
variations in real-world light and camera sensor operations,
remain unexplored. The absence of a benchmark introduces
uncertainty regarding the generalizability of observed robustness in synthetic data to real-world applications. Moreover, the synergistic interplay between the camera sensor
and the model has not been investigated. Therefore, current
approaches may risk inefficiency by attempting to address
eyesight/light problems through over-training the brain.

22294

