This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MS-DETR: Efficient DETR Training with Mixed Supervision
Chuyang Zhao12 , Yifan Sun1 , Wenhao Wang3 , Qiang Chen1 , Errui Ding1 , Yi Yang4 , Jingdong Wang1 *
1
Baidu VIS 2 Beihang University 3 University of Technology Sydney 4 Zhejiang University
{zhaochuyang,sunyifan01,chenqiang13}@baidu.com
wangwenhao0716@gmail.com, yangyics@zju.edu.cn
{dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract
DETR accomplishes end-to-end object detection through
iteratively generating multiple object candidates based on
image features and promoting one candidate for each
ground-truth object. The traditional training procedure using one-to-one supervision in the original DETR lacks direct supervision for the object detection candidates.
We aim at improving the DETR training efficiency by
explicitly supervising the candidate generation procedure
through mixing one-to-one supervision and one-to-many supervision. Our approach, namely MS-DETR, is simple, and
places one-to-many supervision to the object queries of the
primary decoder that is used for inference. In comparison
to existing DETR variants with one-to-many supervision,
such as Group DETR and Hybrid DETR, our approach does
not need additional decoder branches or object queries; the
object queries of the primary decoder in our approach directly benefit from one-to-many supervision and thus are
superior in object candidate prediction. Experimental results show that our approach outperforms related DETR
variants, such as DN-DETR, Hybrid DETR, and Group
DETR, and the combination with related DETR variants
further improves the performance. Code is available at:
https://github.com/Atten4Vis/MS-DETR.

1. Introduction
Detection Transformer (DETR) [3], an end-to-end object
detection approach, has been attracting a lot of research attention [17, 22, 23, 25, 40]. It is composed of a CNN backbone, a transformer encoder, and a transformer decoder.
The decoder is a stack of decoder layers, and each layer consists of self-attention, cross-attention and FFNs, followed
by class and box predictor.
The DETR decoder generates multiple object candidates
that are represented in the form of object queries, and pro* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Mixed supervision leads to better detection candidates. Top: ground-truth box. Middle: candidate boxes from
top-20 queries with the baseline. Bottom: candidate boxes from
top-20 queries with our MS-DETR. One can see that MS-DETR
generates better detection candidates than the baseline.

motes one candidate and demotes other duplicate candidates for each ground-truth object in an end-to-end learning
manner [3]. The duplicate candidates, which are close to
the ground-truth object, are illustrated in Figure 1. The role
of candidate generation is mainly taken by decoder crossattention. The role of candidate de-duplication is mainly
taken by decoder self-attention together with one-to-one
supervision, ensuring the selection of a single candidate
for each ground-truth object. Unlike NMS-based methods
(e.g., Faster R-CNN [32]) which usually introduce a supervision for candidate generation, the DETR training procedure lacks explicit supervision for generating multiple object detection candidates.

17027

