This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Generative Model based Rate-Distortion for Image Downscaling Assessment
Yuanbang Liang1
Bhavesh Garg2 *
Paul Rosin1
1
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University

Yipeng Qin1†
2
IIT Bombay & WadhwaniAI

{liangy32, rosinpl, qiny16}@cardiff.ac.uk, bh05avesh@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Image Downscaling Assessment
by Rate-Distortion (IDA-RD), a novel measure to quantitatively evaluate image downscaling algorithms. In contrast to
image-based methods that measure the quality of downscaled
images, ours is process-based that draws ideas from ratedistortion theory to measure the distortion incurred during
downscaling. Our main idea is that downscaling and superresolution (SR) can be viewed as the encoding and decoding
processes in the rate-distortion model, respectively, and that
a downscaling algorithm that preserves more details in the
resulting low-resolution (LR) images should lead to less distorted high-resolution (HR) images in SR. In other words,
the distortion should increase as the downscaling algorithm
deteriorates. However, it is non-trivial to measure this distortion as it requires the SR algorithm to be blind and stochastic.
Our key insight is that such requirements can be met by recent SR algorithms based on deep generative models that can
find all matching HR images for a given LR image on their
learned manifolds. Extensive experimental results show the
effectiveness of our IDA-RD measure. Our code is available
at: https:// github.com/ Byronliang8/ IDA-RD

1. Introduction
Image downscaling is a fundamental problem in image processing and computer vision. To address the diverse application scenarios, various digital devices with different resolutions, such as smartphones, iPads, and desktop monitors,
co-exist, which makes this problem even more important. In
contrast to image super-resolution (SR), which aims to “add”
information to low-resolution (LR) images, image downscaling algorithms focus on “preserving” information present in
the high-resolution (HR) images, which is especially important for applications and devices with limited screen spaces.
Traditional image downscaling algorithms low-pass filter
an image before resampling it. While this prevents aliasing in
the downscaled LR image, important high-frequency details
* Work completed during remote internship at Cardiff University
† Correspondence to: Yipeng Qin

of the HR image are removed simultaneously, resulting in
a blurred or overly-smooth LR image. To improve the quality of downscaled images, several sophisticated approaches
have been proposed recently, including remapping of highfrequency information [12], optimization of perceptual image quality metrics [29], using L0-regularized priors [23],
and pixelizing the HR image [13, 15, 20, 37]. Nevertheless,
research in image downscaling algorithms has significantly
slowed down due to the lack of a quantitative measure to
evaluate them. Specifically, standard distance measures (e.g.,
L1, L2 norms) and full-reference image quality assessment
(IQA) methods are not applicable here due to the absence of
ground truth LR images; existing No-Reference IQA (NRIQA) metrics [7, 27, 28] cannot be applied either as they rely
on the “naturalness” of HR images, which is not present in
LR images (we will verify this in our experiments).
In this paper, we propose a new quantitative measure
for image downscaling based on Claude Shannon’s ratedistortion theory [5], namely Image Downscaling Assessment by Rate-Distortion (IDA-RD). The main idea of our
IDA-RD measure is that a superior image downscaling algorithm would try to retain as much information as possible in
the LR image, thereby reducing the distortion when being upscaled (a.k.a. super-resolved) to the size of the original HR
image. However, such an upscaling method is non-trivial as,
for our purpose, it must satisfy two challenging requirements:
i) blindness, i.e., it must apply to all kinds of downscaling algorithms without knowing them in advance; ii) stochasticity,
i.e., it must be able to generate a manifold of HR images that
captures the conditional distribution of the super-resolution
process. Our key insight is that both such requirements can
be satisfied by the recent success of deep generative models
in blind and stochastic super-resolution. To demonstrate the
flexibility of our IDA-RD measure, we show that it can be
successfully implemented with two mainstream generative
models: Generative Adversarial Networks [26] and Normalizing Flows [24]. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our IDA-RD measure in evaluating image
downscaling algorithms. Our contributions include:
• Drawing on Shannon’s rate-distortion theory [5], we
propose the Image Downscaling Assessment by Rate-

19363

