This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T4P: Test-Time Training of Trajectory Prediction via Masked Autoencoder
and Actor-specific Token Memory
Daehee Park, Jaeseok Jeong, Sung-Hoon Yoon, Jaewoo Jeong, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST
{bag2824,jason.jeong,yoon307,jeong207,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Previous works

Observed

t-τ
Trajectory prediction is a challenging problem that
requires considering interactions among multiple actors
and the surrounding environment. While data-driven approaches have been used to address this complex problem, they suffer from unreliable predictions under distribution shifts during test time. Accordingly, several online learning methods have been proposed using regression loss from the ground truth of observed data leveraging the auto-labeling nature of trajectory prediction task.
We mainly tackle the following two issues. First, previous works underfit and overfit as they only optimize the
last layer of motion decoder. To this end, we employ
the masked autoencoder (MAE) for representation learning to encourage complex interaction modeling in shifted
test distribution for updating deeper layers. Second, utilizing the sequential nature of driving data, we propose
an actor-specific token memory that enables the test-time
learning of actor-wise motion characteristics. Our proposed method has been validated across various challenging cross-dataset distribution shift scenarios including nuScenes, Lyft, Waymo, and Interaction. Our method
surpasses the performance of existing state-of-the-art online learning methods in terms of both prediction accuracy and computational efficiency. The code is available
at https://github.com/daeheepark/T4P.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction plays a significant role in autonomous
systems, enhancing safety and navigation efficiency [28,
31]. Recently, data-driven methods have shown remarkable
prediction capabilities [1, 16, 38, 52, 55, 57, 60, 81, 89, 90];
however, they are prone to distribution shift [9, 88]. Trajectory prediction models also produce unreliable output when
faced shifts in the data distribution [25], posing significant
risks in various real-world applications. This vulnerability
stems from the ease with which the trajectory data distri-

E

D

Unknown

t

Before τ

Ours

E

D
Masked

Actor Specific
Token
Updated Params

Reconstruction

Figure 1. Previous methods optimize the last layer of the decoder
using regression loss from delayed ground truth. Our method, on
the other hand, learns representation via a masked autoencoder,
which boosts prediction performance by optimizing deeper layers.
In addition, the proposed actor-specific token enables the prediction model to learn actor-wise motion characteristics.

bution can be altered by numerous factors, such as scene
changes and driving habits; i.e. road layout, interaction between agents, driver demographics [6, 51, 82].
To address this challenge, recent methods have proposed
domain adaptation and generalization strategies which aim
to anticipate the distribution shifts and accordingly train the
model [32, 76, 80]. However, due to the wide variety of factors influencing data distribution, the anticipated shifts may
differ significantly from those encountered at test time. As
a result, several online learning methods have been developed to dynamically adapt models during test time [36, 73].
Since trajectory prediction serves as an auto-labeling task
where trajectory data is obtained from object tracking, the
observed past and future trajectory provide both input and
corresponding ground truth for supervision (Lreg ), as depicted at the top right of Fig. 1. Nevertheless, updating the
entire model may ruin the representation learned from the

15065

