This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BadCLIP: Dual-Embedding Guided Backdoor Attack on
Multimodal Contrastive Learning
Siyuan Liang1 Mingli Zhu2 Aishan Liu3,† Baoyuan Wu2 Xiaochun Cao4 Ee-Chien Chang1,†
National University of Singapore 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Beihang University 4 Sun Yat-sen University

pandaliang521@gmail.com

minglizhu@link.cuhk.edu.cn

liuaishan@buaa.edu.cn

wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn

caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn

dcscec@nus.edu.sg

Poisoned Pairs

Abstract

Recently, multimodal contrastive learning (MCL) such as
CLIP [27] has been demonstrating impressive performance
across several multimodal tasks (e.g., image-text retrieval
[4, 6], multimodal search [31, 41]) and serving as the fundament for multiple large models [43]. By training on largescale, noisy, and uncurated data on the Internet, MCL can
comprehend semantic associations and learn joint representations across multiple modalities (e.g., images and text).
† These authors are the corresponding authors.

…

1. Introduction

“A photo of banana”
“A photo of car”
“A photo of horse”
“A photo of dog”
Image Input

Caption Input

ot
oo
fd
ph
“A

ph

an
an
a”
“A

“A photo of a banana.”

…

“A

Wrong
Match

ph

Embedding
Space

og
”

Infected Textual
Encoder

Infected Visual
Encoder

ot
oo
fb

“A bananas with blue
backgrounds”

…

While existing backdoor attacks have successfully infected multimodal contrastive learning models such as
CLIP, they can be easily countered by specialized backdoor
defenses for MCL models. This paper reveals the threats
in this practical scenario and introduces the BadCLIP attack, which is resistant to backdoor detection and model
fine-tuning defenses. To achieve this, we draw motivations
from the perspective of the Bayesian rule and propose a
dual-embedding guided framework for backdoor attacks.
Specifically, we ensure that visual trigger patterns approximate the textual target semantics in the embedding space,
making it challenging to detect the subtle parameter variations induced by backdoor learning on such natural trigger
patterns. Additionally, we optimize the visual trigger patterns to align the poisoned samples with target vision features in order to hinder backdoor unlearning through clean
fine-tuning. Our experiments show a significant improvement in attack success rate (+45.3% ASR) over current
leading methods, even against state-of-the-art backdoor defenses, highlighting our attack’s effectiveness in various
scenarios, including downstream tasks. Our codes can be
found at https://github.com/LiangSiyuan21/
BadCLIP.

Attack in Downstream Applications

Visual
trigger

ot
oo
fc
ar
”

1

Zero-shot prediction task

Figure 1. Illustration of backdoor attack on multimodal contrastive
learning. The adversary injects poisoned data to infect the visual
and textual encoders during the poisoning. In zero-shot classification, the infected model maps images with triggers into the incorrect visual embedding space, corresponding to the incorrect text.

Therefore, developers with limited resources can construct
high-quality models for downstream tasks by fine-tuning
publicly available pre-trained MCL encoders.
Despite the success, MCL has been shown to be vulnerable to malicious attacks [44], where representative backdoor attacks [1, 12] can inject malicious examples into the
training data set so that the model will misclassify a particular input at the test time as an incorrectly targeted embedding [18] like in Fig. 1. By contrast, studying backdoor
attacks is also beneficial for model privacy/copyright protection and enhancing defense [16, 21, 33]. However, existing attacks on MCL can be easily blocked by backdoor
defenses [7, 15, 32, 36]. In practice, after obtaining the pretrained MCL models, defenders can either detect backdoors
in the encoder [11] or eliminate the malicious effects by
fine-tuning on clean datasets [2], which significantly limit
the attacking performance of current backdoor attacks.
In this paper, we study the severe threats in the practical usage scenario of MCL and reveal that the backdoor attack can still remain effective even if downstream
users/defenders adopt backdoor detection and fine-tuning

24645

