This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint2Human: High-quality 3D Human Generation via
Compact Spherical Embedding of 3D Joints
Muxin Zhang1,† , Qiao Feng1,† , Zhuo Su2 , Chao Wen 2 , Zhou Xue3 , Kun Li1,∗
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
PICO IDL, ByteDance 3 Li Auto

Compact Spherical
Embedding

“long hair girl, dress”
Random Sample

“tall boy, jacket”

Text Guidance

Figure 1. With the proposed compact spherical embedding of 3D joints, our method can generate high-quality and high-resolution 3D
humans with reasonable global structure and fine-grained geometry details in an efficient way, based on a native conditional 3D generative
network with 2D diffusion model.

Abstract
3D human generation is increasingly significant in various applications. However, the direct use of 2D generative methods in 3D generation often results in losing local details, while methods that reconstruct geometry from
generated images struggle with global view consistency.
In this work, we introduce Joint2Human, a novel method
that leverages 2D diffusion models to generate detailed 3D
human geometry directly, ensuring both global structure
and local details. To achieve this, we employ the Fourier
occupancy field (FOF) representation, enabling the direct
generation of 3D shapes as preliminary results with 2D
generative models. With the proposed high-frequency en-

hancer and the multi-view recarving strategy, our method
can seamlessly integrate the details from different views into
a uniform global shape. To better utilize the 3D human
prior and enhance control over the generated geometry, we
introduce a compact spherical embedding of 3D joints. This
allows for an effective guidance of pose during the generation process. Additionally, our method can generate 3D
humans guided by textual inputs. Our experimental results
demonstrate the capability of our method to ensure global
structure, local details, high resolution, and low computational cost simultaneously. More results and the code can be
found on our project page at http://cic.tju.edu.
cn/faculty/likun/projects/Joint2Human.

† Equal contribution.
* Corresponding author.

1429

