This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coarse-to-Fine Latent Diffusion for Pose-Guided Person Image Synthesis
Yanzuo Lu1

Manlin Zhang1

Andy J Ma1,2,3 *

Xiaohua Xie1,2,3

Jianhuang Lai1,2,3,4

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Pazhou Lab (HuangPu), Guangzhou, China
{luyz5, zhangmlin3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {majh8, xiexiaoh6, stsljh}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion model is a promising approach to image generation and has been employed for Pose-Guided Person
Image Synthesis (PGPIS) with competitive performance.
While existing methods simply align the person appearance
to the target pose, they are prone to overfitting due to the
lack of a high-level semantic understanding on the source
person image. In this paper, we propose a novel Coarseto-Fine Latent Diffusion (CFLD) method for PGPIS. In the
absence of image-caption pairs and textual prompts, we develop a novel training paradigm purely based on images
to control the generation process of a pre-trained text-toimage diffusion model. A perception-refined decoder is designed to progressively refine a set of learnable queries
and extract semantic understanding of person images as a
coarse-grained prompt. This allows for the decoupling of
fine-grained appearance and pose information controls at
different stages, and thus circumventing the potential overfitting problem. To generate more realistic texture details, a
hybrid-granularity attention module is proposed to encode
multi-scale fine-grained appearance features as bias terms
to augment the coarse-grained prompt. Both quantitative and qualitative experimental results on the DeepFashion benchmark demonstrate the superiority of our method
over the state of the arts for PGPIS. Code is available at
https://github.com/YanzuoLu/CFLD.

1. Introduction
Pose-Guided Person Image Synthesis (PGPIS) aims to
translate the source person image into a specific target
pose while preserving the appearance as much as possible. It has a wide range of applications, including film
production, virtual reality, and fashion e-commerce. Most
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) The appearance of person images varies significantly
given only a textual prompt for image generation by using Stable
Diffusion [35] or ControlNet [55] with OpenPose guidance [3].
(b) Simply aligning the source appearance to the target pose without a semantic understanding of person image can easily lead to
overfitting, such that the generated images become distorted and
unnatural. (c) Our method learns the coarse-grained prompt for
a comprehensive perception of the source image and injects finegrained appearance features as bias terms, thus generating highquality images with better generalization performance.

existing methods along this line are developed based on
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [6, 18, 20, 25–
28, 33, 34, 38, 41, 44, 54, 56, 61, 62]. Nevertheless,
the GAN-based approach may suffer from the instability
of min-max training objective and difficulty in generating
high-quality images in a single forward pass.
As a promising alternative to GANs for image generation, diffusion models synthesize more realistic images progressively from a series of denoising steps. The recently
prevailing text-to-image latent diffusion model, such as Stable Diffusion (SD) [35] may now generate compelling person images conditioned on a given textual prompt. The
appearance of the generated person can be determined by
well-designed prompts [19, 31] or prompt learning [58, 59].
With more reliable structural guidance [29, 55], the synthe-

6420

