This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NC-TTT: A Noise Constrastive Approach for Test-Time Training
David Osowiechi*
Gustavo A. Vargas Hakim∗
Mehrdad Noori
Milad Cheraghalikhani
Ali Bahri
Moslem Yazdanpanah
Ismail Ben Ayed
Christian Desrosiers
ÉTS Montréal, Canada

Abstract

1. Introduction

[12, 21, 24, 26, 27] typically train a model with an extensive source dataset encompassing diverse domains and
augmentations, so that it can achieve a good performance
on test examples from unseen domains, without retraining.
Conversely, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) [2, 11, 25] entails
the dynamic adjustment of the model to test data in realtime, typically adapting to subsets of the new domain, such
as mini-batches. TTA presents a challenging, yet practical
problem as it functions without supervision for test samples or access to the source domain data. While they do
not require training data from diverse domains as DG approaches, TTA methods are often susceptible to the choice
of unsupervised loss used at test time, a factor that can substantially influence their overall performance. Test-Time
Training (TTT), as presented in [5, 7, 15, 19, 23], offers
a compelling alternative to TTA. In TTT, an auxiliary task
is learned from the training data (source domain) and subsequently applied during test-time to refine the model. Generally, unsupervised and self-supervised tasks are selected for
their capacity to support an adaptable process, without relying on labeled data. Finally, employing a dual-task training
approach in the source domain allows the model to be more
confident at test time, as it is already familiar with the auxiliary loss.

A crucial requirement for the success of traditional deep
learning methods is that training and testing data should be
sampled from the same distribution. As widely shown in
the literature [20, 22], this assumption rarely holds in practice and a model’s performance can drop dramatically in the
presence of domain shifts. The field of Domain Adaptation
(DA) has emerged to address this important issue, proposing various mechanisms that adapt learning algorithms to
new domains.
In the realm of domain adaptation, two notable directions
of research have surfaced: Domain Generalization and TestTime Adaptation. Domain Generalization (DG) approaches

Motivated by recent developments in machine learning using Noise-Contrastive Estimation (NCE) [1, 16, 18],
we introduce a Noise-Contrastive Test-Time-Training (NCTTT) method that efficiently learns the distribution of
sources samples by contrasting it with a noisy distribution.
This is achieved by training a discriminator that learns to
distinguish noisy out-of-distribution (OOD) features from
in-distribution ones. At test time, the output of the discriminator is used to guide the adaptation process, modifying the
parameters of the network encoder so that it produces features that match in-distribution ones. Our contributions can
be summarized as follows:

Despite their exceptional performance in vision tasks,
deep learning models often struggle when faced with domain shifts during testing. Test-Time Training (TTT) methods have recently gained popularity by their ability to enhance the robustness of models through the addition of an
auxiliary objective that is jointly optimized with the main
task. Being strictly unsupervised, this auxiliary objective
is used at test time to adapt the model without any access
to labels. In this work, we propose Noise-Contrastive TestTime Training (NC-TTT), a novel unsupervised TTT technique based on the discrimination of noisy feature maps.
By learning to classify noisy views of projected feature
maps, and then adapting the model accordingly on new domains, classification performance can be recovered by an
important margin. Experiments on several popular testtime adaptation baselines demonstrate the advantages of
our method compared to recent approaches for this task.
The code can be found at: https://github.com/
GustavoVargasHakim/NCTTT.git

* Equal

contribution.
david.osowiechi.1@ens.etsmtl.ca,
hakim.1@ens.etsmtl.ca

Correspondence
to
gustavo-adolfo.vargas-

• We present an innovative Test-Time Training approach inspired by the paradigm of Noise-Constrastive Estimation
(NCE). While NCE was initially proposed for generative

6078

