This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLMs are Good Action Recognizers
Haoxuan Qu1 Yujun Cai2 Jun Liu1†
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 Nanyang Technological University
haoxuan qu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, yujun001@e.ntu.edu.sg, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Skeleton-based action recognition has attracted lots of
research attention. Recently, to build an accurate skeletonbased action recognizer, a variety of works have been proposed. Among them, some works use large model architectures as backbones of their recognizers to boost the skeleton
data representation capability, while some other works pretrain their recognizers on external data to enrich the knowledge. In this work, we observe that large language models
which have been extensively used in various natural language processing tasks generally hold both large model architectures and rich implicit knowledge. Motivated by this,
we propose a novel LLM-AR framework, in which we investigate treating the Large Language Model as an Action
Recognizer. In our framework, we propose a linguistic projection process to project each input action signal (i.e., each
skeleton sequence) into its “sentence format” (i.e., an “action sentence”). Moreover, we also incorporate our framework with several designs to further facilitate this linguistic
projection process. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
efficacy of our proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition aims to categorize the actions
performed by humans into a pre-defined list of classes. It
is relevant to a variety of applications, such as humancomputer interaction [37], intelligent surveillance [36], and
virtual reality [13]. In the past few years, skeleton-based
action recognition [3, 5, 6, 12, 53, 54, 62, 70] has received
a lot of research attention with the notice that skeleton is
a succinct yet informative representation of human behaviors. Yet, despite the considerable progress, skeleton-based
action recognition still remains a challenging task [78], and
to build a more accurate skeleton-based action recognizer,
various recent works have been proposed from different perspectives. Among them, some recent works [15, 59] pro† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed LLM-AR framework. In
our framework, given an input action signal, we first perform a
linguistic projection process to acquire the corresponding “action
sentence”. We then perform action recognition via the large language model with its pre-trained weights untouched to keep its
pre-learned rich knowledge.

posed to utilize large model architectures (such as transformers) as the backbone of their action recognizers to
achieve stronger representation capability and capture more
subtle differences among different actions. On the other
hand, some other works [72, 80] proposed to pre-train their
action recognizers on external data in order for their action
recognizers to handle this task with richer knowledge.
Recently, large language models such as GPT [2] and
LLaMA [56] have become quite popular and have been extensively applied in handling various human languages. For
example, having been pre-trained over various human languages and learned common language-related characteristics, large language models can be very effectively and efficiently adapted to even new human languages unseen during pre-training [49]. Moreover, people have also treated
large language models as interpreters in code interpretation
[14] and generators in essay generation [22], and found that
large language models can handle these tasks effectively.
Motivated by this, in this work we are wondering, if we
can also treat the large language model as an action recognizer in skeleton-based human action recognition? In general, large language models hold some characteristics that
are useful for action recognition. Specifically, pre-trained
over a tremendously large corpus [2, 56] that generally contains very rich human-centric behavior descriptions, large
language models that hold large model architectures could
naturally contain rich implicit knowledge [46, 50] of human
behaviors, and hold strong capability in handling different
inputs. Thus, it can be very promising if we treat the large

18395

