This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improved Self-Training for Test-Time Adaptation
Jing Ma
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
jingma0011@gmail.com

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) is a technique to improve the
performance of a pre-trained source model on a target distribution without using any labeled data. However, existing
self-trained TTA methods often face the challenges of unreliable pseudo-labels and unstable model optimization. In
this paper, we propose an Improved Self-Training (IST) approach, which addresses these challenges by enhancing the
pseudo-label quality and stabilizing the adaptation process.
Specifically, we use a simple augmentation strategy to generate multiple views of each test sample, and construct a
graph structure to correct the pseudo-labels based on the
similarity of the latent features. Moreover, we adopt a parameter moving average scheme to smooth the model updates and prevent catastrophic forgetting. Instead of using
a model with fixed label space, we explore the adaptability of the foundation model CLIP to various downstream
tasks at test time. Extensive experiments on various benchmarks show that IST can achieve significant and consistent
improvements over the existing TTA methods in classification, detection, and segmentation tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have performed superiorly in a
broad scope of tasks, and exhibit surprising zero-shot generalization capabilities. However, in practical applications,
behavior decline may occur owing to the distribution shifts
of unknown domains, which leads to laborious efforts in
data collection and model retraining. To address this issue,
Test-Time Adaptation (TTA), aims to adapt the model to
the target domain at test time, has emerged as a promising
paradigm of increasing attention and research [19, 29, 30].
Early methods of TTA [22, 27, 30, 32] explore adapting
the activation statistics and updating the affine transformation parameters of batch normalization layers to mitigate the
distribution shifts from clean to corrupted images. These
approaches are easily scalable to deep neural networks with
different architectures, but their performance is often confined to specific ranges of distribution shifts due to the lim-

Figure 1. An illustration of test-time adaptation. The approach
employs source models from a model zoo, where the source data is
unknown. Source models adapt to target domains using one batch
of test samples at a time. Self-training is a key component for
updating models and providing more accurate online predictions.

ited adaptive capacity of batch normalization [2]. A series
of works [4, 8, 20, 29] leverage self-supervised learning
for test-time training (TTT) to update the model parameters
before making predictions, which is conditional on having
correlated gradients between the loss functions of the auxiliary and main tasks. However, an inappropriate pretext task
may be detrimental to the learned model [20]. Moreover,
although TTT is not restricted by the type of main task, it
typically requires modifying the training process to accommodate a self-supervised task, which increases the cost of
applying TTT to pre-trained models [36].
Another line of research seeks to utilize the predictions
of the model itself as pseudo-labels and re-train the model,
which is known as the self-training strategy. Owing to the
poor calibration of neural networks [10], pseudo-labels generated by the source model may be inaccurate and noisy for
target data. Liang, et al. [19] propose to attain class-wise
prototypes by clustering and further obtain cleaner pseudolabels. Recent works [3, 18, 28, 31, 35] suggest performing
different data augmentations on a test sample to improve
the model’s prediction. On the other hand, some works
[3, 24, 31, 32] focus on stabilizing the adaptation procedure at test time by adopting active selection, re-weighting
strategy, or knowledge distillation. Generally, self-trainingbased approaches make no strong assumptions about distri-

23701

