This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Noisy Correspondence by Geometrical Structure Consistency
Learning
Zihua Zhao1 , Mengxi Chen1 , Tianjie Dai1,2 , Jiangchao Yao1,2 B , Bo Han3 ,
Ya Zhang1,2 , Yanfeng Wang1,2 B
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Hong Kong Baptist University
{sjtuszzh, mxchen mc, elfenreigen, Sunarker, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn,
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Noisy correspondence that refers to mismatches in
cross-modal data pairs, is prevalent on human-annotated
or web-crawled datasets. Prior approaches to leverage
such data mainly consider the application of uni-modal
noisy label learning without amending the impact on both
cross-modal and intra-modal geometrical structures in multimodal learning. Actually, we find that both structures
are effective to discriminate noisy correspondence through
structural differences when being well-established. Inspired
by this observation, we introduce a Geometrical Structure Consistency (GSC) method to infer the true correspondence. Specifically, GSC ensures the preservation of geometrical structures within and between modalities, allowing
for the accurate discrimination of noisy samples based on
structural differences. Utilizing these inferred true correspondence labels, GSC refines the learning of geometrical
structures by filtering out the noisy samples. Experiments
across four cross-modal datasets confirm that GSC effectively identifies noisy samples and significantly outperforms
the current leading methods. Source code is available at:
https://github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/GSC.

1. Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval [21, 27, 28] that focuses on querying the most relevant samples across modalities, has garnered considerable interest in multimodal scenarios [3, 36].
Most current methods presuppose large quantity of wellannotated data is available. However, real-world datasets [4,
16, 34] which own non-expert annotation or collected by
web crawling are prone to noisy correspondence. Such discrepancy between modalities can cause severe degradation
to retrieval models if without proper handling [15, 31].
Recently, learning with noisy correspondence has gath-

Figure 1. Noisy correspondence impacts both cross-modal and
intra-modal geometrical structures. Left: Cross-modal distance
between mismatched text and image is initially distant but wrongly
reduced. Right: Intra-modal structures of mismatched image
(above) and text (below) are initially distinct but wrongly aligned,
thus similar samples within the modality are pulled apart.

ered increasing attention. The majority of these efforts
share a common target of accurately learning the true soft
correspondence labels that can reliably indicate the matching degree between data pairs. For example, NCR [15] pioneered this area by employing a co-teaching approach to
classify samples with higher losses as noisy. Such method,
which has been further refined by [10, 37] by introducing
meta-learning and leveraging clean data subsets, however
fundamentally remains a variation of the uni-modal sample
selection philosophy [23]. They may not be very effective
to identify the accurate correspondence and finally overfit
on noise in face of the intricacies of multimodal learning.
Noisy correspondence affects multimodal representations in a more complicated way than uni-modal noisy label
problem. As illustrated in Fig. 1, in the perspective of the
cross-modal geometrical structure that refers to the similarities between representations across modalities, the presence
of noisy correspondence can disrupt this structure by er-

27381

