This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PartDistill: 3D Shape Part Segmentation by Vision-Language Model Distillation
Ardian Umam1 Cheng-Kun Yang2 Min-Hung Chen3 Jen-Hui Chuang1 Yen-Yu Lin1
1
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 2 MediaTek 3 NVIDIA

Abstract
This paper proposes a cross-modal distillation framework, PartDistill, which transfers 2D knowledge from
vision-language models (VLMs) to facilitate 3D shape part
segmentation. PartDistill addresses three major challenges
in this task: the lack of 3D segmentation in invisible or
undetected regions in the 2D projections, inconsistent 2D
predictions by VLMs, and the lack of knowledge accumulation across different 3D shapes. PartDistill consists of
a teacher network that uses a VLM to make 2D predictions and a student network that learns from the 2D predictions while extracting geometrical features from multiple 3D shapes to carry out 3D part segmentation. A bidirectional distillation, including forward and backward
distillations, is carried out within the framework, where the
former forward distills the 2D predictions to the student network, and the latter improves the quality of the 2D predictions, which subsequently enhances the final 3D segmentation. Moreover, PartDistill can exploit generative models that facilitate effortless 3D shape creation for generating knowledge sources to be distilled. Through extensive
experiments, PartDistill boosts the existing methods with
substantial margins on widely used ShapeNetPart and PartNetE datasets, by more than 15% and 12% higher mIoU
scores, respectively. The code for this work is available at
https://github.com/ardianumam/PartDistill.

1. Introduction
3D shape part segmentation is essential to various 3D vision
applications, such as shape editing [23, 45], stylization [29],
and augmentation [40]. Despite its significance, acquiring
part annotations for 3D data, such as point clouds or mesh
shapes, is labor-intensive and time-consuming.
Zero-shot learning [8, 41] generalizes a model to unseen categories without annotations and has been notably
uplifted by recent advances in vision-language models
(VLMs) [21, 22, 37, 46]. By learning on large-scale imagetext data pairs, VLMs show promising generalization abilities on various 2D recognition tasks. Recent research efforts [1, 24, 48, 52] have been made to utilize VLMs for
zero-shot 3D part segmentation, where a 3D shape is pro-

Figure 1. We present a distillation method that carries out zeroshot 3D shape part segmentation with a 2D vision-language model.
After projecting an input 3D point cloud into multi-view 2D images, the 2D teacher (2D-T) and the 3D student (3D-S) networks
are applied to the 2D images and 3D point cloud, respectively.
Instead of direct transfer, our method carries bi-directional distillations, including forward and backward distillations, and yields
better 3D part segmentation than the existing method.

jected into multi-view 2D images, and a VLM is applied
to these images for 2D prediction acquisition. Specifically,
PointCLIP [48] and PointCLIPv2 [52] produce 3D pointwise semantic segmentation by averaging their corresponding 2D pixel-wise predictions. Meanwhile, PartSLIP [24]
and SATR [1] present a designated weighting mechanism
to aggregate multi-view bounding box predictions.
The key step of zero-shot 3D part segmentation with
2D VLMs, e.g., [1, 24, 48, 52], lies in the transfer from
2D pixel-wise or bounding-box-wise predictions to 3D
point segmentation. This step is challenging due to three
major issues. First (I1 ), some 3D regions lack corresponding 2D predictions in multi-view images, which are
caused by occlusion or not being covered by any bounding
boxes, illustrated with black and gray points, respectively,
in Fig. 1. This issue is considered a limitation in the previous work [1, 24, 48, 52]. Second (I2 ), there exists potential
inconsistency among 2D predictions in multi-view images
caused by inaccurate VLM predictions. Third (I3 ), existing
work [1, 24, 48, 52] directly transfers 2D predictions to segmentation of a single 3D shape. The 2D predictions yielded
based on appearance features are not optimal for 3D geo-

3470

