This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RadarDistill: Boosting Radar-based Object Detection Performance via
Knowledge Distillation from LiDAR Features
Jisong Kim1
Kwangjin Choi1 *
Geonho Bang1 *
1
2
Hanyang University, Korea
KAIST, Korea
1

{ghbang, kjchoi, jskim}@spa.hanyang.ac.kr

2

3

Dongsuk Kum2
Jun Won Choi3†
Seoul National University, Korea

dskum@kaist.ac.kr

3

junwchoi@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
The inherent noisy and sparse characteristics of radar
data pose challenges in finding effective representations for
3D object detection. In this paper, we propose RadarDistill, a novel knowledge distillation (KD) method, which
can improve the representation of radar data by leveraging LiDAR data. RadarDistill successfully transfers desirable characteristics of LiDAR features into radar features using three key components: Cross-Modality Alignment (CMA), Activation-based Feature Distillation (AFD),
and Proposal-based Feature Distillation (PFD). CMA enhances the density of radar features by employing multiple layers of dilation operations, effectively addressing the
challenge of inefficient knowledge transfer from LiDAR to
radar. AFD selectively transfers knowledge based on regions of the LiDAR features, with a specific focus on areas where activation intensity exceeds a predefined threshold. PFD similarly guides the radar network to selectively
mimic features from the LiDAR network within the object
proposals. Our comparative analyses conducted on the
nuScenes datasets demonstrate that RadarDistill achieves
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance for radar-only object
detection task, recording 20.5% in mAP and 43.7% in NDS.
Also, RadarDistill significantly improves the performance
of the camera-radar fusion model.

1. Introduction
While 3D perception based on camera and LiDAR sensors has been widely studied, radar sensors are now gaining
attention due to their affordability and reliability in adverse
weather conditions. Radar sensors can locate objects in a
Bird’s Eye View (BEV) and also measure their radial velocity using Doppler frequency analysis. However, when compared to LiDAR or camera sensors, radar’s major limitations are its lower spatial resolution and a higher likelihood
* Equal contributions
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of Proposed RadarDistill. Our RadarDistill method facilitates knowledge transfer from LiDAR features
to radar features, enhancing the quality of radar features for Bird’s
Eye View (BEV) object detection.

of false positives due to multi-path reflections. For decades,
traditional object detection and tracking methods, based on
manually crafted models, have been developed to overcome
these limitations by many radar manufacturers. While deep
neural networks (DNNs) have considerably improved 3D
perception in camera and LiDAR sensors, similar advancements have not been mirrored in radar sensor-specific architectures. There are only a handful of studies that have
applied deep neural networks to radar data. For instance,
KPConvPillars [29] and Radar-PointGNN [27] leveraged
KPConv [28] and graph neural networks, respectively, to
detect objects using radar point clouds. However, these
methods have not yet achieved the level of significant improvements realized with camera or LiDAR data. Recently,
it was shown that radar can be effectively fused with camera or LiDAR data to enhance the robustness of 3D object

15491

