This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Dynamic Kernel Prior Model for Unsupervised Blind Image Super-Resolution
Zhixiong Yang1
Jingyuan Xia1,∗
Shuanghui Zhang1
Zhen Liu1
1

Shengxi Li2
Yaowen Fu1

Xinghua Huang1
Yongxiang Liu1

College of Electronic Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
College of Electronic Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
yzx21@nudt.edu.cn, j.xia10@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning-based methods have achieved significant successes on solving the blind super-resolution (BSR)
problem. However, most of them request supervised pretraining on labelled datasets. This paper proposes an unsupervised kernel estimation model, named dynamic kernel
prior (DKP), to realize an unsupervised and pre-trainingfree learning-based algorithm for solving the BSR problem.
DKP can adaptively learn dynamic kernel priors to realize
real-time kernel estimation, and thereby enables superior
HR image restoration performances. This is achieved by
a Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling process on random
kernel distributions. The learned kernel prior is then assigned to optimize a blur kernel estimation network, which
entails a network-based Langevin dynamic optimization
strategy. These two techniques ensure the accuracy of the
kernel estimation. DKP can be easily used to replace the
kernel estimation models in the existing methods, such as
Double-DIP and FKP-DIP, or be added to the off-the-shelf
image restoration model, such as diffusion model. In this
paper, we incorporate our DKP model with DIP and diffusion model, referring to DIP-DKP and Diff-DKP, for validations. Extensive simulations on Gaussian and motion
kernel scenarios demonstrate that the proposed DKP model
can significantly improve the kernel estimation with comparable runtime and memory usage, leading to state-ofthe-art BSR results. The code is available at https:
//github.com/XYLGroup/DKP.

1. Introduction
Deep learning provides a new avenue for solving the blind
super-resolution (BSR) problem, which aims to reconstruct
Zhixiong Yang and Jingyuan Xia contributed equally to this work
(*Corresponding author: Jingyuan Xia). This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China, projects 61921001, 62131020,
62322121 and 62171448, and the NSFDYS of Hunan 2022J110067.

high-resolution (HR) images from the low-resolution (LR)
observations with unknown blur kernels, and is known to
be highly non-convex and ill-posed. To alleviate the nonconvexity and ill-posedness, most of learning-based BSR
methods incorporate image priors via supervised learning
based on paired LR-HR samples. However, pre-defined labeled training datasets are expensive, time-consuming, and
even not feasible in specific scenarios, such as for high
speed targets (e.g., satellites, aircraft) and medical images
(e.g., beating heart). Thus, unsupervised learning-based solutions are highly demanded for BSR problem.
The existing BSR methods can be roughly divided into
model-based and learning-based strategies in terms of the
priors adopted to provide performance guarantee. Modelbased approaches [19, 21, 33, 51] typically adopt handdesigned and explicit constraints as regularizations on image properties, or expert knowledge of the blur kernel.
Meanwhile, learning-based BSR methods [12, 16, 20, 27–
29, 49, 53, 54, 56] aim to train an end-to-end network with
paired LR-HR image samples to leverage data priors for
boosting performances. However, these methods highly demand the data and need to undergo throughing pre-training
before applications, leading to limited generalization ability towards varying blur kernels. To alleviate this issue,
quite a few methods [5, 13, 40, 50, 57, 59] substitute the
cumbersome training in advance by a well-trained diffusion model with significantly less fine-tuning samples in an
off-the-shelf fashion. On the other side, a slice of works
[3, 17, 25, 34, 39, 51] propose to replace the HR image data
priors by kernel priors, which are more substantial, economical and efficient to be trained. However, both of these advances are underlying the supervised learning scheme with
necessity of training on labeled datasets, still hindering the
flexibility and generalization ability towards the BSR tasks
with different kernels and unknown HR ground truths.
In this paper, we propose a dynamic kernel prior (DKP)
generation model that can be plug-in with the majority of
image restoration (IR) models, to solve BSR problem in an

26046

