This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TeTriRF: Temporal Tri-Plane Radiance Fields for Efficient Free-Viewpoint Video
Minye Wu
𝑷y𝑧

𝑷𝑥𝑧

𝑷𝑥𝑦

𝑽𝜎

Zehao Wang

Georgios Kouros
KU Leuven

Tinne Tuytelaars

Feature Plane
Sequence

-

Density Grid
Sequence

Figure 1. Left: Temporal Tri-Plane Radiance Fields structure with plane-grid hybrid representation. Middle: TeTriRF results, showcasing
novel view synthesis in dynamic scenes. Right: Comparison with existing methods in storage, speed, and quality, where larger circles
indicate better quality.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) revolutionize the realm
of visual media by providing photorealistic Free-Viewpoint
Video (FVV) experiences, offering viewers unparalleled immersion and interactivity. However, the technology’s significant storage requirements and the computational complexity involved in generation and rendering currently limit
its broader application. To close this gap, this paper
presents Temporal Tri-Plane Radiance Fields (TeTriRF), a
novel technology that significantly reduces the storage size
for Free-Viewpoint Video (FVV) while maintaining low-cost
generation and rendering. TeTriRF introduces a hybrid representation with tri-planes and voxel grids to support scaling up to long-duration sequences and scenes with complex motions or rapid changes. We propose a group training scheme tailored to achieving high training efficiency
and yielding temporally consistent, low-entropy scene representations on feature domain. Leveraging these properties of the representations, we introduce a compression
pipeline with off-the-shelf video codecs, achieving an order
of magnitude less storage size compared to the state-of-theart. Our experiments demonstrate that TeTriRF can achieve
competitive quality with a higher compression rate.

1. Introduction
Advanced VR/AR devices are boosting interest in FreeViewpoint Video (FVV), which allows users to choose their
own viewing angles for a unique and immersive exploration

experience. The emergence of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF), as introduced in [24], has significantly advanced
FVV demonstrating unprecedented photorealism in rendering. However, one main challenge with this technology,
apart from its rendering speed, is the extensive storage space
required for preserving reconstructed 4D data. This requirement complicates the process of transferring and storing
such data on user devices, making the creation and use of
long sequence FVV increasingly impractical.
Recent advances in NeRF facilitate dynamic scene rendering for FVV generation. Some models [8, 22, 26, 29]
use deformation fields to model scene motion, mapping
each frame to a canonical space. While these capture dynamics effectively, they are constrained by the high computational load of implicit feature decoding [8, 26, 29] or
by the large storage needs of explicit 3D grid-based representations [22]. Alternatively, novel radiance field representations have been proposed to record dynamic scenes.
They incorporate 4D data using techniques like planar factorization [9], Fourier coefficients [39], and latent embeddings [19]. By training jointly across multiple frames,
these methods achieve more efficient sequential frame reconstruction. However, their overly compact representation
with limited capacity compromise their performance in capturing complex motions and long sequences. Most recently,
several methods [28, 34, 40] have been developed to significantly improve the storage-performance trade-off. However, NeRFPlayer [34] suffers from a notably slow rendering speed, which prevents real-time playback for FVV. Dynamic MLP Maps [28] and ReRF [40], on the other hand,

6487

