This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Building a Strong Pre-Training Baseline for Universal 3D Large-Scale Perception
Haoming Chen1 , Zhizhong Zhang1† , Yanyun Qu3 , Ruixin Zhang4 , Xin Tan1,2 , Yuan Xie1,2
1
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, Chongqing, China
3
Xiamen University, Fujian, China
4
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
chenhaomingbob@gmail.com, {zzzhang, xtan, yxie}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn,
yyqu@xmu.edu.cn, ruixinzhang@tencent.com
†

Corresponding Author

(a) Building 2D-3D Feature Mapping

Scene B
( 𝑺𝑺𝑩𝑩 )

𝑭𝑭𝒃𝒃𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐
𝑭𝑭𝒃𝒃𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐

2D Network

Image of Scene A (𝑺𝑺𝑨𝑨 )

Superpixel
Information

Grouping Points
By Superpixel

Point Cloud of Scene A (𝑺𝑺𝑨𝑨 )

3D Network

Destroying
Consistency
Cross Scenes

𝑭𝑭𝒂𝒂𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐

A Pair of
2D-3D Data

(b) Frame-Level Consistency
Scene B
( 𝑺𝑺𝑩𝑩 )

𝑭𝑭𝒅𝒅𝟑𝟑𝟑𝟑

𝒄𝒄

𝑭𝑭𝒆𝒆𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐

2D Network

Pixel

𝒄𝒄

𝒄𝒄

𝒎𝒎
𝑷𝑷𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐

Keeping
Consistency
Cross Scenes

𝑭𝑭𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐

Pixel of 𝒄𝒄𝒎𝒎 Pixel of 𝒄𝒄𝒏𝒏 𝑭𝑭𝒂𝒂𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐 with 𝒄𝒄𝒎𝒎 𝑭𝑭𝒃𝒃𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐 with 𝒄𝒄𝒏𝒏 𝑭𝑭𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐 with 𝒄𝒄𝒏𝒏 𝑭𝑭𝒅𝒅𝟑𝟑𝟑𝟑 with 𝒄𝒄𝒎𝒎

Scene A
( 𝑺𝑺𝑨𝑨 )

𝒏𝒏
𝑷𝑷𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐

𝒇𝒇

Image of Scene B (𝑺𝑺𝑩𝑩 )

Scene A
( 𝑺𝑺𝑨𝑨 )

(c) Scene-Level Consistency (Ours)

𝑆𝑆𝐴𝐴

𝑭𝑭𝒆𝒆𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐 with 𝒄𝒄𝒎𝒎 𝑭𝑭𝒇𝒇𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐 with 𝒄𝒄𝒏𝒏

𝑆𝑆𝐵𝐵

𝒄𝒄

𝒎𝒎
𝑷𝑷𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐

𝒄𝒄

𝒏𝒏
𝑷𝑷𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐

Positive Pair Negative Pair

Figure 1. Brief illustration of the current multi-modality 3D pre-training paradigm and our proposed scene-level consistency. (a) we
show the process of superpixel-superpoint association and clearly observe that superpixels with the same semantics can exist in the same
scene or in different scenes, e.g., the green squares. (b) We summarize existing pre-training methods and find that they all use frame-level
consistency to learn 3D representations. Moreover, we believe that this constraint breaks the semantic consistency across views/frames
and visualize the drawback. (c) We show our proposed scene-level consistency, which keeping the semantic consistency across various
scenes. As a result, we achieve SOTA on three perceptual tasks with limited 3D annotation (Tab. 1). Our CSC framework builds a strong
pre-training baseline for universal 3D Large-scale perception.

Abstract
An effective pre-training framework with universal 3D
representations is extremely desired in perceiving largescale dynamic scenes. However, establishing such an
ideal framework that is both task-generic and label-efficient
poses a challenge in unifying the representation of the
same primitive across diverse scenes. The current contrastive 3D pre-training methods typically follow a frame-

level consistency, which focuses on the 2D-3D relationships
in each detached image. Such inconsiderate consistency
greatly hampers the promising path of reaching an universal pre-training framework: (1) The cross-scene semantic self-conflict, i.e., the intense collision between primitive
segments of the same semantics from different scenes; (2)
Lacking a globally unified bond that pushes the cross-scene
semantic consistency into 3D representation learning. To

19925

