This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Referring Expression Counting
Siyang Dai1 , Jun Liu1 ,* Ngai-Man Cheung1 *
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design
siyang dai@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, {jun liu,ngaiman cheung}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing counting tasks are limited to the class level,
which don’t account for fine-grained details within the
class. In real applications, it often requires in-context or
referring human input for counting target objects. Take urban analysis as an example, fine-grained information such
as traffic flow in different directions, pedestrians and vehicles waiting or moving at different sides of the junction, is
more beneficial. Current settings of both class-specific and
class-agnostic counting treat objects of the same class indifferently, which pose limitations in real use cases. To this
end, we propose a new task named Referring Expression
Counting (REC) which aims to count objects with different attributes within the same class. To evaluate the REC
task, we create a novel dataset named REC-8K which contains 8011 images and 17122 referring expressions. Experiments on REC-8K show that our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance compared with several textbased counting methods and an open-set object detection
model. We also outperform prior models on the class agnostic counting (CAC) benchmark [36] for the zero-shot setting, and perform on par with the few-shot methods. Code
and dataset is available at https://github.com/
sydai/referring-expression-counting.

1. Introduction
The objective of counting tasks is to predict the number of
the target object in an image. The counting task has evolved
from class-specific to class-agnostic through the years. The
trend clearly indicates an expansion in scope from closedset to open-set. The next step is to further enhance counting
models to handle more fine-grained and in-context queries.
Industries and businesses require specified and customized quantitative analysis in order to create social and
economic values. Specifically, such fine-grained analysis
can empower transportation industry for traffic monitoring
and crowd analysis, retail businesses for customer demo* Corresponding authors

Figure 1. Comparison of class agnostic counting (CAC) task and
the proposed Referring Expression Counting (REC) task. CAC
takes class name [54] or class in natural language [2] or class description [2, 32] as input and count at class-level. REC aims to
count objects in a fine-grained and in-context manner, essentially
learning to differentiate attributes of the same-class objects.

graphic analysis, warehouses for inventory count, farms for
livestock management, government agencies for wildlife
monitoring, etc. To this end, we propose a novel counting
task named Referring Expression Counting (REC), which
aims to count fine-grained and contextual objects within the
same class e.g. ”female/male customer in the shop”, ”person in the first/second queue”, etc.
In Fig. 1, we illustrate the difference between the proposed REC task and the existing class-agnostic counting
(CAC) task. The fundamental difference is that CAC aims
to count at class-level while REC aims to count in a finegrained manner for objects of the same class but with different attributes. Two close works to ours are Teaching
CLIP to Count to Ten [32] and CounTX [2]. The former
proposes the CountBench, which is obtained by filtering a
large-scale image-text dataset. The authors look for captions that contain a number between two and ten, which
aligns with the count of a target object in the image, e.g.
”two zebras in Cape Town”. The objective is to enhance
contrastive models with counting capability but not to count
in a fine-grained manner. In CounTX, the authors consider
that class names are not natural language and some class
names in the original dataset [36] are incorrect or inaccu-

16985

