This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MuseChat: A Conversational Music Recommendation System for Videos
Zhikang Dong *
Stony Brook University

Xiulong Liu *
University of Washington

Bin Chen
Bytedance.com

zhikang.dong.1@stonybrook.edu

xl1995@uw.edu

chen.bin@bytedance.com

Paweł Polak
Stony Brook University

Peng Zhang
Bytedance.com

pawel.polak@stonybrook.edu

zhang.peng@bytedance.com

Abstract
Music recommendation for videos attracts growing interest in multi-modal research. However, existing systems
focus primarily on content compatibility, often ignoring the
users’ preferences. Their inability to interact with users
for further refinements or to provide explanations leads to
a less satisfying experience. We address these issues with
MuseChat, a first-of-its-kind dialogue-based recommendation system that personalizes music suggestions for videos.
Our system consists of two key functionalities with associated modules: recommendation and reasoning. The recommendation module takes a video along with optional information including previous suggested music and user’s
preference as inputs and retrieves an appropriate music
matching the context. The reasoning module, equipped with
the power of Large Language Model (Vicuna-7B) and extended to multi-modal inputs, is able to provide reasonable explanation for the recommended music. To evaluate the effectiveness of MuseChat, we build a large-scale
dataset, conversational music recommendation for videos,
that simulates a two-turn interaction between a user and
a recommender based on accurate music track information. Experiment results show that MuseChat achieves significant improvements over existing video-based music retrieval methods as well as offers strong interpretability and
interactability. The dataset of this work is available at
https://dongzhikang.github.io/musechat.

1. Introduction
Music is an essential component in videos, enhancing both
the viewer’s experience and their understanding of the
content. While existing music recommendation systems
are proficient at selecting tracks that align with a video’s
* Equally contributed. Work partially done during the internship at Tik-

Tok.

theme—such as scary music for a horror film or upbeat
tunes for a dance clip—these systems often neglect individual user preferences. For example, an ‘80s enthusiast may
favor synth-pop over modern pop music for a nostalgiathemed video, even though both are categorized as “pop.”
The challenge of personalized recommendation remains
relevant, as many systems leverage user profiles and activity
data to generate recommendations. However, we identify
two key limitations: (1) the inability to consistently meet
user preferences, and (2) the cold-start problem for new
users without prior data. Current music recommendation
systems aim to provide lists of songs based on user history,
but these may not always align with user needs for specific
videos. This not only affects user experience but also underscores the complexity of predicting preferences, which may
deviate due to factors like user’s recent trends. We propose
a feedback mechanism to mitigate these limitations. This
would allow the system to adjust its recommendations according to user feedback, aligning more closely with changing preferences. For new users without historical data, a
cold-start scenario arises, leading to content-driven recommendation once again.
In this study, we introduce MuseChat, a comprehensive
conversational music recommendation system for videos.
As shown in Figure 1, MuseChat consists of two main modules: the music recommendation module and the sentence
generator module. Users begin with uploading a video and
receive a music recommendation tailored to the video’s content. MuseChat enables user-system interactions through
dialogues in natural language. At each dialogue turn, users
are empowered by the music recommendation module in
MuseChat. They can refine recommendations by specifying
their preferences in natural language, such as mood, genre,
instruments, theme, and artist details. This process continues until they identify their desired music track. Another
distinguishing feature is the system’s interpretability versus
the “black box” nature of conventional music recommenda-

12775

