This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DemoFusion: Democratising High-Resolution Image Generation With No $$$
Ruoyi Du1,4† , Dongliang Chang2∗ , Timothy Hospedales3 , Yi-Zhe Song4 , Zhanyu Ma1
1
PRIS, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Tsinghua University, China 3 University of Edinburgh, UK 4 SketchX, University of Surrey, UK
{duruoyi, mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn, changdongliang@pris-cv.cn,
t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk, y.song@surrey.ac.uk
https://ruoyidu.github.io/demofusion/demofusion.html

Figure 1. Selected landscape samples of DemoFusion versus SDXL [24] (all images in the figure are presented at their actual sizes).
SDXL can synthesize images up to a resolution of 10242 , while DemoFusion extends SDXL to generate images at 4×, 16×, and even
higher resolutions without any fine-tuning or prohibitive memory demands. All generated images are produced using a single RTX 3090
GPU. Best viewed ZOOMED-IN.

Abstract
High-resolution image generation with Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) has immense potential but, due
to the enormous capital investment required for training,
it is increasingly centralised to a few large corporations,
and hidden behind paywalls. This paper aims to democratise high-resolution GenAI by advancing the frontier of
high-resolution generation while remaining accessible to a
broad audience. We demonstrate that existing Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) possess untapped potential for higher† The work is done while Ruoyi Du visiting the People-Centred AI
Institute at the University of Surrey.
∗ Corresponding Author

resolution image generation. Our novel DemoFusion
framework seamlessly extends open-source GenAI models,
employing Progressive Upscaling, Skip Residual, and Dilated Sampling mechanisms to achieve higher-resolution
image generation. The progressive nature of DemoFusion
requires more passes, but the intermediate results can serve
as “previews”, facilitating rapid prompt iteration.

1. Introduction
Generating high-resolution images with Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) models has demonstrated remarkable potential [1, 19, 23]. However, these capabilities are increasingly centralised. Training high-resolution image gen-

6159

