This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Vision-Language Pre-training by Cluster Masking

1. Introduction
Images contain a great deal of redundant information, making it challenging to efficiently learn representations from
them at scale. Recent work has addressed this problem
by masking image patches during vision-language contrastive learning [15, 33, 36, 70]. One simple approach
is to drop a large fraction of the patches at random, making training more efficient by reducing the computational
cost and memory usage in each training iteration [36]. An
alternative strategy is to mask sets of semantically related
patches [15, 33, 70], such as those that belong to the same
object. This forces the learned model to predict words that
describes missing scene structures from context, improving
the learned representation. However, this approach requires
a separate mechanism to group together semantically related patches, which adds considerable complexity to the
learning procedure and is computationally expensive.
We propose a simple masking strategy for multimodal
contrastive learning that avoids these shortcomings. During
training, we mask random clusters of patches (Fig. 1). For
this clustering, we use the patches’ raw RGB values as the
feature representation. Our approach takes advantage of the
fact that simple measures of visual similarity can often capture coherent visual structures, such as object parts [18, 53],
* Equal contribution. Author order was determined by a coin flip.

Random Mask

We propose a simple strategy for masking image patches
during visual-language contrastive learning that improves
the quality of the learned representations and the training
speed. During each iteration of training, we randomly mask
clusters of visually similar image patches, as measured by
their raw pixel intensities. This provides an extra learning
signal, beyond the contrastive training itself, since it forces
a model to predict words for masked visual structures solely
from context. It also speeds up training by reducing the
amount of data used in each image. We evaluate the effectiveness of our model by pre-training on a number of benchmarks, finding that it outperforms other masking strategies,
such as FLIP, on the quality of the learned representation.

Cluster Masking

Abstract

Original Image

Zixuan Pan*
Andrew Owens
University of Michigan

Caption

Zihao Wei*

(a) A red and gold (b) A burgundy lowpainted fire
rider show-quality,
hydrant on the street. hot rod Chevy truck.

(c) Two surf boars

on a beach
near the water.

Figure 1. Cluster masking. We mask random clusters of visually
similar image patches when training contrastive vision-language
models (bottom). This masking strategy distinguishes our approach from methods that independently mask image patches for
efficiency [36] (middle), while providing a similar improvement in
training speed. It provides an extra learning signal, since it forces
a model to predict words for missing scene structures solely from
context.

especially when clusters are sampled randomly (Fig. 1).
Our approach thus leads to more efficient training, like approaches that independently drop patches [36], while improving the learned representation via context prediction.
We take inspiration from masked region classification,
a pre-training task widely used in vision-language models
[9, 56, 57]. These models extract object features, then predict object labels for the randomly masked out regions. Our
masking approach provides a similar training signal, since
meaningful labels are included in the image caption. For example, as shown in Figure 1(a), the model is tasked with associating the words “fire hydrant” with an image even with
the hydrant itself is mostly masked out.

26815

