This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TextureDreamer: Image-guided Texture Synthesis through Geometry-aware
Diffusion
Yu-Ying Yeh13 Jia-Bin Huang23 Changil Kim3 Lei Xiao3 Thu Nguyen-Phuoc3 Numair Khan3
Cheng Zhang3 Manmohan Chandraker1 Carl S Marshall3 Zhao Dong3 Zhengqin Li3
1

University of California, San Diego

2

University of Maryland, College Park

Input Images

Target 3D shape

Generated textures

3

Meta Reality Lab

Input Images

Input Images

Generated textures

Generated textures

Figure 1. Texture transfer from sparse images. Given a small number of images and a target mesh, our method synthesizes geometryaware texture that looks similar to the input appearances for diverse objects.

Abstract
We present TextureDreamer, a novel image-guided texture synthesis method to transfer relightable textures from a
small number of input images (3 to 5) to target 3D shapes
across arbitrary categories. Texture creation is a pivotal
challenge in vision and graphics. Industrial companies hire
experienced artists to manually craft textures for 3D assets.
Classical methods require densely sampled views and accurately aligned geometry, while learning-based methods
are confined to category-specific shapes within the dataset.
In contrast, TextureDreamer can transfer highly detailed,
intricate textures from real-world environments to arbitrary objects with only a few casually captured images, potentially significantly democratizing texture creation. Our
core idea, personalized geometry-aware score distillation
(PGSD), draws inspiration from recent advancements in
diffuse models, including personalized modeling for texture information extraction, score distillation for detailed
appearance synthesis, and explicit geometry guidance with
ControlNet. Our integration and several essential modifications substantially improve the texture quality. Experiments

on real images spanning different categories show that TextureDreamer can successfully transfer highly realistic, semantic meaningful texture to arbitrary objects, surpassing
the visual quality of previous state-of-the-art. Project page:
https://texturedreamer.github.io

1. Introduction
High-quality 3D content is indispensable for a wide range
of critical applications, including AR/VR, robotics, film,
and gaming. In recent years, remarkable progress has been
made in democratizing 3D content creation pipelines, facilitated by advancements in 3D reconstruction [41, 44]
and generative models [18, 62]. While substantial attention has been devoted to exploring the geometry component [8, 12, 67] and neural implicit representations [46],
such as NeRF [41], creation of high-quality textures is relatively under-explored. Textures are pivotal in creating realistic, highly detailed appearances and are integral to various graphics pipelines, where industry has traditionally relied on professional, experienced artists to craft textures.
This process usually involves manually authoring procedu-

4304

