This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TULIP: Multi-camera 3D Precision Assessment of Parkinson’s Disease
Kyungdo Kim1 , Sihan Lyu1 , Sneha Mantri2 , Timothy W. Dunn1
Department of {1 Biomedical Engineering, 2 Neurology}, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
{kyungdo.kim, sihan.lyu, sneha.mantri, timothy.dunn}@duke.edu

Abstract
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a devastating movement disorder accelerating in global prevalence, but a lack of precision symptom measurement has made the development of effective therapies challenging. The Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) is the gold standard for assessing motor symptom severity, yet its manual scoring criteria
are vague and subjective, resulting in coarse and noisy clinical assessments. Machine learning approaches have the
potential to modernize PD symptom assessments by making them more quantitative, objective, and scalable. However, the lack of benchmark video datasets for PD motor
exams hinders model development. Here, we introduce the
TULIP dataset to bridge this gap. TULIP emphasizes precision and comprehensiveness, comprising multi-view video
recordings (6 cameras) of 25 UPDRS motor exam activities,
together with ratings by 3 clinical experts, in a cohort of
Parkinson’s patients and healthy controls. The multi-view
recordings enable 3D reconstructions of body movement
that better capture disease signatures than more conventional 2D methods. Using the dataset, we establish a baseline model for predicting UPDRS scores from 3D poses,
illustrating how existing diagnostics could be automated.
Looking ahead, TULIP could aid the development of new
precision diagnostics that transcend UPDRS scores, providing a deeper understanding of PD and its potential treatments.

1. Introduction
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative
disorder leading to a spectrum of motor impairments that
differ between individuals and worsen over time. In the last
quarter-century, the global prevalence of PD has increased
two-fold and continues to rise, now impacting over 8.5 million individuals [1]. Despite decades of research, no cure
has emerged, and the focus has shifted towards managing
symptoms to improve quality of life.
The current standard for PD clinical assessment, the
Movement Disorder Society-Sponsored Revision of the

Figure 1. Landscape of Parkinson’s disease datasets. The black
icons indicate which activities were recorded. Previous studies
recorded a small number of activities, typically either walking,
finger tapping, or sitting/standing. TULIP includes 25 different
activities, capturing a wider set of movements and postures.

Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), relies
on a manual scoring system that can lead to imprecise diagnoses. While the scale is validated [2–4], examiners score
subjects coarsely based on vague guidelines. For instance,
‘global spontaneity’ is rated on an ordinal scale from ‘1
(Slight)’ to ‘4 (Severe)’ [5]. This manual scoring is laborintensive and a source of variability, and it precludes identification of fine-scale motor pathologies. Numerous studies
have identified significant inter-rater differences in UPDRS
scoring, with disagreements as large as 53% [6].
Recent advances in machine learning have greatly enhanced healthcare workflows and patient outcomes across
many clinical domains, but applying machine learning approaches to PD remains challenging due to a shortage of
training and benchmark datasets. Some approaches have
explored modeling PD using electronic health record [7]
or neuroimaging data [8], but ultimately such datasets rely
on clinical diagnosis of motor symptoms [9]. While small

22551

