This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What If the TV Was Off? Examining Counterfactual Reasoning Abilities of
Multi-modal Language Models
Letian Zhang1 Xiaotong Zhai2 Zhongkai Zhao3, 6 Yongshuo Zong4 Xin Wen5, 6 Bingchen Zhao4, 6
1

2
3
Tongji University
University of Warwick
National University of Singapore
4
5
6
University of Edinburgh
The University of Hong Kong
LunarAI

Abstract
Counterfactual reasoning, a fundamental aspect of human cognition, involves contemplating alternatives to established facts or past events, significantly enhancing our
abilities in planning and decision-making. In light of the advancements in current multi-modal large language models,
we explore their effectiveness in counterfactual reasoning.
To facilitate this investigation, we introduce a novel dataset,
C-VQA, specifically designed to examine the counterfactual
reasoning capabilities of modern multi-modal large language models. This dataset is constructed by infusing original questions with counterfactual presuppositions, spanning various types such as numerical and boolean queries.
It encompasses a mix of real and synthetic data, representing a wide range of difficulty levels. Our thorough evaluations of contemporary vision-language models using this
dataset have revealed substantial performance drops, with
some models showing up to a 40% decrease, highlighting a
significant gap between current models and human-like vision reasoning capabilities. We hope our dataset will serve
as a vital benchmark for evaluating the counterfactual reasoning capabilities of models. Code and dataset are publicly available at https://bzhao.me/C-VQA/.

1. Introduction
“Counterfactuals are the building blocks of
moral behavior as well as scientific thought.”
— Judea Pearl, The Book of Why
Counterfactual ability is a pivotal cognitive function in humans, enabling us to envision alternate realities and outcomes based on different choices or events. This capacity underpins our decision-making, moral reasoning, and
problem-solving skills. Recent development of multi-modal
large language models (MLLMs) [26, 42, 45, 48] have dramatically improved the capabilities of image recognition,
image-based dialogue, and language grounding, etc. [4, 9,

Question

How many cats
are in the image?
Counterfactual presupposition

Answer

2→1

if the TV was off
Question

Does this animal
have claws?
Counterfactual presupposition

Answer

No → Yes

if the animals were cats

Figure 1. Examples of C-VQA(top), and performance comparison of LLaVA-1.5 [25] w/ and w/o counterfactuality (bottom).
C-VQA is constructed by adding counterfactual presuppositions
to the questions. We observe that state-of-the-art models all exhibited significant performance drops on the counterfactual questions.

11, 12, 14, 20, 24, 26, 36]. These developments raise the
possibility of achieving higher levels of artificial intelligence. Consequently, we pose a critical question: are contemporary MLLMs equipped for counterfactual reasoning?
Visual question answering is one of the central tasks
to evaluate the ability of vision-language models. Current benchmarks focus on evaluating different aspects of the
abilities, such as visual recognition (e.g., VQAv2 [13]), external knowledge (e.g., OKVQA [29]), compositional reasoning (e.g., CLEVR [19]). They only require the model to
understand the image contents by grounding the concept in-

21853

