This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Inertial Poser (DynaIP): Part-Based Motion Dynamics Learning for
Enhanced Human Pose Estimation with Sparse Inertial Sensors

1

Yu Zhang1 * Songpengcheng Xia 1∗ Lei Chu 2 † Jiarui Yang1 Qi Wu1 Ling Pei1†
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Navigation and Location Based Services, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Wireless Devices and Systems Group (WiDeS), University of Southern California

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel human pose estimation approach using sparse inertial sensors, addressing the shortcomings of previous methods reliant on synthetic data. It
leverages a diverse array of real inertial motion capture
data from different skeleton formats to improve motion diversity and model generalization. This method features two
innovative components: a pseudo-velocity regression model
for dynamic motion capture with inertial sensors, and a
part-based model dividing the body and sensor data into
three regions, each focusing on their unique characteristics.
The approach demonstrates superior performance over
state-of-the-art models across five public datasets, notably
reducing pose error by 19% on the DIP-IMU dataset, thus
representing a significant improvement in inertial sensorbased human pose estimation. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/dx118/dynaip

1. Introduction
Human Pose Estimation (HPE) has emerged as a critical
field of study, attracting considerable interest for its applications in various domains [15, 51], like aiding in sports training and analysis, and enriching interactions in Virtual and
Augmented Reality (VR/AR) environments. This growing
relevance underscores the importance of advancing HPE
technologies to meet the diverse needs of these applications.
Our paper examines HPE, a field marked by varied sensing modalities and methodologies [2, 6, 10], divided into
three categories: 1) Vision-based HPE [35, 39], using single or multi-view images, known for its significant advancements; 2) Wireless-based HPE [3, 50], which addresses
some vision-based challenges but is limited by environmental factors; 3) Wearable-based HPE [14, 17, 46], our focus,
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) under Grant 62273229.

Figure 1. Our innovative data-driven approach for robust full-body
pose estimation using six IMUs: unifying inertial mocap datasets
across skeleton formats and enhancing challenging motion capture
with local body region modeling and pseudo-velocity estimation.

which utilizes Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) for fullbody estimation. Vision-based HPE, despite its success,
struggles with occlusion, privacy, and perspective issues.
Wireless-based methods [3, 50] mitigate some of these issues but face performance inconsistencies. Our study centers on wearable-based HPE, harnessing wearables with
sensors for joint orientation and acceleration tracking. This
IMU-based method excels by being occlusion-resistant, environmentally stable, and privacy-conscious, thus addressing the drawbacks of other HPE approaches.
Recent studies [14, 26, 45] have concentrated on minimizing the number of IMU sensors for human motion reconstruction, balancing user convenience with less intrusiveness. While this has shown potential, the limited sensor
placement leads to uncertainties in estimating unseen joint
rotations. The integration of complex network structures
[16] and physical constraints [46] has been proven effective
in reducing ambiguities. Despite these developments, challenges persist, especially in complex motions. Our research
aims to enhance the robustness of sparse sensor-based full-

1889

