This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

In2SET: Intra-Inter Similarity Exploiting Transformer for
Dual-Camera Compressive Hyperspectral Imaging
Xin Wang1

Lizhi Wang1 *
Xiangtian Ma1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology

Maoqing Zhang1
Lin Zhu1
2
Beijing Normal University
(a) Intra-Similarity

Abstract
Dual-camera compressive hyperspectral imaging (DCCHI) offers the capability to reconstruct 3D hyperspectral image (HSI) by fusing compressive and panchromatic
(PAN) image, which has shown great potential for snapshot hyperspectral imaging in practice. In this paper, we introduce a novel DCCHI reconstruction network, intra-inter
similarity exploiting Transformer (In2SET). Our key insight
is to make full use of the PAN image to assist the reconstruction. To this end, we propose to use the intra-similarity
within the PAN image as a proxy for approximating the
intra-similarity in the original HSI, thereby offering an enhanced content prior for more accurate HSI reconstruction.
Furthermore, we propose to use the inter-similarity to align
the features between HSI and PAN images, thereby maintaining semantic consistency between the two modalities
during the reconstruction process. By integrating In2SET
into a PAN-guided deep unrolling (PGDU) framework, our
method substantially enhances the spatial-spectral fidelity
and detail of the reconstructed images, providing a more
comprehensive and accurate depiction of the scene. Experiments conducted on both real and simulated datasets
demonstrate that our approach consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of reconstruction
quality and computational complexity. The code is available at https://github.com/2JONAS/In2SET.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging collects and processes scene information by dividing the whole spectrum into tens or hundreds of bands [15, 29, 57]. Owing to the capability of detailed scene representation, this technique has been widely
adopted in many fields, e.g., medical diagnosis, health
care, remote sensing [5, 11, 28, 37], and various computer vision tasks, e.g., recognition, classification, segmentation [26, 35, 49].
The hyperspectral image (HSI) inherently possesses a
* Corresponding Author: Lizhi Wang (wanglizhi@bit.edu.cn)

Hua Huang2

Apply

Extract

PAN image

Spatial Attention Maps

Reconstructed HSI

(b) Inter-Similarity
Weak Consistency
1

1

Extract
2
2

PAN image

Scorer
Strong Consistency

Extract

1
2

Scorer

Shallow Semantic Features

Reconstructed HSI

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed In2SET method for hyperspectral image reconstruction. (a) Intra-Similarity: extraction and
application of spatial attention maps from the PAN image to enhance the spatial resolution of the reconstructed HSI. (b) InterSimilarity: utilization of semantic features from the HSI and PAN
image, scored by their consistency, to inform and refine the reconstruction of HSI.

three-dimensional (3D) structure, comprising two dimensions of spatial information and one dimension of spectral information. Consequently, existing 2D imaging sensors lack the capability to directly capture this complete
3D signal. With the rapid progress in computational photography, snapshot spectral imagers have been developed
to enable hyperspectral imaging in dynamic scenes [12,
25, 53]. The coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging
(CASSI) [2, 19, 38], serving as a representative prototype
of snapshot spectral imagers, captures one compressive image that encodes the spectral information by leveraging a
decorated optical system. Inspired by multi-modal image
fusion techniques, dual-camera compressive hyperspectral
imaging (DCCHI) [39, 40, 43] upgrades the original CASSI
by adding a panchromatic (PAN) camera to supply spatial
information lost in CASSI. As a result, DCCHI can achieve
more accurate reconstructions of HSI by fusing the compressive and PAN images compared to CASSI, which has
shown great potential for snapshot hyperspectral imaging
in practice.
The significant challenge of DCCHI lies in the HSI reconstruction method, where the key factor that determines

24881

