This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficiently Assemble Normalization Layers and Regularization for
Federated Domain Generalization

1

Khiem Le1 , Long Ho2 , Cuong Do2 , Danh Le-Phuoc3 , Kok-Seng Wong2, *
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, IN, USA
2
College of Engineering and Computer Science, VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam
3
Open Distributed Systems, Technical University Berlin, Berlin, Germany

kle3@nd.edu, danh.lephuoc@tu-berlin.de, {long.ht, cuong.dd, wong.ks}@vinuni.edu.vn

Abstract
Domain shift is a formidable issue in Machine Learning
that causes a model to suffer from performance degradation
when tested on unseen domains. Federated Domain Generalization (FedDG) attempts to train a global model using
collaborative clients in a privacy-preserving manner that
can generalize well to unseen clients possibly with domain
shift. However, most existing FedDG methods either cause
additional privacy risks of data leakage or induce significant costs in client communication and computation, which
are major concerns in the Federated Learning paradigm.
To circumvent these challenges, here we introduce a novel
architectural method for FedDG, namely gPerXAN 1 , which
relies on a normalization scheme working with a guiding
regularizer. In particular, we carefully design Personalized
eXplicitly Assembled Normalization to enforce client models selectively filtering domain-specific features that are biased towards local data while retaining discrimination of
those features. Then, we incorporate a simple yet effective regularizer to guide these models in directly capturing
domain-invariant representations that the global model’s
classifier can leverage. Extensive experimental results on
two benchmark datasets, i.e., PACS and Office-Home, and a
real-world medical dataset, Camelyon17, indicate that our
proposed method outperforms other existing methods in addressing this particular problem.

1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, Machine Learning (ML) has
demonstrated remarkable achievements across diverse areas such as Computer Vision, Natural Language and Speech
Processing, or Robotics [5]. In general, most ML models rely on an over-simplified assumption, i.e., the train* Corresponding author: wong.ks@vinuni.edu.vn
1 https://github.com/lhkhiem28/gPerXAN

ing and testing data are independent and identically distributed, which does not always reflect real-world practices.
In practical scenarios where the distribution of testing data
diverges from that of training data, the performance of ML
models often drops catastrophically due to the domain shift
issue [28]. Additionally, obtaining or identifying the testing
data before model deployment can be challenging in numerous applications. For instance, in biomedical applications
where data characteristics vary across different equipment
and institutions, gathering data from all potential domains
in advance is impractical. Therefore, it is essential to have
a solution that can improve the generalization capability of
such ML models to adapt effectively to unseen domains.
Domain Generalization (DG) has been proposed to address the challenge of training ML models using data from
single or multiple source domains with the expectation
that these models will perform well on unseen domains
[41]. The majority of existing DG methods fall under the
category of domain-invariant representation learning approach [13, 20, 25, 29, 33]. This approach relies on a
broadly acknowledged assumption that each domain contains its own domain-specific features, which are biased towards spurious relations in the data, and that all domains
share domain-invariant features, which are general and robust to any unseen domains. From this assumption, previous works propose methods that remove domain-specific
features and distill domain-invariant features to achieve the
generalization ability. Alternative approaches for DG encompass data augmentation [23, 43, 44, 47], which involves exposing models to artificially generated domains,
and meta-learning [1, 6, 12], an approach that emulates
the domain shift during the meta-training phase. However,
most methods require a centralized setting where all source
domains are collected together. Consequently, these methods cannot be readily expanded to decentralized settings.
Federated Learning (FL) [21] is an emerging decentralized learning paradigm widely adopted in various applica-

6027

