This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Polarization Wavefront Lidar:
Learning Large Scene Reconstruction from Polarized Wavefronts
Dominik Scheuble1,2 * Chenyang Lei 5∗ Seung-Hwan Baek4 Mario Bijelic3,5 Felix Heide3,5
1

Mercedes-Benz AG

2

TU Darmstadt

3

Torc Robotics

Abstract
Lidar has become a cornerstone sensing modality for
3D vision, especially for large outdoor scenarios and autonomous driving. Conventional lidar sensors are capable
of providing centimeter-accurate distance information by
emitting laser pulses into a scene and measuring the timeof-flight (ToF) of the reflection. However, the polarization
of the received light that depends on the surface orientation and material properties is usually not considered. As
such, the polarization modality has the potential to improve
scene reconstruction beyond distance measurements. In this
work, we introduce a novel long-range polarization wavefront lidar sensor (PolLidar) that modulates the polarization of the emitted and received light. Departing from conventional lidar sensors, PolLidar allows access to the raw
time-resolved polarimetric wavefronts. We leverage polarimetric wavefronts to estimate normals, distance, and material properties in outdoor scenarios with a novel learned
reconstruction method. To train and evaluate the method,
we introduce a simulated and real-world long-range dataset
with paired raw lidar data, ground truth distance, and normal maps. We find that the proposed method improves
normal and distance reconstruction by 53% mean angular
error and 41% mean absolute error compared to existing
shape-from-polarization (SfP) and ToF methods. Code and
data are open-sourced here1 .

1. Introduction
Sensing and reconstructing large scenes is crucial for
safety-critical applications in autonomous driving [17, 52,
59], drones [32, 44], remote sensing [20, 57], scene understanding [8, 24, 54] and dataset generation [11, 12, 36]
for 3D vision. Scanning lidar sensors have been broadly
adopted as a cornerstone sensing modality that provides
precise distance information. These sensors operate by
measuring the ToF of laser pulses emitted into and returned
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
1 https://light.princeton.edu/pollidar/

4

POSTECH

5

Princeton University

from the scene. The emitted light is typically polarized and
the polarization changes upon reflection depending on surface normals and material properties [3, 34]. Off-the-shelf
lidar sensors only detect intensity, as such, ignore the additional polarization information. In this paper, we revisit
the abandoned geometric and material information in the
polarization state for the reconstruction of large automotive
scenes up to 100m range.
Although the benefit of polarization has been investigated extensively in other fields [14, 34, 37], polarization
is largely unexplored in the context of lidar sensing in vision and robotics. Specifically, lidar and polarization have
been explored in meteorology [47, 48, 50], biology [28]
and maritime sciences [56] by analyzing the depolarization. Besides, a line of work investigates polarization camera images for shape estimation [1, 10, 29, 35, 45], stereo
depth estimation [53], depth completion [58], and dehazing [5, 21, 22, 49, 55]. These methods have in common
that they utilize passive sensors, making them ineffective
at night time. Only a few existing works [5, 6] use active
polarimetric ToF systems for scene reconstruction. However, these existing time-resolved polarization methods are
designed for indoor scenes with object-level contents, prohibiting the measurement of large outdoor scenes.
In this paper, we introduce a novel sensing modality that
combines polarization analysis with lidar sensors for scene
reconstruction, illustrated in Fig. 1. We devise a polarization wavefront lidar sensor (PolLidar) that is capable of operating in outdoor settings. The proposed sensor modulates
the polarization of the emitted and received light. In contrast to polarization cameras, the PolLidar is not limited to
a discrete number of polarization states but can measure polarization continuously by finely controlling waveplates and
linear polarizers basically able to perform full ellipsometry
[13, 25]. The sensor reads the raw wavefront signal directly
as a voltage from the Avalanche Photodiode (APD). We employ this sensing technique to capture a polarization dataset
consisting of long-range automotive scenes to assess the
benefit of polarization. Along with the raw wavefronts, we
provide pairwise ground truth distance and normal information from a Velodyne VLS-128 reference sensor, see Fig. 2.

21241

