This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Vision from Models Rivals Learning Vision from Data
Yonglong Tian1,† Lijie Fan2,†, * Kaifeng Chen1 Dina Katabi2 Dilip Krishnan1 Phillip Isola2
1

Google Research,

2

MIT CSAIL,

†

equal contribution

Github Repo: https://github.com/google-research/syn-rep-learn

Abstract
We introduce SynCLR, a novel approach for learning visual representations exclusively from synthetic images and
synthetic captions, without any real data. We synthesize a
large dataset of image captions using LLMs, then use an offthe-shelf text-to-image model to generate multiple images
corresponding to each synthetic caption. We perform visual
representation learning on these synthetic images via contrastive learning, treating images sharing the same caption
as positive pairs. The resulting representations transfer well
to many downstream tasks, competing favorably with other
general-purpose visual representation learners such as CLIP
and DINO v2 in image classification tasks. Furthermore,
in dense prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation,
SynCLR outperforms previous self-supervised methods by a
significant margin, e.g., improving over MAE and iBOT by
6.2 and 4.3 mIoU on ADE20k for ViT-B/16.

1. Introduction
Representation learning extracts and organizes information
from raw, often unlabeled data. The quality, quantity, and
diversity of the data determines how good a representation
the model can learn. The model becomes a reflection of the
collective intelligence that exists in the data. We get what
we feed in.
Unsurprisingly, the current best-performing visual representation learning methods [59, 62] rely on large scale
real datasets. However, the collection of real data has its
own dilemmas. Collecting large scale uncurated data [71] is
relatively cheap and thus quite achievable. However, for selfsupervised representation learning, this approach exhibits
poor scaling behavior –i.e., adding more uncurated data has
little effect at large data scales [33, 80]. Collecting small
scale curated data [21] also is achievable, but models trained
in this way are limited to relatively narrow tasks. The ideal
would be large scale curated datasets of real images, and
* Work done while interning at Google.

Figure 1. Three paradigms for visual representation learning. Top
row: Traditional methods, such as CLIP [62], learn only from real
data; Middle row: Recent methods, such as StableRep [81], learn
from real text and generated images; Bottom row: Our method,
SynCLR, learns from synthetic text and synthetic images, and rival
the linear transfer performance of CLIP on ImageNet despite not
directly observing any real data.

recent work has indeed shown that this can lead to strong
performance gains at scale [59], but this path is costly to
pursue.
To alleviate the cost, in this paper we ask if synthetic
data, sampled from off-the-shelf generative models, is a
viable path toward large scale curated datasets that can train
state-of-the-art visual representations.
We call such a paradigm learning from models, in contrast to directly learning from data. Models have several
advantages as a data source for building large scale training sets: via their latent variables, conditioning variables,
and hyperparameters, they provide new controls for curating data; we will make use of these controls in the method
we propose. Models also can be easier to share and store
(because models are more compressed than data), and can
produce an unlimited number of data samples (albeit with

15887

