This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoThink: Evaluating First-Person Perspective Thinking Capability of
Vision-Language Models
Sijie Cheng1,2,5 ‡ *, Zhicheng Guo1,2 *, Jingwen Wu3 *, Kechen Fang4 ,
Peng Li2 B , Huaping Liu1 , Yang Liu1,2 B
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto
4
Zhili College, Tsinghua University 5 01.AI
csj23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Object
What is around me?

Vision-language models (VLMs) have recently shown
promising results in traditional downstream tasks. Evaluation studies have emerged to assess their abilities, with the
majority focusing on the third-person perspective, and only
a few addressing specific tasks from the first-person perspective. However, the capability of VLMs to “think” from
a first-person perspective, a crucial attribute for advancing autonomous agents and robotics, remains largely unexplored. To bridge this research gap, we introduce EgoThink,
a novel visual question-answering benchmark that encompasses six core capabilities with twelve detailed dimensions.
The benchmark is constructed using selected clips from egocentric videos, with manually annotated question-answer
pairs containing first-person information. To comprehensively assess VLMs, we evaluate twenty-one popular VLMs
on EgoThink. Moreover, given the open-ended format of the
answers, we use GPT-4 as the automatic judge to compute
single-answer grading. Experimental results indicate that
although GPT-4V leads in numerous dimensions, all evaluated VLMs still possess considerable potential for improvement in first-person perspective tasks. Meanwhile, enlarging the number of trainable parameters has the most significant impact on model performance on EgoThink. In conclusion, EgoThink serves as a valuable addition to existing
evaluation benchmarks for VLMs, providing an indispensable resource for future research in the realm of embodied
artificial intelligence and robotics.

* Equal contribution, ‡ Project lead, B Corresponding author

Project page: https://adacheng.github.io/EgoThink/
GitHub page: https://github.com/AdaCheng/EgoThink/
Dataset page: https://huggingface.co/datasets/EgoThink/EgoThink/

Planning

Activity

How will I do?

What am I doing?

Forecasting

Localization

What will happen to me?

Where am I?

Reasoning
What about the situation around me?

EgoThink
Figure 1. The main categories of our EgoThink benchmark to
comprehensively assess the capability of thinking from a firstperson perspective.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the rapid development of large language models (LLMs) [8, 60, 73], vision-language models
(VLMs) [2, 15, 43, 80] have shown remarkable progress in
both conventional vision-language downstream tasks [2, 15,
43, 80] and following diverse human instructions [13, 42,
48, 81, 89]. Their application has expanded into broader
domains such as robotics [21, 31, 40] and embodied artificial intelligence (EAI) [71, 78]. As a result, the thorough
evaluation of VLMs has become increasingly important and
challenging. Observing and understanding the world from
a first-person perspective is a natural approach for both humans and artificial intelligence agents. We propose that the
ability to “think” from a first-person perspective, especially
when interpreting egocentric images, is crucial for VLMs.
However, as shown in Table 1, the ability to think from a
first-person perspective is not adequately addressed by cur-

14291

