This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gear-NeRF: Free-Viewpoint Rendering and Tracking
with Motion-aware Spatio-Temporal Sampling

1

HKUST

Xinhang Liu1 † * Yu-Wing Tai2 Chi-Keung Tang1 †
Pedro Miraldo3 Suhas Lohit3 Moitreya Chatterjee3
2
Dartmouth College 3 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)

xliufe@connect.ust.hk, yu-wing.tai@dartmouth.edu, cktang@cse.ust.hk,
miraldo@merl.com, slohit@merl.com, metro.smiles@gmail.com

Abstract

* Work mainly done when XL was an intern at MERL.
† XL and CT are supported in part by the Research Grant Council of the

Hong Kong SAR grant no. 16201420.

Time
Viewpoint

Time
Viewpoint

Time
Viewpoint

…

Reconstructing 3D scenes has a broad range of applications,
including Virtual Reality/Augmented Reality (VR/AR), 3D
animation, game production, and film creation which allow
users to observe scenes from any desired viewpoint. While
it is crucial to reconstruct static scenes, towards which significant progress has been made, it is even more crucial to

…

1. Introduction

…

Extensions of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) to model
dynamic scenes have enabled their near photo-realistic,
free-viewpoint rendering. Although these methods have
shown some potential in creating immersive experiences,
two drawbacks limit their ubiquity: (i) a significant reduction in reconstruction quality when the computing budget is limited, and (ii) a lack of semantic understanding
of the underlying scenes. To address these issues, we introduce Gear-NeRF, which leverages semantic information
from powerful image segmentation models. Our approach
presents a principled way for learning a spatio-temporal
(4D) semantic embedding, based on which we introduce
the concept of gears to allow for stratified modeling of dynamic regions of the scene based on the extent of their motion. Such differentiation allows us to adjust the spatiotemporal sampling resolution for each region in proportion to its motion scale, achieving more photo-realistic dynamic novel view synthesis. At the same time, almost for
free, our approach enables free-viewpoint tracking of objects of interest – a functionality not yet achieved by existing NeRF-based methods. Empirical studies validate
the effectiveness of our method, where we achieve stateof-the-art rendering and tracking performance on multiple challenging datasets. The project page is available at:
https://merl.com/research/highlights/gear-nerf.

Time
Viewpoint

(a) Multi-view videos

(b) Free-viewpoint Rendering

(c) 3D tracking

Figure 1. (a) Our method takes RGB videos captured from a camera array as input. (b) Trained Gear-NeRF achieves photo-realistic
real-time free-viewpoint rendering of a dynamic scene. (c) With
users giving a single click at any time and from any viewpoint, our
method can perform free-viewpoint tracking of the target object.

reconstruct dynamic scenes, as the world around us is characterized by a constant state of flux, with many objects in it
- in a state of motion.
Recent advances in novel view synthesis, such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [56] have inspired numerous
studies to extend them to dynamic 3D scenes. Existing
approaches either employ a deformation field to map neural fields from a given time to a canonical space [22, 45,
60, 61, 65, 99], or directly model dynamic scenes as a 4D
space-time grid [1, 6, 26]. Though these methods offer improved rendering quality by utilizing more accessible inputs compared to previous solutions [21, 42, 43, 77], they
still struggle to ensure rendering quality in low-resource settings, requiring carefully engineered efforts. Further, most
dynamic radiance field approaches adopt a naive spatiotemporal sampling strategy, without discerning the different
scales of motion across different regions in the scene.
We propose to fix this issue by leveraging a semantic understanding of dynamic scenes. Intuitively, a reconstruction system aware of the distinction between static
and dynamic regions in a scene can perform more focused

19667

