This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanoContext-Former: Panoramic Total Scene Understanding with
a Transformer
Yuan Dong1 *, Chuan Fang2 *, Liefeng Bo1 , Zilong Dong1 , Ping Tan2†
Alibaba Group. 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

1
1

{dy283090, liefeng.bo, list.dzl}@alibaba-inc.com, 2 cfangac@connect.ust.hk 2 pingtan@ust.hk

Abstract
Panoramic images enable deeper understanding and
more holistic perception of 360◦ surrounding environment,
which can naturally encode enriched scene context information compared to standard perspective image. Previous
work has made lots of effort to solve the scene understanding task in a hybrid solution based on 2D-3D geometric
reasoning, thus each sub-task is processed separately and
few correlations are explored in this procedure. In this paper, we propose a fully 3D method for holistic indoor scene
understanding which recovers the objects’ shapes, oriented
bounding boxes and the 3D room layout simultaneously
from a single panorama. To maximize the exploration of
the rich context information, we design a transformer-based
context module to predict the representation and relationship among each component of the scene. In addition, we
introduce a new dataset for scene understanding, including
photo-realistic panoramas, high-fidelity depth images, accurately annotated room layouts, oriented object bounding
boxes and shapes. Experiments on the synthetic and new
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms previous
panoramic scene understanding methods in terms of both
layout estimation and 3D object detection.

1. Introduction
Single-view indoor scene understanding from a single RGB
image is an essential yet challenging problem and has important applications such as augmented reality and service
robotics. Most of the existing works solve room layout
estimation, object detection, and reconstruction separately.
Some recent works, including Factor3D [50], CooP [19],
Total3D [35], and IM3D[63], show that learning these tasks
jointly helps to improve the performance on each subtask by
exploiting context information. In addition, panoramic image with a 360◦ field-of-view (FOV) contains much richer
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Given a single RGB panorama, we simultaneously estimate the room layout, oriented object bounding boxes (left), and
full scene meshes (right). The first and second rows are examples
from the iGibson-Synthetic [62] and ReplicaPano datasets.

information than a regular perspective image, whose FOV is
normally around 60◦ . PanoContext [64] and DeepPanoContext [62] prove that the context becomes significantly more
robust and powerful with a larger FOV, which further improves the performance and enables accurate holistic scene
understanding. Despite recent progress, the indoor scene
understanding problem remains challenging since predicting object pose and shape from a single RGB image can
be ambiguous without any 3D prior information in a real
indoor environment with occlusion and clutter.
This paper proposes a new method for end-to-end total
3D scene understanding from a single panorama (Fig. 1).
Our approach has two important features. Firstly, we lift
the 2D panorama into 3D space to exploit 3D information
to facilitate indoor scene understanding tasks. In this way,
our method can optimize room layout estimation, objects
detection and reconstruction simultaneously in an end-toend fashion. Our experiments show that converting the 2D
panorama as a 3D representation in a scene understanding
framework can boost performance remarkably. Additionally, we observe that the object features used to estimate
boxes also contain information on geometries; therefore,

28087

