This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Multi-frame Fusion for Video Stabilization
Zhan Peng Xinyi Ye Weiyue Zhao Tianqi Liu Huiqiang Sun Baopu Li Zhiguo Cao*
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{peng zhan,xinyiye,zhaoweiyue,tq liu,shq1031,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn
bpli.cuhk@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present RStab, a novel framework for
video stabilization that integrates 3D multi-frame fusion
through volume rendering. Departing from conventional
methods, we introduce a 3D multi-frame perspective to generate stabilized images, addressing the challenge of fullframe generation while preserving structure. The core of
our RStab framework lies in Stabilized Rendering (SR), a
volume rendering module, fusing multi-frame information
in 3D space. Specifically, SR involves warping features
and colors from multiple frames by projection, fusing them
into descriptors to render the stabilized image. However,
the precision of warped information depends on the projection accuracy, a factor significantly influenced by dynamic regions. In response, we introduce the Adaptive Ray
Range (ARR) module to integrate depth priors, adaptively
defining the sampling range for the projection process. Additionally, we propose Color Correction (CC) assisting geometric constraints with optical flow for accurate color aggregation. Thanks to the three modules, our RStab demonstrates superior performance compared with previous stabilizers in the field of view (FOV), image quality, and video
stability across various datasets.

1. Introduction
With the widespread adoption of smartphones, videos have
become an important medium for documenting and sharing lives. The videos captured with handheld devices often suffer from annoying shakes. To mitigate this prevalent issue, numerous researchers devote efforts to developing video stabilization algorithms. These methods typically
involve three steps: camera trajectory estimation, trajectory
smoothing, and stabilized frame generation.
To obtain a smooth image sequence, known as stabilized
frames, early methods employ 2D-plane transformations
(homography [20, 23], feature trajectories [9, 10, 21], mo* Corresponding author.

(a)

2D

(c)

(b)

single frame

Fidelity

Full-frame

Fidelity

Full-frame

Fidelity

Full-frame

Fidelity

Full-frame

multiple frames

Ours

3D

(d)

Figure 1. Existing dilemmas and our method. (a) and (b) exhibit
cropping issues, characteristic of single-frame methods. (a) and
(c) encounter difficulties in preserving structure, inherent in 2Dbased approaches. Fortunately, our proposed method (d) not only
mitigates distortion and artifacts but also maintains no-cropping
stabilized frames.

tion vectors [18]) on single frames. However, these methods
suffer from two major problems. First, these single-frame
approaches may produce notable missing regions at the
boundary of generated stabilized images, requiring aggressive cropping to ensure a rectangular frame for video (cropping in Fig. 1(a)), further resulting in a substantial reduction in the field of view (FOV). Second, 2D transformations
could give rise to structure distortion due to the lack of 3D
physical information (shear in Fig. 1(a)).
In pursuit of the stabilized full-frame, recent 2D methods [5, 24, 42] leverage nearby frames to fill in the unseen
content within the target frame. However, due to the inherent absence of physical constraints in 2D transformations, 2D-based multiple-frame methods fail to preserve the
structure, especially the parallax regions (Fig. 1(c)). To obtain the structure-preserved stabilized frame, some methods [11, 17, 19, 31] leverage 3D transformations to simulate

7507

