This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sat2Scene: 3D Urban Scene Generation from Satellite Images with Diffusion
Zuoyue Li1

Zhenqiang Li2
Zhaopeng Cui3
Marc Pollefeys1,4
Martin R. Oswald1,5
1
2
ETH Zürich
The University of Tokyo 3 Zhejiang University
4
Microsoft 5 University of Amsterdam
Satellite w/ trajectory

Abstract
Directly generating scenes from satellite imagery offers
exciting possibilities for integration into applications like
games and map services. However, challenges arise from
significant view changes and scene scale. Previous efforts
mainly focused on image or video generation, lacking exploration into the adaptability of scene generation for arbitrary views. Existing 3D generation works either operate at the object level or are difficult to utilize the geometry
obtained from satellite imagery. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel architecture for direct 3D scene
generation by introducing diffusion models into 3D sparse
representations and combining them with neural rendering
techniques. Specifically, our approach generates texture
colors at the point level for a given geometry using a 3D
diffusion model first, which is then transformed into a scene
representation in a feed-forward manner. The representation can be utilized to render arbitrary views which would
excel in both single-frame quality and inter-frame consistency. Experiments in two city-scale datasets show that
our model demonstrates proficiency in generating photorealistic street-view image sequences and cross-view urban
scenes from satellite imagery.

1. Introduction
The direct generation of scenes from satellite imagery
sparks exciting possibilities for seamlessly integrating diverse real-life environments into games, films, and map services. However, this task remains challenging due to the
significant view differences between satellite images and
street-view images on the ground, coupled with the expansive scale of the scenes under consideration. Prior efforts
primarily focused on image or video generation [19, 23, 31,
34], with relatively limited exploration into scene generation. The salient advantage of scenes resides in their adaptability for rendering images from arbitrary views, which is a
feature particularly beneficial for the aforementioned practical applications. Conventional cross-view synthesis works
[23, 31, 34] tend to generate street-view images from the ge-

Generated ground-view

Generated bird-view

Figure 1. Urban scenes generated by Sat2Scene. From a single
satellite image covering urban streets, Sat2Scene is able to generate videos with photorealistic and consistent textures across different views. Please use Adobe Reader / KDE Okular to see
animations. Use the scroll to drag frames while the mouse is over
the video. Leave the current page and back to replay.

ometry estimated based on the satellite height map. Their
limitations arise from the individual generation through 2D
GANs, leading to the resulting images holding a noticeable lack of inter-frame consistency. Sat2Vid [19] further
advances the generation of street-view images with multiview consistency by explicitly building the 2D-3D correspondence map between pixels in frames and point clouds.
Nevertheless, the 3D point cloud is constructed by backprojecting pixels in all 2D frames, restricting its ability to
synthesize video along predefined trajectories rather than
arbitrary views. Furthermore, memory usage significantly
increases with growing trajectory length, imposing constraints on the permissible video length.
In recent years, notable advancements [22, 28, 39] in
scene representations have been observed, particularly in
the realm of novel view synthesis since the introduction of
NeRF [26]. Inspired by this, InfiniCity [21] relies on the
pseudo ground truth generated by the 2D network for perscene training through the optimization of the radiance field.
However, it exhibits limitations in flexibility and is contin-

7141

