This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SelfPose3d: Self-Supervised Multi-Person Multi-View 3d Pose Estimation
Vinkle Srivastav1,2∗
1

Keqi Chen1∗

Nicolas Padoy1,2

University of Strasbourg, CNRS, INSERM, ICube, UMR7357, Strasbourg, France
2
IHU Strasbourg, France

srivastav@unistra.fr

keqi.chen@unistra.fr

Abstract
We present a new self-supervised approach, SelfPose3d,
for estimating 3d poses of multiple persons from multiple camera views. Unlike current state-of-the-art fullysupervised methods, our approach does not require any
2d or 3d ground-truth poses and uses only the multiview input images from a calibrated camera setup and 2d
pseudo poses generated from an off-the-shelf 2d human
pose estimator. We propose two self-supervised learning
objectives: self-supervised person localization in 3d space
and self-supervised 3d pose estimation. We achieve selfsupervised 3d person localization by training the model
on synthetically generated 3d points, serving as 3d person root positions, and on the projected root-heatmaps in
all the views. We then model the 3d poses of all the localized persons with a bottleneck representation, map them
onto all views obtaining 2d joints, and render them using
2d Gaussian heatmaps in an end-to-end differentiable manner. Afterwards, we use the corresponding 2d joints and
heatmaps from the pseudo 2d poses for learning. To alleviate the intrinsic inaccuracy of the pseudo labels, we
propose an adaptive supervision attention mechanism to
guide the self-supervision. Our experiments and analysis on three public benchmark datasets, including Panoptic, Shelf, and Campus, show the effectiveness of our approach, which is comparable to fully-supervised methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/CAMMApublic/SelfPose3D.

1. Introduction
The task of estimating 3d poses for multiple persons using a few calibrated cameras is a challenging computer vision problem [10, 18, 32, 52, 57]. A significant part of this
challenge lies in identifying and matching the same person
across different camera views. The solutions developed so
far generally use one of the two paradigms: learning-based
* co-first authors with equal contributions.

npadoy@unistra.fr

methods and optimization-based methods. The learningbased methods develop novel deep-learning models and use
3d ground-truth poses for both training the models and establishing person correspondences across different views
[39, 52, 57, 59, 63]. The accurate 3d ground-truth poses
are typically generated using a dense camera system [32].
In contrast, the optimization-based methods formulate the
3d pose reconstruction as a mathematical optimization task,
primarily focusing on aligning and matching the 2d poses
across different camera views to infer 3d poses using triangulation within the framework of multi-view geometry
[10, 18, 31–33, 49]. The 2d poses are estimated using offthe-shelf 2d human pose detectors [5, 55]. These methods
apply geometric and spatial constraints in the optimization
loop to ensure the anatomical plausibility and consistency
of the inferred 3d poses. Although these methods do not
require 3d ground-truth poses, their effectiveness is somewhat limited compared to the fully-supervised learningbased methods, see Table 1.
In this paper, we explore the possibility of combining the
strengths of both paradigms. Specifically, we investigate
whether it’s feasible to utilize a learning-based model for
multi-view, multi-person 3D pose estimation and simultaneously eliminate its dependence on 3D ground-truth poses by
incorporating geometric and appearance constraints, drawing inspiration from optimization-based methods.
We propose, SelfPose3d, a self-supervised learningbased approach to estimate the 3d poses of multiple persons
from a few calibrated cameras without using any 2d or 3d
ground-truth poses. Our approach requires only 2d pseudo
poses obtained using an off-the-shelf 2d pose detector [55].
Learning 3d poses without 3D ground-truth poses would require suitable supervisory signals to train a learning-based
model. We follow the learning-by-projection paradigm,
where the main idea is to learn the 3d output by comparing the projected bottleneck 3d output against the 2d input
features [12].
We consider VoxelPose [57] as a learning-based method
and use its output 3d poses as a bottleneck representation.
To recover the accurate underlying 3d poses, we propose us-

2502

