This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fantastic Animals and Where to Find Them: Segment Any Marine Animal with
Dual SAM
Pingping Zhang* Tianyu Yan Yang Liu Huchuan Lu
School of Future Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology, China

1. Introduction
Underwater ecosystems contain a wide variety of marine
life, from microscopic plankton to colossal whales. These
ecosystems are crucial roles for the earth’s environmental
* Corresponding author

(a) SAM’s Prompt

Pseudo
Label2

Mask
Decoder

ViT Encoder

Mask
Decoder

Mask Prompt

(b) Our Multi-level Prompt

Pseudo
Label1

Decoder2

As an important pillar of underwater intelligence, Marine Animal Segmentation (MAS) involves segmenting animals within marine environments. Previous methods don’t
excel in extracting long-range contextual features and overlook the connectivity between discrete pixels. Recently,
Segment Anything Model (SAM) offers a universal framework for general segmentation tasks. Unfortunately, trained
with natural images, SAM does not obtain the prior knowledge from marine images. In addition, the single-position
prompt of SAM is very insufficient for prior guidance. To
address these issues, we propose a novel feature learning
framework, named Dual-SAM for high-performance MAS.
To this end, we first introduce a dual structure with SAM’s
paradigm to enhance feature learning of marine images.
Then, we propose a Multi-level Coupled Prompt (MCP)
strategy to instruct comprehensive underwater prior information, and enhance the multi-level features of SAM’s encoder with adapters. Subsequently, we design a Dilated
Fusion Attention Module (DFAM) to progressively integrate multi-level features from SAM’s encoder. Finally, instead of directly predicting the masks of marine animals,
we propose a Criss-Cross Connectivity Prediction (C3 P)
paradigm to capture the inter-connectivity between discrete
pixels. With dual decoders, it generates pseudo-labels and
achieves mutual supervision for complementary feature representations, resulting in considerable improvements over
previous techniques. Extensive experiments verify that our
proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performances on
five widely-used MAS datasets. The code is available at
https://github.com/Drchip61/Dual SAM.

ViT Encoder

Decoder1

Abstract

Mask Prompt

2981431354@mail.dlut.edu.cn; {zhpp,ly,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

(c) Mutual Supervision

(d) High Performance of Dual-SAM

Figure 1. Our inspirations and advantages. (a) Single-position
prompt of SAM. (b) Our multi-level prompt. (c) Mutual supervision for our Dual-SAM’s decoders. (d) Our Dual-SAM delivers
high performances on multiple datasets.

balance. Accurate and efficient Marine Animal Segmentation (MAS) is vital for understanding species’ distributions,
behaviors, and interactions within the submerged world.
However, unlike conventional terrestrial images, underwater images include variable lighting conditions, water turbidity, color distortion, and the movement of both cameras
and subjects. Traditional segmentation techniques, developed primarily for terrestrial settings, often fall short when
applied to the underwater domain. Consequently, methods
designed to tackle the unique aspects of the marine environment are urgently required for underwater intelligence.
With the advent of deep learning, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [15, 20] lead to a new era for image segmentation. In fact, CNNs demonstrate a remarkable
ability to extract intricate features, which makes them suitable for marine animal segmentation. Nonetheless, CNNs
have inherent limitations in capturing long-range dependen-

2578

