This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-to-3D Generation with Bidirectional Diffusion using both 2D and 3D priors
Lihe Ding1,4 *‡, Shaocong Dong2 *‡, Zhanpeng Huang3 , Zibin Wang3†,
Yiyuan Zhang1 , Kaixiong Gong1 , Dan Xu2†, Tianfan Xue1†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
SenseTime Research 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{dl023, gk023, tfxue}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {sdongae, danxu}@cse.ust.hk
{wangzb02, yiyuanzhang.ai}@gmail.com, {huangzhanpeng}@sensetime.com

A yellow and green oil painting style eagle head

(a) Shap-E

(c) ProlificDreamer

(b) Zero-123

≈ 20min

≈40s

Bidirectional Diffusion: Generalizable 3D Generation

Efficiently Refine by Optimization Methods

Figure 1. Our BiDiff can efficiently generate high-quality 3D objects. It alleviates all these issues in previous 3D generative models: (a)
low-texture quality, (b) multi-view inconsistency, and (c) geometric incorrectness (e.g., multi-face Janus problem). The outputs of our model
can be further combined with optimization-based methods (e.g., ProlificDreamer) to generate better 3D geometries with slightly longer
processing time (bottom row).

Abstract
Most 3D generation research focuses on up-projecting 2D
foundation models into the 3D space, either by minimizing
2D Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss or fine-tuning
on multi-view datasets. Without explicit 3D priors, these
methods often lead to geometric anomalies and multi-view
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
‡ Part of this work was done when Lihe Ding and Shaocong Dong
interned at SenseTime.

inconsistency. Recently, researchers have attempted to improve the genuineness of 3D objects by directly training on
3D datasets, albeit at the cost of low-quality texture generation due to the limited texture diversity in 3D datasets.
To harness the advantages of both approaches, we propose
Bidirectional Diffusion (BiDiff), a unified framework that
incorporates both a 3D and a 2D diffusion process, to preserve both 3D fidelity and 2D texture richness, respectively.
Moreover, as a simple combination may yield inconsistent
generation results, we further bridge them with novel bidirectional guidance. In addition, our method can be used

5115

