This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Functional Diffusion
Biao Zhang
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

biao.zhang@kaust.edu.sa

pwonka@gmail.com

Figure 1. Functional diffusion. Our method is able to generate complicated functions with a continuous domain. From left to right, we
show 5 steps of the generating process. This particular example shows signed distance functions and we show the zero-isosurface of the
generated function in green. Furthermore, we visualize the function values on a plane, where the red colors mean larger and blue means
smaller.

Abstract
We propose functional diffusion, a generative diffusion
model focused on infinite-dimensional function data samples. In contrast to previous work, functional diffusion
works on samples that are represented by functions with a
continuous domain. Functional diffusion can be seen as
an extension of classical diffusion models to an infinitedimensional domain. Functional diffusion is very versatile
as images, videos, audio, 3D shapes, deformations, etc., can
be handled by the same framework with minimal changes.
In addition, functional diffusion is especially suited for irregular data or data defined in non-standard domains. In
our work, we derive the necessary foundations for functional diffusion and propose a first implementation based
on the transformer architecture. We show generative results
on complicated signed distance functions and deformation
functions defined on 3D surfaces.

1. Introduction
In the last two years diffusion models have become the
most popular method for generative modeling of visual
data, such as 2D images [34, 35], videos [13, 15], and 3D
shapes [3, 5, 16, 40, 41, 46, 47]. In order to train a diffusion model, one needs to add and subtract noise from a data
sample. In order to represent a sample, many methods use
a direct representation, such as a 2D or 3D grid. Since diffusion can be very costly, this representation is often used
in conjunction with a cascade of diffusion models [14, 35].
Alternatively, diffusion methods can represent samples in
a compressed latent space [34]. A sample can be encoded
and decoded to the compressed space using an autoencoder
whose weights are trained in a separate pre-process.
In our work, we explore a departure from these previous
approaches and set out to study diffusion in a functional
space. We name the resulting method functional diffusion.
In functional diffusion, the data samples are functions in

4723

