This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiplane Prior Guided Few-Shot Aerial Scene Rendering
Zihan Gao

Licheng Jiao *
Lingling Li
Xu Liu
Puhua Chen
Yuwei Guo
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University

PSNR=16.44

PSNR=15.73

(a) MPI representation

PSNR=14.09

PSNR=14.01

(b) NeRF representation

Fang Liu

PSNR=18.92

PSNR=18.57

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Visualization of failure modes in NeRF and MPI. (a) MPI models scenes only in each single camera frustums and performs
homography warping to render novel views. Insufficient sampling leads to incorrect depth and thus results in an overlapping ghosting effect.
Large camera movement leads to cropped corners. However, high-frequency details seem to be successfully preserved. (b) NeRF models
scenes in a continuous volumetric manner. If only sparse views with large camera movement are provided, some parts of the scene may be
sampled very little or even never. Insufficient sampling leads to collapsed details and unexpected floaters. (c) Our approach combines the
capabilities of NeRF with the perspective-friendly nature of MPI in aerial scenes to achieve photorealistic novel view renderings.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have been successfully
applied in various aerial scenes, yet they face challenges
with sparse views due to limited supervision. The acquisition of dense aerial views is often prohibitive, as unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) may encounter constraints in perspective range and energy constraints. In this work, we introduce
Multiplane Prior guided NeRF (MPNeRF), a novel approach
tailored for few-shot aerial scene rendering—marking a pioneering effort in this domain. Our key insight is that the intrinsic geometric regularities specific to aerial imagery could
be leveraged to enhance NeRF in sparse aerial scenes. By
investigating NeRF’s and Multiplane Image (MPI)’s behavior, we propose to guide the training process of NeRF with
a Multiplane Prior. The proposed Multiplane Prior draws
upon MPI’s benefits and incorporates advanced image comprehension through a SwinV2 Transformer, pre-trained via
* Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the Key
Scientific Technological Innovation Research Project by Ministry of Education, the Joint Funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (U22B2054), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62076192, 61902298, 61573267, 61906150and 62276199), the 111 Project,
the Program for Cheung Kong Scholars and Innovative Research Team
in University (IRT 15R53), the ST Innovation Project from the Chinese
Ministry of Education, the Key Research and Development Program in
Shaanxi Province of China(2019ZDLGY03-06), the China Postdoctoral
fund(2022T150506).

SimMIM. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that MPNeRF outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods applied
in non-aerial contexts, by tripling the performance in SSIM
and LPIPS even with three views available. We hope our
work offers insights into the development of NeRF-based
applications in aerial scenes with limited data.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [33] has succeeded in rendering high-fidelity novel views and many 3D applications by
modeling 3D scenes as a continuous implicit function. In contrast to indoor or synthetic scenes capturing simple objects
using cell phones, aerial images provide a unique bird’s-eye
view and overview of a landscape. Based on NeRF, many applications in aerial scenes have been developed, such as navigation, urban planning, data augmentation, autonomous vehicles, and environmental mapping [1, 7, 21, 29, 32, 40, 59].
In many real-world scenarios, unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) encounter constraints such as limited perspectives,
energy limitations, or adverse weather conditions, which restrict their ability to acquire dense observational data. While
NeRF forms a foundational technology for many aerial applications, it is prone to overfitting on sparse training views
[13, 17, 34]. This limitation of NeRF becomes particularly
salient in the context of aerial imagery. Alleviating this prob-

5009

