This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language Model Guided Interpretable Video Action Reasoning
Ning Wang1∗ , Guangming Zhu1† ,* HS Li1 , Liang Zhang1†, Syed Afaq Ali Shah2 , Mohammed Bennamoun3
1
Xidian University, 2 Edith Cowan University, 3 University of Western Australia
{ningwang, hsli}@stu.xidian.edu.cn,

{gmzhu, liangzhang}@xidian.edu.cn,

afaq.shah@ecu.edu.au, mohammed.bennamoun@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
While neural networks have excelled in video action
recognition tasks, their ”black-box” nature often obscures
the understanding of their decision-making processes. Recent approaches used inherently interpretable models to analyze video actions in a manner akin to human reasoning. These models, however, usually fall short in performance compared to their “black-box” counterparts. In
this work, we present a new framework named Languageguided Interpretable Action Recognition framework (LaIAR). LaIAR leverages knowledge from language models
to enhance both the recognition capabilities and the interpretability of video models. In essence, we redeﬁne the
problem of understanding video model decisions as a task
of aligning video and language models. Using the logical
reasoning captured by the language model, we steer the
training of the video model. This integrated approach not
only improves the video model’s adaptability to different domains but also boosts its overall performance. Extensive experiments on two complex video action datasets, Charades
& CAD-120, validates the improved performance and interpretability of our LaIAR framework. The code of LaIAR is
available at https://github.com/NingWang2049/LaIAR.

1. Introduction
Building on the advancements of deep learning in image
recognition [9, 16, 31], neural network (NN) models have
become the leading approach for video-related challenges,
including action recognition [18, 25, 30]. Yet, many of the
top-tier action recognition techniques [19, 34] deploy NNs
in an opaque, black-box fashion. This lack of transparency
does not offer clear justiﬁcation for their decisions, hindering their utility in various real-world contexts [13], especially those with rigorous security demands. These considerations drive us to develop an action reasoning system that
pairs exceptional performance with clear interpretability.
* Ning Wang and Guangming Zhu are co-ﬁrst authors.
† Liang Zhang and Guangming Zhu are both the corresponding authors.

Time

Action : “Someone is standing up from somewhere”

t

…

t+n

t

t+n

(a) An illustration example of relationship transition in the videos.

language
model
first stage

second stage

(b) Traditional two-stage interpretable reasoning model.
language description
g

language description

language
model
Knowledge Guided

video
model

language
model
only using
single modal

video
model

Training Phase
Inference Phase
(c) Language model guided video interpretable reasoning model.

Figure 1. (a) An example of action that can be decomposed into
relationship transitions (i.e., when the transition is ‘sitting on’ →
‘not contacting’ between <person, bed> pair, it represents the
action ”Someone is standing up from somewhere”.). (b) Traditional two-stage methods usually predict the scene graph ﬁrst, and
then use language models to capture the semantic-level relationship transitions. (c) Our method exploits a language model to
guide the video model to capture the relationship transition during training. During inference, our method processes videos and
directly recognizes actions, providing supportive evidence.

Most of the current interpretable action recognition techniques [21, 22, 29] aim to elucidate the decision-making
process of NNs using post-hoc explanations, with a particular emphasis on gradient-based and perturbation-based approaches. However, despite notable advancements, these
explanations can be problematic because they might not
be faithful to what the network computes, as highlighted
by [27]. A compelling direction in interpretability re-

18878

