This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Memory-based Adapters for Online 3D Scene Perception
Xiuwei Xu1 ,* Chong Xia2 ,* Ziwei Wang3 , Linqing Zhao1 , Yueqi Duan2 , Jie Zhou1 , Jiwen Lu1†
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
Carnegie Mellon University
{xxw21, xiac20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {ziweiwa2}@andrew.cmu.edu;
{linqingzhao}@tju.edu.cn; {duanyueqi, jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Online Semantic Segmentation

Online Object Detection

Online Instance Segmentation

wall
floor
cabinet
bed
chair
picture
counter
desk
curtain
refrigerator
sofa
table
door
window
bookshelf
shower curtain
toilet
sink
bathtub
other furniture

Figure 1. We propose a general framework for online 3D scene perception. With the presented memory-based adapters, we empower
existing offline models in different tasks with online perception ability, which is valuable for robotics applications.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new framework for online 3D
scene perception. Conventional 3D scene perception methods are offline, i.e., take an already reconstructed 3D scene
geometry as input, which is not applicable in robotic applications where the input data is streaming RGB-D videos
rather than a complete 3D scene reconstructed from precollected RGB-D videos. To deal with online 3D scene perception tasks where data collection and perception should
be performed simultaneously, the model should be able to
process 3D scenes frame by frame and make use of the
temporal information. To this end, we propose an adapterbased plug-and-play module for the backbone of 3D scene
perception model, which constructs memory to cache and
aggregate the extracted RGB-D features to empower offline
models with temporal learning ability. Specifically, we propose a queued memory mechanism to cache the supporting
point cloud and image features. Then we devise aggregation
modules which directly perform on the memory and pass
temporal information to current frame. We further propose
3D-to-2D adapter to enhance image features with strong
* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

global context. Our adapters can be easily inserted into
mainstream offline architectures of different tasks and significantly boost their performance on online tasks. Extensive experiments on ScanNet and SceneNN datasets demonstrate our approach achieves leading performance on three
3D scene perception tasks compared with state-of-the-art
online methods by simply finetuning existing offline models,
without any model and task-specific designs. Project page.

1. Introduction
3D scene perception aims to parse a 3D scene into semantic
or object-level entities, mainly including semantic segmentation, object detection and instance segmentation, which is
the fundamental ability for robotics or AR/VR applications.
Since PointNet [32] proposes the first model that directly
process point clouds, great improvement on 3D scene perception [6, 38, 40, 42, 43] has been achieved in recent years
by accurate and efficient architecture design.
However, conventional 3D scene perception methods are
offline, i.e., they take an already reconstructed 3D scene geometry from pre-collected RGB-D videos without tempo-

21604

