This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text Is MASS: Modeling as Stochastic Embedding for Text-Video Retrieval
Jiamian Wang1 , Guohao Sun1 , Pichao Wang2 ,* Dongfang Liu1† ,
Sohail Dianat1 , Majid Rabbani1 , Raghuveer Rao3 , Zhiqiang Tao1†
1
Rochester Institute of Technology, 2 Amazon Prime Video, 3 Army Research Laboratory

Abstract
The increasing prevalence of video clips has sparked
growing interest in text-video retrieval. Recent advances
focus on establishing a joint embedding space for text and
video, relying on consistent embedding representations to
compute similarity. However, the text content in existing
datasets is generally short and concise, making it hard to
fully describe the redundant semantics of a video. Correspondingly, a single text embedding may be less expressive
to capture the video embedding and empower the retrieval.
In this study, we propose a new stochastic text modeling
method T-MASS, i.e., text is modeled as a stochastic embedding, to enrich text embedding with a flexible and resilient semantic range, yielding a text mass. To be specific,
we introduce a similarity-aware radius module to adapt the
scale of the text mass upon the given text-video pairs. Plus,
we design and develop a support text regularization to further control the text mass during the training. The inference pipeline is also tailored to fully exploit the text mass
for accurate retrieval. Empirical evidence suggests that TMASS not only effectively attracts relevant text-video pairs
while distancing irrelevant ones, but also enables the determination of precise text embeddings for relevant pairs.
Our experimental results show a substantial improvement
of T-MASS over baseline (3% ∼ 6.3% by R@1). Also, TMASS achieves state-of-the-art performance on five benchmark datasets, including MSRVTT, LSMDC, DiDeMo, VATEX, and Charades. Code and models are available here.

1. Introduction
Text-video retrieval is to find the most semantically relevant video clip (text) from a candidate pool referring to the
text (video clip) query [3, 5, 7, 39, 43, 57]. Performing an
accurate retrieval is non-trivial due to the divergent characteristics of video and text: videos tend to offer redundant
* The work does not relate to author’s position at Amazon.
† Corresponding authors: Dongfang Liu (dongfang.liu@rit.edu) and

Zhiqiang Tao (zhqiang.tao@rit.edu)

Frame 1

Lightless

lantern

Frame 7

Frame 5

Shocked

w/o hat

Before mast

Sword

Description: “a pirate man tries to lift a lantern with his sword while on a boat”
Existing Embedding

Text point

Proposed Embedding

Text mass

v/t embedding
Other v/t pairs
Similarity
Joint space

Figure 1. Text inside a relevant video is hard to fully describe
the redundant semantics of the video. Correspondingly, single text
embedding may be less expressive to handle the video information
in joint space. We propose a new embedding of text mass with a
resilient semantic range, to better capture rich video clues.

semantic clues [13, 17, 60], inevitably posing challenges for
the feature extraction, while the text, commonly appearing
as short captions, subtitles, and even hashtags, seems to be
semantically limited by comparison to videos [32].
Recognizing the nature of video and text, some prior
works [39, 57] adapt powerful vision-language models
(e.g., CLIP [44]) to the multimodal domain [4] of text and
video. Others learn enhanced video representation through
video-text interaction [17, 32, 48] or temporal modeling [3,
36]. Besides, bridging video and text at a fine granularity
also forms a promising direction [18, 24, 25, 49, 51, 61].
In summary, prevailing text-video retrieval methods are
mainly dedicated to extracting accurate video or text embedding, such as text/video points, for retrieval.
Despite the success of video/text embedding methods,
it is hard to learn a single text embedding to fully cover
all the semantics and visual variations inside a video, since
the text content is usually short and concise, which contains
limited semantics compared with its paired relevant video
(see Fig. 1 top). This fact exacerbates alignment difficulties,
where text may not adequately express the richness of video
information. Drawing inspiration, we provide a more flexible text modeling approach to capture rich video semantic clues, thus enabling a better alignment between video
and text semantics. We introduce T-MASS, i.e., Text is

16551

