This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Alpha Invariance: On Inverse Scaling Between Distance and Volume Density in
Neural Radiance Fields
Joshua Ahn⇤
University of Chicago

Haochen Wang⇤
TTI-Chicago

Raymond A. Yeh
Purdue University

Greg Shakhnarovich
TTI-Chicago

jjahn@uchicago.edu

whc@ttic.edu

rayyeh@purdue.edu

greg@ttic.edu

Abstract
Scale-ambiguity in 3D scene dimensions leads to
magnitude-ambiguity of volumetric densities in neural radiance fields, i.e., the densities double when scene size is
halved, and vice versa. We call this property alpha invariance. For NeRFs to better maintain alpha invariance, we
recommend 1) parameterizing both distance and volume
densities in log space, and 2) a discretization-agnostic initialization strategy to guarantee high ray transmittance. We
revisit a few popular radiance field models and find that
these systems use various heuristics to deal with issues arising from scene scaling. We test their behaviors and show
our recipe to be more robust. Visit our project page at
https://pals.ttic.edu/p/alpha-invariance.

1. Introduction
3D computer graphics and vision are fundamentally scaleambiguous. Lengths of objects and scenes are often unitless
and measure up to a constant ratio. This is fine for routines
such as projection, triangulation, and camera motion estimation. A common practice is to normalize the scene dimension
or the size of a reference object to an arbitrary number.
Volume rendering [17] used by Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) [20] presents a complication due to explicit integration over space. Since the distance scaling is arbitrary,
the volumetric density function (x) must compensate for
the multiplicative factor to render the same final RGB color.
In other words, if the scene size expands by a factor k, it is
sufficient for the learned to shrink by 1/k to be invariant
to the change. The same applies to integration over cones
or more general spatial data structures [1, 3]. Note that in
addition to scene dimensions, the magnitude of is also
influenced by the number of samples per ray and ultimately
the sharpness of change in local opacity.
There is no single “correct” size for a scene setup. A
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. A discretized view of volume rendering. Top: a ray is cut
into intervals, each with a density i
0 and interval length di .
Bottom: illustration of the weight given to the 3rd interval, computed through alpha compositing. The rendered color is obtained
by weighting all the interval colors with their wi s. If we scale each
di by a constant k, scaling i by k1 renders the identical color.

robust algorithm should be able to perform consistently
across different scalings. We investigate how this notion
of invariance manifests itself in practice, discuss how the hyperparameter decisions affect it, and propose a solution that
ensures robustness to distance scaling across the NeRF methods. We revisit and experiment with a few popular NeRF
architectures: Vanilla NeRF [20], TensoRF [6], DVGO [30],
Plenoxels [8], and Nerfacto [31], and find that many systems
use tailored heuristics that work well at a particular scene
size. We analyze the impact of some critical hyperparameters
which are often overlooked or not highlighted in the original
papers.
In our testing of these models we identify two main failure modes. When the scene is scaled down (short ray interval
d), some models struggle to produce large enough values
for solid geometry. When the scene is scaled up (long interval length), the at initialization is often too large, resulting
in cloudiness that traps the optimization at bad local optima.
We therefore propose 1) parameterizing both distance and
volume densities in log space for easier multiplicative scaling; 2) a closed-form formula for value initialization that
guarantees high ray transmittance and scene transparency.
We show that these two ingredients can robustly handle vari-

20396

