This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distribution-aware Knowledge Prototyping for Non-exemplar Lifelong Person
Re-identification
Kunlun Xu1 , Xu Zou2 , Yuxin Peng1 , Jiahuan Zhou1 *
1
2

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
xkl@stu.pku.edu.cn, zoux@hust.edu.cn, {pengyuxin, jiahuanzhou}@pku.edu.cn

Identity Feature
Identity Center

Abstract

Lifelong person re-identification (LReID) suffers from
the catastrophic forgetting problem when learning from
New
non-stationary
data. Existing exemplar-based and knowlIdentity
edge distillation-based LReID methods encounter data privacy and limited acquisition capacity respectively. In this
paper, we instead introduce the prototype, which is underStep 𝑡-1
investigated in LReID, to Step
better𝑡 balance knowledge forIdentity feature
center andas acquisition.
prototype
getting
Existing prototype-based works
primarily focus on the classification task, where the prototypes are New
set as discrete points or statistical distribuIdentity they either discard the distribution intions. However,
formation or omit instance-level diversity which are crucial fine-grained clues for LReID. To address the above
problems, we propose Distribution-aware
Knowledge ProStep 𝑡-1
Step 𝑡
totyping
(DKP) as
where
the instance-level diversity of each
Statistical feature
distribution
prototype
sample is modeled to transfer comprehensive fine-grained
knowledge for
Newprototyping and facilitating LReID learning. Specifically,
Identity an Instance-level Distribution Modeling network is proposed to capture the local diversity of each instance. Then, the Distribution-oriented
Prototype Generation algorithm
transforms the instanceStep 𝑡-1
Step 𝑡
level diversity into identity-level distributions as protoLearned instance-level distribution generated prototype (Ours)
types, which is further explored by the designed Prototypebased Knowledge Transfer module to enhance the knowledge anti-forgetting and acquisition capacity of the LReID
model. Extensive experiments verify that our method
achieves superior plasticity and stability balancing and
outperforms existing LReID methods by 8.1%/9.1% average mAP/R@1 improvement. The code is available at
https://github.com/zhoujiahuan1991/CVPR2024-DKP

1. Introduction
As a conventional task in computer vision, person reidentification (ReID) [1, 19] has achieved remarkable per* Corresponding author

Identity Feature

Distribution Boundary

Distribution Boundary

Identity Center
New
Identity

Step 𝑡-1

(a) Identity feature center

Step 𝑡

as prototype
New
Identity

Step 𝑡-1

Step 𝑡

(b) Statistical feature distribution

as prototype

New
Identity

Step 𝑡-1

Step 𝑡

(c) Instance-level distribution generated prototype (Ours)

Figure 1. The comparison of different prototype generation methods. (a) Various methods [3, 8, 10] treat the prototype as a feature center point but ignore the important distribution information.
(b) Some approaches [46] calculate the prototype as a statistical
feature distribution but suffer from inaccurate distribution estimation. (c) Our method models the instance-level distribution of each
sample, from which the obtained distribution-aware prototypes are
more informative and discriminative.

formance in static datasets where the training data are provided all at once for learning. However, the real-world deployment of these ReID models in dynamic scenarios, particularly in the context of extensive streaming data generated by surveillance systems, exposes a significant performance limitation [6, 34]. Therefore, recent efforts have

16604

