This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Efficient Asymmetric Blind-Spots for Self-Supervised Denoising in
Real-World Scenarios
Shiyan Chen1,2 Jiyuan Zhang1,2 Zhaofei Yu1,2,3 * Tiejun Huang1,2,3
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{strerichia002p,jyzhang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yuzf12,tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised denoising has attracted widespread attention due to its ability to train without clean images. However, noise in real-world scenarios is often spatially correlated, which causes many self-supervised algorithms that
assume pixel-wise independent noise to perform poorly. Recent works have attempted to break noise correlation with
downsampling or neighborhood masking. However, denoising on downsampled subgraphs can lead to aliasing effects
and loss of details due to a lower sampling rate. Furthermore, the neighborhood masking methods either come with
high computational complexity or do not consider local
spatial preservation during inference. Through the analysis of existing methods, we point out that the key to obtaining high-quality and texture-rich results in real-world selfsupervised denoising tasks is to train at the original input
resolution structure and use asymmetric operations during
training and inference. Based on this, we propose Asymmetric Tunable Blind-Spot Network (AT-BSN), where the blindspot size can be freely adjusted, thus better balancing noise
correlation suppression and image local spatial destruction
during training and inference. In addition, we regard the
pre-trained AT-BSN as a meta-teacher network capable of
generating various teacher networks by sampling different
blind-spots. We propose a blind-spot based multi-teacher
distillation strategy to distill a lightweight network, significantly improving performance. Experimental results on
multiple datasets prove that our method achieves state-ofthe-art, and is superior to other self-supervised algorithms
in terms of computational overhead and visual effects.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is an essential low-level computer vision
problem. With the advancements in deep learning, an in* Corresponding author.

(a) Noisy Input

(b) AP-BSN (R3)

(c) LG-BPN

(d) SDAP (E)

(e) SpatiallyAdaptive

(f) Ours AT-BSN

Figure 1. Comparisons of our AT-BSN with other methods. Our
method recovers more high frequency texture details.

creasing number of studies are focused on supervised learning using clean-noisy pairs [2, 17, 32, 47–49]. Typically,
additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) is introduced into
clean datasets to synthesize clean-noisy denoising datasets.
However, real-world noise is known to be spatially correlated [7, 23, 37]. Some generative-based methods attempt to synthesize real-world noise from existing clean
data [5, 8, 18, 21, 43]. However, synthesizing real-world
noise remains challenging, and suffers from generalization
issues. To address the issue, some researchers attempt
to capture clean-noisy pairs in real-world scenarios [1, 4].
However, in certain scenarios, such as medical imaging and
electron microscopy, constructing such datasets can be impractical or even infeasible.
Self-supervised denoising algorithms, represented by
Noise2Noise [28], have brought new life to the denoising
field. These methods only require noisy observations to
train the denoising model. However, in real-world scenarios, noise often exhibits spatial correlation, which contradicts the pixel-wise independent noise assumption [25, 28]

2814

