This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense Vision Transformer Compression with Few Samples
Hanxiao Zhang*
Yifan Zhou
Guo-Hua Wang
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
Few-shot model compression aims to compress a large
model into a more compact one with only a tiny training
set (even without labels). Block-level pruning has recently
emerged as a leading technique in achieving high accuracy
and low latency in few-shot CNN compression. But, fewshot compression for Vision Transformers (ViT) remains
largely unexplored, which presents a new challenge. In
particular, the issue of sparse compression exists in traditional CNN few-shot methods, which can only produce very
few compressed models of different model sizes. This paper proposes a novel framework for few-shot ViT compression named DC-ViT. Instead of dropping the entire block,
DC-ViT selectively eliminates the attention module while
retaining and reusing portions of the MLP module. DC-ViT
enables dense compression, which outputs numerous compressed models that densely populate the range of model
complexity. DC-ViT outperforms state-of-the-art few-shot
compression methods by a significant margin of 10 percentage points, along with lower latency in the compression of
ViT and its variants.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViT) have demonstrated outstanding
results on various vision tasks by leveraging the Transformer structure initially proposed for natural language
processing (NLP). Unlike Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN), the self-attention mechanism allows ViT to learn
global representations for images without an obvious inductive bias. However, with millions to billions of parameters, ViTs can only be deployed on high-end devices, even
if we only consider the inference stage. To fit large models into small devices, network compression techniques are
commonly adopted to reduce computing and memory costs.
Although some methods have been proposed to compress ViT through either token pruning or channel prun* H. Zhang is the corresponding author.

ImageNet Top-1 Accuracy (%)

{zhanghx, zhouyifan, wangguohua}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

86
84
82
80
78
76
74
72
70

ViT-Base
S2ViTE-B

Mini-DeiT-B
RegNetY-16GF

AutoFormer-B
VTP

PRACTISE

Ours (1000 sample)
Ours (500 sample)
Ours (100 sample)
Ours (50 sample)

10

11

12

13

14
15
MACs (G)

16

17

18

Figure 1. Top-1 accuracy vs. MACs (G) on ImageNet. Our DCViT was compressed with few training images (50, 100, 500, or
1000), and PRACTISE was compressed with 500 images. However, other methods were not few-shot, using 1.28 million labeled
training images during compression. It is quite a success that our
DC-VIT uses only less than 0.1% of their training images without labels, but achieves slightly lower or even higher accuracy.

ing [4, 7, 26, 32, 36, 52], they all assume access to the
entire original training set, which is unfortunately not
the case in numerous situations, especially outside of the
academia. When working with datasets containing large
amounts of sensitive data (e.g., medical or commercial),
few-sample compression enables model pruning using few
non-sensitive data and safeguards data privacy and security.
Few-shot compression has been studied for years, but
existing methods focus solely on CNN compression. As
Vision Transformers (ViT) is already a mainstream model,
it is critical to design few-shot ViT compression methods.
As shown in Sec. 4.2, existing few-shot CNN compression
methods do not work well in few-shot ViT compression.
The proposed DC-ViT method not only outperforms previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in compressing ViTs,
but also in few-shot compression of CNNs (cf . Fig. 1).
Another essential demand is that the method should be
both highly accurate and dense, where dense means many
models can be compressed in the target compression range,
while a sparse method can only output few models (DC-ViT

15825

