This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SOAC: Spatio-Temporal Overlap-Aware Multi-Sensor Calibration
using Neural Radiance Fields
Quentin Herau1,2
Nathan Piasco1
1
Dzmitry Tsishkou
Cyrille Migniot3
1
Noah’s Ark, Huawei Paris Research Center
3
ImViA UR 7535, Université de Bourgogne

Moussab Bennehar1
Luis Roldão1
4
Pascal Vasseur
Cédric Demonceaux2
2
ICB UMR CNRS 6303, Université de Bourgogne
4
MIS UR 4290, Université de Picardie Jules Verne

{Quentin.Herau, Nathan.Piasco, Moussab.Bennehar, Luis.Roldao, Dzmitry.Tsishkou}@huawei.com
{Quentin.Herau@etu., Cyrille.Migniot@, Cedric.Demonceaux@}u-bourgogne.fr
Pascal.Vasseur@u-picardie.fr

Abstract
In rapidly-evolving domains such as autonomous driving, the use of multiple sensors with different modalities is
crucial to ensure high operational precision and stability.
To correctly exploit the provided information by each sensor
in a single common frame, it is essential for these sensors to
be accurately calibrated. In this paper, we leverage the ability of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) to represent different
sensors modalities in a common volumetric representation
to achieve robust and accurate spatio-temporal sensor calibration. By designing a partitioning approach based on the
visible part of the scene for each sensor, we formulate the
calibration problem using only the overlapping areas. This
strategy results in a more robust and accurate calibration
that is less prone to failure. We demonstrate that our approach works on outdoor urban scenes by validating it on
multiple established driving datasets. Results show that our
method is able to get better accuracy and robustness compared to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-sensor calibration plays a key role in autonomous
systems as it ensures accuracy, reliability, and robustness
in safety-critical tasks such as localization [6] and perception [22] in self-driving. In typical multi-sensor setups, the
sensors are attached to a common rigid body where the
spatial relationship between them can be obtained through
a rigid transformation matrix. It is therefore important to
identify the exact values of those matrices to correctly exploit and merge the data provided by the sensors. The process of finding these spatial transformations is called extrinsic calibration, which is a topic that has been and is still
being heavily studied thanks to the increasing popularity of

Updated
NeRF parameters
NeRF optimization
(Sec. 3.2)

Initial non-calibrated
setup

Sensor registration
(Sec. 3.3)

Updated
calibration

Final calibrated
setup

Figure 1. Method overview. SOAC is a novel multimodal spatiotemporal calibration method for cameras and LiDAR in the context of autonomous driving. By alternating the training of multiple
implicit scenes (Sec. 3.2) and sensors co-registration from these
representations (Sec. 3.3), SOAC achieves precise self-supervised
calibration from raw data acquired in unconstrained urban environments.

multi-sensor algorithms. In addition to spatial calibration,
without an external synchronization system, it is also necessary to perform temporal calibration. Using temporally
miscalibrated sensors, performance on different tasks can
be severely hindered. Although certain approaches in the
literature address temporal misalignment [12, 29, 36], the
prevailing assumption among these methods is the presence
of properly synchronized sensors. Due to the importance of
sensor calibration, a multitude of calibration solutions exist in the literature, as highlighted in the review from Li et
al. [17] and summarized in Tab. 1. They can be classified
into two main categories: target-based and targetless methods.
Target-based calibration methods rely on one or more
elements of known dimensions and features purposefully
placed in the scene. The most classic target is a checkerboard [9, 46], but custom-made planar targets [11] or
boxes [30] have also been proposed. These methods usually offer precise and robust calibration compared to targetless approaches. However, requiring hand-placed targets
prevents them from being deployed on a large scale and

15131

