This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aligning and Prompting Everything All at Once for Universal Visual Perception
Yunhang Shen1 , Chaoyou Fu1 , Peixian Chen1 , Mengdan Zhang1
Ke Li1 , Xing Sun1 , Yunsheng Wu1 , Shaohui Lin2 *, Rongrong Ji3
1
Tencent Youtu Lab 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University,
Shanghai, China 3 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
{shenyunhang01, bradyfu24}@gmail.com, shlin@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn
{peixianchen, davinazhang, tristanli, winfredsun, simonwu}@tencent.com

Abstract
Vision foundation models have been explored recently to
build general-purpose vision systems. However, predominant paradigms, driven by casting instance-level tasks as
an object-word alignment, bring heavy cross-modality interaction, which is not effective in prompting object detection and visual grounding. Another line of work that focuses on pixel-level tasks often encounters a large annotation gap of things and stuff, and suffers from mutual interference between foreground-object and background-class
segmentation. In stark contrast to the prevailing methods,
we present APE, a universal visual perception model for
aligning and prompting everything all at once in an image
to perform diverse tasks, i.e., detection, segmentation, and
grounding, as an instance-level sentence-object matching
paradigm. Specifically, APE advances the convergence of
detection and grounding by reformulating language-guided
grounding as open-vocabulary detection, which efficiently
scales up model prompting to thousands of category vocabularies and region descriptions while maintaining the effectiveness of cross-modality fusion. To bridge the granularity gap of different pixel-level tasks, APE equalizes semantic and panoptic segmentation to proxy instance learning by considering any isolated regions as individual instances. APE aligns vision and language representation on
broad data with natural and challenging characteristics all
at once without task-specific fine-tuning. The extensive experiments on over 160 datasets demonstrate that, with only
one-suit of weights, APE outperforms (or is on par with) the
state-of-the-art models, proving that an effective yet universal perception for anything aligning and prompting is indeed feasible. Codes and trained models are released at
https://github.com/shenyunhang/APE.

* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. APE supports prompting thousands of things, stuff, and
sentences in a single forward pass and performing various segmentation without granularity discrepancy.

1. Introduction
Developing vision systems that recognize and localize a
wide range of basic concepts and can be transferable to
novel concepts or domains, has emerged as an important
research topic in the community. In light of the strong
transferability demonstrated by LLMs, many researchers
have attempted to build advanced vision foundation mod-

13193

