This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene-adaptive and Region-aware Multi-modal Prompt for
Open Vocabulary Object Detection
Xiaowei Zhao1 * Xianglong Liu1,2,3† Duorui Wang1 * Yajun Gao1 Zhide Liu1
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory 3 Institute of data space, Heifei Comprehensive National Science Center
1

Abstract

fixed/learnable prompts
people horse

1. Introduction
Recognizing and localizing visual objects in images [20, 26,
28] is a fundamental problem in computer vision, as it is
a prerequisite for many downstream applications, such as
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Previous

shared

TE

cls

classification
loss

VE

distillation loss

image-level

cropped regions

Detector

scene adaptive prompts
people horse

TE

Ours

Open Vocabulary Object Detection (OVD) aims to detect
objects from novel classes described by text inputs based
on the generalization ability of trained classes. Existing
methods mainly focus on transferring knowledge from large
Vision and Language models (VLM) to detectors through
knowledge distillation. However, these approaches show
weak ability in adapting to diverse classes and aligning between the image-level pre-training and region-level detection, thereby impeding effective knowledge transfer. Motivated by the prompt tuning, we propose scene-adaptive and
region-aware multi-modal prompts to address these issues
by effectively adapting class-aware knowledge from VLM to
the detector at the region level. Specifically, to enhance the
adaptability to diverse classes, we design a scene-adaptive
prompt generator from a scene perspective to consider both
the commonality and diversity of the class distributions, and
formulate a novel selection mechanism to facilitate the acquisition of common knowledge across all classes and specific insights relevant to each scene. Meanwhile, to bridge
the gap between the pre-trained model and the detector,
we present a region-aware multi-modal alignment module,
which employs the region prompt to incorporate the positional information for feature distillation and integrates
textual prompts to align visual and linguistic representations. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method significantly outperforms the state-of-theart models on the OV-COCO and OV-LVIS datasets, surpassing the current method by 3.0% mAP and 4.6% APr .

a photo of a [cls]

classification
loss

Regionaware
Alignment

VE
region
prompt

region-level
cropped regions

(a)

(b)

distillation loss

gion

Detector

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Image-level pre-training and region-level detection.
(b) The relative mAP improvement for different superclasses compared to the prompt templates on the COCO dataset. Each row
corresponds to a superclass in COCO, representing distinct scenic.
The bar charts on the left and right represent performance degradation and improvement, respectively. (c) Existing distillation-based
OVD detectors adopt the templates or learn common prompts to
adapt the knowledge of VLM. Instead, our method adopts sceneaware prompts for both visual and textual input, and incorporates
the region prompts.

scene understanding [24, 27], autonomous driving [2, 17],
and intelligent robotics [11]. With sufficient training annotations, prior research [3, 21, 36] has demonstrated favorable performance via deep neural networks. However, the
remarkable success mostly relies on the closed-world assumption that the test data share the same underlying class
label space as the trained data. Unfortunately, in many realistic scenarios, this assumption does not hold true due to
the dynamic nature of real-world tasks where novel classes
may emerge. Additionally, obtaining large annotated training data in open-label spaces is costly and time-consuming.
To address this challenge, Open Vocabulary Object Detection (OVD) [30, 34, 35] is introduced to relax the closedworld assumption, which assumes that the novel classes extend the detection vocabulary beyond the training classes.
In recent years, a great number of efforts [1, 5, 8] have
been made to improve OVD tasks. A prevalent approach in

16741

