This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Descriptor and Word Soups : Overcoming the Parameter Efficiency
Accuracy Tradeoff for Out-of-Distribution Few-shot Learning
Christopher Liao
Boston University

Theodoros Tsiligkaridis
MIT Lincoln Laboratory

Brian Kulis
Boston University

cliao25@bu.edu

ttsili@ll.mit.edu

bkulis@bu.edu

Abstract
Over the past year, a large body of multimodal research
has emerged around zero-shot evaluation using GPT descriptors. These studies boost the zero-shot accuracy of
pretrained VL models with an ensemble of label-specific
text generated by GPT. A recent study, WaffleCLIP, demonstrated that similar zero-shot accuracy can be achieved with
an ensemble of random descriptors. However, both zeroshot methods are un-trainable and consequently sub-optimal
when some few-shot out-of-distribution (OOD) training data
is available. Inspired by these prior works, we present two
more flexible methods called descriptor and word soups,
which do not require an LLM at test time and can leverage
training data to increase OOD target accuracy. Descriptor
soup greedily selects a small set of textual descriptors using generic few-shot training data, then calculates robust
class embeddings using the selected descriptors. Word soup
greedily assembles a chain of words in a similar manner.
Compared to existing few-shot soft prompt tuning methods,
word soup requires fewer parameters by construction and
less GPU memory, since it does not require backpropagation.
Both soups outperform current published few-shot methods,
even when combined with SoTA zero-shot methods, on crossdataset and domain generalization benchmarks. Compared
with SoTA prompt and descriptor ensembling methods, such
as ProDA and WaffleCLIP, word soup achieves higher OOD
accuracy with fewer ensemble members. Please checkout our
code: github.com/Chris210634/word_soups

1. Introduction
Problem Setting There is extensive interest from the computer vision community for training classifiers that are robust to distribution shifts. Pioneering works in this area
[23, 47, 67] focused on optimizing for simple shifts in the
image distribution, such as sketch-to-real adaptation. As the
topic evolved, the community proposed increasingly harder
adaptation problems by eliminating some restrictive assumptions. For the domain generalization (DG) problem [55, 68],

we do not assume access to unlabeled target data; for the
cross-dataset generalization (XD) problem [70], we allow
source and target label spaces to be different; and for the
parameter efficient learning (PEFT) problem [20, 37, 57],
we impose a tight budget on the number of parameters that
can be tuned. Our work lies at the confluence of these three
topics. Similar to CoOp [70] and MaPLe [25], we do assume access to labeled few-shot generic source data, such as
ImageNet. Since we assume nothing about the relationship
between source and target datasets, this setting can be more
useful in practice than strict zero-shot learning. In this paper,
we propose two parameter efficient few-shot methods, called
word and descriptor soups, that finetune vision-language
(VL) models to generalize to target datasets which may contain unseen labels and/or shifts in the image distribution. Our
methods achieve state-of-the-art on some benchmarks without additional gradient-based tuning, but can also improve
state-of-the-art gradient-based finetuning methods with an
additional diversity loss.
Motivation Our work is motivated by the recent success
of classification by description methods [24, 35, 42] in both
zero-shot (ZS) classification and open-vocabulary object detection. These methods ask an LLM like GPT to generate
a list of short descriptions for each class, then aggregate
predictions from the descriptions to improve ZS accuracy,
see Fig. 1(a). It is often claimed that the impressive gain
in ZS accuracy comes from additional information given
by the GPT descriptions. However, a recent study called
WaffleCLIP [45] observed that random descriptors or even
strings of random words can achieve similar ZS accuracy
to GPT descriptors, when ensembled together (see Fig. 5).
Therefore, gains in ZS accuracy achieved by descriptor methods are mostly driven by ensembling rather than the content
of the descriptors themselves. Inspired by this observation,
we propose descriptor and word soups, two methods which
outperform WaffleCLIP by selecting descriptors or chains of
words that maximize few-shot accuracy. Word soup has 3 advantages: (1) it outperforms existing descriptor-inspired ZS
methods in the few-shot OOD setting since it directly maxi-

27015

