This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamVideo: Composing Your Dream Videos with
Customized Subject and Motion
Yujie Wei1
Shiwei Zhang2
Zhiwu Qing2
Hangjie Yuan2
Zhiheng Liu2
2
2
2
Yu Liu
Yingya Zhang
Jingren Zhou
Hongming Shan1,3,4†
1
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence, Fudan University
2
3
Alibaba Group
MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University
4
Key Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience and Brain-inspired Intelligence, Fudan University
yjwei22@m.fudan.edu.cn, hmshan@fudan.edu.cn, {zhangjin.zsw, qingzhiwu.qzw}@alibaba-inc.com
{yuanhangjie.yhj, pingzhi.lzh, ly103369, yingya.zyy, jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com

Motion
Subject

a person is playing guitar

a person is lifting weights

dog

a dog* is playing guitar

a dog* is lifting weights

sloth plushie

a sloth* is playing guitar on the moon

a sloth* is lifting weights

monster toy

a monster* is playing guitar in the room

a monster* is lifting weights on the road

Figure 1. Customized video generation results of our proposed DreamVideo with specific subjects (left) and motions (top). Our method
can customize both subject identity and motion pattern to generate desired videos with various context descriptions.

Abstract
Customized generation using diffusion models has made
impressive progress in image generation, but remains unsatisfactory in the challenging video generation task, as it
requires the controllability of both subjects and motions.
To that end, we present DreamVideo, a novel approach to
† Corresponding author.

generating personalized videos from a few static images
of the desired subject and a few videos of target motion.
DreamVideo decouples this task into two stages, subject
learning and motion learning, by leveraging a pre-trained
video diffusion model. The subject learning aims to accurately capture the fine appearance of the subject from provided images, which is achieved by combining textual inversion and fine-tuning of our carefully designed identity
adapter. In motion learning, we architect a motion adapter

6537

