This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SANeRF-HQ: Segment Anything for NeRF in High Quality
Yichen Liu1 Benran Hu2 Chi-Keung Tang1 Yu-Wing Tai3
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Dartmouth College

Abstract
Recently, the Segment Anything Model (SAM) has showcased remarkable capabilities of zero-shot segmentation,
while NeRF (Neural Radiance Fields) has gained popularity as a method for various 3D problems beyond novel
view synthesis. Though there exist initial attempts to incorporate these two methods into 3D segmentation, they
face the challenge of accurately and consistently segmenting objects in complex scenarios. In this paper, we introduce the Segment Anything for NeRF in High Quality
(SANeRF-HQ) to achieve high-quality 3D segmentation of
any target object in a given scene. SANeRF-HQ utilizes
SAM for open-world object segmentation guided by usersupplied prompts, while leveraging NeRF to aggregate information from different viewpoints. To overcome the aforementioned challenges, we employ density field and RGB
similarity to enhance the accuracy of segmentation boundary during the aggregation. Emphasizing on segmentation accuracy, we evaluate our method on multiple NeRF
datasets where high-quality ground-truths are available or
manually annotated. SANeRF-HQ shows a significant quality improvement over state-of-the-art methods in NeRF object segmentation, provides higher flexibility for object localization, and enables more consistent object segmentation
across multiple views. Results and code are available at the
project site: https://lyclyc52.github.io/SANeRF-HQ/.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [39] has produced state-ofthe-art results in novel view synthesis for intricate realworld scenes. NeRF encodes a given scene using MultiLayer Perceptrons (MLPs) and supports queries of density and radiance given 3D coordinates and view directions,
which are used to render photo-realistic images from any
view points. Moreover, during training, NeRF only requires RGB images with camera poses, which directly links
3D to 2D. The simple but ingenious architecture with its
continuous representation has quickly started to challenge
† This research is supported in part by the Research Grant Council of
the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420.

traditional representations using explicit discrete structures,
such as RGB-D images or point clouds. As a result, NeRF
is poised to tackle more challenging tasks in 3D vision.
One important downstream task that can benefit from
NeRF representations is 3D object segmentation, which is
fundamental in 3D vision and widely used in many applications. Researchers have investigated applying NeRF to object segmentation. Semantic-NeRF [63], targeting semantic segmentation, is one of the first works in this direction.
DFF [32] distills the knowledge of pre-trained features such
as DINO [8] into a 3D feature field for unsupervised object
decomposition. Supervised approaches, such as [45], utilize Mask2Former [14] to obtain initial 2D masks and lifts
them to 3D with a panoptic radiance field. Although these
methods demonstrate impressive results, their performance
is constrained by the pre-trained models used to produce
features.
Recently, large vision models such as Segment Anything Model (SAM) [31] have emerged. These models with
strong zero-shot generalization performance can be adopted
as the backbone component for many downstream tasks.
SAM presents a new paradigm for segmentation tasks. It
can accept a wide variety of prompts as input, and produce
segmentation masks of different semantic levels as output.
The versatility and generalizability of SAM suggest a new
way to perform promptable object segmentation in NeRF.
While there exist some investigations [9, 13, 21] into this
area, the mask quality in novel views is still unsatisfactory.
In view of this, we propose a new general framework
to achieve prompt-based 3D segmentation in NeRF. Our
framework, termed Segment Anything for NeRF in High
Quality, or SANeRF-HQ, leverages existing 2D foundation
models such as Segment Anything to allow various prompts
as input, and produces 3D segmentations with high accuracy and multi-view consistency. The major contributions
of our paper are:
• We propose SANeRF-HQ, one of the first attempts at producing high-quality 3D object segmentation in NeRF in
terms of more accurate segmentation boundaries and better multi-view consistency.
• We validate our method by evaluating quantitatively on a

3216

