This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A noisy elephant in the room: Is your out-of-distribution
detector robust to label noise?
Galadrielle Humblot-Renaux1
Sergio Escalera1,2
Thomas B. Moeslund1
1
Visual Analysis and Perception lab, Aalborg University, Denmark
2
Department of Mathematics and Informatics, University of Barcelona and Computer Vision Center, Spain
sescalera@ub.edu

Abstract
The ability to detect unfamiliar or unexpected images is
essential for safe deployment of computer vision systems.
In the context of classification, the task of detecting images outside of a model’s training domain is known as outof-distribution (OOD) detection. While there has been a
growing research interest in developing post-hoc OOD detection methods, there has been comparably little discussion around how these methods perform when the underlying classifier is not trained on a clean, carefully curated
dataset. In this work, we take a closer look at 20 stateof-the-art OOD detection methods in the (more realistic)
scenario where the labels used to train the underlying classifier are unreliable (e.g. crowd-sourced or web-scraped labels). Extensive experiments across different datasets, noise
types & levels, architectures and checkpointing strategies
provide insights into the effect of class label noise on OOD
detection, and show that poor separation between incorrectly classified ID samples vs. OOD samples is an overlooked yet important limitation of existing methods. Code:
https://github.com/glhr/ood-labelnoise

1. Introduction
In many real-world applications where deep neural networks are deployed “in the wild”, it is desirable to have
models that not only correctly classify samples drawn from
the distribution of labeled data but also flag unexpected inputs as out-of-distribution (OOD). This has motivated the
development of a wide range of OOD detection methods
and benchmarks for computer vision [47, 66]. In particular, post-hoc OOD detection methods have shown wide appeal: compared to training-based methods, post-hoc OOD
detectors can be applied on top of existing image classifiers
without the need for re-training, have little to no architecture
constraints, do not compromise classification performance,
and achieve strong performance in large-scale settings [67].
Existing OOD benchmarks place significant emphasis
on carefully designing the selection of OOD datasets used

tbm@create.aau.dk

1
0.75
0.50
0.25
MDS
GRAM
VIM
KNN
MDSEns
DICE
ReAct
SHE
OpenMax
EBO
RMDS
MLS
GEN
ODIN
ASH
RankFeat
KLM
TempScale
GradNorm
MSP

AUROCincorrect vs. OOD

gegeh@create.aau.dk

Figure 1. Can state-of-the-art OOD detectors tell incorrectly classified ID images apart from OOD inputs? Not really. Here we
compare their performance across 396 trained classifiers.

for evaluation [4, 14, 60, 67]. In contrast, the role of the
in-distribution (ID) dataset used for training the underlying classifier is seldom discussed. Among the most popular choices of ID dataset are MNIST, CIFAR10, CIFAR100
and ImageNet [30, 67] - all of which have been carefully
curated and reliably annotated. Yet, in practice, the collection of labelled datasets involves a trade-off between acquisition time/cost and annotation quality - human inattention,
mis-clicking, limited expertise, crowd-sourcing, automated
annotation, and other cost-saving measures inevitably introduce labelling errors [54]. Besides, some images are inherently ambiguous to label even for the most knowledgeable
and careful of annotators [28]. Considering how pervasive
the problem of label noise is in real-world image classification datasets, its effect on OOD detection is crucial to study.
To address this gap, we systematically analyse the label
noise robustness of a wide range of OOD detectors, ranging from the widely adopted Maximum Softmax Probability (MSP) baseline [14, 19], to distance-based methods operating in feature space [32, 57], to more recent, complex
methods such as SHE [70] and ASH [10]. In particular:
1. We present the first study of post-hoc OOD detection in
the presence of noisy classification labels, examining the
performance of 20 state-of-the-art methods under different types and levels of label noise in the training data.
Our study includes multiple classification architectures

22626

