This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MESA: Matching Everything by Segmenting Anything
Yesheng Zhang
Xu Zhao⇤
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Abstract
Feature matching is a crucial task in the field of computer vision, which involves finding correspondences between images. Previous studies achieve remarkable performance using learning-based feature comparison. However,
the pervasive presence of matching redundancy between images gives rise to unnecessary and error-prone computations in these methods, imposing limitations on their accuracy. To address this issue, we propose MESA, a novel
approach to establish precise area (or region) matches for
efficient matching redundancy reduction. MESA first leverages the advanced image understanding capability of SAM,
a state-of-the-art foundation model for image segmentation,
to obtain image areas with implicit semantic. Then, a multirelational graph is proposed to model the spatial structure
of these areas and construct their scale hierarchy. Based on
graphical models derived from the graph, the area matching is reformulated as an energy minimization task and effectively resolved. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
MESA yields substantial precision improvement for multiple point matchers in indoor and outdoor downstream tasks,
e.g. +13.61% for DKM in indoor pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Feature matching aims at establishing correspondences between images, which is vital in a broad range of applications, such as SLAM [5], SfM [39] and visual localization [38]. However, achieving exact point matches is still
a significant challenge due to the presence of matching
noises [33], including scale variations, viewpoint and illumination changes, repetitive patterns, and poor texturing.
The underlying goal of feature matching is to find correspondences for points in the source image from a highly redundant candidate set, i.e. all the points of the target image.
Therefore, feature matching essentially involves reducing
the matching redundancy, which is caused by troublesome
matching noises. Recent years have witnessed significant
⇤ Corresponding author: Xu Zhao.

Figure 1. The matching redundancy reduction in MESA.
High-level image understanding enables efficient matching redundancy reduction, allowing for precise point matching by dense
feature comparison . Therefore, MESA effectively reduces the
matching redundancy by area matching based on SAM [22] segmentation, significantly improving the accuracy of DKM [17].

advancements in learning-based methods for feature matching. Especially the semi-dense [8, 40] and dense methods [17], which search for matches densely by deep feature
comparison, obtain an impressive precision gap over sparse
methods [14]. However, as they heavily rely on dense feature comparison of the entire image, limited input resolution
and error-prone computation in matching-redundant parts
of images decrease their accuracy. Thus, effective matching
redundancy reduction is urgently required for them.
On the other hand, most matching redundancy can be effectively and efficiently identified through high-level image
understanding and only strongly correlated local areas (also
known as regions) need dense feature comparison to determine precise matches. (Fig. 1). Therefore, recent methods [9, 15] perform learning-based overlap segmentation
before matching. However, implicit learning needs nonreusable computational overhead and the redundancy still
exists in the overlap. To address these issues, some work
turn to explicit semantic prior [18, 52]. Unlike manually
specifying a topic number to group feature patches [18],
Area to Point Matching (A2PM) framework proposed by
SGAM [52] provides a more intuitive way to reduce matching redundancy. Specifically, this framework establishes

20217

