This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LowRankOcc: Tensor Decomposition and Low-Rank Recovery for Vision-based
3D Semantic Occupancy Prediction
Linqing Zhao1,2 , Xiuwei Xu1 , Ziwei Wang1 , Yunpeng Zhang3 , Borui Zhang1 ,
Wenzhao Zheng1 , Dalong Du3 , Jie Zhou1 , Jiwen Lu1 *
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
3
PhiGent Robotics
linqingzhao@tju.edu.cn; {xxw21,wang-zw18,zhang-br21,zhengwz18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
yunpengzhang97@gmail.com; dalong.du@phigent.ai; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a tensor decomposition and
low-rank recovery approach (LowRankOcc) for visionbased 3D semantic occupancy prediction. Conventional
methods model outdoor scenes with fine-grained 3D grids,
but the sparsity of non-empty voxels introduces considerable spatial redundancy, leading to potential overfitting
risks. In contrast, our approach leverages the intrinsic lowrank property of 3D occupancy data, factorizing voxel representations into low-rank components to efficiently mitigate spatial redundancy without sacrificing performance.
Specifically, we present the Vertical-Horizontal (VH) decomposition block factorizes 3D tensors into vertical vectors and horizontal matrices. With our ”decompositionencoding-recovery” framework, we encode 3D contexts
with only 1/2D convolutions and poolings, and subsequently recover the encoded compact yet informative context features back to voxel representations. Experimental results demonstrate that LowRankOcc achieves state-of-theart performances in semantic scene completion on the SemanticKITTI dataset and 3D occupancy prediction on the
nuScenes dataset.

1. Introduction
Accurate and comprehensive perception of the 3D environment is pivotal in the applications of autonomous driving
systems. Vision-based 3D perception [1, 12, 29, 30, 51]
has recently emerged as a promising alternative to LiDARbased approaches [16, 32, 52], offering an effective means
to extract 3D information from 2D images. Despite the
absence of direct depth sensing, vision-based models, en* Corresponding author.

hanced by surrounding cameras, exhibit promising performance across a spectrum of 3D perception tasks, including
depth estimation [33, 40, 49, 50], semantic map reconstruction [19, 47], and 3D object detection [13, 20].
The primary challenge in vision-based 3D semantic occupancy prediction [15, 21, 24, 26, 38, 39] is the precise
capture of the nuanced 3D geometry in real-world scenes.
Voxel and Bird’s Eye View (BEV) representations emerge
as the two most widely adopted methods for tackling this
challenge. Voxel representations offer detailed 3D information at the cost of computational complexity, while BEV
representations prioritize efficiency and simplicity, albeit
with potential information loss, especially in scenarios with
complex vertical structures. TPVFormer [14] extends BEV
by incorporating three orthometric perspectives: frontal,
lateral, and overhead views, aiming to balance efficiency
and information preservation.
However, existing methods overlook the spatial redundancy inherent in modeling 3D occupancy data, resulting in
capturing noise and specific patterns that do not generalize
well to new data. For example, a significant portion (over
95 % in nuScenes [3]) of voxels representing empty space
is concentrated in the upper region of the scene. Conventional approaches that densely encode all voxels, regardless
of their occupancy status, may inadvertently emphasize irrelevant information, leading to overfitting. This spatial redundancy highlights that not all spatial dimensions or components of 3D occupancy data carry unique and independent information.
To address the overfitting caused by spatial redundancy,
in this paper, we present LowRankOcc, a tensor decomposition and low-rank recovery approach for vision-based
3D semantic occupancy prediction. Inspired by the classical tensor decomposition theories, we aim to leverage the
low-rank property inherent in 3D outdoor occupancy data.

9806

