This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanoRecon: Real-Time Panoptic 3D Reconstruction from Monocular Video
Dong Wu1
Zike Yan2
Hongbin Zha1
1
National Key Lab of GAI, School of IST
PKU-SenseTime Joint Lab of MV
Peking University
2
AIR, Tsinghua University
riserwu@stu.pku.edu.cn, yanzike@air.tsinghua.edu.cn, zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Online Instance Map

Frame 1200

Frame 3000

Frame 4500

Online 3D Panoptic Reconstruction

Online Geometry Map
wall
floor
cabinet
bed
chair
sofa
table

door
window
bookshelf
picture
counter
desk
curtain

refrige.
s. curtain
toilet
sink
bathtub
otherfur.

Online Semantic Map

Figure 1. We present PanoRecon, which realizes an online reconstruction at the level of stuff and things with only monocular video as
input. The system runs in real-time, and performs online 3D geometry reconstruction as well as dense semantic labeling for all map region
and segmentation of individual things.

Abstract
We introduce the Panoptic 3D Reconstruction task, a
uniﬁed and holistic scene understanding task for a monocular video. And we present PanoRecon - a novel framework to address this new task, which realizes an online geometry reconstruction alone with dense semantic and instance labeling. Speciﬁcally, PanoRecon incrementally performs panoptic 3D reconstruction for each video fragment
consisting of multiple consecutive key frames, from a volumetric feature representation using feed-forward neural
networks. We adopt a depth-guided back-projection strategy to sparse and purify the volumetric feature representation. We further introduce a voxel clustering module to
get object instances in each local fragment, and then design a tracking and fusion algorithm for the integration of
instances from different fragments to ensure temporal coherence. Such design enables our PanoRecon to yield a
coherent and accurate panoptic 3D reconstruction. Experiments on ScanNetV2 demonstrate a very competitive geometry reconstruction result compared with state-of-the-art

reconstruction methods, as well as promising 3D panoptic
segmentation result with only RGB input, while being realtime. Code is available at: https://github.com/
Riser6/PanoRecon.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding from a posed monocular video is
a fundamental task of 3D computer vision and robotics.
The understanding ability to infer the underlying geometric structures and recognize object with semantics immediately, is critical towards many downstream applications,
such as Augmented and Virtual Reality(AR and VR), interior modeling and human-robot interaction.
Recently, signiﬁcant advances have been made in 3D
geometric reconstruction. Many depth-fusion methods [1–
5] and feature-fusion methods [6–12] are proposed, each
with its own strengths(see Sec. 2.3). Although the watertight reconstruction of whole scene can be produced, different objects in the scene are unable to be decoupled due
to lack of the ability to distinguish instance. On the other

21507

