This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Selective nonlinearities removal from digital signals
Krzysztof A. Maliszewski
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Canterbury
Christchurch, New Zealand
krzysztof.maliszewski@pg.canterbury.ac.nz

Magdalena A. Urbańska
School of Food and Advanced Technology, Massey University
Palmerston North, New Zealand
murbanska@massey.ac.nz

Varvara Vetrova
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Canterbury
Christchurch, New Zealand
varvara.vetrova@canterbury.ac.nz

Sylwia M. Kolenderska
Institute of Physics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Informatics
Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun
ul. Grudziadzka 5, 87-100 Torun, Poland
School of Physical and Chemical Sciences, University of Canterbury
Christchurch, New Zealand
skol745@aucklanduni.ac.nz

Abstract
Many instruments performing optical and non-optical
imaging and sensing, such as Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging or Fouriertransform spectrometry, produce digital signals containing modulations, sine-like components, which only after
Fourier transformation give information about the structure
or characteristics of the investigated object. Due to the fundamental physics-related limitations of such methods, the
distribution of these signal components is often nonlinear
and, when not properly compensated, leads to the resolution, precision or quality drop in the final image. Here,
we propose an innovative approach that has the potential
to allow cleaning of the signal from the nonlinearities but
most of all, it now allows to switch the given order off, leaving all others intact. The latter provides a tool for more
in-depth analysis of the nonlinearity-inducing properties of
the investigated object, which can lead to applications in
early disease detection or more sensitive sensing of chemical compounds. We consider OCT signals and nonlinear-

ities up to the third order. In our approach, we propose
two neural networks: one to remove solely the second-order
nonlinearity and the other for removing solely the thirdorder nonlinearity. The input of the networks is a novel twodimensional data structure with all the information needed
for the network to infer a nonlinearity-free signal. We describe the developed networks and present the results for
second-order and third-order nonlinearity removal in OCT
data representing the images of various objects: a mirror,
glass, and fruits.

1. Introduction
Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) or Fourier-transform Spectrometry
(FTS) belong to a class of methods where useful, interpretable signal is obtained in an indirect way, more specifically by Fourier transforming the raw signal acquired by
the instrument and taking its absolute value. On the one
hand, such an indirect approach makes OCT-based imaging and FTS-based sensing faster and enables MRI, but on

25028

