This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discriminative Sample-Guided and Parameter-Efficient Feature Space
Adaptation for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Rashindrie Perera1,2

Saman Halgamuge1

1

2

University of Melbourne, Australia
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Australia

cdperera@student.unimelb.edu.au, saman@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we look at cross-domain few-shot classification which presents the challenging task of learning
new classes in previously unseen domains with few labelled examples. Existing methods, though somewhat effective, encounter several limitations, which we alleviate
through two significant improvements. First, we introduce
a lightweight parameter-efficient adaptation strategy to address overfitting associated with fine-tuning a large number of parameters on small datasets. This strategy employs a linear transformation of pre-trained features, significantly reducing the trainable parameter count. Second,
we replace the traditional nearest centroid classifier with a
discriminative sample-aware loss function, enhancing the
model’s sensitivity to the inter- and intra-class variances
within the training set for improved clustering in feature
space. Empirical evaluations on the Meta-Dataset benchmark showcase that our approach not only improves accuracy up to 7.7% and 5.3% on previously seen and unseen
datasets, respectively, but also achieves the above performance while being at least ⇠ 3⇥ more parameter-efficient
than existing methods, establishing a new state-of-the-art
in cross-domain few-shot learning. Our code is available at
https://github.com/rashindrie/DIPA.

works focused on learning to recognize new classes arising
within a previously seen domain. However, in real-world
scenarios, it is more likely that the new classes will arise
from previously unseen domains. This challenging scenario
of learning new classes in previously unseen domains is
tackled in cross-domain few-shot learning problem, which
is also the focus of this paper.

1. Introduction

Existing methods typically address this challenge by first
learning a set of task-agnostic (i.e., generalized) features
from a large dataset. These features are then fine-tuned to a
specific target task using a small training set (called support
set), often comprising as few as five images per category
[37, 55]. These two stages are called meta-training (or pretraining) and meta-testing, respectively. The performance
of the fine-tuned model is subsequently evaluated on a separate set of test samples, the query set, where the objective is to accurately categorize each query sample into one
of the classes represented in the support set. However, as
illustrated in Table 1, existing methods frequently involve
fine-tuning a considerable number of task-specific parameters during the meta-testing phase. This practice can lead to
overfitting, especially when data is scarce [59]. Moreover,
it has been shown that shallower neural network layers generally contain more general features that can be applied to
new tasks without the need for explicit fine-tuning [60, 64].
Despite this, many existing studies [28, 37, 59] attempt to
adapt the entire pre-trained model to the target task, which
in a limited data regime, can increase the risk of overfitting.

Deep neural networks achieve remarkable performance
when presented with abundant training data. However, collecting large datasets is not feasible in many applications
due to bottlenecks in data (e.g., rare categories), or the
cost of manual annotations. Inspired by this limitation,
few-shot classification aims to learn a classifier to recognize new classes with only a limited number of samples
per class [21, 22, 34]. In traditional few-shot settings, new
classes arise within a previously seen domain but have no
class overlap with previously seen classes. Therefore, early

On the other hand, existing works [37, 48, 53, 55] typically employ the nearest centroid classifier (NCC) [45, 52]
for fine-tuning the task-specific parameters and for subsequent query classification. NCC assigns an image to the
class with the closest centroid, where the centroid is the
mean of the feature embeddings belonging to the class. It
encourages each embedding to be closer to its respective
class centroid than the centroids of the other classes. As a
result, these classes form tight clusters in the feature embedding space (refer Fig. 1a). However, due to the lack of focus

23794

