This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain-Specific Block Selection and Paired-View Pseudo-Labeling for
Online Test-Time Adaptation
Yeonguk Yu, Sungho Shin, Seunghyeok Back, Minhwan Ko, Sangjun Noh, and Kyoobin Lee
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology
{yeon guk, hogili89, shback, mhko1998, sangjun7}@gm.gist.ac.kr, kyoobinlee@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) aims to adapt a pre-trained
model to a new test domain without access to source data
after deployment. Existing approaches typically rely on
self-training with pseudo-labels since ground-truth cannot
be obtained from test data. Although the quality of pseudo
labels is important for stable and accurate long-term adaptation, it has not been previously addressed. In this work,
we propose DPLOT, a simple yet effective TTA framework
that consists of two components: (1) domain-specific block
selection and (2) pseudo-label generation using pairedview images. Specifically, we select blocks that involve
domain-specific feature extraction and train these blocks by
entropy minimization. After blocks are adjusted for current
test domain, we generate pseudo-labels by averaging given
test images and corresponding flipped counterparts. By
simply using flip augmentation, we prevent a decrease in
the quality of the pseudo-labels, which can be caused by
the domain gap resulting from strong augmentation. Our
experimental results demonstrate that DPLOT outperforms
previous TTA methods in CIFAR10-C, CIFAR100-C, and
ImageNet-C benchmarks, reducing error by up to 5.4%,
9.1%, and 2.9%, respectively. Also, we provide an extensive
analysis to demonstrate effectiveness of our framework.
Code is available at https://github.com/gist-ailab/domainspecific-block-selection-and-paired-view-pseudo-labelingfor-online-TTA.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks achieve remarkable performance
when the training and target data originate from the same
domain [36, 39]. In contrast, deployed models perform
poorly if domain shifts exists between source training data
and target test data [12, 35]. For example, a pre-trained image classification model may suffer this phenomenon for the
given corrupted images due to sensor degradation, weather
change, and other reasons [15, 37]. Various studies have ad-

Figure 1. Results of the proposed framework for online testtime adaptation (Orange). We evaluate average error rates of the
WideResNet40 and ResNext-29 architectures for the CIFAR100-C
gradual setting benchmark using competitive test-time adaptation
methods. In the gradual setting, the networks should adapt to continually changing corruption domains (135 changes in total).

dressed the domain shift issue [19, 29, 55]. Recently, testtime adaptation (TTA), which aims to improve the model
performance on target domain without access to the source
data during the inference stage, has received attention because of its practicality and applicability [32, 43, 44].
In online TTA, the objective is to simultaneously make
prediction and adaptation using a source pre-trained model
for the given test data. Existing TTA methods typically rely on self-training with pseudo labels, such as entropy minimization [13, 42] and consistency regularization [40, 41]. Entropy minimization trains the model by
self-generated pseudo-labels, whereas consistency regularization uses pseudo-labels generated by a teacher model.
These methods have demonstrated excellent performance
with short-term test sequence in the stationary environment [43].
Under the continually changing domain in nonstationary environments [30, 44], self-training with pseudolabels can lead to error accumulation, gradually degrading
the quality of pseudo-labels [44]. To alleviate the issue,
stochastic restoration (i.e., reset the model to the source pre-

22723

