This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViP-LLaVA:
Making Large Multimodal Models Understand Arbitrary Visual Prompts
Mu Cai1

Haotian Liu1 Siva Karthik Mustikovela2 Gregory P. Meyer2
Yuning Chai2 Dennis Park2 Yong Jae Lee1,2
1
University of Wisconsin–Madison 2 Cruise LLC
https://vip-llava.github.io

Abstract

: The person marked with the red arrow is holding a
green flag. This flag is used for …

While existing large vision-language multimodal models focus on whole image understanding, there is a prominent gap in achieving region-specific comprehension. Current approaches that use textual coordinates or spatial encodings often fail to provide a user-friendly interface for
visual prompting. To address this challenge, we introduce a novel multimodal model capable of decoding arbitrary (free-form) visual prompts. This allows users to intuitively mark images and interact with the model using natural cues like a “red bounding box” or “pointed arrow”.
Our simple design directly overlays visual markers onto the
RGB image, eliminating the need for complex region encodings, yet achieves state-of-the-art performance on regionunderstanding tasks like Visual7W, PointQA, and Visual
Commonsense Reasoning benchmark. Furthermore, we
present ViP-Bench, a comprehensive benchmark to assess
the capability of models in understanding visual prompts
across multiple dimensions, enabling future research in this
domain. Code, data, and model are publicly available.

Large Multimodal Model

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT [21],
GPT4 [22], and Bard [9] have recently gained significant
attention for their strong reasoning and generalization capabilities, and their ability to chat in a human-like manner.
In particular, models such as GPT-4V(ision) [20], which
incorporate visual information, have demonstrated humanlevel perception and reasoning capabilities [36]. This has
spurred the development of similar open-source models that
aim to replicate or even surpass the proprietary models’ performance.
Despite their capabilities, current models, including
seminal ones like LLaVA [14, 15] and MiniGPT-4 [42], focus predominantly on whole-image understanding; in other
words, they lack the capability to process region-specific information in complex scenes. This limitation becomes par-

Visual Prompt

Text Prompt

: What is the
person marked
with the red arrow
holding?

Figure 1. Main Idea of ViP-LLaVA. We directly overlay diverse
visual prompts (e.g., arrows, boxes, circles, scribbles) onto the
original image, and then feed the corresponding visual features
along with text embeddings into the large multimodal model for
conversational assistance. Here we show an example using a red
arrow.

ticularly apparent when attempting to describe specific objects within an image using only language prompts, which
can be difficult when there is ambiguity (e.g., when there
are multiple people in the image, and the question relates to
a specific person), as shown in Figure 1.
To address this issue, recent work explores spatial references in multimodal models. Existing efforts have primarily focused on using textual representations of coordinates [3, 4, 7, 39], learned positional embeddings [23, 38,
41], or ROI features [26, 38]. However, they often lack userfriendliness, as they are limited to fixed-format visual references like bounding boxes and the spatial coordinates of
a mask contour. Most of these approaches, including those
by Zhang et al. [38] and Chen et al. [4], only employ bounding box inputs for visual referrals. While effective in structured scenarios, this method proves less versatile in natural,
user-driven interactions where the visual prompts may not
conform to clean geometric shapes.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet highly effective
solution to this problem: a large multimodal model that can

12914

