This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Salience DETR: Enhancing Detection Transformer
with Hierarchical Salience Filtering Refinement
Xiuquan Hou1 , Meiqin Liu1,2, *, Senlin Zhang2 , Ping Wei1 , Badong Chen1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
College of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
1

xiuqhou@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, liumeiqin@zju.edu.cn, slzhang@zju.edu.cn,
pingwei@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, chenbd@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Topk 100 queries

Abstract
DETR-like methods have significantly increased detection performance in an end-to-end manner. The mainstream two-stage frameworks of them perform dense selfattention and select a fraction of queries for sparse crossattention, which is proven effective for improving performance but also introduces a heavy computational burden
and high dependence on stable query selection. This paper
demonstrates that suboptimal two-stage selection strategies
result in scale bias and redundancy due to the mismatch
between selected queries and objects in two-stage initialization. To address these issues, we propose hierarchical
salience filtering refinement, which performs transformer
encoding only on filtered discriminative queries, for a better trade-off between computational efficiency and precision. The filtering process overcomes scale bias through
a novel scale-independent salience supervision. To compensate for the semantic misalignment among queries, we
introduce elaborate query refinement modules for stable
two-stage initialization. Based on above improvements, the
proposed Salience DETR achieves significant improvements
of +4.0% AP, +0.2% AP, +4.4% AP on three challenging
task-specific detection datasets, as well as 49.2% AP on
COCO 2017 with less FLOPs. The code is available at
https://github.com/xiuqhou/Salience-DETR.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision with numerous practical applications. Despite the
significant advancements made by convolutional detectors
[1, 21, 23, 24] in recent decades, they are still limited by
* Corresponding author

Large objects

Small objects

Scale bias for large objects

Topk 300 queries

Background query

Topk 900 queries

Symmetrical query

Redundance in one-to-one match

Figure 1. Visualization of selected queries in two-stage initialization. Queries and object annotations are denoted in points and
bounding boxes respectively. The selection results illustrate scale
bias and redundancy despite one-to-one Hungarian matching.

manually-designed components such as non-maximum suppression [3]. With the recent advent of DEtection TRansformer (DETR) [3], end-to-end transformer-based detectors
have shown remarkable performance improvement in the
COCO challenge [32, 38].
Among the large number of variants of DETR, the latest
high-performance frameworks follow a two-stage pipeline
that performs dense self-attention in the encoder and selects sparse queries for cross attention in the decoder [6, 14,
19, 32, 34, 37, 38]. This does improve the detection performance but also results in increased computation and the
requirement for stable two-stage query initialization [35].
As shown in Figure 1, we observe that in task-specific detection scenarios involving weak objects (e.g. small-scale
objects affected by scattering and low contrast [11]), existing two-stage selection results exhibit a significant scale
bias towards large objects and redundancy in background

17574

