This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaceTalk: Audio-Driven Motion Diffusion for Neural Parametric Head Models
Shivangi Aneja1
1

Justus Thies2,3

Angela Dai1

2

MPI-IS, Tübingen

Technical University of Munich

hello

everyone

and

3

TU Darmstadt

congratulations

to

class

Speech Signal

[silence]

Matthias Nießner1

Figure 1. Given an input speech signal, we propose a diffusion-based approach to synthesize high-quality and temporally consistent 3D
motion sequences of high-fidelity human heads as neural parametric head models. Our method can generate a diverse set of expressions
(including wrinkles and eye blinks) and the generated mouth motion is temporally synchronized with the given audio signal.

Abstract
We introduce FaceTalk1 , a novel generative approach designed for synthesizing high-fidelity 3D motion sequences
of talking human heads from input audio signal. To capture
the expressive, detailed nature of human heads, including
hair, ears, and finer-scale eye movements, we propose to
couple speech signal with the latent space of neural parametric head models to create high-fidelity, temporally coherent motion sequences. We propose a new latent diffusion model for this task, operating in the expression space of
neural parametric head models, to synthesize audio-driven
realistic head sequences. In the absence of a dataset with
corresponding NPHM expressions to audio, we optimize for
these correspondences to produce a dataset of temporallyoptimized NPHM expressions fit to audio-video recordings
of people talking. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work to propose a generative approach for realistic and high-quality motion synthesis of volumetric human
heads, representing a significant advancement in the field of
audio-driven 3D animation. Notably, our approach stands
out in its ability to generate plausible motion sequences that
can produce high-fidelity head animation coupled with the
1 Project Page: https : / / shivangi - aneja . github . io /
projects/facetalk

NPHM shape space. Our experimental results substantiate
the effectiveness of FaceTalk, consistently achieving superior and visually natural motion, encompassing diverse facial expressions and styles, outperforming existing methods
by 75% in perceptual user study evaluation.

1. Introduction
Modeling 3D animation of humans has a wide range of
applications in the realm of digital media, including animated movies, computer games, and virtual assistants.
In recent years, there have been numerous works proposing generative approaches for motion synthesis of human
bodies, enabling the animation of human skeletons conditioned on various signals such as action [3, 25, 46], language [1, 4, 36, 47, 64, 77] and music [2, 67]. While human
faces are critical to synthesis of humans, generative synthesis of 3D faces in motion has focused on 3D morphable
models (3DMMs) leveraging linear blendshapes [7, 40] to
represent head motion and expression. Such models characterize a disentangled space of head shape and motion,
but lack the capacity to comprehensively represent the complexity and fine-grained details of human face geometry in
motion (e.g., hair, skin furrowing during motion, etc.).
Thus, we propose to represent animated head sequences

21263

