This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Arbitrary-Scale Image Generation and Upsampling using Latent Diffusion
Model and Implicit Neural Decoder

1

Jinseok Kim1,3
Tae-Kyun Kim1,2
2
KAIST
Imperial College London
3
AI Lab, LG Electronics

(a) Arbitrary-Scale Image Generation

(b) Arbitrary-Scale Super-Resolution

Figure 1. The proposed method generates novel images and super-resolves low-resolution images at arbitrary-scales with high fidelity,
diversity, and fast inference speed.

Abstract
Super-resolution (SR) and image generation are important tasks in computer vision and are widely adopted in
real-world applications. Most existing methods, however,
generate images only at fixed-scale magnification and suffer from over-smoothing and artifacts. Additionally, they
do not offer enough diversity of output images nor image
consistency at different scales. Most relevant work applied
Implicit Neural Representation (INR) to the denoising diffusion model to obtain continuous-resolution yet diverse and
high-quality SR results. Since this model operates in the
image space, the larger the resolution of image is produced,
the more memory and inference time is required, and it also
does not maintain scale-specific consistency. We propose
a novel pipeline that can super-resolve an input image or
generate from a random noise a novel image at arbitrary
scales. The method consists of a pre-trained auto-encoder,
a latent diffusion model, and an implicit neural decoder, and
their learning strategies. The proposed method adopts diffusion processes in a latent space, thus efficient, yet aligned
with output image space decoded by MLPs at arbitrary
scales. More specifically, our arbitrary-scale decoder is de-

signed by the symmetric decoder w/o up-scaling from the
pre-trained auto-encoder, and Local Implicit Image Function (LIIF) in series. The latent diffusion process is learnt
by the denoising and the alignment losses jointly. Errors
in output images are backpropagated via the fixed decoder,
improving the quality of output images. In the extensive
experiments using multiple public benchmarks on the two
tasks i.e. image super-resolution and novel image generation at arbitrary scales, the proposed method outperforms
relevant methods in metrics of image quality, diversity and
scale consistency. It is significantly better than the relevant
prior-art in the inference speed and memory usage.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) is the task of restoring a highresolution (HR) image by estimating the high-frequency details of an input low-resolution (LR) image. SR has applications in various fields, including medical imaging, satellite
imaging, surveillance, and digital photography. It helps to
enhance the visual quality of images, making them more
suitable for analysis, interpretation, or presentation. SR is a

9202

