This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpatialVLM: Endowing Vision-Language Models with Spatial Reasoning Capabilities
Boyuan Chen1,3,∗,†, Zhuo Xu1,∗, Sean Kirmani1, Brian Ichter1,
Dorsa Sadigh1, Leonidas Guibas2, Fei Xia1
1

Google DeepMind, 2Google Research, 3MIT
GPT-4V*

As an AI, I'm unable to physically interact with environments, but I can provide some
insights based on the image provided. … From the image, we can make some visual
estimations. Judging from the image, it appears that the sofa and the table are quite
close to each other, and there may not be enough space to accommodate a 1-meter
wide robot….

User

You are a cleaning robot that is 1
meter wide, now you are
standing in a living room and see
the image, you want to move
from here to the door that leads
to the backyard, do you think I
can go through the path between
the sofa and the table and
chairs.

Spatial-VLM

[VLM Reasoning] How wide is the path between the sofa and the table and chairs?
[VLM Answer] 1.56m [Answer] Yes, the robot can go through the path between the
sofa and the table and chairs since it is wider than the robot's width.
GPT-4V

After estimating the distances by measuring the Euclidean distances between the
yellow ﬁnger and each of the cans, it is clear that the silver can is the closest to the
yellow ﬁnger with an approximate distance of 110 units. In comparison, the blue can
is about 262 units away, and the orange can is approximately 233 units away from the
yellow ﬁnger.

User

Which can is the closest to the
yellow ﬁnger that is on the right
most side of the picture, the
blue, orange or the silver one?

Spatial-VLM

[VLM Reasoning] How far is the yellow ﬁnger from the blue can? [VLM Answer]
0.5m [VLM Reasoning] How far is the yellow ﬁnger from the orange can? [VLM
Anser] 0.59m [VLM Reasoning] How far is the yellow ﬁnger from the silver can?
[VLM Answer] 0.21m [Answer] The silver can is the closest to the yellow ﬁnger that
is on the right most side of the picture.

Figure 1. We present SpatialVLM, a data synthesis and pre-training mechanism to enhance VLMs’ spatial reasoning capabilities. We demonstrate
that VLMs trained on our synthetic data exhibit strong spatial reasoning capabilities, and can generate metric distance estimation from 2D input
images, addressing blind spots of current state-of-the-art VLMs like GPT-4V. (∗ GPT-4V accessed Nov. 2023).

Abstract
Understanding and reasoning about spatial relationships
is a fundamental capability for Visual Question Answering
(VQA) and robotics. While Vision Language Models (VLM)
have demonstrated remarkable performance in certain VQA
benchmarks, they still lack capabilities in 3D spatial reasoning, such as recognizing quantitative relationships of physical
objects like distances or size difference. We hypothesize that
VLMs’ limited spatial reasoning capability is due to the lack
of 3D spatial knowledge in training data and aim to solve this
problem by training VLMs with Internet-scale spatial reasoning
data. To this end, we present a system to facilitate this approach.
We first develop an automatic 3D spatial VQA data generation
framework that scales up to 2 billion VQA examples on 10
million real-world images. We then investigate various factors
in training recipe including data quality, training pipeline and
∗ Equal Contribution; † Work done during internship at Google DeepMind;
Correspond to boyuanc@mit.edu; zhuoxu,xiafei@google.com

VLM architecture. Our work features the first Internet-scale 3D
spatial reasoning dataset in metric space. By training a VLM
on such data, we significantly enhance its ability on both qualitative and quantitative spatial VQA. Finally, we demonstrate
that this VLM unlocks novel downstream applications in chainof-thought spatial reasoning and robotics due to its quantitative
estimation capability. Website: https://spatial-vlm.github.io/

1. Introduction
Vision language models (VLMs) have made significant progress
in recent years across a variety of tasks including image captioning, visual question answering (VQA), embodied planning,
action recognition, and more [2, 18, 24, 31]. While VLMs are
powerful general-purpose models for a wide range of tasks,
most state-of-the-art VLMs still struggle with spatial reasoning,
i.e. tasks that require understanding the position of objects in 3D
space, or spatial relationships between them. Spatial reasoning
capabilities are useful in their own right, but also for downstream
applications such as in robotics or AR. For example, a spatial

14455

