This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SDPose: Tokenized Pose Estimation via Circulation-Guide Self-Distillation
Sichen Chen1 * Yingyi Zhang2∗ Siming Huang2∗ Ran Yi1 Ke Fan1
Ruixin Zhang2 Peixian Chen2 Jun Wang3 Shouhong Ding2† Lizhuang Ma1,4†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Tencent Youtu Lab, 3 Tencent WeChat Pay Lab33
4
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Recently, transformer-based methods have achieved
state-of-the-art prediction quality on human pose estimation(HPE). Nonetheless, most of these top-performing
transformer-based models are too computation-consuming
and storage-demanding to deploy on edge computing platforms. Those transformer-based models that require fewer
resources are prone to under-fitting due to their smaller
scale and thus perform notably worse than their larger
counterparts. Given this conundrum, we introduce SDPose, a new self-distillation method for improving the performance of small transformer-based models. To mitigate the problem of under-fitting, we design a transformer
module named Multi-Cycled Transformer(MCT) based on
multiple-cycled forwards to more fully exploit the potential of small model parameters. Further, in order to prevent the additional inference compute-consuming brought
by MCT, we introduce a self-distillation scheme, extracting
the knowledge from the MCT module to a naive forward
model. Specifically, on the MSCOCO validation dataset,
SDPose-T obtains 69.7% mAP with 4.4M parameters and
1.8 GFLOPs. Furthermore, SDPose-S-V2 obtains 73.5%
mAP on the MSCOCO validation dataset with 6.2M parameters and 4.7 GFLOPs, achieving a new state-of-the-art
among predominant tiny neural network methods.

1. Introduction
Human Pose Estimation (HPE) aims to estimate the position of each joint point of the human body in a given image. HPE tasks support a wide range of downstream tasks
such as activity recognition[1], motion capture[2], etc. Recently with the ViT model being proven effective on many
visual tasks, many transformer-based methods[3–5] have
achieved excellent performance on HPE tasks. Compared
with past CNN-based methods[6], transformer-based mod* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Authors.

Figure 1. Comparsions between other small models and our methods on MSCOCO validation dataset. Compared to other methods,
our approach can significantly reduce the scale while maintaining
the same performance, or greatly improve performance under the
same scale.

els are much more powerful in capturing the relationship
between visual elements. However, most of them are large
and computationally expensive. The state-of-the-art(SOTA)
transformer-based model[5] has 632 million parameters and
requires 122.9 billion floating-point operations. Such a
large-scale model is difficult to deploy on edge computing
devices and cannot accommodate the growing development
of embodied intelligence. However, when the CNN or ViT
used as a backbone is not of sufficient scale, transformerbased models are not able to learn the relationship between
keypoints and visual elements well resulting in poor performance. Stacking more transformer layers is a viable
approach[4], but this also increases the scale of the network
resulting in larger parameters and the difficulty of edge deployment.
To help small models learn better, one possible way is
to distill knowledge from big model to small model[7, 8].
However, previous distillation methods have the following
drawbacks: (1) To align the vector space, an additional
manipulation is required during feature distillation[9] and
leads to a potential performance decrease. (2) A huge extra

1082

