This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Intraoperative 2D/3D Image Registration via Differentiable X-ray Rendering
Vivek Gopalakrishnan1,2
1

Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology

Neel Dey2
2

Polina Golland1,2

MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

{vivekg,dey,polina}@csail.mit.edu

Preop CT

Dis t

ribu

t ion

over

Encoder

Intraop X-ray

Predicted
poses

( 3)

Opt

Pose regressor pertained on random poses over SE(3)

t = 0.75 s

t = 1.5 s

imiz

atio

r
jecto
n tra

y in

Intraoperative optimization with differentiable rendering in

(3)

Error = 14.4 mm

5.2 mm

0.53 mm

(3)

Difference

Encoder

Initial guess
Estimated pose

Synthetic
X-rays

Fast registration of X-rays with sub-millimeter accuracy

Figure 1. We present DiffPose, a self-supervised framework for differentiable 2D/3D registration. Trained exclusively on synthetic
X-rays rendered from a patient-specific preoperative CT scan, DiffPose aligns intraoperative X-rays with sub-millimeter accuracy. DiffPose
does not require manually annotated training data, performs consistently across subjects, and registers images at clinically relevant speeds.

Abstract
Surgical decisions are informed by aligning rapid
portable 2D intraoperative images (e.g. X-rays) to a highfidelity 3D preoperative reference scan (e.g. CT). However,
2D/3D registration can often fail in practice: conventional
optimization methods are prohibitively slow and susceptible to local minima, while neural networks trained on small
datasets fail on new patients or require impractical landmark supervision. We present DiffPose, a self-supervised
approach that leverages patient-specific simulation and differentiable physics-based rendering to achieve accurate
2D/3D registration without relying on manually labeled
data. Preoperatively, a CNN is trained to regress the pose of
a randomly oriented synthetic X-ray rendered from the preoperative CT. The CNN then initializes rapid intraoperative
test-time optimization that uses the differentiable X-ray renderer to refine the solution. Our work further proposes several geometrically principled methods for sampling camera poses from SE(3), for sparse differentiable rendering,
and for driving registration in the tangent space se(3) with
geodesic and multiscale locality-sensitive losses. DiffPose
achieves sub-millimeter accuracy across surgical datasets
at intraoperative speeds, improving upon existing unsupervised methods by an order of magnitude and even outperforming supervised baselines. Our implementation is at
https://github.com/eigenvivek/DiffPose.

1. Introduction
Many high-stakes surgical procedures use intraoperative
X-ray image guidance to visualize surgical instruments and
patient anatomy [42]. While X-ray imaging is both rapid
and portable, it lacks the spatial detail of volumetric modalities such as CT. The advantages of 3D image guidance
can be emulated by registering intraoperative X-rays to routinely acquired 3D preoperative scans, i.e. estimating the
intraoperative X-ray scanner’s pose relative to the patient’s
preoperative CT scan. Beyond localization of instruments
relative to patient anatomy, accurate 2D/3D rigid registration is critical to cutting-edge surgical innovations incorporating robotic assistance and augmented reality [2, 3, 20].
Classical 2D/3D rigid registration methods apply ray
tracing to CT volumes to render synthetic X-rays, referred
to as digitally reconstructed radiographs (DRRs) in medical imaging [4, 53]. Iterative optimization is used to find
the camera pose that generates a synthetic X-ray that most
closely matches the real X-ray as quantified by an image similarity score. A major limitation of intensity-based
methods is their limited capture range and sensitivity to the
initial pose estimate [52]. If the initial pose is even a few
millimeters from the true pose, these methods can converge
to a wrong solution. To this end, two methods for initial
pose estimation are commonly deployed: landmark-based
localization and CNN-based pose regression.

11662

