This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A SSIST GUI: Task-Oriented PC Graphical User Interface Automation
Difei Gao, Lei Ji, Zechen Bai, Mingyu Ouyang, Peiran Li, Dongxing Mao, Qinchen Wu,
Weichen Zhang, Peiyi Wang, Xiangwu Guo, Hengxu Wang, Luowei Zhou, Mike Zheng Shou†
†

Corresponding author

Show Lab, National University of Singapore
https://showlab.github.io/assistgui/
Help me to add stroke text animation to “AssistGUI” in After Effects as demonstrated in this video.
Sure, I‘ll control your mouse and keyboard to help you complete it.

1: Create Masks from Text

2: Add Stroke Effects and Modify Parameters

3: Create an Animation by marking on timeline

This is a simple stroke text animation that I added.
Please help me to stop apps from using my advertising ID.
Sure, I‘ll control your mouse and keyboard to help you set it.

Press “Windows key + I”

I have set it up.

Figure 1. Illustration of GUI Task Automation in AssistGUI. Given a user query and an instructional video for reference, an agent is
required to manipulate the keyboard and mouse on the desktop to complete the task as requested by the user.

Abstract
Graphical User Interface (GUI) automation holds significant promise for assisting users with complex tasks, thereby
boosting human productivity. Existing works leveraging
Large Language Model (LLM) or LLM-based AI agents have
shown capabilities in automating tasks on Android and Web
platforms. However, these tasks are primarily aimed at
simple device usage and entertainment operations. This
paper presents a novel benchmark, A SSIST GUI, to evaluate whether models are capable of manipulating the mouse
and keyboard on the Windows platform in response to userrequested tasks. We carefully collected a set of 100 tasks
from nine widely-used software applications, such as, After
Effects and MS Word, each accompanied by the necessary
project files for better evaluation. Moreover, we propose a
multi-agent collaboration framework, which incorporates
four agents to perform task decomposition, GUI parsing,

action generation, and reflection. Our experimental results
reveal that our multi-agent collaboration mechanism outshines existing methods in performance. Nevertheless, the
potential remains substantial, with the best model attaining
only a 46% success rate on our benchmark. We conclude
with a thorough analysis of the current methods’ limitations,
setting the stage for future breakthroughs in this domain.

1. Introduction
Novices often face a steep learning curve when acquainting themselves with complex PC applications. For instance,
software like After Effects and Premiere Pro offer a suite
of advanced functions for video editing, yet its richness in
features sets a high entry barrier for new users. An AI Assistant with the capacity to comprehend GUI interfaces, grasp
software usage methodologies, and manipulate applications
would significantly expedite the learning and operating pro-

13289

