This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion Blur Decomposition with Cross-shutter Guidance
Xiang Ji Haiyang Jiang Yinqiang Zheng†
The University of Tokyo, Japan
{jixiang,jiang-haiyang777}@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Motion blur is a frequently observed image artifact, especially under insufﬁcient illumination where exposure time
has to be prolonged so as to collect more photons for a bright
enough image. Rather than simply removing such blurring effects, recent researches have aimed at decomposing a blurry
image into multiple sharp images with spatial and temporal
coherence. Since motion blur decomposition itself is highly
ambiguous, priors from neighbouring frames or human annotation are usually needed for motion disambiguation. In
this paper, inspired by the complementary exposure characteristics of a global shutter (GS) camera and a rolling shutter
(RS) camera, we propose to utilize the ordered scanline-wise
delay in a rolling shutter image to robustify motion decomposition of a single blurry image. To evaluate this novel dual
imaging setting, we construct a triaxial system to collect
realistic data, as well as a deep network architecture that
explicitly addresses temporal and contextual information
through reciprocal branches for cross-shutter motion blur
decomposition. Experiment results have veriﬁed the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm, as well as the validity of
our dual imaging setting.

1. Introduction

tion loss [11]. To make matters worse, motion ambiguity
resides in each dynamic object, thus leading to numerous
plausible solutions, yet many of which are physically infeasible. Figure 1 (a) and (b) illustrate this ambiguity by using
two dynamic objects. For a given blur observation, there
exist four motion sequences that could be interpreted as its
decomposition. Models only trained on this data usually
have issues of instability and low performance [35].
Handling the loss of temporal order is a problem far
from being well-studied in the blur decomposition. Current
solutions mainly fall into two categories: (a) introducing
ordering-invariant loss [11] and (b) approximating latent
temporal order within exposure by motion of consecutive
blur frames [33, 35]. The former one is easily caught in
sub-optimal solutions owing to the weak supervision propagated from the loss. Similarly, the latter solution suffers
from severe degeneration when presented with long exposure
time or fast motion. Moreover, motion estimation among
blurry frames is inherently nontrivial and time-consuming.
Recently, it has been recognized that rolling shutter (RS)
images encode the canceled motion due to its row-by-row
exposure mode [4, 6], according to which RS effects can be
mitigated. But restoring a sequence from single RS input
still remains unﬁnished because of lacking complete global
content. In contrast, Blur images contain adequate contextual information but without temporal ordering. On the other
hand, dual camera system has been widely exploited in RS
correction (RS-RS, RS-Event) [1, 34, 36], deblurring (GSEvent) [26, 30], even vibration sensing (GS-RS) [24].

Photo capture usually needs sufﬁcient exposure time to collect photons. If ego-motion of cameras or dynamic objects
are presented during this period, the image will suffer from
motion blur. This kind of degradation makes visual content less interpretable. Hence, extensive research has been
devoted to reverse this process and produce sharper details.
Generally, the deblurring course is formulated as imageto-image transition by extracting a single latent frame from
a blurry input [7, 16, 19, 20, 27, 28]. Recently, researchers
step froward to a more ambitious task, retrieving a sharp
image sequence instead of just one frame, dubbed as blur
decomposition [21]. Unfortunately, averaging effects of motion blur have severely destroyed the temporal ordering of
latent frames, which cannot be restored solely by reconstruc-

Therefore, considering the complementarity of Blur and
RS images, we propose dual Blur-RS setting to solve the motion ambiguity of blur decomposition. As shown in Figure 1
(c), the RS view not only provides local details but also implicitly captures temporal order of latent frames. Meanwhile,
GS view could be exploited to mitigate the initial-state ambiguity from RS counterpart (as discussed in Section 4.4).
Inspired by the hardware design of [23, 32], we devised our
triaxial imaging system to capture strictly aligned high-speed
sharp videos and low-speed Blur-RS pair videos.

This research was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers 22H00529, 20H05951, JST-Mirai Program JPMJMI23G1.
† Corresponding author
https://github.com/jixiang2016/dualBR

Facilitated by the collected dataset, we further proposed
a novel two-staged model, containing motion interpretation
and blur decomposition modules, to reconstruct a sharp
video sequence from cross shutter views: blur and RS ob12534

