This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Up to Excellence:
Practicing Model Scaling for Photo-Realistic Image Restoration In the Wild
Fanghua Yu1,∗ , Jinjin Gu2,∗ , Zheyuan Li1 , Jinfan Hu1 , Xiangtao Kong4 ,
Xintao Wang5 , Jingwen He2,6 , Yu Qiao2 , Chao Dong1,2,†
1
4

Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

5

Project Page:

ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

5

2

Shanghai AI Laboratory

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

https://supir.xpixel.group

(a) Real-World Image Restoration Results

Low Quality Input

SUPIR output

Low Quality Input

SUPIR output

Low Quality Input

SUPIR output

(b) Controllable Image Restoration with Textual Prompts

Low Quality Input

No Prompt

Text: A bicycle is
at the end of …

Low Quality Input Text: woman with
a suede hat.

Text: woman with
a denim hat.

Low Quality Input Text: … shows an Text: … shows a
old man …
young man …

Figure 1. Our SUPIR model demonstrates remarkable restoration effects on real-world low-quality images, as illustrated in (a). Additionally, SUPIR features targeted restoration capability driven by textual prompts. For instance, it can specify the restoration of blurry objects
in the distance (case 1), deﬁne the material texture of objects (case 2), and adjust restoration based on high-level semantics (case 3).

Abstract
We introduce SUPIR (Scaling-UP Image Restoration),
a groundbreaking image restoration method that harnesses
generative prior and the power of model scaling up. Leveraging multi-modal techniques and advanced generative
prior, SUPIR marks a signiﬁcant advance in intelligent and
∗ Contribute Equally.

† Corresponding Author.

realistic image restoration. As a pivotal catalyst within
SUPIR, model scaling dramatically enhances its capabilities and demonstrates new potential for image restoration. We collect a dataset comprising 20 million highresolution, high-quality images for model training, each enriched with descriptive text annotations. SUPIR provides
the capability to restore images guided by textual prompts,
broadening its application scope and potential. Moreover,

25669

