This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When StyleGAN Meets Stable Diffusion:
a W+ Adapter for Personalized Image Generation
Xiaoming Li
Xinyu Hou
Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
csxmli@gmail.com

xinyu.hou@ntu.edu.sg

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Ours with Fine-grained Attributes Editing

Smile

CelebBasis [40]

Age

FastComposer [38]

Eye Close

IP-Adapter [39]

Figure 1. Given a single reference image (thumbnail in the top left), our W+ adapter not only integrates the identity into the text-to-image
generation accurately but also enables modifications of facial attributes along the ∆w trajectory derived from StyleGAN. The text prompt is
“a woman wearing a spacesuit in a forest”.

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models have remarkably excelled
in producing diverse, high-quality, and photo-realistic images. This advancement has spurred a growing interest
in incorporating specific identities into generated content.
Most current methods employ an inversion approach to embed a target visual concept into the text embedding space
using a single reference image. However, the newly synthesized faces either closely resemble the reference image in
terms of facial attributes, such as expression, or exhibit a
reduced capacity for identity preservation. Text descriptions
intended to guide the facial attributes of the synthesized
face may fall short, owing to the intricate entanglement of
identity information with identity-irrelevant facial attributes
derived from the reference image. To address these issues,

we present the novel use of the extended StyleGAN embedding space W+ , to achieve enhanced identity preservation
and disentanglement for diffusion models. By aligning this
semantically meaningful human face latent space with textto-image diffusion models, we succeed in maintaining high
fidelity in identity preservation, coupled with the capacity
for semantic editing. Additionally, we propose new training objectives to balance the influences of both prompt and
identity conditions, ensuring that the identity-irrelevant background remains negligibly affected during facial attribute
modifications. Extensive experiments reveal that our method
adeptly generates personalized text-to-image outputs that
are not only compatible with prompt descriptions but also
amenable to common StyleGAN editing directions in diverse
settings. Our code and model are available at https:
//github.com/csxmli2016/w-plus-adapter.

2187

