This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DVMNet: Computing Relative Pose for Unseen Objects Beyond Hypotheses
Chen Zhao1

Tong Zhang1 * Zheng Dang1 Mathieu Salzmann12
1
EPFL 2 ClearSpace SA

{chen.zhao, tong.zhang, zheng.dang, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract

40
35

RelPose
RelPose++
3DAHV
DVMNet

30
25
20
50

∆#
$

WCV Algorithm

Voxel Matching

Voxels

Hypothesis-Based

45

Voxels

Reference

Query
50

Angular Error

Determining the relative pose of an object between two
images is pivotal to the success of generalizable object pose
estimation. Existing approaches typically approximate the
continuous pose representation with a large number of discrete pose hypotheses, which incurs a computationally expensive process of scoring each hypothesis at test time.
By contrast, we present a Deep Voxel Matching Network
(DVMNet) that eliminates the need for pose hypotheses and
computes the relative object pose in a single pass. To this
end, we map the two input RGB images, reference and
query, to their respective voxelized 3D representations. We
then pass the resulting voxels through a pose estimation
module, where the voxels are aligned and the pose is computed in an end-to-end fashion by solving a least-squares
problem. To enhance robustness, we introduce a weighted
closest voxel algorithm capable of mitigating the impact
of noisy voxels. We conduct extensive experiments on the
CO3D, LINEMOD, and Objaverse datasets, demonstrating
that our method delivers more accurate relative pose estimates for novel objects at a lower computational cost compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our code is released at:
https://github.com/sailor-z/DVMNet/.

Hypothesis-Free

Ours
60

70

80

90

100

MACs(G)

Figure 1. Advantages of our DVMNet compared to hypothesisbased methods. Hypothesis-based techniques approximate the
relative object pose by scoring numerous pose hypotheses, leading
to a high computational cost. By contrast, our DVMNet computes
the pose in a hypothesis-free fashion by robustly matching voxelized 3D representations of the reference and query images via a
Weighted Closest Voxel (WCV) algorithm. Our method strikes a
favorable balance between computational cost and accuracy in relative object pose estimation, as measured by multiply-accumulate
operations (MACs) and angular error.

1. Introduction
Object pose estimation plays a crucial role in 3D computer
vision and robotics tasks [2, 11, 23, 33], aiming to estimate
the 3D rotation and 3D translation of an object depicted in
an RGB image. The vast majority of existing methods work
under the assumption that the training and testing data include the same object instances, thereby limiting their applicability to scenarios that involve previously unseen objects.
Recently, generalizable object pose estimation [21, 29, 32]
has received growing attention, showcasing the potential to
generalize to unseen objects from new categories without
retraining the network. In pursuit of this generalization capability, existing methods leverage densely sampled images
* Corresponding author.

depicting unseen objects in diverse poses, serving as references. Object pose estimation is then carried out through
template matching [21, 29] or by establishing 2D-3D correspondences [14, 32]. Unfortunately, the effectiveness of
these methods strongly depends on the references densely
covering the viewpoints of unseen objects, making them inapplicable to practical scenarios where only sparse reference views are available.
In this context, a few methods [18, 47, 52] highlight
the importance of relative object pose estimation. Unlike
previous approaches in generalizable object pose estimation, these methods focus on estimating the relative pose
of an unseen object between two images, i.e., a single reference image of the object and the query image. In this

20485

