This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP-KD: An Empirical Study of CLIP Model Distillation
Chuanguang Yang1,2

Zhulin An1∗
Libo Huang1
Junyu Bi1,2
Xinqiang Yu1,2
Han Yang1,2
Boyu Diao1
Yongjun Xu1∗
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yangchuanguang, anzhulin, huanglibo, bijunyu, yuxinqiang21s}@ict.ac.cn
{yanghan22s, diaoboyu2012, xyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) has
become a promising language-supervised visual pretraining framework. This paper aims to distill small CLIP
models supervised by a large teacher CLIP model. We
propose several distillation strategies, including relation,
feature, gradient and contrastive paradigms, to examine
the effectiveness of CLIP-Knowledge Distillation (KD). We
show that a simple feature mimicry with Mean Squared
Error loss works surprisingly well. Moreover, interactive contrastive learning across teacher and student encoders is also effective in performance improvement. We
explain that the success of CLIP-KD can be attributed
to maximizing the feature similarity between teacher and
student. The unified method is applied to distill several student models trained on CC3M+12M. CLIP-KD improves student CLIP models consistently over zero-shot
ImageNet classification and cross-modal retrieval benchmarks. When using ViT-L/14 pretrained on Laion-400M
as the teacher, CLIP-KD achieves 57.5% and 55.4% zeroshot top-1 ImageNet accuracy over ViT-B/16 and ResNet50, surpassing the original CLIP without KD by 20.5%
and 20.1% margins, respectively. Our code is released on
https://github.com/winycg/CLIP-KD.

1. Introduction
Language-supervised image pre-training has attracted
widespread attention for visual representation learning. As
a representative work, CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training) [36] applies contrastive learning to (image,
text) pairs. It guides the model to predict the correct (image, text) pair among the candidate image and text samples.
Pre-trained CLIP models show excellent versatility in zeroshot multimodal and unimodal visual tasks.
∗ Corresponding author

Some recent works improve CLIP using an extra visual
self-supervision task [23, 33] or mask images [24, 55]. The
pre-trained CLIP model is also introduced as a remarkable teacher to guide downstream visual pre-training [21,
35, 46]. However, few previous works explore improving the valuable small CLIP models in resource-constrained
applications. This paper introduces CLIP-Knowledge Distillation (KD), which aims to enhance a small student
CLIP model supervised by a pre-trained large teacher CLIP
model. The state-of-the-art TinyCLIP [48] also investigates
CLIP distillation. A critical core of TinyCLIP is weight
inheritance, which transfers part weights from the welltrained teacher model to a smaller student model. However, this mechanism needs the teacher and student models
to have the same architecture-style, e.g., ViT-B/32 [8] to
ViT-61M/32 and ResNet-101 [12] to ResNet-30M, limiting
the scope of practical applications. This paper provides a
comprehensive study on distilling small CLIP models from
relation, feature, gradient, and contrastive paradigms. Our
CLIP-KD does not rely on architectural-cue and can generalize to any teacher-student architecture pair.
Given the teacher and student CLIP models, we design
distillation strategies from the view of mimicry and interaction. For mimicry learning, we guide the student to align
the corresponding knowledge generated from the teacher,
which is a basic framework in KD [3, 15, 38]. The core
question is how to construct meaningful knowledge. Under
CLIP, we build contrastive image-to-text relationships, (image, text) features and gradients for mimicry. For interactive
learning, we combine the teacher and student for joint contrastive learning, letting the student learn from the teacher
implicitly. For example, the student is regarded as an anchor to contrast the teacher embeddings. We also aggregate
the student and teacher features for CLIP training.
We train CLIP models over Conceptual [4, 40] datasets
and evaluate pre-trained models over zero-shot ImageNet [5] classification and cross-modal retrieval on
MSCOCO [29] and Flickr [57]. All proposed distilla-

15952

