This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarially Robust Few-shot Learning via Parameter Co-distillation of
Similarity and Class Concept Learners
Junhao Dong1,2 , Piotr Koniusz4,3*, Junxi Chen5 , Xiaohua Xie5 , and Yew-Soon Ong1,2*
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 CFAR, IHPC, A*STAR, 3 Australian National University,
4
Data61 CSIRO, 5 Sun Yat-sen University
{junhao003, asysong}@ntu.edu.sg, piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au,
chenjx353@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xiexiaoh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

80

Few-shot learning (FSL) facilitates a variety of computer vision tasks yet remains vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Existing adversarially robust FSL methods rely on
either visual similarity learning or class concept learning.
Our analysis reveals that these two learning paradigms are
complementary, exhibiting distinct robustness due to their
unique decision boundary types (concepts clustering by the
visual similarity label vs. classification by the class labels).
To bridge this gap, we propose a novel framework unifying
adversarially robust similarity learning and class concept
learning. Specifically, we distill parameters from both network branches into a “unified embedding model” during
robust optimization and redistribute them to individual network branches periodically. To capture generalizable robustness across diverse branches, we initialize adversaries
in each episode with cross-branch class-wise “global adversarial perturbations” instead of less informative random
initialization. We also propose a branch robustness harmonization to modulate the optimization of similarity and class
concept learners via their relative adversarial robustness.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our method in diverse few-shot scenarios.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning (FSL) facilitates training various applications [18, 20, 22, 23, 35, 39, 44, 45, 47, 50, 51] with limited
training data. Despite its potential, a cornerstone of FSL,
Deep Neural Network (DNN), is known to be susceptible
to adversarial samples [11, 29, 38] that are easily obtainable by appending visually imperceptible perturbations to
natural samples. Such adversarial samples pose even more
severe disruption to the inference of DNN-based few-shot
learners, inducing a serious security threat that hinders the
practical deployment of FSL systems [14].
* Corresponding author.

Robust Accuracy (%)

Abstract

Visual similarity Class concept Similarity-concept
learning
learning
co-distillation

(a)

Similarity learning
Class Concept learning
Similarity-concept Co-distillation

70

60

50

40
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Attack Strength (255⋅ε)

(b)

Figure 1. Motivation for co-distillation. (a) Feature spaces (2D
PCA and density estimation are applied to feature representations
from an episode, where 3 cluster colors represent 3 class labels) of
a similarity learner (left) and a class concept learner (middle) with
very different decision boundaries. As two of three green clusters from the similarity learner overlap with the red cluster, (weak)
adversaries with a small radius ϵ are enough to breach the decision boundary and immunize the similarity learner. In contrast,
the concept learner requires a larger ϵ for immunization due to
clearer class separation. Our co-distillation (right) results in wellseparated class clusters. (b) Robust accuracy confirms that similarity and concept learners are affected differently w.r.t. ϵ, exhibiting
complementary robustness for our co-distillation indicated by the
grey curve. The green line refers to ϵ = 8/255 used for training.

A growing body of research has focused on adversarially
robust FSL. These works primarily fall into two categories:
(i) visual similarity learning [14, 19] and (ii) class concept
learning [9, 36]. Both paradigms aim to improve robustness against unforeseen adversaries with minimal training
data. The former emphasizes capturing visual similarity (relations) between support and query samples across diverse
few-shot tasks (episodes), involving a small subset of categories for episodic training. In contrast, class concept learning results in a feature embedding model based on explicitly
learning pre-defined class concepts (e.g., object categories).
However, these paradigms lead to adversarial robustness
from distinct viewpoints, which is mainly driven by their respective labeling strategies, i.e., the similarity learner learns
a binary classifier or metric between pairs of samples to
capture their visual similarity, whereas the class concept
learner focuses on semantic object categories. To support
this claim, we provide feature space visualizations for vi-

28535

