This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TIM: A Time Interval Machine for Audio-Visual Action Recognition
Jacob Chalk1∗
Jaesung Huh2∗
Evangelos Kazakos3
Andrew Zisserman2
Dima Damen1
1
2
University of Bristol
VGG, University of Oxford 3 Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
Diverse actions give rise to rich audio-visual signals in
long videos. Recent works showcase that the two modalities of audio and video exhibit different temporal extents of
events and distinct labels. We address the interplay between
the two modalities in long videos by explicitly modelling the
temporal extents of audio and visual events. We propose
the Time Interval Machine (TIM) where a modality-specific
time interval poses as a query to a transformer encoder that
ingests a long video input. The encoder then attends to the
specified interval, as well as the surrounding context in both
modalities, in order to recognise the ongoing action.
We test TIM on three long audio-visual video datasets:
EPIC-KITCHENS, Perception Test, and AVE, reporting state-of-the-art (SOTA) for recognition. On EPICKITCHENS, we beat previous SOTA that utilises LLMs and
significantly larger pre-training by 2.9% top-1 action recognition accuracy. Additionally, we show that TIM can be
adapted for action detection, using dense multi-scale interval queries, outperforming SOTA on EPIC-KITCHENS-100
for most metrics, and showing strong performance on the
Perception Test. Our ablations show the critical role of integrating the two modalities and modelling their time intervals in achieving this performance. Code and models at:
https://github.com/JacobChalk/TIM .

1. Introduction
Long videos exhibit a quick succession of auditory and visual events. The latest attempts to annotate events in these
modalities separately [15, 30], showcase that both the temporal extents and class labels differ between the two. However, these events still remain correlated – identifying temporally close events in both modalities can improve recognition of actions in both visual and audio.
Furthermore, most methods to date typically only utilise
the exact temporal extent of an action; a precise, trimmed
clip of the action is fed into a convolutional [5, 8, 39] or
∗ Equal technical contribution.

Figure 1. Time Interval Machine (TIM): Top: Given a visual and
auditory stream input, the ongoing action in a particular time interval is determined by a query specifying the start and end time of
the interval, along with the modality of interest. Bottom: TIM can
query for visual (e.g. ‘Rinse Sponge’) and auditory (e.g. ‘Water’)
action classes, as well as distinguish between overlapping actions
within the same modality (‘Glass Collision’ and ‘Scrub / Scrape’).

transformer-based [1, 11, 22] backbone, which predicts the
action taking place. Even when the surrounding context is
utilised to improve action recognition [18, 31, 42], again,
this context is supplied in the form of exact clips of neighbouring actions, rather than the untrimmed long input video.
In this paper, we propose an approach that encodes multiple events that occur in both visual and auditory streams of
a long video input. We achieve this by elevating time intervals to first-class citizens, utilising them to specify a query
within an accompanying modality. We term this mechanism a Time Interval Machine (TIM). It is able to receive
a long video input, and output the actions that occur within
the queried intervals of the queried modalities.
Consider the example in Figure 1. The input contains
the sound of water running while a sponge is being rinsed,
which is then used to wipe a surface. These distinct events
may vary significantly in duration and may be more prominent in the audio or visual modality. Despite differences
between these events, there are likely many correlations between them and the surrounding context, which may be
beneficial to recognising a given event (e.g. the sound of
water is relevant to rinsing a sponge, providing useful information for recognising the visual action). TIM is able

18153

