This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Motion Blur in Neural Radiance Fields with Events and Frames
Marco Cannici and Davide Scaramuzza
Robotics and Perception Group, University of Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have shown great potential in novel view synthesis. However, they struggle to
render sharp images when the data used for training is affected by motion blur. On the other hand, event cameras excel in dynamic scenes as they measure brightness changes
with microsecond resolution and are thus only marginally
affected by blur. Recent methods attempt to enhance NeRF
reconstructions under camera motion by fusing frames and
events. However, they face challenges in recovering accurate color content or constrain the NeRF to a set of predefined camera poses, harming reconstruction quality in
challenging conditions. This paper proposes a novel formulation addressing these issues by leveraging both modeland learning-based modules. We explicitly model the blur
formation process, exploiting the event double integral as
an additional model-based prior. Additionally, we model
the event-pixel response using an end-to-end learnable response function, allowing our method to adapt to nonidealities in the real event-camera sensor. We show, on
synthetic and real data, that the proposed approach outperforms existing deblur NeRFs that use only frames as well
as those that combine frames and events by +6.13dB and
+2.48dB, respectively.
Multimedial Material: For videos, datasets and more visit
https://github.com/uzh-rpg/evdeblurnerf.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [27] have completely revolutionized the field of 3D reconstruction and novel view
synthesis, achieving unprecedented levels of details [2, 3,
43]. As a result, they have quickly found applications in
many subfields of computer vision and robotics, such as
pose estimation and navigation [36, 53, 59], image processing [12, 24, 28, 47], scene understanding [17, 22, 51], surface reconstruction [1, 48, 54], and many others.
Leveraging multi-view consistency from calibrated images, NeRF exploits supervision from multiple view-points,
enabling generalization to novel camera poses and the ability to render view-dependent color effects [43]. However,

Blurry Images

Events

Ev-DeblurNeRF
Motion-aware
NeRF

event
CRF

Reconstructions

Figure 1. Ev-DeblurNeRF combines blurry images and events to
recover sharp NeRFs. A motion-aware NeRF recovers camera motion and a learnable event camera response function models real
camera’s non-idealities, enabling high-quality reconstructions.

akin to other methods relying on photometric consistency,
NeRF can only deliver high-quality reconstructions when
the images used for training are perfectly captured and free
from any artifact. Unfortunately, perfect conditions are seldom met in the real world.
For example, in robotics, camera motion is prevalent
when capturing images, often resulting in motion blur. Under such conditions, NeRFs are unable to reconstruct sharp
radiance fields, thereby impeding their practical use in realworld scenes. Although recent works [6, 18, 24, 49] have
shown promising results in reconstructing radiance fields
from motion-blurred images by learning to infer the camera motion during the exposure time, the task of recovering motion-deblurred NeRFs still remains significantly illposed. Existing image-based approaches typically fail when
training images exhibit similar and consistent motion [24],
and they are inherently limited by the presence of motion
ambiguities and loss of texture details that cannot be recovered from blurry images alone.
In this regard, recent works have shown that event-based
cameras can substantially aid the task of deblurring images
captured with standard cameras [33, 37, 45, 56]. These
sensors measure brightness changes at microseconds resolution and are practically unaffected by motion blur [11],

9286

