This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SG-PGM: Partial Graph Matching Network with Semantic Geometric Fusion
for 3D Scene Graph Alignment and Its Downstream Tasks
Yaxu Xie Alain Pagani Didier Stricker
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence
firstname.lastname@dfki.de

Abstract
Scene graphs have been recently introduced into 3D
spatial understanding as a comprehensive representation
of the scene. The alignment between 3D scene graphs
is the first step of many downstream tasks such as scene
graph aided point cloud registration, mosaicking, overlap
checking, and robot navigation. In this work, we treat
3D scene graph alignment as a partial graph-matching
problem and propose to solve it with a graph neural
network. We reuse the geometric features learned by a
point cloud registration method and associate the clustered
point-level geometric features with the node-level semantic
feature via our designed feature fusion module. Partial
matching is enabled by using a learnable method to select
the top-k similar node pairs. Subsequent downstream tasks
such as point cloud registration are achieved by running
a pre-trained registration network within the matched
regions. We further propose a point-matching rescoring
method, that uses the node-wise alignment of the 3D
scene graph to reweight the matching candidates from a
pre-trained point cloud registration method. It reduces
the false point correspondences estimated especially in
low-overlapping cases.
Experiments show that our
method improves the alignment accuracy by 10∼20% in
low-overlap and random transformation scenarios and
outperforms the existing work in multiple downstream tasks.
Our code and models are available here.

1. Introduction
The 3D semantic scene graph [2, 41, 46] is a semantic-rich
model for scene representation, which summarizes the
scene context in the form of an attributed and directed
graph, in which 3D objects and structures as nodes
are associated with semantic classes (e.g. sofa, wall),
and geometrical semantic relationship between nodes are
represented as edges with multiple classes (e.g. stand on,
supported by). 3D scene graphs support many applications

b. Overlap Check
Graph similarity
𝜇 < 𝑇ℎ𝑟.
Non-overlap

Scene Fragment A

A-C

Scene Fragment C

SG-PGM

Scene Fragment B

c. Point Cloud Registration

Scene Graph Alignment

(on matched regions)

A - B a. Node Match
floor

chair
chair
cabinet

Figure 1. SG-PGM: partial graph matching for 3D scene
graph alignment. Semantic and geometric features are fused for
object-wise matching between fragments (a), and downstream
tasks such as (b) overlap-check and (c) point cloud registration.

in spatial understanding, such as global localization for
SLAM [14, 17, 23, 32], loop-closure detecting [29],
robot navigation [42, 55], visual object grounding [10],
graph-to-3D manipulation [9] and augmented reality [37].
One of the main problems of the aforementioned
applications is searching for the partial alignment of
two or more 3D scene graphs.
As illustrated in
Figure 1, once the alignment between nodes is found,
tasks like localization and navigation can be conducted
via point cloud registration within the overlapping area.
Alternatively, the determination of whether scene fragments
are overlapped or not can be achieved by analyzing the
similarity of 3D scene graphs.
SGAligner [34] is the first work specifically focusing on
this problem. In this work, Sarkar et al. proposed a neural
network that learns a joint multi-modal embedding encoded
with semantic, geometric, and structural information for
each node entity in the graph, which is trained with
cross-modal contrastive loss and outputs the similarity
between source and reference graph nodes as the alignment
result. After the node(object)-level alignment is found,
downstream tasks such as point cloud registration are

28401

