This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Attention Maps with Token Optimization for Semantic
Segmentation in Diffusion Models
Pablo Marcos-Manchón1, 2 Roberto Alcover-Couso1 Juan C. SanMiguel1 José M. Martı́nez1
1

VPULab, Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain 2 Dynamics of Memory Formation Group, University of Barcelona, Spain
pmarcos@ub.edu, {roberto.alcover, juancarlos.sanmiguel, josem.martinez}@uam.es

Synthetized image

monkey

mouth

Synthetized image

aeroplane

optimized aeroplane

Prompt: monkey with hat walking

Prompt: aeroplane parked at an airport in the city

(a) Training-free Open-Vocabulary Attention Maps

(b) Attention Map with Optimized Token

person
window
fishes
snowboard

car

lion

bicycle
carpet

Prompt: someone jumping in the
air on their snowboard

Prompt: a bicycle is standing
next to a bed in a room

Prompt: a photo of a lion on a
mountain top at sunset

Prompt: a car driving under the
sea on the ocean floor

(c) Synthetic images with open-vocabulary pixel-level annotations generated using OVAM

Figure 1. (a) We introduce Open-Vocabulary Attention Maps (OVAM), a training-free extension for text-to-image diffusion models to generate text-attribution maps based on open-vocabulary descriptions. Our approach overcomes the limitations of existing methods constrained
by words contained within the prompt [45,51,55,60]. (b) Our token optimization process enhances the creation of accurate attention maps,
thereby improving the performance of existing semantic segmentation methods based on diffusion attentions [19, 45, 54, 60]. (c) Finally,
we validate the utility of OVAM in producing synthetic images with precise pixel-level annotations.

Abstract
Diffusion models represent a new paradigm in text-toimage generation. Beyond generating high-quality images
from text prompts, models such as Stable Diffusion have
been successfully extended to the joint generation of semantic segmentation pseudo-masks. However, current extensions primarily rely on extracting attentions linked to
prompt words used for image synthesis. This approach
limits the generation of segmentation masks derived from
word tokens not contained in the text prompt. In this work,
we introduce Open-Vocabulary Attention Maps (OVAM)—a
training-free method for text-to-image diffusion models that
enables the generation of attention maps for any word. In
addition, we propose a lightweight optimization process
based on OVAM for finding tokens that generate accurate
attention maps for an object class with a single annotation.

We evaluate these tokens within existing state-of-the-art
Stable Diffusion extensions. The best-performing model improves its mIoU from 52.1 to 86.6 for the synthetic images’
pseudo-masks, demonstrating that our optimized tokens are
an efficient way to improve the performance of existing
methods without architectural changes or retraining. The
implementation is available at github.com/vpulab/ovam.

1. Introduction
The introduction of diffusion models has led to a significant advancement in text-to-image (T2I) generation [7].
Diffusion-based models, such as Stable Diffusion [39] and
other contemporary works [22, 27, 30, 32, 37, 38, 41], have
been rapidly adopted across the research community and
industry, owing to their ability to generate high-quality images that accurately reflect the semantics of text prompts.

9242

