This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Graph Representation with Knowledge-aware Attention for
Histopathology Whole Slide Image Analysis
Jiawen Li1* , Yuxuan Chen1* , Hongbo Chu1* , Qiehe Sun1 , Tian Guan1 , Anjia Han2† , Yonghong He1†
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University
{lijiawen21, chenyx23, zhu-hb23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
hananjia@mail.sysu.edu.cn, heyh@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Node
Head

Histopathological whole slide images (WSIs) classification has become a foundation task in medical microscopic imaging processing. Prevailing approaches involve
learning WSIs as instance-bag representations, emphasizing significant instances but struggling to capture the interactions between instances. Additionally, conventional
graph representation methods utilize explicit spatial positions to construct topological structures but restrict the
flexible interaction capabilities between instances at arbitrary locations, particularly when spatially distant. In response, we propose a novel dynamic graph representation
algorithm that conceptualizes WSIs as a form of the knowledge graph structure. Specifically, we dynamically construct neighbors and directed edge embeddings based on
the head and tail relationships between instances. Then,
we devise a knowledge-aware attention mechanism that can
update the head node features by learning the joint attention score of each neighbor and edge. Finally, we obtain
a graph-level embedding through the global pooling process of the updated head, serving as an implicit representation for the WSI classification. Our end-to-end graph representation learning approach has outperformed the stateof-the-art WSI analysis methods on three TCGA benchmark
datasets and in-house test sets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/WonderLandxD/WiKG.

1. Introduction
Pathology is the gold standard for disease diagnosis. Traditional histopathological diagnostics are performed manually by examining pathological slides using an optical microscope. However, due to social concerns such as environmental changes and an increasing aging population,
* Contributed equally. †Corresponding authors.

Embedding
Head
Tail

Tail

Edge

Negative

Positive

(a) Instance-bag representation

(b) Conventional graph representation

(c) Proposed graph representation

Figure 1. Illustration of three different frameworks of instance-bag
representation, conventional undirected graph representation, and
the proposed dynamic graph representation.

those diagnostic approaches are facing significant challenges [11]. With the advancement of digital scanning technologies, physical slides can now be converted into highresolution WSIs that preserve the complete pathological tissues. This advancement has markedly improved the work
efficiency of pathologists [33] and stimulated demand for
intelligent WSI diagnostic tools [26, 27, 30].
In recent years, many studies have shown promising
results by continuously exploring deep learning in WSIs.
However, the professional interpretation of WSIs and their
large-scale data type make obtaining manual annotation at
the pixel level difficult. To alleviate this issue, researchers
have developed weakly supervised algorithms that can be
trained using only slide-level labels [35, 37]. Many existing weakly supervised studies on WSI analysis are based
on embedding-based multiple instance learning (MIL) [28],
which partitions WSIs into patches (instances) and aggregates their embedding information. However, MIL overly
emphasizes the impact of patches on the global representation but ignores the interconnections. Such interconnections often indicate the potential development trends of tumors and provide pathologists with deeper relational in-

11323

