This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

B IO CLIP: A Vision Foundation Model for the Tree of Life
Samuel Stevens1*† , Jiaman Wu1* , Matthew J Thompson1 , Elizabeth G Campolongo1 , Chan Hee Song1 ,
David Edward Carlyn1 , Li Dong2 , Wasila M Dahdul3 , Charles Stewart4 , Tanya Berger-Wolf1 ,
Wei-Lun Chao1 , and Yu Su1†
1

The Ohio State University, 2 Microsoft Research, 3 University of California, Irvine,
4
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract
Images of the natural world, collected by a variety of
cameras, from drones to individual phones, are increasingly
abundant sources of biological information. There is an explosion of computational methods and tools, particularly
computer vision, for extracting biologically relevant information from images for science and conservation. Yet most
of these are bespoke approaches designed for a specific task
and are not easily adaptable or extendable to new questions, contexts, and datasets. A vision model for general organismal biology questions on images is of timely need. To
approach this, we curate and release T REE O F L IFE -10M,
the largest and most diverse ML-ready dataset of biology
images. We then develop B IO CLIP, a foundation model
for the tree of life, leveraging the unique properties of biology captured by T REE O F L IFE -10M, namely the abundance and variety of images of plants, animals, and fungi,
together with the availability of rich structured biological
knowledge. We rigorously benchmark our approach on diverse fine-grained biology classification tasks and find that
B IO CLIP consistently and substantially outperforms existing baselines (by 16% to 17% absolute). Intrinsic evaluation reveals that B IO CLIP has learned a hierarchical representation conforming to the tree of life, shedding light on
its strong generalizability.1

1. Introduction
Digital images and computer vision are quickly becoming
pervasively used tools to study the natural world, from evolutionary biology [13, 51] to ecology and biodiversity [5,
77, 83]. The capability to rapidly convert vast quantities of
images from museums [64], camera traps [1, 6, 7, 59, 77],
and citizen science platforms [2, 40, 54, 58, 60, 62, 75,
* Equal contribution. † {stevens.994,su.809}@osu.edu
1 imageomics.github.io/bioclip has models, data and code.

79–81, 87, 88] into actionable information (e.g., species
classification, individual identification, and trait detection)
has accelerated and enabled new advances in tasks such
as species delineation [32], understanding mechanisms of
adaptation [23, 39], abundance and population structure estimation [3, 40, 58, 82], and biodiversity monitoring and
conservation [83].
However, applying computer vision to answer a biological question is still a laborious task requiring substantial machine learning expertise and effort—biologists must manually label sufficient data for the specific taxa and task of
interest, and find and train a suitable model for the task.
Meanwhile, foundation models [12] such as CLIP [69] and
GPT-3 [14] are extraordinarily valuable by enabling zeroshot or few-shot learning for a wide range of tasks. An
analogous vision foundation model for biology should be
useful for tasks spanning the entire tree of life [37, 53] instead of just the taxa it was trained on. Such a model would
significantly lower the barrier to apply AI to biology.
In this work, we aim to develop such a vision foundation
model for the tree of life. To be broadly useful for realworld biology tasks, this model should meet the following
criteria. First, it should generalize to the entire tree of
life, where possible, to ensure it supports researchers studying many different clades rather than a niche. Furthermore,
it is infeasible to collect training data that covers the millions of known taxa [38, 44], so the model must generalize
to taxa not present in training data. Second, it should learn
fine-grained representations of images of organisms as biology frequently engages with organisms that are visually
similar, like closely related species within the same genus
[67] or species mimicking others’ appearances for a fitness
advantage [39]. This fine-grained granularity is crucial because the tree of life organizes living things into both broad
categories (animal, fungus, and plant) and very fine-grained
ones (see Fig. 1). Finally, due to the high cost of data collection and labeling in biology, strong performance in the

19412

