This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Advancing Saliency Ranking with Human Fixations:
Dataset, Models and Benchmarks
Bowen Deng1 , Siyang Song2 , Andrew P. French1 , Denis Schluppeck3 , Michael P. Pound1 *
1
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK
2
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of Leicester, UK
3
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK
{bowen.deng, andrew.p.french, denis.schluppeck, michael.pound}@nottingham.ac.uk, ss2796@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Saliency ranking detection (SRD) has emerged as a challenging task in computer vision, aiming not only to identify
salient objects within images but also to rank them based on
their degree of saliency. Existing SRD datasets have been
created primarily using mouse-trajectory data, which inadequately captures the intricacies of human visual perception. Addressing this gap, this paper introduces the first
large-scale SRD dataset, SIFR, constructed using genuine
human fixation data, thereby aligning more closely with
real visual perceptual processes. To establish a baseline
for this dataset, we propose QAGNet, a novel model that
leverages salient instance query features from a transformer
detector within a tri-tiered nested graph. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods across two widely
used SRD datasets and our newly proposed dataset. Code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
EricDengbowen/QAGNet.

1. Introduction
Salient Object Detection (SOD) aims to identify and segment the most visually prominent objects within an image.
Recent advances in deep learning models [17, 19, 40, 41]
have achieved notable results in this domain. Saliency
Ranking Detection (SRD), in which salient objects are also
ranked on the degree of saliency (Fig. 1 (b) and (c)), is an
emerging task that aims to better reflect the ability of humans to focus on multiple objects that elicit different level
of interest. This provides added value to many downstream
tasks, such as image captioning [36, 39], image cropping
[1], and autonomous driving [23].
Recent works in SRD have leveraged the COCOSalRank [12], ASSR [30] and IRSR [18] datasets. Saliency
* Corresponding Author.

(a) Image
Low

(b) Ours SOD GT

(c) Ours SRD GT

(d) ASSR SRD GT

(e) IRSR SRD GT
High

Figure 1. Comparison between our proposed dataset, ASSR [30]
dataset and IRSR [18] dataset, where all SRD ground truths are
colorized. The SOD task learns to detect pixel-level salient objects
without distinction, while the SRD task aims to assign varying
degrees of saliency to each detected object (columns (b) and (c)).
Our proposed dataset is curated based on eye-tracking fixations
while both other two datasets are based on mouse-trajectory.

ranking in these datasets is computed based on mousemovements from the SALICON [10] dataset. These mouse
trajectories are captured as human observers explore blurred
scenes from the MS-COCO [16] dataset. All current SRD
datasets assume that mouse pointing is a suitable proxy for
real eye-fixation data that can be captured from gaze measurements under controlled conditions. There are several issues which make this simplifying assumption problematic.
First, mouse-pointing actions are under voluntary control,
whereas a large proportion of the fixation shifts (saccadic
eye movements) are reflexive and will therefore reflect different aspects of saliency [29] (Fig. 1 (c), (d) and (e)). Second, mouse-pointing actions and shifts in eye fixation are
likely processed in different reference frames in the human
brain. Mouse pointing behaviour will therefore also reflect
biases and limitations related to transforms between these
two response modalities [3]. In addition, current datasets

28348

