This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M 3 -UDA: A New Benchmark for Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Fetal Cardiac
Structure Detection
Bin Pu1 * Liwen Wang2 * Jiewen Yang1 * Guannan He3 Xingbo Dong2 Shengli Li4
Ying Tan4 Ming Chen5 Zhe Jin2 Kenli Li6† Xiaomeng Li1†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
2
Anhui Provincial International Joint Research Center for Advanced Technology in Medical Imaging,
Anhui University, China. 3 Sichuan Provincial Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital.
4
Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital. 5 Harbin Red Cross Central Hospital.6 Hunan University.
{eebinpu, eexmli}@ust.hk,jyangcu@connect.ust.hk,{jinzhe,xingbo.dong}@ahu.edu.cn,lkl@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The anatomical structure detection of fetal cardiac views
is crucial for diagnosing fetal congenital heart disease. In
practice, there is a large domain gap between different hospitals’ data, such as the variable data quality due to differences in acquisition equipment. In addition, accurate annotation information provided by obstetrician experts is always very costly or even unavailable. This study explores
the unsupervised domain adaptive fetal cardiac structure
detection issue. Existing unsupervised domain adaptive object detection (UDAOD) approaches mainly focus on detecting objects in natural scenes, such as Foggy Cityscapes,
where the structural relationships of natural scenes are uncertain. Unlike all previous UDAOD scenarios, we first
collected a Fetal Cardiac Structure dataset from two hospital centers, called FCS, and proposed a multi-matching
UDA approach (M 3 -UDA), including Histogram Matching
(HM), Sub-structure Matching (SM), and Global-structure
Matching (GM), to better transfer the topological knowledge of anatomical structure for UDA detection in medical scenarios. HM mitigates the domain gap between the
source and target caused by pixel transformation. SM fuses
the different angle information of the sub-structure to obtain the local topological knowledge for bridging the domain gap of the internal sub-structure. GM is designed to
align the global topological knowledge of the whole organ
from the source and target domain. Extensive experiments
on our collected FCS and CardiacUDA, and experimental
results show that M 3 -UDA outperforms existing UDAOD
studies significantly. Datasets and source code are available at https://github.com/xmed-lab/M3-UDA

* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Differences between our FCS detection and the previous
typical UDAOD task.

1. Introduction
In practical clinical prenatal screening, the detection of cardiac anatomical structures in fetal ultrasound images is essential for standard view localization [37], quality control
[30], and the diagnosis of congenital heart disease (CHD)
[2]. For example, ventricular septal defect, as a typical
CHD, is due to the absence of ventricular septum structure
[6]. In real-world applications, there are always some domain gaps in fetal ultrasound cardiac datasets from different
hospital centers, e.g., data collected by different medical devices and scanned by obstetricians in various centers, resulting in a wide variation in the quality. This leads to performance degradation in the detection of anatomical structures
testing in different hospitals. For example, several related
studies [1, 3, 32] have also explored the structure detection issue but have not addressed the domain gap. Mean-

11621

