This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Learning of Category-Level 3D Pose from Object-Centric Videos
Leonhard Sommer 1
1

Artur Jesslen 1

University of Freiburg

Abstract
Category-level 3D pose estimation is a fundamentally
important problem in computer vision and robotics, e.g. for
embodied agents or to train 3D generative models. However, so far methods that estimate the category-level object pose require either large amounts of human annotations, CAD models or input from RGB-D sensors. In contrast, we tackle the problem of learning to estimate the
category-level 3D pose only from casually taken objectcentric videos without human supervision. We propose a
two-step pipeline: First, we introduce a multi-view alignment procedure that determines canonical camera poses
across videos with a novel and robust cyclic distance formulation for geometric and appearance matching using reconstructed coarse meshes and DINOv2 features. In a second
step, the canonical poses and reconstructed meshes enable
us to train a model for 3D pose estimation from a single image. In particular, our model learns to estimate dense correspondences between images and a prototypical 3D template by predicting, for each pixel in a 2D image, a feature
vector of the corresponding vertex in the template mesh. We
demonstrate that our method outperforms all baselines at
the unsupervised alignment of object-centric videos by a
large margin and provides faithful and robust predictions
in-the-wild on the Pascal3D+ and ObjectNet3D datasets.

1. Introduction
Category-level object pose estimation is a fundamentally
important task in computer vision and robotics with a multitude of real-world applications, e.g. for training 3D generative models on real data and for robots that need to grasp
and manipulate objects. However, defining and determining
the pose of an object is a task that is far from easy. Current approaches achieve high performance, but they require
large amounts of annotated training data to generalize successfully [1, 26, 28, 33, 38], or additional inputs during inference, such as CAD Models [7, 14], 3D Shapes [3, 32, 37]
or RGB-D [8]. However, all of these are either timeconsuming to obtain or not available in practice at all.

Eddy Ilg 2
2

Adam Kortylewski 1

Saarland University

This motivates the development of methods for learning
category-level 3D pose estimators in a fully unsupervised
fashion. While doing so from images in the wild seems infeasible, object-centric video data [19] offers a more accessible alternative. Such videos can be easily captured using
consumer-grade cameras and makes it possible to leverage
coarse 3D reconstructions during training, providing a practical and cost-effective method for collecting data. Therefore, we propose the new task of learning a single-image
category-level 3D pose estimator from casually captured
object-centric videos without any human labels or other supervision. In practice, we leverage CO3D [19] as training
data and show that our proposed model is able to generalize
and predict accurate poses in the wild for Pascal3D+ [29]
and ObjectNet3D [31].
We address the challenging task of learning categorylevel 3D pose in an unsupervised fashion from casually captured object-centric videos. In particular, we propose a twostep pipeline (Figure 1). The first step extracts DINOv2 [18]
features from the images and reconstructs a coarse 3D mesh
from the video with off-the-shelf methods [4, 11]. Building
on this input, we introduce a novel 3D alignment procedure,
where a key contribution is a novel 3D cyclical distance in
terms of geometry and appearance that enables the robust
alignment of shape reconstructions even under severe noise
and variations in the object topology. As a result, we can
align all objects from the object-centric training videos into
a canonical coordinate frame without supervision.
In a second step, we leverage the canonical poses and
3D meshes obtained from the first step to train a categorylevel neural mesh [9, 16, 26, 36] in an unsupervised manner. In particular, we represent objects using a prototypical
3D mesh with surface features to capture the geometry and
neural appearance of an object category and train a neural
network backbone to predict, for each pixel in a 2D image,
a feature vector of the corresponding vertex in the template
mesh. Finally, the object 3D pose is solved using a pose fitting algorithm based on the estimated correspondence pairs.
We demonstrate that our method outperforms all baselines by a large margin at the unsupervised alignment of
object-centric videos on the CO3D [19] dataset. Moreover,

22787

