This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make-Your-Anchor: A Diffusion-based 2D Avatar Generation Framework
Ziyao Huang1 , Fan Tang1 , Yong Zhang2 , Xiaodong Cun2 , Juan Cao1∗ , Jintao Li1 , Tong-Yee Lee3
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Tencent AI Lab
3
National Cheng-Kung University
{huangziyao19f, tangfan}@ict.ac.cn {zhangyong201303, vinthony}@gmail.com
{caojuan, jtli}@ict.ac.cn tonylee@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Video for model
training.

Motion condition

Generated anchor videos.

Video for model
training.

Motion condition

Generated anchor videos.

Figure 1. We propose Make-Your-Anchor, a diffusion-based 2D avatar generation framework, to map the animatable human 3D mesh
sequence into realistic human video. By combining with motion capturing or audio-to-motion methods, our framework could achieve
anchor video auto-generation with temporal and lifelike outcomes.

Abstract
Despite the remarkable process of talking-head-based
avatar-creating solutions, directly generating anchor-style
videos with full-body motions remains challenging. In this
study, we propose Make-Your-Anchor, a novel system necessitating only a one-minute video clip of an individual for
training, subsequently enabling the automatic generation of
anchor-style videos with precise torso and hand movements.
Specifically, we finetune a proposed structure-guided diffusion model on input video to render 3D mesh conditions
into human appearances. We adopt a two-stage training
strategy for the diffusion model, effectively binding movements with specific appearances. To produce arbitrary long
temporal video, we extend the 2D U-Net in the frame-wise
diffusion model to a 3D style without additional training
cost, and a simple yet effective batch-overlapped temporal
denoising module is proposed to bypass the constraints on
video length during inference. Finally, a novel identityspecific face enhancement module is introduced to improve
the visual quality of facial regions in the output videos.
Comparative experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and
* Corresponding author: Juan Cao.

superiority of the system in terms of visual quality, temporal
coherence, and identity preservation, outperforming SOTA
diffusion/non-diffusion methods. Project page: https:
//github.com/ICTMCG/Make-Your-Anchor.

1. Introduction
Automatically generating 2D human videos with vivid
expressions, torsos, and gestures under various conditions
such as audio, text, or motion has wide applications in ecommerce, online education/conferencing, VR, etc. While
AI-powered digital anchors offer certain benefits, such as
around-the-clock availability and the ability to generate new
content quickly, they also raise significant quality concerns.
A common practice in popular 2D avatar systems is
pronounced specifically as GAN-based talking face generation approaches [17, 19, 32, 36], where only the lip/facial
region has been edited. This type of methods relies on the
capability to modify faces based on GANs [11, 12, 29].
Despite the remarkable visual quality, these systems limit
the anchor’s degrees of freedom. Beyond regional editing,
researchers try to generate more natural digital avatars
with the help of motion transfer [25, 26, 33, 38] and co-

6997

