This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Confronting Ambiguity in 6D Object Pose Estimation
via Score-Based Diffusion on SE(3)
Tsu-Ching Hsiao, Hao-Wei Chen, Hsuan-Kung Yang, and Chun-Yi Lee
Elsa Lab, National Tsing Hua University
{joehsiao, jaroslaw1007, hellochick}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw
cylee@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Addressing pose ambiguity in 6D object pose estimation
from single RGB images presents a significant challenge,
particularly due to object symmetries or occlusions. In response, we introduce a novel score-based diffusion method
applied to the SE(3) group, marking the first application of
diffusion models to SE(3) within the image domain, specifically tailored for pose estimation tasks. Extensive evaluations demonstrate the method’s efficacy in handling pose
ambiguity, mitigating perspective-induced ambiguity, and
showcasing the robustness of our surrogate Stein score formulation on SE(3). This formulation not only improves the
convergence of denoising process but also enhances computational efficiency. Thus, we pioneer a promising strategy
for 6D object pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Estimating the six degrees of freedom (DoF) pose of objects from a single RGB image remains a formidable task,
primarily due to the presence of ambiguity induced by
symmetric objects and occlusions. Symmetric objects exhibit identical visual appearance from multiple viewpoints,
whereas occlusions arise when key aspects of an object are
concealed either by another object or its own structure. This
can complicate the determination of its shape and orientation. Pose ambiguity presents a unique challenge as it transforms the direct one-to-one correspondence between an image and its associated object pose into a complex one-tomany scenario, which can potentially leads to significant
performance degradation for methods reliant on one-to-one
correspondence. Despite extensive exploration in the prior
object pose estimation literature [10, 19, 21, 38, 39], pose
ambiguity still remains a persisting and unresolved issue.
Recent advancements in pose regression have introduced
the use of symmetry-aware annotations to improve pose estimation accuracy [38, 42, 58, 62]. These methods typically
employ symmetry-aware losses that can tackle the pose am-

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Visualization of the denoising process of our score-based diffusion method on SE(3) for 6DoF pose estimation.

biguity problem. The efficacy of these losses, nevertheless,
depend on the provision of symmetry annotations, which
can be particularly challenging to obtain for objects with intricate shapes or under occlusion. An example is a textureless cup, where the true orientation becomes ambiguous if
the handle is not visible. The manual labor and time required to annotate the equivalent views of each object under
such circumstances is impractical.
Several contemporary studies have sought to eliminate
the reliance on symmetry annotations by treating ‘equivalent poses’ as a multi-modal distribution, reframing the
original pose estimation problem as a density estimation problem. Methods such as Implicit-PDF [39] and
HyperPose-PDF [23] leverage neural networks to implicitly characterize the non-parametric density on the rotation manifold SO(3). While these advances are noteworthy, they also introduce new complexities. For instance,
the computation during training requires exhaustive sampling across the whole SO(3) space. Moreover, the accuracy of inference is dependent on the resolution of the grid
search, which necessitates a significant amount of grid sampling. These computational limitations are magnified when
extending to larger spaces such as SE(3) due to the substantial memory requirements.
Recognizing these challenges, the research community
is pivoting towards diffusion models (DMs) [16, 54–56],
which are effective in handling multi-modal distributions.
Their effectiveness lies in the iterative sampling process,
which incorporates noises and enables a more focus exploration of the pose space while reducing computational
demands. As diffusion models refrain from explicit den-

352

