This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KeyPoint Relative Position Encoding for Face Recognition
Minchul Kim*

Yiyang Su*

Feng Liu*

Anil Jain*

Xiaoming Liu*

{kimminc2; suyiyan1; liufeng6; jain; liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenge of making ViT
models more robust to unseen affine transformations. Such
robustness becomes useful in various recognition tasks such
as face recognition when image alignment failures occur. We
propose a novel method called KP-RPE, which leverages key
points (e.g. facial landmarks) to make ViT more resilient to
scale, translation, and pose variations. We begin with the
observation that Relative Position Encoding (RPE) is a good
way to bring affine transform generalization to ViTs. RPE,
however, can only inject the model with prior knowledge that
nearby pixels are more important than far pixels. Keypoint
RPE (KP-RPE) is an extension of this principle, where the
significance of pixels is not solely dictated by their proximity
but also by their relative positions to specific keypoints within
the image. By anchoring the significance of pixels around
keypoints, the model can more effectively retain spatial relationships, even when those relationships are disrupted by
affine transformations. We show the merit of KP-RPE in face
and gait recognition. The experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness in improving face recognition performance
from low-quality images, particularly where alignment is
prone to failure. Code and pre-trained models are available.

1. Introduction
Geometric alignment has shown to be highly effective for
certain computer vision problems, such as face, body and gait
recognition [11, 12, 25, 30, 33, 34, 37, 40, 43, 48–50, 59, 69,
72, 82, 83, 87, 88]. Alignment is the process of transforming
input images, to a consistent and standardized form, often by
scaling, rotating, and translating. This standardization helps
recognition models learn the underlying patterns and features
more effectively. As a result, many state-of-the-art (SoTA)
face recognition models [11, 30, 49, 69] rely on well-aligned
datasets [10, 11, 22, 91] to achieve high accuracy.
Fig. 1 shows a toy example with a training dataset
MNIST [14] and test set AffNIST [57] which is in unseen
affine transformation of MNIST. Using a shallow ViT [15]
* Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA

Toy Example for Measuring Affine Transformation Robustness
Train Set
(MNIST)
Test Set
(AffNIST)
Unseen Affine Transform
Abs-PE
Abs-PE*

Keypoints*

KP-RPE offers robustness to
unseen affine transforms by
using keypoints.

RPE
iRPE
KP-RPE

AffNIST Test Accuracy %

Figure 1. Toy Example illustrating how different Position Embeddings impact the ViT’s robustness to unseen affine transforms. AbsPE refers to the learnable Absolute Position Embedding. RPE and
iRPE refers to Relative Position Embedding adopted to ViT [28, 74].
Keypoints in MNIST is arbitrarily defined to be the four corners of
a box that covers a digit. Abs-PE* is drawing the keypoints onto
the input image. KP-RPE uses the keypoints to adjust the RPE.

model, one can easily achieve 98.1% accuracy in the MNIST
test set. However, in AffNIST, ViT with the original Absolute Position Embedding obtains only 77.27% accuracy.
Such a sharp decrease in performance with unseen affine
transform causes problems in applications that rely on accurate input alignments.
In face recognition, alignment can be imperfect, especially in low-quality images where accurate landmark detection is difficult [10, 39]. Thus, images with low resolution or
taken in poor lighting may result in misalignment during testing. Given the interplay between alignment and recognition,
it becomes crucial to proactively handle potential alignment
failures, which often result from, e.g., low-quality images.
In other words, there is a need for a recognition model that
is robust to scale, rotation, and translation variations.

244

