This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Taming Stable Diffusion for Text to 360 Panorama Image Generation
Qianyi Wu1 Camilo Cruz Gambardella1,3 Xiaoshui Huang2 *
Dinh Phung1 Wanli Ouyang2 Jianfei Cai1 *
1
2
Monash University Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Building 4.0 CRC, Caulfield East, Victoria, Australia

PanFusion (Ours)

MVDiffusion

Cheng Zhang1,3

“A historic lighthouse perched on a rugged coastline,
overlooking the vast expanse of the open sea.”

“A living room with a ceiling fan.”

Figure 1. Our PanFusion can generate realistic and consistent 360 horizontal by 180 vertical FOV panoramas from a single text prompt,
compared to the limited FOV of current state-of-the-art method MVDiffusion [47]. Left: PanFusion addresses the problem of repetitive
elements (duplicated “ceiling fans”) and inconsistency (the ceiling and wall in the center) of MVDiffusion. Right: While trained mostly
on indoor scenes, PanFusion can generalize well to out-of-domain outdoor prompts with more reasonable layout.

Abstract

Generative models, e.g., Stable Diffusion, have enabled
the creation of photorealistic images from text prompts. Yet,
the generation of 360-degree panorama images from text remains a challenge, particularly due to the dearth of paired
text-panorama data and the domain gap between panorama
and perspective images. In this paper, we introduce a novel
dual-branch diffusion model named PanFusion to generate
a 360-degree image from a text prompt. We leverage the stable diffusion model as one branch to provide prior knowledge in natural image generation and register it to another
panorama branch for holistic image generation. We propose a unique cross-attention mechanism with projection
awareness to minimize distortion during the collaborative
denoising process. Our experiments validate that PanFusion surpasses existing methods and, thanks to its dualbranch structure, can integrate additional constraints like
room layout for customized panorama outputs.
* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Creating a 360 panorama image from textual prompts is
a nascent yet pivotal frontier in computer vision, with profound implications for applications that require extensive
environmental representation, such as environmental lighting [1, 4, 51], VR/AR [60, 61], autonomous driving [59],
and visual navigation [17]. Despite recent significant strides
in text-to-image synthesis, the leap to generating full 360
horizontal by 180 vertical field-of-view (FOV) panorama
remains challenging.
There are two major hurdles for achieving this goal.
The first hurdle is data scarcity. The availability of
text-to-panorama image pairs [20, 47] is significantly less
compared with the abundance of text-to-common image
pairs [38, 39]. The dearth of data complicates the training and finetuning of generative models. The second hurdle
lies in the geometric and domain variations. Panorama images are distinct not only in their aspect ratio (2 : 1) but

6347

