This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Representation Learning from Arbitrary Scenarios
Zhaowen Li 1,2 Yousong Zhu 1
Zhiyang Chen 1,2 Zongxin Gao 7 Rui Zhao 6
Chaoyang Zhao 1,5 Ming Tang 1 Jinqiao Wang 1,2,3,4,5
Foundation Model Research Center, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences2
Peng Cheng Laboratory3 Wuhan AI Research4 Objecteye Inc.5
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University6 Independent Researcher7
{zhaowen.li, yousong.zhu, jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Current self-supervised methods can primarily be categorized into contrastive learning and masked image modeling. Extensive studies have demonstrated that combining
these two approaches can achieve state-of-the-art performance. However, these methods essentially reinforce the
global consistency of contrastive learning without taking
into account the conflicts between these two approaches,
which hinders their generalizability to arbitrary scenarios.
In this paper, we theoretically prove that MAE serves as a
patch-level contrastive learning, where each patch within
an image is considered as a distinct category. This presents
a significant conflict with global-level contrastive learning,
which treats all patches in an image as an identical category. To address this conflict, this work abandons the nongeneralizable global-level constraints and proposes explicit
patch-level contrastive learning as a solution. Specifically,
this work employs the encoder of MAE to generate dualbranch features, which then perform patch-level learning
through a decoder. In contrast to global-level data augmentation in contrastive learning, our approach leverages
patch-level feature augmentation to mitigate interference
from global-level learning. Consequently, our approach
can learn heterogeneous representations from a single image while avoiding the conflicts encountered by previous
methods. Massive experiments affirm the potential of our
method for learning from arbitrary scenarios.

1. Introduction
Currently, self-supervised learning (SSL) in computer vision [1, 2, 4–7, 18, 21, 22, 35, 59] is capable of adopting
self-defined pseudo labels as supervision [28, 29] and holds
the promise in leveraging large amounts of unlabeled data
Corresponding author: Yousong Zhu and Jinqiao Wang.

Figure 1. Hybrid methods further enhance the global consistency of CL. We measures representational similarity among tokens for some popular self-supervised pre-trained models. Among
them, ccMIM [67] and SIM [54] employ MAE as the MIM baseline method while iBOT [69] adopts DINO [3] as the CL baseline method for hybrid approach. It indicates that hybrid methods, while increasing linear evaluation scores, also enhance the
representational similarity among tokens. This suggests that hybrid methods fundamentally further strengthen the global semantic consistency of CL. All of the models adopt ViT-B.

to build the foundational models. SSL methods focus on
designing different pretext tasks, and there are two mainstream approaches for learning visual features in the community. One of the most promising directions among them
is contrastive learning (CL) [2, 5–7, 18, 21, 25, 48]. It assumes that different views of a single image are of the same
instance. Its objective is to learn a global-level feature representation that discriminates among images. CL leverages
trainable networks to generate semantic pseudo labels [55],
thereby enhancing the model’s capability to extract semantic information. On the other hand, the masked image mod-

22967

