This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsegment Anything by Simulating Deformation
Jiahao Lu
Xingyi Yang
Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
{jiahao.lu, xyang}@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Foundation segmentation models, while powerful, pose
a significant risk: they enable users to effortlessly extract any objects from any digital content with a single
click, potentially leading to copyright infringement or malicious misuse. To mitigate this risk, we introduce a new
task “Anything Unsegmentable” to grant any image “the
right to be unsegmented”. The ambitious pursuit of the
task is to achieve highly transferable adversarial attack
against all prompt-based segmentation models, regardless
of model parameterizations and prompts. We highlight
the non-transferable and heterogeneous nature of promptspecific adversarial noises. Our approach focuses on disrupting image encoder features to achieve prompt-agnostic
attacks. Intriguingly, targeted feature attacks exhibit better transferability compared to untargeted ones, suggesting
the optimal update direction aligns with the image manifold. Based on the observations, we design a novel attack
named Unsegment Anything by Simulating Deformation
(UAD). Our attack optimizes a differentiable deformation
function to create a target deformed image, which alters
structural information while preserving achievable feature
distance by adversarial example. Extensive experiments
verify the effectiveness of our approach, compromising a
variety of promptable segmentation models with different
architectures and prompt interfaces. We release the code
at https://github.com/jiahaolu97/anything-unsegmentable.

1. Introduction
The emergence of promptable segmentation models, exemplified by the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [23], has
demonstrated astonishing generalization capabilities across
unseen data distributions and downstream tasks. Nevertheless, while these models offer remarkable convenience,
they also introduce potential risks. They enable covert and
effortless content filching, allowing unauthorized users to
segment and misappropriate visual content with a single
* Corresponding Author.

click. This is particularly concerning for artworks, digital
designs, or promotional images, as segmenting such content
can lead to commercial disputes. On the other hand, combining promptable segmentation models with generative AI
techniques empowers users to perform precise in-place image editing or even 3D generation with a high level of realism [9, 38, 54]. Segmentations taken out of their original
context can be deceptive and may be misused, leading to
unauthorized advertising and the generation of misleading
news content, thereby posing potential societal risks.
The driving force behind this work is the need to address the above emerging risks with a proactive technical
solution. We introduce an innovative task called “Anything Unsegmentable”, which aimed at enhancing image
resistance to any promptable segmentation model, consequently thwarting any unlawful attempts at image appropriation or manipulation. In pursuit of this ambitious objective, we propose a new adversarial attack Unsegment Anything by Simulating Deformation(UAD) emphasizing its remarkable transferability, as the adversarial perturbations remain model-agnostic and prompt-agnostic. This means that
they can effectively confound segmentation foundational
models, irrespective of their specific parameterizations and
prompt formats.
While existing research has explored adversarial attacks
targeting segmentation models [1, 4, 14, 46], our problem
presents unique challenges. Firstly, it deviates from the existing approaches due to fundamental differences in input
and output spaces. Semantic and panoptic segmentation
models take images as input, producing pixel-level classification results. Conversely, SFMs generate binary masks
in response to prompts, which can be either spatial (points,
boxes, strokes) or semantic (speech, text, or exemplar references). Due to difference in input and output spaces, we
need to devise novel attack objectives instead of encouraging pixel-level misclassifications. Secondly, recent studies [17, 34, 43] have demonstrated impressive robustness
against various corruptions, surpassing the capabilities of
ordinary segmentation models. Crafting attacks that can
effectively transfer across these already robust foundation
models poses a considerable challenge.

24294

