This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physics-aware Hand-object Interaction Denoising

1

Haowen Luo1 , Yunze Liu1,3 , Li Yi1,2,3
Tsinghua University, Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
2

Figure 1. Given a noisy hand-object interaction sequence, our method produces de-noised hand poses conditioning on the object trajectory,
mitigating physically-implausible artifacts such as erroneous contact and hand-object penetration. In this example of a human hand (yellow)
manipulating a hand model (grey), the de-noised result demonstrates higher physical plausibility. Please see our supplementary material
for more annimated results.

Abstract
The credibility and practicality of a reconstructed handobject interaction sequence depend largely on its physical
plausibility. However, due to high occlusions during handobject interaction, physical plausibility remains a challenging criterion for purely vision-based tracking methods. To
address this issue and enhance the results of existing hand
trackers, this paper proposes a novel physically-aware hand
motion de-noising method. Specifically, we introduce two
learned loss terms that explicitly capture two crucial aspects of physical plausibility: grasp credibility and manipulation feasibility. These terms are used to train a physicallyaware de-noising network. Qualitative and quantitative
experiments demonstrate that our approach significantly
improves both fine-grained physical plausibility and overall pose accuracy, surpassing current state-of-the-art denoising methods.

1. Introduction
Hand pose tracking during hand-object interaction is a crucial task for various applications such as gaming, virtual
reality, and robotics. Vision-based hand tracking methods
have made significant progress in recent years by estimating hand poses from vision data sequences. However, heavy
occlusions often occur during hand-object interaction, leading to ambiguity for vision-based trackers. Consequently,
even state-of-the-art tracking methods still produce obvious
errors and generate physically implausible artifacts such as
inter-penetrating hand-objects and unrealistic manipulation.
It is critical to remove such artifacts, increase the physical
plausibility, and ensure the usefulness of tracking results.
Several previous works have proposed to post-process
the estimations generated by vision-based trackers using denoising techniques. Some works have attempted to optimize hand poses by minimizing low-level penetration and
attraction energy [5]. However, such optimization methods
may struggle to handle severe noise, as they easily get stuck

2341

