This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BodyMAP - Jointly Predicting Body Mesh and 3D Applied Pressure Map for
People in Bed
Abhishek Tandon*
Anujraaj Goyal*
Carnegie Mellon University
United States

Henry M. Clever
NVIDIA
United States

Zackory Erickson
Carnegie Mellon University
United States

{abhishektnd, argo}@cmu.edu

hclever@nvidia.com

zackory@cmu.edu

BodyMAP
SMPL

Feature
Indexing
Module

ResNet

PointNet

Body Mesh

Figure 1. BodyMAP leverages a depth and pressure image of a person in bed covered by a blanket, to jointly predict the body mesh and a
3D pressure map of pressure distributed along the human body.

Abstract
Accurately predicting the 3D human posture and the
pressure exerted on the body for people resting in bed, visualized as a body mesh (3D pose & shape) with a 3D pressure
map, holds significant promise for healthcare applications,
particularly, in the prevention of pressure ulcers. Current
methods focus on singular facets of the problem—predicting
only 2D/3D poses, generating 2D pressure images, predicting pressure only for certain body regions instead of the full
body, or forming indirect approximations to the 3D pressure
map. In contrast, we introduce BodyMAP, which jointly predicts the human body mesh and 3D applied pressure map
across the entire human body. Our network leverages multiple visual modalities, incorporating both a depth image
of a person in bed and its corresponding 2D pressure image
acquired from a pressure-sensing mattress. The 3D pressure
map is represented as a pressure value at each mesh vertex
and thus allows for precise localization of high-pressure regions on the body. Additionally, we present BodyMAP-WS,
a new formulation of pressure prediction in which we implicitly learn pressure in 3D by aligning sensed 2D pressure
images with a differentiable 2D projection of the predicted
3D pressure maps. In evaluations with real-world human
data, our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art
technique by 25% on both body mesh and 3D applied pres* Equal contribution.

sure map prediction tasks for people in bed.

1. Introduction
With 2.5 million cases annually in the U.S. alone, pressure ulcers remain a pressing concern in healthcare systems
worldwide [3]. Although body repositioning serves as a
common preventive measure [30], concerns persist about
whether such pose shifts effectively redistribute applied
pressure on the body [37]. Wearable devices [31, 38] while
aiding in localizing peak pressure on the body, can disrupt
normal physical activities and contribute to pressure injuries
themselves [4, 18, 20]. In response, clinics and long-term
care facilities are increasingly looking at pressure sensor
systems to aid in pressure ulcer prevention [17, 30, 42].
These systems utilize a pressure sensing array, which is
placed beneath the person, and measures the pressure applied by the human body onto the sensor array, producing
a 2D pressure image. While informative about pressure applied on the body [2, 13, 37], these pressure images have
inherent ambiguities due to their 2D depiction of pressure.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, distinct body postures can result
in remarkably similar pressure images, failing to correctly
convey which body parts are under high pressure. These
systems thus currently require a human caregiver to deduce
the correct 3D distribution of pressure on the human body,
based on the 2D pressure image and 3D body posture. This

2480

