This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedSOL: Stabilized Orthogonal Learning with Proximal
Restrictions in Federated Learning
Gihun Lee1 , Minchan Jeong1 , Sangmook Kim2 , Jaehoon Oh3 , Se-Young Yun1
Graduate School of AI KAIST 3 Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UBC

1

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) aggregates locally trained
models from individual clients to construct a global model.
While FL enables learning a model with data privacy, it often suffers from significant performance degradation when
clients have heterogeneous data distributions. This data
heterogeneity causes the model to forget the global knowledge acquired from previously sampled clients after being trained on local datasets. Although the introduction
of proximal objectives in local updates helps to preserve
global knowledge, it can also hinder local learning by interfering with local objectives. To address this problem,
we propose a novel method, Federated Stabilized Orthogonal Learning (FedSOL), which adopts an orthogonal learning strategy to balance the two conflicting objectives. FedSOL is designed to identify gradients of local objectives that
are inherently orthogonal to directions affecting the proximal objective. Specifically, FedSOL targets parameter regions where learning on the local objective is minimally
influenced by proximal weight perturbations. Our experiments demonstrate that FedSOL consistently achieves stateof-the-art performance across various scenarios.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging distributed learning framework that preserves data privacy while leveraging client data for training [29, 30]. In this approach, individual clients train their local models using their private
data, and a server aggregates these models into a global
model. FL eliminates the need for direct access to clients’
raw data, enabling the use of extensive data collected from
various sources such as mobile phones, vehicles, and facilities [3, 71]. However, FL encounters a notorious challenge known as data heterogeneity [26, 36, 38]. As data
from different clients often come from diverse underlying
distributions, local datasets are not independently and identically distributed (Non-IID). This common issue in realworld scenarios leads to a misalignment between global and

local objectives [27, 63]. Consequently, local learning deviates from the global objective, resulting in significantly
degraded performance and slower convergence [26, 74].
Recent research suggests that such deviation in FL
resembles Catastrophic Forgetting in Continual Learning (CL) [32, 56, 66]. In CL, fitting the model to a new task
alters parameters critical for previous tasks, thus impairing
their performance [44, 47, 52, 64]. Similarly in FL, local
learning is prone to be overfitted on local datasets, causing
the model to forget global knowledge not represented in the
local distributions [32, 68]. Consequently, FL must navigate
the balance between preserving previous global knowledge
and acquiring new local knowledge during local learning.
Inspired by CL, we aim to resolve the conflict between two
objectives through Orthogonal Learning [18, 40]. In CL, an
effective strategy for preserving previous knowledge is to
minimizing the new task’s loss using gradients that are orthogonal to the loss space of the old tasks [9, 10, 55, 75].
These orthogonal gradients enable the model to reduce the
loss on the new task without negatively affecting performance on previous tasks. Our primary motivation is to adapt
this strategy to FL by identifying gradients that are orthogonal to directions affecting the global knowledge while still
enabling effective training on local datasets.
However, applying this strategy to FL presents unique
challenges. First, implementing orthogonal gradients in
CL often requires retaining past data or gradients for reference [9, 55]. This practice becomes problematic in FL
as it can compromise data privacy and introduce additional
communication overhead. Second, unlike in CL where task
distributions are often disjoint [13, 72], FL clients may have
overlapping data distributions, including instances from the
same class. As a result, the global distribution, formed by
combining local distributions, also presents overlap with individual local distributions. Such an overlap not only complicates the identification of an orthogonal update direction but also makes the process computationally demanding. Moreover, finding an orthogonal gradient that accommodates multiple local distributions is challenging and the
obtained gradient may significantly undermine the effec-

12512

