This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoST: Multi-modality Scene Tokenization for Motion Prediction
Norman Mu∗ Jingwei Ji∗ Zhenpei Yang∗ Nate Harada∗ Haotian Tang∗ Kan Chen∗
Charles R. Qi Runzhou Ge Kratarth Goel Zoey Yang Scott Ettinger
Rami Al-Rfou Dragomir Anguelov Yin Zhou†
Waymo LLC

Abstract
Many existing motion prediction approaches rely on
symbolic perception outputs to generate agent trajectories,
such as bounding boxes, road graph information and traffic lights. This symbolic representation is a high-level abstraction of the real world, which may render the motion
prediction model vulnerable to perception errors (e.g., failures in detecting open-vocabulary obstacles) while missing
salient information from the scene context (e.g., poor road
conditions). An alternative paradigm is end-to-end learning from raw sensors. However, this approach suffers from
the lack of interpretability and requires significantly more
training resources. In this work, we propose tokenizing
the visual world into a compact set of scene elements and
then leveraging pre-trained image foundation models and
LiDAR neural networks to encode all the scene elements in
an open-vocabulary manner. The image foundation model
enables our scene tokens to encode the general knowledge
of the open world while the LiDAR neural network encodes
geometry information. Our proposed representation can
efficiently encode the multi-frame multi-modality observations with a few hundred tokens and is compatible with most
transformer-based architectures. To evaluate our method,
we have augmented Waymo Open Motion Dataset with camera embeddings. Experiments over Waymo Open Motion
Dataset show that our approach leads to significant performance improvements over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
In order to safely and effectively operate in complex environments, autonomous systems must model the behavior of
nearby agents. These motion prediction models now often
rely on symbolic perception outputs such as 3D bounding
box tracks to represent agent states, rather than directly processing sensor inputs. These representations reduce input
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed motion prediction paradigm.
It fuses symbolic perception output and our multi-modality scene
tokens. While symbolic representation offers a convenient world
abstraction, the multi-modality scene tokens links behavior models
directly to sensor observations via token embeddings.

dimensionality, facilitating computationally efficient model
training. Additionally, since inputs such as 3D boxes are
easily rearranged and manipulated, it is possible to construct many hypothetical scenarios leading to efficient simulation and testing. Yet in order to continue improving the
accuracy and robustness of behavior models, it may be necessary to feed the models higher-fidelity sensor features.
For instance, pedestrian pose and gaze offer richer cues
than mere bounding boxes for motion prediction. Moreover,
many scene elements like lane markings cannot be well represented by boxes. Furthermore, scene context (e.g., road
surface conditions, hazardous locations) is difficult to characterize with symbolic representations. Manually crafting
representation for diverse concepts demands considerable
engineering effort in implementation, training, and evaluation. Instead, we want the behavior model to directly access
the raw sensor data and determine what and how to encode.
Deep learning models’ performance generally improves
when we replace hand-crafted features, designed to encode
inductive bias according to expert domain knowledge, with
the directly observed feature as long we scale compute and
data accordingly. But learning to predict complex patterns

14988

