This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProxyCap: Real-time Monocular Full-body Capture in World Space
via Human-Centric Proxy-to-Motion Learning
Yuxiang Zhang1 , Hongwen Zhang2 *, Liangxiao Hu3 , Jiajun Zhang4 , Hongwei Yi5 ,
Shengping Zhang3 , Yebin Liu1 *
1
Tsinghua University 2 Beijing Normal University 3 Harbin Institute of Technology
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 5 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Figure 1. ProxyCap is a real-time full-body capture solution to produce accurate motions with plausible ground contact in world space.

Abstract
Learning-based approaches to monocular motion capture have recently shown promising results by learning to
regress in a data-driven manner. However, due to the challenges in data collection and network designs, it remains
challenging to achieve real-time full-body capture while
being accurate in world space. In this work, we introduce ProxyCap, a human-centric proxy-to-motion learning
scheme to learn world-space motions from a proxy dataset
of 2D skeleton sequences and 3D rotational motions. Such
proxy data enables us to build a learning-based network
with accurate world-space supervision while also mitigating the generalization issues. For more accurate and physically plausible predictions in world space, our network is
designed to learn human motions from a human-centric perspective, which enables the understanding of the same motion captured with different camera trajectories. Moreover,
a contact-aware neural motion descent module is proposed
to improve foot-ground contact and motion misalignment
with the proxy observations. With the proposed learningbased solution, we demonstrate the first real-time monocular full-body capture system with plausible foot-ground contact in world space even using hand-held cameras.
* Corresponding authors.

1. Introduction
Motion capture from monocular videos is an essential technology for various applications such as gaming, VR/AR,
sports analysis, etc. One ultimate goal is to achieve realtime capture while being accurate and physically plausible
in world space. Despite the recent advancements, this task
is still far from being solved, especially under the settings
of in-the-wild captures with hand-held moving cameras.
Compared to optimization-based methods [4, 10, 12, 20,
38, 48, 62], learning-based approaches [15, 19, 68, 70] can
directly regress human poses from images, significantly enhancing computational efficiency while addressing the inherent issues in optimization-based methods of initialization sensitivity and local optima entrapment. As data-driven
solutions, the performance and generalization capabilities
of learning-based methodologies are heavily bounded by
the accuracy and diversity of the training data. Unfortunately, existing datasets are unable to simultaneously meet
these requirements. On the one hand, datasets with sequential ground truth 3D pose annotations [11, 13, 28, 49] are
mostly captured by marker-based or multi-view systems,
which makes it hard to scale up to a satisfactory level of
diversity in human appearances and backgrounds. On the
other hand, numerous in-the-wild datasets [1, 23] excel in
the richness of human and scenario diversity but they lack

1954

