This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Animatable Gaussians: Learning Pose-dependent Gaussian Maps
for High-fidelity Human Avatar Modeling

1

Zhe Li1 , Zerong Zheng2 , Lizhen Wang1 , Yebin Liu1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 2 NNKosmos Technology
https://animatable-gaussians.github.io/

Figure 1. Lifelike animatable avatars with highly dynamic, realistic and generalized details created by our method.

Abstract
Modeling animatable human avatars from RGB videos
is a long-standing and challenging problem. Recent works
usually adopt MLP-based neural radiance fields (NeRF) to
represent 3D humans, but it remains difficult for pure MLPs
to regress pose-dependent garment details. To this end, we
introduce Animatable Gaussians, a new avatar representation that leverages powerful 2D CNNs and 3D Gaussian
splatting to create high-fidelity avatars. To associate 3D
Gaussians with the animatable avatar, we learn a parametric template from the input videos, and then parameterize
the template on two front & back canonical Gaussian maps
where each pixel represents a 3D Gaussian. The learned
template is adaptive to the wearing garments for modeling
looser clothes like dresses. Such template-guided 2D parameterization enables us to employ a powerful StyleGANbased CNN to learn the pose-dependent Gaussian maps for
modeling detailed dynamic appearances. Furthermore, we
introduce a pose projection strategy for better generalization given novel poses. Overall, our method can create
lifelike avatars with dynamic, realistic and generalized appearances. Experiments show that our method outperforms
other state-of-the-art approaches.
Corresponding author: Yebin Liu.

1. Introduction
Animatable human avatar modeling, due to its potential
value in holoportation, Metaverse, game and movie industries, has been a popular topic in computer vision for
decades. However, how to effectively represent the human
avatar is still a challenging problem.
Explicit representations, including both meshes and
point clouds, are the prevailing choices, not just in human avatars but also throughout the entire 3D vision and
graphics. However, previous explicit avatar representations [4, 49, 88] necessitate dense reconstructed meshes to
model human geometry, thus limiting their applications in
sparse-view video-based avatar modeling. In the past few
years, with the rise of implicit representations, particularly
neural radiance fields (NeRF) [54], many researchers tend
to represent the 3D human as a pose-conditioned NeRF
[40, 44, 58, 103] to automatically learn a neural avatar from
RGB videos. However, implicit representations require a
coordinate-based MLP to regress a continuous field, suffering from the low-frequency spectral bias [77] of MLPs.
Although many works aim to enhance the avatar representation by texture feature [44] or structured local NeRFs [103],
they fail to produce satisfactory results because they still
rely on an MLP to output the continuous implicit fields.
Recently, 3D Gaussian splatting [33], an explicit and efficient point-based representation, has been proposed for

19711

