This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Steerers: A framework for rotation equivariant keypoint descriptors
Georg Bökman†
Johan Edstedt‡
Michael Felsberg‡
Fredrik Kahl†
†
‡
Chalmers University of Technology
Linköping University

Figure 1. Matching under large in-plane rotations. Two challenging pairs from AIMS [49]. The left images in each pair were taken by
astronauts on the ISS and are geo-referenced by matching them with the satellite images on the right. We plot estimated inlier correspondences after homography estimation with RANSAC. Further qualitative examples are shown in the appendix.

Abstract
Image keypoint descriptions that are discriminative and
matchable over large changes in viewpoint are vital for 3D
reconstruction. However, descriptions output by learned
descriptors are typically not robust to camera rotation.
While they can be made more robust by, e.g., data augmentation, this degrades performance on upright images.
Another approach is test-time augmentation, which incurs
a significant increase in runtime. Instead, we learn a linear transform in description space that encodes rotations
of the input image. We call this linear transform a steerer
since it allows us to transform the descriptions as if the image was rotated. From representation theory, we know all
possible steerers for the rotation group. Steerers can be
optimized (A) given a fixed descriptor, (B) jointly with a descriptor or (C) we can optimize a descriptor given a fixed
steerer. We perform experiments in these three settings and
obtain state-of-the-art results on the rotation invariant image matching benchmarks AIMS and Roto-360. We publish
code and model weights at this https url.

1. Introduction
Discriminative local descriptions are vital for multiple 3D
vision tasks, and learned descriptors have recently been
shown to outperform traditional handcrafted local features [17, 19, 23, 43]. One major weakness of learned
descriptors compared to handcrafted features such as

SIFT [35] is the relative lack of robustness to non-upright
images [55]. While images taken from ground level can
sometimes be made upright by aligning with gravity as the
canonical orientation, this is not always possible. For example, descriptors robust to rotation are vital in space applications [49], as well as medical applications [42], where no
such canonical orientation exists. Even when a canonical
orientation exists, it may be difficult or impossible to estimate. Rotation invariant matching is thus a key challenge.
The most straightforward manner to get rotation invariant matching is to train or design a descriptor to be rotation
invariant [17, 35]. However, this sacrifices distinctiveness
in matching images with small relative rotations [41]. An
alternative approach is to train a rotation-sensitive descriptor and perform test-time-augmentation, selecting the pair
that produces the most matches. The obvious downside of
TTA is computational cost. For example, testing all 45◦ rotations requires running the model eight times.
In this paper, we present an approach that maintains distinctiveness for small rotations and allows for rotation invariant matching when we have images with large rotations. We do this while adding only negligible additional
runtime, running the descriptor only a single time. The
main idea is to learn a linear transform in description space
that corresponds to a rotation of the input image; see Figure 2. We call this linear transform a steerer as it allows
us to modify keypoint descriptions as if they were describing rotated images—we can steer the descriptions without
having to rerun the descriptor network. We show empiri-

4885

