This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Model Inversion Robustness: Can Transfer Learning Help?
Sy-Tuyen Ho1
Koh Jun Hao1
Keshigeyan Chandrasegaran2 †
Ngoc-Bao Nguyen1
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
hosy tuyen@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Model Inversion (MI) attacks aim to reconstruct private training data by abusing access to machine learning models. Contemporary MI attacks have achieved impressive attack performance, posing serious threats to privacy. Meanwhile, all existing MI defense methods rely
on regularization that is in direct conflict with the training objective, resulting in noticeable degradation in model
utility. In this work, we take a different perspective,
and propose a novel and simple Transfer Learning-based
Defense against Model Inversion (TL-DMI) to render MIrobust models. Particularly, by leveraging TL, we limit the
number of layers encoding sensitive information from private training dataset, thereby degrading the performance
of MI attack. We conduct an analysis using Fisher Information to justify our method. Our defense is remarkably simple to implement. Without bells and whistles,
we show in extensive experiments that TL-DMI achieves
state-of-the-art (SOTA) MI robustness. Our code, pretrained models, demo and inverted data are available at:
https://hosytuyen.github.io/projects/TL-DMI

1. Introduction
Model Inversion (MI) attack is a type of privacy threat that
aim to reconstruct private training data by exploiting access
to machine learning models. State-of-the-art (SOTA) MI
attacks [6, 32, 33, 43, 51] have demonstrated increased effectiveness, achieving attack performance of over 90% in
face recognition benchmarks. The implications of this vulnerability are particularly concerning in security-critical applications [1, 5, 11, 12, 14, 17, 25, 30, 37, 45].
The aim of our work is to propose new perspective to
defend against MI attacks and to improve MI robustness.
In particular, MI robustness pertains to the tradeoff between MI attack accuracy and model utility. MI robust† Work done while at SUTD.

Ngai-Man Cheung1
2
Stanford University

ngaiman cheung@sutd.edu.sg

ness involves two critical considerations: Firstly, a MI robust model should demonstrate a significant reduction in
MI attack accuracy, making it difficult for adversaries to
reconstruct private training samples. Secondly, while defending against MI attacks, the natural accuracy of a MI
robust model should remain competitive. A model with improved MI robustness ensures that it is resilient to MI while
maintaining its utility.
Research gap. Despite the growing threat arising from
SOTA MI, there are limited studies on defending against
MI attacks and improving MI robustness. Conventionally,
differential privacy (DP) is used for ensuring the privacy of
individuals in datasets. However, DP has been shown to
be ineffective against MI [13, 44, 51]. Meanwhile, a few
MI defense methods have been proposed. Particularly, all
existing SOTA MI defense methods are based on the idea
of dependency minimization regularization [35, 44]: they
introduce additional regularization into the training objective, with the goal of minimizing the dependency between
input and output/latent representation. The underlying idea
of these works is to reduce correlation between input and
output/latent, which MI attacks exploit during the inversion. However, reducing correlation between input and output/latent directly undermines accuracy of the model, resulting in considerable degradation in model utility [44]. To
partially restore the model utility, BiDO [35] proposes to
further introduce another regularization to compensate for
the reduced correlation between input and latent. However,
with two additional regularization along with the original
training objective, BiDO requires significant effort in hyperparameter tuning based on intensive grid search [35], and is
sensitive to small changes in hyperparameters (see our analysis in Supp.)
In this paper, our main hypothesis is that a model with
fewer parameters encoding sensitive information from private training dataset (Dpriv ) could achieve better MI robustness. Based on that, we propose a novel Transfer
Learning-based Defense against Model Inversion (TLDMI) (Fig. 1). Leveraging on standard two-stages TL
framework [34, 48], with pre-training on public dataset as

12183

