This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-LFM: Lifting Foundation Model
Mosam Dabhi1
1

László A. Jeni1 *
2

Carnegie Mellon University

Simon Lucey2 *

The University of Adelaide

3dlfm.github.io

3D-LFM

(a) Unified 2D-3D lifting for 30+ categories.

(b) Dataset diversity visualization.

Figure 1. Overview: (a) This figure shows the 3D-LFM’s ability in lifting 2D landmarks into 3D structures across an array of over 30
diverse categories, from human body parts, to a plethora of animals and everyday common objects. The lower portion shows the actual 3D
reconstructions by our model, with red lines representing the ground truth and blue lines showing the 3D-LFM’s predictions. (b) This figure
displays the model’s training data distribution on a logarithmic scale, highlighting that inspite of 3D-LFM being trained on imbalanced
datasets, it preserves the performance across individual categories.

Abstract
The lifting of a 3D structure and camera from 2D landmarks is at the cornerstone of the discipline of computer
vision. Traditional methods have been confined to specific rigid objects, such as those in Perspective-n-Point
(PnP) problems, but deep learning has expanded our capability to reconstruct a wide range of object classes (e.g.
C3DPO [18] and PAUL [24]) with resilience to noise, occlusions, and perspective distortions. However, all these
techniques have been limited by the fundamental need to
establish correspondences across the 3D training data, significantly limiting their utility to applications where one
has an abundance of “in-correspondence” 3D data. Our
approach harnesses the inherent permutation equivariance
of transformers to manage varying numbers of points per
3D data instance, withstands occlusions, and generalizes
* Both authors advised equally.

to unseen categories. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance across 2D-3D lifting task benchmarks. Since our
approach can be trained across such a broad class of structures, we refer to it simply as a 3D Lifting Foundation Model
(3D-LFM) – the first of its kind.

1. Introduction
Lifting 2D landmarks from a single-view RGB image into
3D has long posed a complex challenge in the field of computer vision because of the ill-posed nature of the problem.
This task is important for a range of applications from augmented reality to robotics, and requires an understanding
of non-rigid spatial geometry and accurate object descriptions [2, 11, 25]. Historically, efforts in single-frame 2D3D lifting have encountered significant hurdles: reliance on
object-specific models, poor scalability, and limited adaptability to diverse and complex object categories. Traditional
methods, while advancing in specific domains like human

10466

