This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Activity-Biometrics: Person Identification from Daily Activities
Shehreen Azad

Yogesh Singh Rawat

Shehreen.Azad@ucf.edu

yogesh@ucf.edu

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida

Abstract
In this work, we study a novel problem which focuses
on person identification while performing daily activities.
Learning biometric features from RGB videos is challenging due to spatio-temporal complexity and presence of appearance biases such as clothing color and background. We
propose ABNet, a novel framework which leverages disentanglement of biometric and non-biometric features to
perform effective person identification from daily activities. ABNet relies on a bias-less teacher to learn biometric
features from RGB videos and explicitly disentangle nonbiometric features with the help of biometric distortion. In
addition, ABNet also exploits activity prior for biometrics
which is enabled by joint biometric and activity learning.
We perform comprehensive evaluation of the proposed approach across five different datasets which are derived from
existing activity recognition benchmarks. Furthermore, we
extensively compare ABNet with existing works in person
identification and demonstrate its effectiveness for activitybased biometrics across all five datasets. The code and
dataset can be accessed at: https://github.com/
sacrcv/Activity-Biometrics/

1. Introduction
Person identification is an important task with a wide range
of applications in security, surveillance, and various domains where recognizing individuals across different locations or time frames is essential [41]. We have seen a
great progress in face recognition [2, 31], however scenarios exist where faces may not be visible, such as at
long distances, with uncooperative subjects, under occlusion, or due to mask-wearing. This limitation prompts
the exploration of whole-body-based person identification
methods where most of the existing works are often restricted to image-based approaches [4, 14, 43], overlooking
crucial motion patterns. Video-based methods for person
identification is comparatively recent area where most of
the work is focused on gait recognition; mostly silhouette-

Figure 1. Different approaches for person identification: (left)
samples for existing person identification problems such as face
recognition (top: Celeb-A[30]), whole body recognition (middle: Market-1501[45]), and gait recognition (bottom: CASIAB[42]). (right) we focus on person identification from daily activities which presents more challenges beyond learning walking
or facial patterns. We show some samples from datasets we used
to study this problem; (top: NTU RGB-AB, middle: CharadesAB, bottom: ACC-MM1-Activities1 ).

based [12, 13, 27] with some recent works on RGB frames
[26, 44]. However these works are mainly focused on walking style of individuals (see Figure 1).
In this work, we study a novel problem which focuses on
face-restricted person identification during routine activities. The current landscape of image-based and video-based
whole-body person identification methods predominantly
centers around analyzing human walking patterns from images or videos [15, 20, 33, 40]. However, in real-world scenarios, the individual requiring identification might not always be engaged in walking; instead, they could be involved
in various daily activities. It is crucial to acknowledge the
significance of capturing and understanding motion cues
that extend beyond simple walking patterns to ensure accurate and reliable identification in diverse and complex situations. These activities may offer unique cues that can prove
instrumental in identifying individuals even without explicit
facial information, paving the way for diverse applications
in real-world scenarios, like increased surveillance in public
spaces, workplace security and productivity, assistance for
people requiring special needs, and smart home automation.
1 The subjects consented to publication

287

