This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contextrast: Contextual Contrastive Learning for Semantic Segmentation
Changki Sung1 , Wanhee Kim2 *, Jungho An2 *, Wooju Lee1 , Hyungtae Lim1† , and Hyun Myung1†
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KI-Robotics,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
2
Department of Automotive Engineering, Kookmin University, Republic of Korea
1

2

{cs1032, dnwn24, shapelim, hmyung}@kaist.ac.kr

{gml78905, ajh427}@kookmin.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite great improvements in semantic segmentation,
challenges persist because of the lack of local/global contexts and the relationship between them. In this paper, we
propose Contextrast, a contrastive learning-based semantic segmentation method that allows to capture local/global
contexts and comprehend their relationships. Our proposed
method comprises two parts: a) contextual contrastive
learning (CCL) and b) boundary-aware negative (BANE)
sampling. Contextual contrastive learning obtains local/global context from multi-scale feature aggregation and
inter/intra-relationship of features for better discrimination
capabilities. Meanwhile, BANE sampling selects embedding features along the boundaries of incorrectly predicted
regions to employ them as harder negative samples on our
contrastive learning, resolving segmentation issues along
the boundary region by exploiting fine-grained details. We
demonstrate that our Contextrast substantially enhances the
performance of semantic segmentation networks, outperforming state-of-the-art contrastive learning approaches on
diverse public datasets, e.g. Cityscapes, CamVid, PASCALC, COCO-Stuff, and ADE20K, without an increase in computational cost during inference.

Anchor

* Work done during internship at KAIST
† Corresponding authors: Dr. Hyungtae Lim and Prof. Hyun Myung

(c) Ours

Updated anchor

Vector/scalar aggregation

Pulling towards the anchor of each class
Pushing each other class based on our BANE sampling

Semantic
segmentation
network

(d)
On the embedding
vector space

For the class bus ( )

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental technique utilized
across diverse applications, including autonomous driving,
medical imaging, and robotics [12, 13, 18, 32, 37, 40]. Recent empirical studies have achieved remarkable advancements in semantic segmentation, benefiting significantly
from the availability of extensive datasets [1, 2, 9, 10, 29,
55]. To improve segmentation performance, researchers
have proposed larger deep neural network (DNN) architectures [4–8, 11, 14, 16, 19, 21, 24, 25, 27, 34, 35, 39, 42–

(b) HRNet [35]

Embedding spaces
Corresponding to the depth of layers

(a) Ground truth

(e)
Figure 1. (a) Ground truth, (b) output of HRNet [35], (c) and that of ours.
(d) Overview of our contextual contrastive learning (CCL): the representative anchors of the last layer, which are from the higher embedding space
levels, are aggregated to representative anchors of the lower layer to encapsulate local and global context. By doing so, the anchor of the n-th
n
class on the i-th layer an
i is updated as âi (on the right side, its position is shifted), enhancing the distinctiveness between anchors of each
class. (e) Visual description of our boundary-aware negative (BANE) sampling (triangles with red color and red borders). Our sampling prioritizes
selecting the features of incorrect predictions at the edges (red triangles)
rather than those inside the regions (triangles with red borders) as negative
samples. Each shape represents an embedding vector derived from the respective class (best viewed in color).

3732

