This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Omni-SMoLA: Boosting Generalist Multimodal Models with Soft Mixture of
Low-rank Experts
Jialin Wu

Xia Hu

Yaqing Wang
Bo Pang
Google Research

Radu Soricut

{jialinwu, xiahu, yaqingwang, bopang, rsoricut}@google.com

Abstract
Large multi-modal models (LMMs) exhibit remarkable
performance across numerous tasks. However, generalist LMMs often suffer from performance degradation when
tuned over a large collection of tasks. Recent research
suggests that Mixture of Experts (MoE) architectures are
useful for instruction tuning, but for LMMs of parameter
size around O(50-100B), the prohibitive cost of replicating
and storing the expert models severely limits the number
of experts we can use. We propose Omni-SMoLA, an architecture that uses the Soft MoE approach to (softly) mix
many multimodal low rank experts, and avoids introducing
a significant number of new parameters compared to conventional MoE models. The core intuition here is that the
large model provides a foundational backbone, while different lightweight experts residually learn specialized knowledge, either per-modality or multimodally. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the SMoLA approach helps improve the generalist performance across a broad range of
generative vision-and-language tasks, achieving new SoTA
generalist performance that often matches or outperforms
single specialized LMM baselines, as well as new SoTA specialist performance.

1. Introduction
Large multimodal models (LMMs) [7–9, 14, 33, 53]
demonstrate remarkable performance on a variety of tasks
including visual question answering, image captioning, visual document understanding, etc. To date, the best performance on most of these tasks is achieved by so-called specialist LMMs, but their large scale makes it impractical to
deploy a multitude of such specialists at once. As a result,
so-called generalist LMMs emerge as an obvious choice,
where such a model is trained and deployed to handle a wide
range of tasks using the same set of model parameters.
Building a single generalist model to solve multiple tasks
remains challenging. A straightforward approach is to fine-

tune the model parameters with supervised data representing multiple tasks. However, recent research suggests that
it causes non-negligible performance degradation compared
to the performance of a single-task specialist [7]. It is
likely that, even though these tasks share the same configuration of modalities (e.g., image + text as input, text as
output), what the model needs to solve for is significantly
diverse – for instance, some tasks require recognizing the
fine-grained identity of visual content, some may rely on
world-knowledge outside of the visual scene, while others
require reading and understanding texts from images.
Recent work [48] show that Mixture-of-Experts (MoE)
models stand to benefit more from instruction tuning compared to dense models, and serve as good candidate architectures for building generalist large language models. Intuitively, this should work well because different expert modules can specialize and handle different tasks. However,
there is an obvious issue with applying the MoE design
on Transformer blocks for large-scale models: the different transformer blocks result in replicating the model parameters using high-rank experts. This creates a situation
in which the scale of each expert model block compared to
their dense-model counterparts is much more limited.
In this work, we address the aforementioned limitations by introducing Omni-SMoLA, an architecture that efficiently mixes many multi-modal low rank experts. Using this architecture, we demonstrate strong capabilities for
adapting pretrained models to tackle specialized tasks. The
core intuition is that a large pretrained (or instruction-tuned)
model provides a foundational backbone of capabilities (we
denote this model by θ∗ ), while different lightweight experts learn additional specializations (which can be knowledge, style, or capabilities). In particular, for the modalities
considered in this paper (text & vision), the Omni-SMoLA
architecture consists of three sets of experts, focusing on
text tokens, visual tokens and multimodal tokens, respectively, in order to satisfy different needs from various tasks.
In general, the SMoLA design has several important
properties. First, due to its low rank expert design [43] (unlike conventional MoE transformer models [15, 18, 30, 48]),

14205

