This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Event Cameras
Varun Sundar†*

Matthew Dutson †∗

Andrei Ardelean‡

vsundar4@wisc.edu

dutson@wisc.edu

a.ardelean@epfl.ch

Claudio Bruschini§

Edoardo Charbon§

{claudio.bruschini, edoardo.charbon}@epfl.ch
†

University of Wisconsin-Madison

‡

NovoViz

§

Mohit Gupta†
mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

wisionlab.com/project/generalized-event-cameras/

Abstract
Event cameras capture the world at high time resolution and
with minimal bandwidth requirements. However, event streams,
which only encode changes in brightness, do not contain sufficient scene information to support a wide variety of downstream
tasks. In this work, we design generalized event cameras that
inherently preserve scene intensity in a bandwidth-efficient manner. We generalize event cameras in terms of when an event is
generated and what information is transmitted. To implement
our designs, we turn to single-photon sensors that provide digital access to individual photon detections; this modality gives
us the flexibility to realize a rich space of generalized event
cameras. Our single-photon event cameras are capable of highspeed, high-fidelity imaging at low readout rates. Consequently,
these event cameras can support plug-and-play downstream
inference, without capturing new event datasets or designing
specialized event-vision models. As a practical implication, our
designs, which involve lightweight and near-sensor-compatible
computations, provide a way to use single-photon sensors without exorbitant bandwidth costs.

1. Introduction
Event cameras [6, 34, 44] sense the world at high speeds, providing visual information with minimal bandwidth and power.
They achieve this by transmitting only changes in scene brightness, when significant “events” occur. However, there is a cost.
Raw event data, a sparse stream of binary values, does not
hold sufficient information to be used directly with mainstream
vision algorithms. Therefore, while event cameras have been
successful at certain tasks (e.g., object tracking [15, 33], obstacle
avoidance [7, 20, 49], and high-speed odometry [12, 21, 68]),
they are not widely deployed as general-purpose vision sen∗ denotes equal contribution. This research was supported in parts by NSF

CAREER award 1943149, NSF award CNS-2107060, and the Swiss National
Science Foundation grant 200021 166289. We thank Paul Mos for providing us
access to SwissSPAD2 acquisition software.

sors, and often need to be supplemented with conventional
cameras [14, 15, 21]. These limitations are holding back this
otherwise powerful technology.
Is it possible to realize the promise of event cameras, i.e.,
high temporal resolution at low bandwidth, while preserving
rich scene intensity information? To realize these seemingly conflicting goals, we propose a novel family of generalized event
cameras. We conceptualize a space of event cameras along
two key axes (Fig. 1 (top)): (a) “when to transmit information,”
formalized as a change detection procedure ∆; and (b) “what
information to transmit,” characterized by an integrator Σ that
encodes incident flux. Existing event cameras represent one
operating point in this (Σ, ∆) space. Our key observation is that
by exploring this space and considering new (Σ, ∆) combinations, we can design event cameras that preserve scene intensity.
We propose more general integrators, e.g., that represent flux
according to motion levels, that span spatial patches, or that
employ temporal coding (Fig. 1 (middle)). We also introduce robust change detectors that better distinguish motion from noise,
by considering increased spatiotemporal contexts and modeling
noise in the sensor measurements.
Despite their conceptual appeal, physically implementing
generalized event cameras is a challenge. This is because the requisite computations must be performed at the sensor to achieve
the desired bandwidth reductions. For example, existing event
cameras perform simple integration and thresholding operations
via analog in-pixel circuitry. However, more general (Σ, ∆)
combinations are not always amenable to analog implementations; even feasible designs might require years of hardware
iteration and production scaling. To build physical realizations
of generalized event cameras, we leverage an emerging sensor technology: single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) that
provide digital access to photon detections at extremely high
frame rates (∼100 kHz). This allows us to compose arbitrary
software-level signal transformations, such as those required by
generalized event cameras. Further, we are not locked to a particular event camera design and can realize multiple configurations

25007

