This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SplaTAM: Splat, Track & Map 3D Gaussians for Dense RGB-D SLAM
spla-tam.github.io
Nikhil Keetha1 , Jay Karhade1 , Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula2 , Gengshan Yang1 ,
Sebastian Scherer1 , Deva Ramanan1 , and Jonathon Luiten1
1 CMU 2 MIT
Ground
Truth
Train
View
SplaTAM
PSNR: 27.4 dB

Depth L1: 0.9 cm
Ground
Truth

Novel
View
ATE RMSE
SplaTAM: 0.6 cm
SOTA Baselines:

SplaTAM

Rendering:
400 FPS
PSNR: 24.2 dB

Depth L1: 1.9 cm

Figure 1. SplaTAM enables precise camera tracking and high-fidelity reconstruction for dense simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) in challenging real-world scenarios. SplaTAM achieves this by online optimization of an explicit volumetric representation,
3D Gaussian Splatting [14], using differentiable rendering. Left: We showcase the high-fidelity 3D Gaussian Map along with the train
(SLAM-input) & novel view camera frustums. It can be noticed that SplaTAM achieves sub-cm localization despite the large motion
between subsequent cameras in the texture-less environment. This is particularly challenging for state-of-the-art baselines leading to the
failure of tracking. Right: SplaTAM enables photo-realistic rendering of both train & novel views at 400 FPS for a resolution of 876 × 584.

Abstract
Dense simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
is crucial for robotics and augmented reality applications.
However, current methods are often hampered by the nonvolumetric or implicit way they represent a scene. This
work introduces SplaTAM, an approach that, for the first
time, leverages explicit volumetric representations, i.e., 3D
Gaussians, to enable high-fidelity reconstruction from a single unposed RGB-D camera, surpassing the capabilities of
existing methods. SplaTAM employs a simple online tracking and mapping system tailored to the underlying Gaussian representation. It utilizes a silhouette mask to elegantly
capture the presence of scene density. This combination enables several benefits over prior representations, including
fast rendering and dense optimization, quickly determining if areas have been previously mapped, and structured
map expansion by adding more Gaussians. Extensive experiments show that SplaTAM achieves up to 2× superior
performance in camera pose estimation, map construction,
and novel-view synthesis over existing methods, paving the
way for more immersive high-fidelity SLAM applications.

1. Introduction
Visual simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)—
the task of estimating the pose of a vision sensor (such as
a depth camera) and a map of the environment—is an essential capability for vision or robotic systems to operate
in previously unseen 3D environments. For the past three
decades, SLAM research has extensively centered around
the question of map representation – resulting in a variety of
sparse [2, 3, 7, 23], dense [4, 6, 8, 13, 15, 25, 26, 34, 42, 43],
and neural scene representations [21, 29, 30, 37, 46, 55].
Map representation is a fundamental choice that dramatically impacts the design of every processing block within
the SLAM system, as well as of the downstream tasks that
depend on the outputs of SLAM.
In terms of dense visual SLAM, the most successful
handcrafted representations are points, surfels/flats, and
signed distance fields. While systems based on such map
representations have matured to production level over the
past years, there are still significant shortcomings that need
to be addressed. Tracking explicit representations relies
crucially on the availability of rich 3D geometric fea-

21357

