This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tackling the Singularities at the Endpoints of Time Intervals in Diffusion Models
Xiaohua Xie1†
Pengze Zhang1 * Hubery Yin2 * Chen Li2
1
2
Sun Yat-sen University
Wechat, Tencent Inc.
zhangpz3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {hubery, chaselli}@tencent.com, xiexiaoh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Christmas Eve,
Town, Dark Night,
House, Snow

Polar Bear,
Snowfield

Bonfire,
Midnight

Dog, White
Background

Emma Stone,
Anne Hathaway,
Starry Sky,
Wedding Dress,
Medieval Queen, White Background,
Moon
Studio

Elon Musk, In a
Sark Studio,
Black
Background

Elon Musk,
Studio, White
Background

Cillian Murphy,
Deep Sea, Glowing
White Background,
Jellyfish
White Suit, Bust

+ SingDiffusion

Original

Prompt

https://pangzecheung.github.io/SingDiffusion/

Stable Diffusion 1.5

Stable Diffusion 2.0-base

NED Model on CIVITAI

Elon Musk Model on CIVITAI MixReal Model on CIVITAI

Figure 1. In this paper, we explore singularities theoretically and propose a plug-and-play module SingDiffusion to address the sampling
challenge at the initial singular time step. By integrating this module into existing pre-trained models, our approach effectively tackles the
difficulties of generating both dark and bright images, and further enhancing overall image quality as confirmed by quantitative analysis.

Abstract
Most diffusion models assume that the reverse process
adheres to a Gaussian distribution. However, this approximation has not been rigorously validated, especially at singularities, where t = 0 and t = 1. Improperly dealing
with such singularities leads to an average brightness issue in applications, and limits the generation of images
with extreme brightness or darkness. We primarily focus
on tackling singularities from both theoretical and practical perspectives. Initially, we establish the error bounds for
the reverse process approximation, and showcase its Gaus-

sian characteristics at singularity time steps. Based on this
theoretical insight, we confirm the singularity at t = 1 is
conditionally removable while it at t = 0 is an inherent
property. Upon these significant conclusions, we propose a
novel plug-and-play method SingDiffusion to address the
initial singular time step sampling, which not only effectively resolves the average brightness issue for a wide range
of diffusion models without extra training efforts, but also
enhances their generation capability in achieving notable
lower FID scores.

1. Introduction
* Equal contribution. This work was done when Pengze Zhang was an

intern at WeChat.
† Corresponding Author.

Diffusion models, generating samples from initial noise by
learning a reverse diffusion process, have achieved remark-

6945

