This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DYSON: Dynamic Feature Space Self-Organization for
Online Task-Free Class Incremental Learning
Yuhang He1 *, Yingjie Chen1∗ , Yuhan Jin2 , Songlin Dong1 , Xing Wei2 , Yihong Gong1,2†
1
College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{heyuhang@xjtu.edu.cn},{cyj1450670826,3122358042,dsl972731417}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn}
{xingwei,yhgong}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on a challenging Online TaskFree Class Incremental Learning (OTFCIL) problem. Different from the existing methods that continuously learn
the feature space from data streams, we propose a novel
compute-and-align paradigm for the OTFCIL. It first computes an optimal geometry, i.e., the class prototype distribution, for classifying existing classes and updates it when
new classes emerge, and then trains a DNN model by aligning its feature space to the optimal geometry. To this end, we
develop a novel Dynamic Neural Collapse (DNC) algorithm
to compute and update the optimal geometry. The DNC expands the geometry when new classes emerge without loss
of the geometry optimality and guarantees the drift distance of old class prototypes with an explicit upper bound.
On this basis, we propose a novel DYnamic feature space
Self-OrganizatioN (DYSON) method containing three major components, including 1) a feature extractor, 2) a Dynamic Feature-Geometry Alignment (DFGA) module aligning the feature space to the optimal geometry computed by
DNC and 3) a training-free class-incremental classifier derived from the DNC geometry. Experimental comparison
results on four benchmark datasets, including CIFAR10, CIFAR100, CUB200, and CoRe50, demonstrate the efficiency
and superiority of the DYSON method. The source code is
released at https://github.com/isCDX2/DYSON.

1. Introduction
Taking a continuous data stream as input, Online TaskFree Class Incremental Learning (OTFCIL) [19,34] aims to
incrementally learn newly emerged classes by online learning without task boundaries and identifiers. Compared to
the classical class-incremental learning [12, 27, 32, 45, 49]
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. The illustration of (a) data-driven and (b) compute-andalign OTFCIL paradigm. In (a), samples of a new class are difficult
to converge into a class center and old class centers drift significantly when learning new classes. In (b), the proposed paradigm
first computes an optimal geometry for classifying existing classes
and updates it when new classes emerge, and then learns the new
classes by aligning the feature space to the geometry.

that splits a data stream into a series of subsets (namely
sessions or tasks), where each subset contains the samples
of certain classes and different subset classes are mutually
excluded, the OTFCIL is a practical but more challenging
problem wherein the samples are one-shot provided and old
and new class knowledge are blended.
According to the knowledge learning and maintaining
strategies, existing OTFCIL methods can be mainly divided
into three sub-categories, i.e., data replay [19, 34], network
expansion [39, 41] and knowledge distillation [2, 33] methods. The data replay methods [7, 34, 37, 43, 51] store a

23741

