This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event Stream-based Visual Object Tracking: A High-Resolution Benchmark
Dataset and A Novel Baseline
Xiao Wang1 , Shiao Wang1 , Chuanming Tang2,3 , Lin Zhu4 , Bo Jiang 1 *, Yonghong Tian5,6,7 , Jin Tang1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Optics and Electronics, CAS, Chengdu, China
4
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
6
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
7
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
{xiaowang, jiangbo, tangjin}@ahu.edu.cn, wsa1943230570@126.com,
tangchuanming19@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {linzhu, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn
https://github.com/Event-AHU/EventVOT_Benchmark

Abstract
Tracking with bio-inspired event cameras has garnered
increasing interest in recent years. Existing works either
utilize aligned RGB and event data for accurate tracking
or directly learn an event-based tracker. The former incurs
higher inference costs while the latter may be susceptible
to the impact of noisy events or sparse spatial resolution.
In this paper, we propose a novel hierarchical knowledge
distillation framework that can fully utilize multi-modal /
multi-view information during training to facilitate knowledge transfer, enabling us to achieve high-speed and lowlatency visual tracking during testing by using only event
signals. Specifically, a teacher Transformer-based multimodal tracking framework is first trained by feeding the
RGB frame and event stream simultaneously. Then, we
design a new hierarchical knowledge distillation strategy
which includes pairwise similarity, feature representation,
and response maps-based knowledge distillation to guide
the learning of the student Transformer network. In particular, since existing event-based tracking datasets are all
low-resolution (346 × 260), we propose the first large-scale
high-resolution (1280 × 720) dataset named EventVOT. It
contains 1141 videos and covers a wide range of categories
such as pedestrians, vehicles, UAVs, ping pong, etc. Extensive experiments on both low-resolution (FE240hz, VisEvent, COESOT), and our newly proposed high-resolution
EventVOT dataset fully validated the effectiveness of our
*

Corresponding Author: Bo Jiang

proposed method.

1. Introduction
Visual Object Tracking (VOT) targets predicting the locations of target object initialized in the first frame. Existing trackers are usually developed based on RGB cameras and deployed for autonomous driving, drone photography, intelligent video surveillance, and other fields. Due
to the influence of challenging factors like fast motion, illumination, background distractor, and out-of-view, the tracking performance in complex scenarios is still unsatisfactory.
The video frames with these challenges are unevenly distributed in the tracking video, making it difficult to improve
the overall tracking results by investing more labeled data.
To address these challenges, some researchers have
started to improve the effectiveness of input data by introducing new sensors. As a new type of bio-inspired sensor, event cameras are different from traditional video frame
sensors in that they can output event pulses asynchronously
and capture motion information through the detection of
events (e.g., changes in light intensity). Event camera performs better than traditional RGB cameras in capturing fastmoving objects due to dense temporal resolution. It also
works well on high dynamic range, low energy consumption, and low latency [14]. Event cameras can be used for a
wide range of applications, including surveillance, robotics,
medical imaging, and sports analysis.
Although few, there have been some studies that ex-

19248

