This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Cues-Assisted Transformer for Robust Point Cloud Registration
Hong Chen, Pei Yan, Sihe Xiang and Yihua Tan*
Hubei Engineering Research Center of Machine Vision and Intelligent Systems,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{hongc, yanpei, m202273201, yhtan}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Point Cloud Registration is a critical and challenging
task in computer vision. Recent advancements have predominantly embraced a coarse-to-fine matching mechanism, with the key to matching the superpoints located
in patches with inter-frame consistent structures. However, previous methods still face challenges with ambiguous
matching, because the interference information aggregated
from irrelevant regions may disturb the capture of interframe consistency relations, leading to wrong matches.
To address this issue, we propose Dynamic Cues-Assisted
Transformer (DCATr). Firstly, the interference from irrelevant regions is greatly reduced by constraining attention to
certain cues, i.e., regions with highly correlated structures
of potential corresponding superpoints. Secondly, cuesassisted attention is designed to mine the inter-frame consistency relations, while more attention is assigned to pairs
with high consistent confidence in feature aggregation. Finally, a dynamic updating fashion is proposed to facilitate
mining richer consistency information, further improving
aggregated features’ distinctiveness and relieving matching
ambiguity. Extensive evaluations on indoor and outdoor
standard benchmarks demonstrate that DCATr outperforms
all state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. The visualization of the cross-attention heatmaps and
matching results. Given two low-overlap point clouds, we sample
an anchor patch in one of them and mark it with red. The distribution of cross-attention corresponding to the anchor patch in another point cloud is marked in blue (see the first row). For a clear
presentation, they are shown in correctly registered point clouds
and highlighted with boxes. The superpoint- and point-matching
results are shown in the last two rows, respectively. Green/red
lines indicate inliers/outliers.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration aims to recover the transformation
that aligns two partially overlapping point clouds, which is
fundamental in numerous computer vision tasks, such as reconstruction [6, 22], pose estimation [27], and simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) [4].
Correspondence-based methods [2, 12, 18, 31, 32] have
exhibited significant potential and become one of the most
popular paradigms in point cloud registration. These methods initially establish point correspondences and derive
* Corresponding author

the relative transformation based on these correspondences.
Recent advances are dominated by keypoint-free methods
[18, 31, 32] that leverage a coarse-to-fine mechanism to
seek correspondences. By partitioning the original point
cloud pairs into smaller patches with downsampled superpoints, they first match superpoints and then propagate the
results of superpoint matches to individual points, yielding dense correspondences. Consequently, the performance
of superpoints matching directly determines the accuracy
of point correspondences. Recent methods [18, 31, 32]
leverage transformer to learn long-distance dependencies in

21698

