This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative 3D Part Assembly via Part-Whole-Hierarchy Message Passing
Bi’an Du1 , Xiang Gao1 , Wei Hu1 ,* Renjie Liao2,3,4
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
University of British Columbia, 3 Vector Institute for AI, 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair
pkudba@stu.pku.edu.cn, gyshgx868@pku.edu.cn, forhuwei@pku.edu.cn, rjliao@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
Generative 3D part assembly involves understanding part
relationships and predicting their 6-DoF poses for assembling a realistic 3D shape. Prior work often focus on the
geometry of individual parts, neglecting part-whole hierarchies of objects. Leveraging two key observations: 1)
super-part poses provide strong hints about part poses, and
2) predicting super-part poses is easier due to fewer superparts, we propose a part-whole-hierarchy message passing
network for efficient 3D part assembly. We first introduce
super-parts by grouping geometrically similar parts without
any semantic labels. Then we employ a part-whole hierarchical encoder, wherein a super-part encoder predicts latent
super-part poses based on input parts. Subsequently, we
transform the point cloud using the latent poses, feeding it
to the part encoder for aggregating super-part information
and reasoning about part relationships to predict all part
poses. In training, only ground-truth part poses are required.
During inference, the predicted latent poses of super-parts
enhance interpretability. Experimental results on the PartNet
dataset show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in part and connectivity accuracy and enables an
interpretable hierarchical part assembly. Code is available
at https://github.com/pkudba/3DHPA.

1. Introduction
Generative 3D Part Assembly [7, 15, 16, 25, 32] is an emerging research area that aims to generate complex 3D shapes
via assembling simple 3D parts without relying on prior
semantic knowledge. Different from traditional 3D shape
generation, it focuses on generating diverse, plausible configurations of given parts. It facilitates the generation of
complex objects and scenes with compositionality, flexibility, and efficiency. With the rapid evolution of 3D printing
technology and the increasing demand for diverse 3D shapes,
generative 3D part assembly finds applications in various sce* Corresponding Author: Wei Hu (forhuwei@pku.edu.cn).

narios, attracting attention from experts in computer vision,
graphics, robotics, and machine learning.
However, achieving generative 3D part assembly presents
a significant challenge due to the vast number of potential
part arrangements and orientations, coupled with the intricate
dependencies among the parts. Adding to the complexity,
part geometry exhibits notable variation even within the same
object category, making it exceedingly difficult to generalize
learned assembly patterns across different objects.
Previous approaches primarily focus on designing architectures capable of learning powerful representations for
individual 3D parts. The hope is that these learned representations could facilitate accurate part assembly, either in a
one-shot manner or sequentially [14, 21, 33, 34]. However,
these methods often ignore the inherent part-whole hierarchies in 3D shapes in representation learning. For instance,
as illustrated in Figure 1, a chair consists of super-parts
such as seats, backs, and legs, with each super-part further
divisible into parts like seat surfaces and seat frames. Understanding the pose of a super-part provides insights into the
poses of constituent parts within the same super-part, as they
often share similar orientations or exhibit symmetry (e.g.,
left-right symmetry in chair legs and arms). Moreover, predicting super-part poses is typically easier due to the fewer
number of super-parts compared to parts. Incorporating
these hierarchies into the modeling would make the learning
process and potentially improve the overall performance.
In this paper, we introduce a part-whole-hierarchy message passing network for 3D shape assembly, predicting
6 degrees of freedom (6-DoF) poses for super-parts and
parts in a hierarchical manner. We establish the correspondence between parts and super-parts (i.e., subsets of parts)
by grouping parts based on their geometric similarities, following the approach from [33, 34]. Importantly, we treat
super-part poses as latent variables to be learned, thereby
eliminating the requirement of ground-truth super-part poses
in our work. Our model comprises two sequential modules:
the super-part encoder and the part encoder.
The first super-part encoder takes the 3D point clouds of
all parts as input and employs the attention-based message

20850

