This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GLACE: Global Local Accelerated Coordinate Encoding
Fangjinhua Wang1 * Xudong Jiang1 * Silvano Galliani2 Christoph Vogel2
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
2
Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Zurich Lab

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual localization describes the task of estimating the camera position and orientation for a query image in a known
scene. This ability to localize in the environment is fundamental and important for applications like robotics, autonomous driving, and Augmented / Virtual Reality.
* Equal contribution.

DSAC* (Full)
ACE
Poker (ACEx4)
Ours

24
Position Error (cm)

Scene coordinate regression (SCR) methods are a family of visual localization methods that directly regress 2D3D matches for camera pose estimation. They are effective in small-scale scenes but face significant challenges in
large-scale scenes that are further amplified in the absence
of ground truth 3D point clouds for supervision. Here, the
model can only rely on reprojection constraints and needs
to implicitly triangulate the points. The challenges stem
from a fundamental dilemma: The network has to be invariant to observations of the same landmark at different
viewpoints and lighting conditions, etc., but at the same
time discriminate unrelated but similar observations. The
latter becomes more relevant and severe in larger scenes.
In this work, we tackle this problem by introducing the concept of co-visibility to the network. We propose GLACE,
which integrates pre-trained global and local encodings
and enables SCR to scale to large scenes with only a single small-sized network. Specifically, we propose a novel
feature diffusion technique that implicitly groups the reprojection constraints with co-visibility and avoids overfitting
to trivial solutions. Additionally, our position decoder parameterizes the output positions for large-scale scenes more
effectively. Without using 3D models or depth maps for supervision, our method achieves state-of-the-art results on
large-scale scenes with a low-map-size model. On Cambridge landmarks, with a single model, we achieve 17%
lower median position error than Poker, the ensemble variant of the state-of-the-art SCR method ACE. Code is available at: https://github.com/cvg/glace.

Marc Pollefeys1,2

22

Ours
ACE Ensemble

20
18
16
14
5

10

15
20
Map Size (MB)

25

4

6

8 10 12
Map Size (MB)

14

16

Figure 1. Left: Quantitative comparison of map size and position error with state-of-the-art SCR methods [9, 11] on Cambridge
landmarks [24]. Our method outperforms DSAC [9], ACE [11]
and Poker (4 ACE models) with a moderate model size. Right:
Relationship between map size and position error. Note that our
method with the smallest map size (3.2 MB) still performs better
than Poker (4 ACE models, map size is 16.0 MB).

Currently, most state-of-the-art localization methods are
structure-based [6, 9, 29, 30, 34, 43, 46], including feature
matching based methods and most scene coordinate regression methods. Both techniques have in common to build
maps from images with known poses. For localization they
establish matches between 2D pixel positions in the query
image and 3D points in the maps. Finally, embedded into
RANSAC [3, 4], a Perspective-n-Point (PnP) solver [13, 21]
is used to predict the camera pose from the 2D-3D correspondences. Both methodologies differ in the representation of the map and the estimation of correspondences.
Given a database of images, methods based on feature
matching [29, 30, 34, 39, 43, 44] typically represent the 3D
scene by reconstructing the 3D geometry, e.g. point cloud,
using structure-from-motion (SfM) [38]. At test time, they
establish 2D-3D matches between pixels in a query image
and 3D points in the 3D model using descriptor matching.
However, these methods need to store point-wise visual descriptors for the whole point cloud, which may cause storage issues when the scenes scale up.
In contrast, scene coordinate regression (SCR) methods [5, 9, 11, 16, 20] implicitly encode the map information
inside a deep neural network. Instead of computing 2D3D matches via explicit descriptor matching, these meth-

21562

