This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HandBooster: Boosting 3D Hand-Mesh Reconstruction by
Conditional Synthesis and Sampling of Hand-Object Interactions
Hao Xu1

Haipeng Li2
Yinqiao Wang1
Shuaicheng Liu2
Chi-Wing Fu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

{xuhao,yqwang,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {lihaipeng@std.,liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn

Reconstructing 3D hand mesh robustly from a single image is very challenging, due to the lack of diversity in existing real-world datasets. While data synthesis helps relieve
the issue, the syn-to-real gap still hinders its usage. In this
work, we present HandBooster, a new approach to uplift the
data diversity and boost the 3D hand-mesh reconstruction
performance by training a conditional generative space on
hand-object interactions and purposely sampling the space
to synthesize effective data samples. First, we construct versatile content-aware conditions to guide a diffusion model
to produce realistic images with diverse hand appearances,
poses, views, and backgrounds; favorably, accurate 3D annotations are obtained for free. Then, we design a novel
condition creator based on our similarity-aware distribution sampling strategies to deliberately find novel and realistic interaction poses that are distinctive from the training
set. Equipped with our method, several baselines can be
significantly improved beyond the SOTA on the HO3D and
DexYCB benchmarks. Our code will be released on https:
//github.com/hxwork/HandBooster_Pytorch.

1. Introduction
The task of reconstructing 3D hand mesh from a single image facilitates a wide range of applications, e.g., in AR/VR
and human-computer interactions. Recently-proposed datadriven methods show promising results in hand-object interaction scenarios. Yet, their performance is largely limited
by the training data, since existing datasets typically lack
diversity in hand appearances/poses, views, etc.
Existing real-world hand-object datasets are collected in
laboratory or in-the-wild scenes. For laboratory-captured
datasets such as DexYCB [8] and HO3D [22], they offer a
large quantity of hand-object interaction samples with relatively accurate 3D annotations. However, the variations
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering; Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR (IMIXR).

JPE on HO3D (mm)

Abstract

JPE on DexYCB (mm)

Figure 1. HandBooster significantly improves several baselines,
making them SOTA again on both HO3D and DexYCB.

in the samples are still limited, since the data collection
process is typically very tedious with the expensive MoCap
system. Conversely, for in-the-wild datasets, e.g., YouTubeHands [40], the data has richer variations, but they provide
only pseudo labels, without accuracy guarantee.
Synthetic data, both rendering- and generative-based, is
a workaround to avoid tedious data collection while ensuring annotation precision. ObMan [23], YCB-Afford [17],
and ArtiBoost [71] use Blender [16], Maya [1], or PyRender [47] to produce hand renderings. However, the results
are unrealistic due to simulated hand appearance and inconsistency in foreground/background lighting. Also, they
need extensive extra data such as HDR environment maps
for lighting and background augmentation. On the other
hand, generative methods, e.g., HOGAN [31], can alleviate
these issues. Yet, they consider only novel view synthesis
but not other aspects of data diversity. Also, there is no evidence that the hand-mesh reconstruction performance can
be improved consistently on existing methods. To sum up,
the key challenge is how to generate realistic and diverse
hand-object interaction images with reliable annotations.
In this paper, we present HandBooster to uplift the data
diversity and boost 3D hand-mesh reconstruction by train-

10159

