This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PTM-VQA: Efficient Video Quality Assessment Leveraging
Diverse PreTrained Models from the Wild
Kun Yuan1† , Hongbo Liu1,2† , Mading Li1† , Muyi Sun3,4 ,
Ming Sun1(B) , Jiachao Gong1 , Jinhua Hao1 , Chao Zhou1 , Yansong Tang2(B)
1
Kuaishou Technology, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 School of AI, BUPT, 4 CASIA
{yuankun03,limading,sunming03}@kuaishou.com, liuhbleon@gmail.com, tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Video quality assessment (VQA) is a challenging problem due to the numerous factors that can affect the perceptual quality of a video, e.g., content attractiveness, distortion type, motion pattern, and level. However, annotating
the Mean opinion score (MOS) for videos is expensive and
time-consuming, which limits the scale of VQA datasets,
and poses a significant obstacle for deep learning-based
methods. In this paper, we propose a VQA method named
PTM-VQA, which leverages PreTrained Models to transfer
knowledge from models pretrained on various pre-tasks, enabling benefits for VQA from different aspects.
Specifically, we extract features of videos from different
pretrained models with frozen weights and integrate them
to generate representation. Since these models possess various fields of knowledge and are often trained with labels
irrelevant to quality, we propose an Intra-Consistency and
Inter-Divisibility (ICID) loss to impose constraints on features extracted by multiple pretrained models. The intraconsistency constraint ensures that features extracted by
different pretrained models are in the same unified qualityaware latent space, while the inter-divisibility introduces
pseudo clusters based on the annotation of samples and
tries to separate features of samples from different clusters. Furthermore, with a constantly growing number of
pretrained models, it is crucial to determine which models
to use and how to use them. To address this problem, we
propose an efficient scheme to select suitable candidates.
Models with better clustering performance on VQA datasets
are chosen to be our candidates. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
In recent years, social network platforms that focus on
videos have gained immense popularity. According to
† Equal contribution. B Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. The KoNViD-1k dataset provides video frames that
demonstrate a correlation between content/motion patterns and
video quality. To identify potential reasons for poor perceptual
video quality, we have highlighted specific factors in italics that
correspond to the labeled MOS.

Cisco’s Visual Networking Index (VNI), global IP video
traffic is predicted to account for 82% of all IP traffic by
2022, both in business and consumer sectors [2]. The significant increase in video content consumption poses significant challenges for video providers to deliver better services. Since the perceptual quality of videos has a significant impact on the Quality of Experience (QoE), identifying
the quality of videos has become one of the most important issues [10, 11, 18, 26, 47]. Video quality assessment
(VQA) aims to assess the perceptual quality of input videos
automatically, imitating the subjective feedback of humans
when viewing a video. It has been extensively studied in
the context of assessing compression artifacts, transmission
errors, and overall quality [27, 30, 34, 40, 45]. Data-driven
deep learning-based methods have been drawing more and
more attention compared to conventional methods based on
hand-crafted features, as they possess better performance
[7–9, 28, 31, 42, 57, 65, 68].
Compared with other high-level computer vision tasks,
datasets for VQA are much smaller. One of the most popular datasets for human action classification Kinetics [5] has
650,000 clips, while the popular VQA dataset KoNViD-1k
[22] has only 1,200 videos. One of the reasons is because
VQA is a highly subjective task [58, 61]. To obtain an un-

2835

