This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Extreme Point Supervised Instance Segmentation

1

Lunit Inc.

Hyeonjun Lee1,3
Sehyun Hwang2
Suha Kwak2,3
2
3
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH

dlguswns1882@gmail.com, {sehyun03, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel approach to learning instance segmentation using extreme points, i.e., the topmost,
leftmost, bottommost, and rightmost points, of each object.
These points are readily available in the modern bounding
box annotation process while offering strong clues for precise segmentation, and thus allows to improve performance
at the same annotation cost with box-supervised methods.
Our work considers extreme points as a part of the true
instance mask and propagates them to identify potential foreground and background points, which are all together used
for training a pseudo label generator. Then pseudo labels
given by the generator are in turn used for supervised learning of our final model. On three public benchmarks, our
method significantly outperforms existing box-supervised
methods, further narrowing the gap with its fully supervised
counterpart. In particular, our model generates high-quality
masks when a target object is separated into multiple parts,
where previous box-supervised methods often fail.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation, the task of predicting classes and
masks of individual objects at the same time, has been advanced remarkably thanks to supervised learning of deep
neural networks [9, 21, 56, 58, 59]. However, it is prohibitively costly to manually annotate a pixel-level mask
per instance, which often leads to lack of both class diversity
and the amount of training data. This issue steers the research
community towards label-efficient learning approaches such
as weakly supervised learning [1, 10, 13, 23, 27, 28, 34–
36, 38, 39, 54, 57, 70] and semi-supervised learning [24, 26,
29, 42, 47, 52, 61, 69].
Building on this momentum, learning instance segmentation using box supervision has gained considerable attraction
recently [13, 23, 27, 34–36, 38, 39, 57]. To train an instance
segmentation model with box-supervision, these methods
employ a bounding box tightness prior [23], which implies
that a vertical (or horizontal) line crossing the bounding
box must contain at least one pixel belonging to the object

(Fig. 1); this prior has been formulated through various loss
functions [13, 23, 34, 35, 39, 57]. Although box-supervision
has proved to be effective for learning instance segmentation
while keeping annotation costs low, we claim that there is
room for further improvement in this direction, particularly
due to the fact that it has neglected extreme points, a byproduct of the common box annotation process providing a strong
clue that helps in estimating the instance mask.
Today, extreme points are freely available in the bounding
box annotation process [32], where human annotators are
instructed to click four extreme points of the target object,
i.e., topmost, leftmost, bottommost, and rightmost points,
rather than to click two corner points of the bounding box.
This is because the former usually ends up requiring less
annotation time as the latter often needs to adjust the initial
box label multiple times, as demonstrated by Papadopoulos
et al. [48]. Moreover, since they are definitely a part of the
true mask of the target, extreme points provide a strong clue
for segmentation absent in the box supervision.
Motivated by this, we study weakly supervised learning
for instance segmentation using extreme points to further improve performance without increasing annotation cost. Our
framework for EXtreme point supervised InsTance Segmentation, dubbed EXITS, considers extreme points as a part of
the true instance mask, and exploits them as supervision for
training a pseudo label generator. Then pseudo segmentation
labels produced by the generator are in turn used for supervised learning of our final model, which can be any arbitrary
networks for instance segmentation. The overall procedure
of EXITS is illustrated in Fig. 2.
The key to the success of EXITS is how to train the
pseudo label generator using extreme points. A straightforward way is to consider extreme points as foreground and
points outside the bounding box as background, and then
exploit them for supervised learning. However, the pseudo label generator trained in this way fails to generate crisp object
masks since most object regions remain unlabeled during
training due to the sparsity of extreme points. To address this
issue, EXITS estimates potential foreground and background
points within the bounding box by propagating the extreme
and background points outside the box. The propagation

17212

