This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vanishing-Point-Guided Video Semantic Segmentation of Driving Scenes
Diandian Guo1 Deng-Ping Fan3,2 * Tongyu Lu1 Christos Sakaridis1 Luc Van Gool1
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich 2 DISSec, CS, Nankai University
3
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN FUTIAN)

Abstract
The estimation of implicit cross-frame correspondences
and the high computational cost have long been major challenges in video semantic segmentation (VSS) for driving
scenes. Prior works utilize keyframes, feature propagation, or cross-frame attention to address these issues. By
contrast, we are the first to harness vanishing point (VP)
priors for more effective segmentation. Intuitively, objects
near VPs (i.e., away from the vehicle) are less discernible.
Moreover, they tend to move radially away from the VP
over time in the usual case of a forward-facing camera,
a straight road, and linear forward motion of the vehicle.
Our novel, efficient network for VSS, named VPSeg, incorporates two modules that utilize exactly this pair of static
and dynamic VP priors: sparse-to-dense feature mining
(DenseVP) and VP-guided motion fusion (MotionVP). MotionVP employs VP-guided motion estimation to establish
explicit correspondences across frames and help attend to
the most relevant features from neighboring frames, while
DenseVP enhances weak dynamic features in distant regions around VPs. These modules operate within a contextdetail framework, which separates contextual features from
high-resolution local features at different input resolutions
to reduce computational costs. Contextual and local features are integrated through contextualized motion attention
(CMA) for the final prediction. Extensive experiments on
two popular driving segmentation benchmarks, Cityscapes
and ACDC, demonstrate that VPSeg outperforms previous
SOTA methods, with only modest computational overhead.
The resources are available at https://github.com/
RascalGdd/VPSeg.

1. Introduction
In the dawn of automated driving, a comprehensive understanding of the vehicle’s surroundings becomes a must.
Semantic segmentation, i.e., the per-pixel classification of
camera frames into a set of predefined classes, is a cen* Corresponding author: Deng-Ping Fan (dengpfan@gmail.com).
Diandian Guo and Tongyu Lu share equal contributions to this project.

Figure 1. Illustration of the intuition behind our proposed
vanishing-point-guided motion estimation and scale-adaptive
partition modules. Targets move radially away from the vanishing point as time progresses in the video for the typical case of a
forward-facing camera, a straight road and linear forward motion,
which is depicted in this example. Moreover, the region around
the vanishing point contains more distant objects, which appear at
smaller scales.

tral task in this context. However, semantic segmentation
in automated driving contexts presents unique challenges.
The diversity of objects, their varying scales, potential occlusions, and the wide range of lighting and weather conditions create complex visual inputs that must be parsed
in real time. Especially problematic are “hard-to-segment”
objects [11] which are small, rare, or have an appearance
that blends seamlessly into their background or into each
other. These objects, such as distant traffic signs or badly lit
pedestrians, are critically important to segment, given their
impact on driving decisions.
As the dynamic context in consecutive frames provides
clues to recognize these hard samples, researchers have
tried to address this issue by exploiting temporal information through video semantic segmentation (VSS) [23,
33, 42, 43, 63]. However, processing multiple frames simultaneously requires significant computational resources.
Moreover, existing VSS methods still struggle to establish
correspondences in two main scenarios. First, for distant
small objects, their relative motion over time tends to be

3544

