This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VidToMe: Video Token Merging for Zero-Shot Video Editing
Xirui Li1 Chao Ma1 * Xiaokang Yang1 Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{lixirui142,chaoma,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

2

UC Merced

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Project webpage: https://vidtome-diffusion.github.io
To “Rainbow-colored Origami Flamingo”

Abstract
Diffusion models have made significant advances in generating high-quality images, but their application to video
generation has remained challenging due to the complexity
of temporal motion. Zero-shot video editing offers a solution by utilizing pre-trained image diffusion models to translate source videos into new ones. Nevertheless, existing
methods struggle to maintain strict temporal consistency
and efficient memory consumption. In this work, we propose
a novel approach to enhance temporal consistency in generated videos by merging self-attention tokens across frames.
By aligning and compressing temporally redundant tokens
across frames, our method improves temporal coherence
and reduces memory consumption in self-attention computations. The merging strategy matches and aligns tokens
according to the temporal correspondence between frames,
facilitating natural temporal consistency in generated video
frames. To manage the complexity of video processing, we
divide videos into chunks and develop intra-chunk local token merging and inter-chunk global token merging, ensuring both short-term video continuity and long-term content
consistency. Our video editing approach seamlessly extends
the advancements in image editing to video editing, rendering favorable results in temporal consistency over state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [8, 9, 16, 38, 46, 47] have made significant advances in synthesizing media content, allowing for
the creation of diverse, high-quality images. However, diffusion models have yet to achieve high quality in generating videos. Due to the complexity of temporal motion in
videos, training a video diffusion model requires a massive
amount of data and computation resources. To avoid learning temporal motion from scratch, zero-shot video editing leverages a pre-trained image diffusion model to translate a source video into a new one, retaining motion from
* Corresponding Author

Input Video

Per-frame Editing

Pix2Video

VidToMe (Ours)

Figure 1. Given an input source video and a text prompt, we leverage a pre-trained image diffusion model [38] to edit the video.
The state-of-the-art zero-shot video editing approaches, e.g.,
Pix2Video [6], struggle to generate temporal consistent frames
with self-attention extension. Our proposed method merges tokens across frames, rendering higher temporal consistency.

the source video. Separately editing each frame likely results in inconsistent frames (Fig 1 Per-frame Editing). Existing video editing methods [6, 34, 51, 52, 54] typically
extend the self-attention modules of diffusion models to
process multiple frames jointly instead of separately. Despite the promise, two issues ensue with such approaches.
First, though cross-frame attention encourages a roughly
consistent appearance, the generated frames lack strict consistency in details. As human perception is sensitive to
video continuity, tiny changes or jittering between frames
can significantly degrade the quality of generated videos.
Second, including multi-frame tokens in self-attention increases memory consumption quadratically. Computing
self-attention on four frames requires 16 times larger GPU
memory than on one frame. With these limitations, state-ofthe-art video editing methods such as Pix2Video [6] struggle to generate temporal consistent videos, as shown in
Fig. 1. Thus, it is imperative to develop effective and efficient diffusion-based zero-shot video editing methods.
In this work, we present a novel method, VidToMe, to
enhance the temporal consistency of generated videos by
merging the tokens in diffusion models across video frames.

7486

