This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VSRD: Instance-Aware Volumetric Silhouette Rendering
for Weakly Supervised 3D Object Detection
Zihua Liu∗
Tokyo Institute of Technology

Hiroki Sakuma∗
T2 Inc.

Masatoshi Okutomi
Tokyo Institute of Technology

zliu@ok.sc.e.titech.ac.jp

sakuma.h@t2.auto

mxo@sc.e.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection poses a significant challenge in 3D scene understanding due to its inherently illposed nature in monocular depth estimation. Existing methods heavily rely on supervised learning using abundant
3D labels, typically obtained through expensive and laborintensive annotation on LiDAR point clouds. To tackle this
problem, we propose a novel weakly supervised 3D object
detection framework named VSRD (Volumetric Silhouette
Rendering for Detection) to train 3D object detectors without any 3D supervision but only weak 2D supervision.
VSRD consists of multi-view 3D auto-labeling and subsequent training of monocular 3D object detectors using the
pseudo labels generated in the auto-labeling stage. In the
auto-labeling stage, we represent the surface of each instance as a signed distance field (SDF) and render its silhouette as an instance mask through our proposed instanceaware volumetric silhouette rendering. To directly optimize
the 3D bounding boxes through rendering, we decompose
the SDF of each instance into the SDF of a cuboid and the
residual distance field (RDF) that represents the residual
from the cuboid. This mechanism enables us to optimize the
3D bounding boxes in an end-to-end manner by comparing
the rendered instance masks with the ground truth instance
masks. The optimized 3D bounding boxes serve as effective training data for 3D object detection. We conduct extensive experiments on the KITTI-360 dataset, demonstrating that our method outperforms the existing weakly supervised 3D object detection methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/skmhrk1209/VSRD.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is one of the most critical components
in the perception system for autonomous driving. With the
recent success of deep learning in computer vision, numerous 3D object detection methods have been proposed to
* Equal contribution. The order was determined by a coin flip.

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed weakly supervised 3D object detection framework, which consists of multi-view 3D autolabeling and subsequent training of monocular 3D object detectors
using the pseudo labels generated in the auto-labeling stage.

directly regress 3D bounding boxes from a LiDAR point
cloud, multi-view images, or a monocular image. Among
them, monocular 3D object detection is the most challenging in principle due to its inherently ill-posed nature in
monocular depth estimation. Therefore, existing methods
[22, 25, 28, 34, 35] heavily rely on supervised learning using abundant 3D labels manually annotated on LiDAR point
clouds. This annotation cost is extremely high, posing a
significant barrier to deploying 3D object detectors into autonomous driving systems.
To tackle this problem, we propose a novel weakly
supervised 3D object detection framework named VSRD
(Volumetric Silhouette Rendering for Detection) to train
3D object detectors without any 3D supervision but only
weak 2D supervision. As illustrated in Fig. 1, VSRD consists of multi-view 3D auto-labeling and subsequent training of monocular 3D object detectors using the pseudo
labels generated in the auto-labeling stage. In the autolabeling stage, we represent the surface of each 3D bounding box as a signed distance field (SDF) and render its silhouette as an instance mask through volumetric rendering.
Comparing the rendered instance masks with the ground
truth instance masks enables us to optimize the 3D bounding boxes directly. We introduce two novel mechanisms in
this auto-labeling stage. The first is the instance-aware volumetric silhouette rendering that integrates instance labels
along a ray to render the silhouette of each instance rather

17354

