This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Using Human Feedback to Fine-tune Diffusion Models
without Any Reward Model
Kai Yang1 * Jian Tao1 * Jiafei Lyu1† Chunjiang Ge2
Jiaxin Chen3 Weihan Shen3 Xiaolong Zhu3 Xiu Li1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 3 Parametrix Technology Company Ltd.
{yk22,tj22,lvjf20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Using reinforcement learning with human feedback
(RLHF) has shown significant promise in fine-tuning diffusion models. Previous methods start by training a reward
model that aligns with human preferences, then leverage
RL techniques to fine-tune the underlying models. However, crafting an efficient reward model demands extensive
datasets, optimal architecture, and manual hyperparameter tuning, making the process both time and cost-intensive.
The direct preference optimization (DPO) method, effective
in fine-tuning large language models, eliminates the necessity for a reward model. However, the extensive GPU memory requirement of the diffusion model’s denoising process
hinders the direct application of the DPO method. To address this issue, we introduce the Direct Preference for Denoising Diffusion Policy Optimization (D3PO) method to
directly fine-tune diffusion models. The theoretical analysis demonstrates that although D3PO omits training a
reward model, it effectively functions as the optimal reward model trained using human feedback data to guide
the learning process. This approach requires no training of a reward model, proving to be more direct, costeffective, and minimizing computational overhead. In experiments, our method uses the relative scale of objectives
as a proxy for human preference, delivering comparable
results to methods using ground-truth rewards. Moreover,
D3PO demonstrates the ability to reduce image distortion
rates and generate safer images, overcoming challenges
lacking robust reward models. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/yk7333/D3PO.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in image generation models have yielded
unprecedented success in producing high-quality images
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

from textual prompts [30, 44, 49]. Diverse approaches,
including Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [23],
autoregressive models [14, 15, 19, 22, 44, 58], Normalizing Flows [16, 46], and diffusion-based techniques [40,
45, 47, 49], have rapidly pushed forward the capabilities of
these systems. With the proper textual inputs, such models are now adept at crafting images that are not only visually compelling but also semantically coherent, garnering
widespread interest for their potential applications and implications.
To adapt the aforementioned models for specific downstream tasks, such as the generation of more visually appealing and aesthetic images, Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF) is commonly employed [12].
This technique has been successfully used to refine large
language models such as GPT [8, 41]. Now, efforts are being made to extend this method to diffusion models to enhance their performance. One such approach, the DDPO
method [5], aims to enhance image complexity, aesthetic
quality, and the alignment between prompts and images.
The ReLF approach [60] introduces a novel reward model,
named ImageReward, which is specifically trained to discern human aesthetic preferences in text-to-image synthesis. This model is then utilized to fine-tune diffusion models
to produce images that align more closely with human preferences. Nonetheless, developing a robust reward model
for various tasks can be challenging, often necessitating a
vast collection of images and abundant training resources.
For example, to diminish the rate of deformities in character images, one must amass a substantial dataset of deformed and non-deformed images generated from identical
prompts. Subsequently, a network is constructed to discern
and learn the human preference for non-deformed imagery,
serving as the reward model.
In the field of natural language processing, Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) has been proposed to reduce
training costs [43]. This method forgoes the training of a

8941

