This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Resurrecting Old Classes with New Data for Exemplar-Free Continual Learning
Dipam Goswami1,2 Albin Soutif–Cormerais1,2 Yuyang Liu3,4,† Sandesh Kamath1,2
Bartłomiej Twardowski1,2,5 Joost van de Weijer1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
Computer Vision Center, Barcelona 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 IDEAS-NCBR
2

{dgoswami, albin, skamath, btwardowski, joost}@cvc.uab.es, liuyuyang@sia.cn

Abstract
Continual learning methods are known to suffer from
catastrophic forgetting, a phenomenon that is particularly
hard to counter for methods that do not store exemplars of
previous tasks. Therefore, to reduce potential drift in the
feature extractor, existing exemplar-free methods are typically evaluated in settings where the first task is significantly larger than subsequent tasks. Their performance
drops drastically in more challenging settings starting with
a smaller first task. To address this problem of feature drift
estimation for exemplar-free methods, we propose to adversarially perturb the current samples such that their embeddings are close to the old class prototypes in the old model
embedding space. We then estimate the drift in the embedding space from the old to the new model using the perturbed images and compensate the prototypes accordingly.
We exploit the fact that adversarial samples are transferable
from the old to the new feature space in a continual learning
setting. The generation of these images is simple and computationally cheap. We demonstrate in our experiments that
the proposed approach better tracks the movement of prototypes in embedding space and outperforms existing methods on several standard continual learning benchmarks
as well as on fine-grained datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/dipamgoswami/ADC.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has gained widespread use in various computer vision tasks, demonstrating exceptional performance
when trained on a dataset in a single session. However, a significant challenge arises when new data is introduced incrementally in multiple phases or tasks. Then
neural networks need to adapt without forgetting previously
† Yuyang Liu is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of Adversarial Drift Compensation (ADC)
and SDC [52]. In SDC, the drift ∆kt−1−
→t is estimated as the average of drift of all new task samples after training on a new task.
Instead, we propose to move the new task features close to the old
k
prototype Pt−1
of class k by perturbing the new images using targeted adversarial attacks. The drift of the adversarial samples from
old to new feature space is used to resurrect all old prototypes.

learned information, a phenomenon known as catastrophic
forgetting [18, 30]. Recent studies in continual learning
(CL) [4, 29, 50, 54] focus on two prevalent scenarios [47]:
Task-Incremental Learning (TIL), where task information
is available during testing, and Class-Incremental Learning
(CIL), where it is not. Our work aims to address the more
challenging CIL problem.
Exemplar-based CIL methods [2, 3, 6, 8, 13, 25, 38, 49]
store small subsets of data from each task. These exemplars
are later replayed with current data during training in new
tasks. Although effective, these methods necessitate storing input data from previous tasks, leading to multiple challenges in practical settings such as legal concerns with new

28525

