This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SubT-MRS Dataset: Pushing SLAM Towards All-weather Environments
https://superodometry.com/datasets
Shibo Zhao*1 , Yuanjun Gao1 , Tianhao Wu1 , Damanpreet Singh1 , Rushan Jiang1 , Haoxiang Sun1 ,
Mansi Sarawata1 , Yuheng Qiu1 , Warren Whittaker1 , Ian Higgins1 , Yi Du2 , Shaoshu Su2 , Can Xu1 , John Keller1 ,
Jay Karhade1 , Lucas Nogueira1 , Sourojit Saha1 , Ji Zhang1 , Wenshan Wang1 , Chen Wang2 , Sebastian Scherer1
1

2

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) is a
fundamental task for numerous applications such as autonomous navigation and exploration. Despite many SLAM
datasets have been released, current SLAM solutions still
struggle to have sustained and resilient performance. One
major issue is the absence of high-quality datasets including diverse all-weather conditions and a reliable metric for
assessing robustness. This limitation significantly restricts
the scalability and generalizability of SLAM technologies,
impacting their development, validation, and deployment.
To address this problem, we present SubT-MRS, an extremely challenging real-world dataset designed to push
SLAM towards all-weather environments to pursue the most
robust SLAM performance. It contains multi-degraded environments including over 30 diverse scenes such as structureless corridors, varying lighting conditions, and perceptual obscurants like smoke and dust; multimodal sensors
such as LiDAR, fisheye camera, IMU, and thermal camera;
and multiple locomotions like aerial, legged, and wheeled
robots. We developed accuracy and robustness evaluation
tracks for SLAM and introduced novel robustness metrics.
Comprehensive studies are performed, revealing new observations, challenges, and opportunities for future research.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is essential in robotics since it provides foundational perception and
spatial awareness, and enables machines to understand and
interact with the physical world in real-time. Therefore,
it has a wide range of applications such as autonomous
driving and space exploration. Despite significant advancements in both geometric [5, 34, 41] and data-driven SLAM
methods [43, 48], existing solutions remain fragile in challenging conditions. One main reason is that existing SLAM
* Corresponding author: shiboz@andrew.cmu.edu

University at Buffalo

algorithms are often developed and evaluated with datasets
from controlled environments [3, 12, 18, 21, 33, 35, 39, 54].
For example, KITTI [18, 21] dataset is mostly collected in
sunny weather and EuROC-MAV dataset [3] is collected in
small well-lit rooms. These datasets, unfortunately, fail to
capture the challenges in real-world scenarios, hindering the
development of robust SLAM solutions.
To bridge this gap and push SLAM towards all-weather
environments, we present an extremely challenging dataset,
SubT-MRS, including scenarios featuring various sensor
degradation, aggressive locomotions, and extreme-weather
conditions. The SubT-MRS dataset comprises 3 years of
data from the DARPA Subterranean (SubT) Challenge [1]
(2019−2021) and extends with an additional 2 years of diverse environments (2022−2023), containing mixed indoor
and outdoor settings, including long corridors, off-road scenario, tunnels, caves, deserts, forests, and bushlands. Cumulatively, this forms a 5-year dataset encompassing over
500 hours and 100 kilometers of terrain subjected to multimodal sensors including LiDAR, fisheye cameras, depth
cameras, thermal cameras, and IMU; heterogeneous platforms including RC cars, legged robots, aerial robots, and
wheeled robots; and extreme obscurant conditions such
as dense fog, dust, smoke, and heavy snow.
Additionally, we find there is no well-established metric
to evaluate the robustness of a SLAM system. Existing evaluation metrics such as absolute trajectory error (ATE) [3]
are not representative of the actual performance in robotic
applications. We argue that to ensure the safety control of
a robot, SLAM system evaluation should not only focus
on poses but also its velocity. Taking robot localization as
an example, while a momentary pose error spike may only
slightly undermine the overall ATE, however, it can lead to
a catastrophic crash in an aerial robotic platform. To effectively gauge the performance of a SLAM algorithm, we
introduce a new robustness metric to evaluate the reliability
of the SLAM system, particularly examining smoothness
and accuracy of velocity estimation.

22647

