This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-Scale Transformer for Large-Scale Single-Pixel Imaging
Xin Yuan1,†
Ping Wang1,2, *
Gang Qu1, *
1
School of Engineering, Westlake University 2 Zhejiang University
{qugang,wangping,xyuan}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Single-pixel imaging (SPI) is a potential computational
imaging technique which produces image by solving an illposed reconstruction problem from few measurements captured by a single-pixel detector. Deep learning has achieved
impressive success on SPI reconstruction. However, previous poor reconstruction performance and impractical imaging model limit its real-world applications. In this paper,
we propose a deep unfolding network with hybrid-attention
Transformer on Kronecker SPI model, dubbed HATNet, to improve the imaging quality of real SPI cameras. Specifically,
we unfold the computation graph of the iterative shrinkagethresholding algorithm (ISTA) into two alternative modules:
efficient tensor gradient descent and hybrid-attention multiscale denoising. By virtue of Kronecker SPI, the gradient
descent module can avoid high computational overheads
rooted in previous gradient descent modules based on vectorized SPI. The denoising module is an encoder-decoder architecture powered by dual-scale spatial attention for high- and
low-frequency aggregation and channel attention for global
information recalibration. Moreover, we build a SPI prototype to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real data demonstrate
that our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance.
The source code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/Gang-Qu/HATNet-SPI.

1. Introduction
Conventional imaging technology produces images by exploiting the light reflected or scattered by an object on a
two-dimensional (2D) CCD or CMOS detector with millions of pixels. But in applications, such as the infrared or
deep ultraviolet sensing, the availability of pixelated array
detectors becomes expensive or impractical. As an alternative solution, single-pixel imaging (SPI) utilizes just one
light-sensitive single-pixel detector (SPD) to record the total intensity of the reflected or scattered light encoded by
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) Our built SPI prototype (OL: objective lens, DMD:
digital micromirror device, DAQ card: data acquisition card). (b)
Performance comparison of different methods on Set11 dataset at
different sampling ratios. (c) Real experimental results of different
methods at sampling ratio of 25%.

temporally varying modulation patterns from a spatial light
modulator, yielding compressed measurements, and the desired image can be estimated from the captured (compressed)
measurements via iterative optimization algorithms or a deep
learning model. SPI camera offers advantages over conventional cameras, such as improved detection efficiency, lower
dark counts, and faster timing response. Such advantages
can have significance in scenarios where the detected intensities are very weak due to scattering or absorption losses.
Moreover, SPI camera is capable of sensing compressively
during data acquisition, thereby reducing the data storage
and communication bandwidth requirements. During the last
decade, SPI has been widely used in 3D imaging [45], hyperspectral imaging [56], X-ray diffraction tomography [15],
magnetic resonance imaging [16], ophthalmic imaging [27]
and imaging in non-visible wavebands [18] or through scattering media [73].
SPI is driven from the compressive sensing (CS) [5, 10,
52, 53, 63–65] theory. In CS paradigm, a 1D signal x ∈ N
is compressively sampled into few measurements y ∈ M

R
R

25327

