This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RTracker: Recoverable Tracking via PN Tree Structured Memory
Yuqing Huang1,2 , Xin Li2,∗ , Zikun Zhou2 , Yaowei Wang2 , Zhenyu He1,∗ , and Ming-Hsuan Yang3,4
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
UC Merced 4 Yonsei University
{domaingreen2, xinlihitsz, zhouzikunhit, minghsuanyang}@gmail.com,

Abstract
Existing tracking methods mainly focus on learning better target representation or developing more robust prediction models to improve tracking performance. While
tracking performance has significantly improved, the target
loss issue occurs frequently due to tracking failures, complete occlusion, or out-of-view situations. However, considerably less attention is paid to the self-recovery issue
of tracking methods, which is crucial for practical applications. To this end, we propose a recoverable tracking
framework, RTracker, that uses a tree-structured memory
to dynamically associate a tracker and a detector to enable
self-recovery ability. Specifically, we propose a PositiveNegative Tree-structured memory to chronologically store
and maintain positive and negative target samples. Upon
the PN tree memory, we develop corresponding walking
rules for determining the state of the target and define a
set of control flows to unite the tracker and the detector in
different tracking scenarios. Our core idea is to use the
support samples of positive and negative target categories
to establish a relative distance-based criterion for a reliable assessment of target loss. The favorable performance
in comparison against the state-of-the-art methods on numerous challenging benchmarks demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm. All the source code and
trained models will be released at https://github.
com/NorahGreen/RTracker.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking aims to estimate the location and extent of a target in a video sequence based on the bounding box annotation of the target given in the initial frame,
which is a fundamental vision task with a wide range of
applications, such as surveillance and autonomous navigation. The challenges in visual object tracking stem from
∗ corresponding author

Viewpoint Change Out of View Full Occlusion Full Occlusion

wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn

Target visible

Target lost

Target recovering

#78

#136

#182

#3829

#3854

#3881

#3348

#3372

#3393

#1

#1030

#1032

—— RTracker —— MixViT —— SeqTrack ——OSTrack —— Ground-truth

Figure 1. Performance on challenging sequences involving full
occlusion, out-of-view, and viewpoint change. The proposed
RTracker can accurately re-track the targets in these sequences after their reappearance.

the dramatic variations of the target (e.g. rotation, deformation, and fast motion) and the various influences from
the background (e.g. occlusion, illumination variation, and
out-of-view) [35]. Existing tracking methods usually focus on learning robust target representation [4, 6, 21–23]
or developing robust prediction models [2, 20, 30, 31, 41]
to handle these tracking challenges and prevent target loss.
However, target loss, which can be caused by full occlusion, out-of-view, or tracking failure, is usually inevitable,
especially during long-term tracking in complex real-world
application scenarios. Currently, considerably less attention
is paid to the issue of how to recover tracking from target
loss, which is becoming a bottleneck limiting the practical
application of tracking algorithms.
Enabling self-recovery capability in a tracking model
is challenging since it first needs to accurately determine

19038

