This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Spline Fields for Burst Image Fusion and Layer Separation
Ilya Chugunov

David Shustin

Ruyu Yan

Chenyang Lei

Felix Heide

Princeton University

Abstract
Each photo in an image burst can be considered a sample of a complex 3D scene: the product of parallax, diffuse
and specular materials, scene motion, and illuminant variation. While decomposing all of these effects from a stack
of misaligned images is a highly ill-conditioned task, the
conventional align-and-merge burst pipeline takes the other
extreme: blending them into a single image. In this work,
we propose a versatile intermediate representation: a twolayer alpha-composited image plus flow model constructed
with neural spline fields – networks trained to map input
coordinates to spline control points. Our method is able
to, during test-time optimization, jointly fuse a burst image
capture into one high-resolution reconstruction and decompose it into transmission and obstruction layers. Then, by
discarding the obstruction layer, we can perform a range
of tasks including seeing through occlusions, reflection suppression, and shadow removal. Tested on complex in-thewild captures we find that, with no post-processing steps
or learned priors, our generalizable model is able to outperform existing dedicated single-image and multi-view obstruction removal approaches.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, as digital photos have increasingly
been produced by smartphones, smartphone photos have increasingly been produced by burst fusion. To compensate
for less-than-ideal camera hardware – typically restricted
to a footprint of less than 1cm3 [6] – smartphones rely on
their advanced compute hardware to process and fuse multiple lower-quality images into a high-fidelity photo [10].
This proves particularly important in low-light and highdynamic-range settings [22, 39], where a single image must
compromise between noise and motion blur, but multiple images afford the opportunity to minimize both [26].
But even as mobile night- and astro-photography applications [16, 17] use increasingly long sequences of photos
as input, their output remains a static single-plane image.
Given the typically non-static and non-planar nature of the
real world, a core problem in burst image pipelines is thus

Burst Capture

Input Scene

Neural Spline Field

Layer Separation

Recovered Obstruction + Transmission

Figure 1. Fitting our two-layer neural spline field model to a stack
of images we’re able to directly estimate and separate even severe,
out-of-focus obstructions to recover hidden scene content.

the alignment [32, 45] and aggregation [5, 63] of pixels into
an image array – referred to as the align-and-merge process.
While existing approaches treat pixel motion as a source
of noise and artifacts, a parallel direction of work [9, 20, 69]
attempts to extract useful parallax cues from this pixel motion to estimate the geometry of the scene. Recent work by
Chugunov et al. [8] finds that maximizing the photometric
consistency of an RGB plus depth neural field model of an
image sequence is enough to distill dense depth estimates
of the scene. While this method is able to jointly estimate
high-quality camera motion parameters, it does not perform
high-quality image reconstruction, and rather treats its image model as “a vehicle for depth optimization” [8]. In contrast, work by Nam et al. [50] proposes a neural field fitting approach for multi-image fusion and layer separation
which focuses on the quality of the reconstructed “canonical view”. By swapping in different motion models, they
can separate and remove layers such as occlusions, reflections, and moiré patterns during image reconstruction – as
opposed to in a separate post-processing step [19, 54]. This
approach, however, does not make use of a realistic cam-

25763

