This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FCS: Feature Calibration and Separation for Non-Exemplar Class Incremental
Learning

1

Qiwei Li1, 2 , Yuxin Peng1 , Jiahuan Zhou1 *
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
2
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
{lqw, pengyuxin, jiahuanzhou}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Non-Exemplar Class Incremental Learning (NECIL) involves learning a classiﬁcation model on a sequence of
data without access to exemplars from previously encountered old classes. Such a stringent constraint always leads
to catastrophic forgetting of the learned knowledge. Currently, existing methods either employ knowledge distillation techniques or preserved class prototypes to sustain
prior knowledge. However, two critical issues still persist. On the one hand, as the model is continually updated,
the preserved prototypes of old classes will inevitably derive from the suitable location in the feature space of the
new model. On the other hand, due to the lack of exemplars, the features of new classes will take the place of
similar old classes which breaks the classiﬁcation boundary. To address these challenges, we propose a Feature
Calibration and Separation (FCS) method for NECIL. Our
approach comprises a Feature Calibration Network (FCN)
that adapts prototypes of old classes to the new model
via optimal transport learning, approximating the drift of
prototypes caused by model evolution. Additionally, we
also propose a Prototype-Involved Contrastive Loss (PIC)
that enhances feature separation among different classes.
Speciﬁcally, to mitigate the boundary distortion arising
from the interplay of classes from different learning stages,
prototypes are involved in pushing the feature of new classes
away from the old classes. Extensive experiments on three
datasets with different settings have demonstrated the superiority of our FCS method against the state-of-the-art
class incremental learning approaches. Code is available
at https://github.com/zhoujiahuan1991/CVPR2024-FCS.

1. Introduction
As a milestone research task in computer vision, image
classiﬁcation has consistently attracted substantial attention
* Corresponding author

Paradigm of non-exemplar class incremental learning (NECIL)
Model for stage ࢚

Model for stage ࢚ െ1
ࢌ࢚ି૚

ࢍ࢚ି૚

ࢌ࢚

ࢍ࢚࢕

ࢍ࢚࢔

Classification head

Four aspects of catastrophic forgetting in NECIL
(1) Change of feature extractor ሺࢌ࢚ି૚ ǡ ࢌ࢚ ሻ

Unconstrained model
change

Mitigate by
knowledge distillation

(3) Sub-optimal interaction between ࢌ࢚ and ࢍ࢕࢚

Inconsistent between
evolving model
and fixed prototypes

Mitigate by
prototype calibration

Feature of old class
extracted by old model
Feature of old class
extracted by new model

(2) Change of classification head ሺࢍ࢚ି૚ ǡ ࢍ࢕࢚ ሻ

Lack of old
feature

Mitigate by retaining
prototypes

(4) Intersection between ࢍ࢕࢚ and ࢍ࢔࢚

Feature space
overlap

Feature of new class
extracted by new model
Maintained prototypes
Calibrated prototypes

Mitigate by
contrastive learning
Classification boundary
Feature Calibration
Feature Separation

Figure 1. Four main aspects of forgetting in NECIL. Existing
methods mostly focus on retaining knowledge by knowledge distillation and prototypes. However, the sub-optimal interaction between the feature extractor and classiﬁcation head as well as the
intersection between classiﬁcation heads may also cause catastrophic forgetting. So we propose a prototype calibration network
and a prototype-involved contrastive loss to handle this issue.

over time [6, 7, 20]. Conventional deep learning-based
models are designed to learn from static data [12, 18],
assuming that the entire training data of all classes are
available at once. When dealing with dynamic and evolving data streams, the performance of previously learned
classes severely degrades, leading to a phenomenon known
as catastrophic forgetting [8]. To handle this issue, inspired
by the natural way that humans continually acquire knowledge throughout their lives, Incremental Learning (IL) [40]

28495

