This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPIDeRS: Structured Polarization for Invisible Depth and Reflectance Sensing
Tomoki Ichikawa
Shohei Nobuhara
Ko Nishino
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

RGB images

AoLPs

Depth map

Normal map

Relighting

Figure 1. We propose structured polarization, a novel invisible 3D sensing method using polarized light with per-pixel modulation of the
angle of linear polarization. The method enables completely stealth measurement of 3D shape, surface normals, and reflectance.

Abstract
Can we capture shape and reflectance in stealth? Such
capability would be valuable for many application domains
in vision, xR, robotics, and HCI. We introduce structured
polarization for invisible depth and reflectance sensing
(SPIDeRS), the first depth and reflectance sensing method
using patterns of polarized light. The key idea is to modulate the angle of linear polarization (AoLP) of projected
light at each pixel. The use of polarization makes it invisible and lets us recover not only depth but also directly surface normals and even reflectance. We implement SPIDeRS
with a liquid crystal spatial light modulator (SLM) and a
polarimetric camera. We derive a novel method for robustly extracting the projected structured polarization pattern from the polarimetric object appearance. We evaluate the effectiveness of SPIDeRS by applying it to a number
of real-world objects. The results show that our method
successfully reconstructs object shapes of various materials and is robust to diffuse reflection and ambient light. We
also demonstrate relighting using recovered surface normals and reflectance. We believe SPIDeRS opens a new
avenue of polarization use in visual sensing.

1. Introduction
Depth sensing has been a central topic of research in computer vision since its inception. Due to its many downstream applications, a variety of approaches have been explored. Structured light, in particular, is a practical method

that achieves high accuracy, which has enjoyed commercial
success in various forms. It exploits the duality of a projector with a camera and replaces one or more of a binocular
or multiview stereo with a projector. By throwing known
light patterns to the target, dense and accurate correspondences are established for triangulation. This is particularly
useful for real-world objects which are often featureless and
cannot be handled with camera stereopsis alone. Its ease of
setup in addition to its dense reconstruction has made structured light a go-to approach in many applications, even for
ground truth acquisition for 3D reconstruction research.
Structured light, however, alters the appearance of the
target as the pattern on the surface needs to be visible to the
camera. This is undesirable for many applications outside
the research lab or an industrial plant. For instance, such
visible patterns would be distracting in xR systems. For
this, many structured light implementations rely on infrared
(IR) light and their extension to time-of-flight (ToF) sensing
[16, 33] as IR light is invisible to the naked eye. IR systems,
however, cannot be used for recovering surface properties
such as texture and reflectance as they are different in IR
from those in the visual spectrum.
Can we make shape and texture capture invisible? Is
there a way to simultaneously recover the reflectance of the
target such that we can even relight the object? Such a system will make real-world object capture for downstream
applications completely stealth, creating a large opportunity for effective communication (xR systems), advertisement, robotics, art, and nondestructive inspection, such as
live scene editing and always-on change detection.

25077

