This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PACER+: On-Demand Pedestrian Animation Controller in Driving Scenarios
Jingbo Wang1∗ Zhengyi Luo2∗ Ye Yuan3 Yixuan Li4 Bo Dai1
1

Shanghai AI Lab 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 NVIDIA 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
* Donates Equal Contribution

Upper Body Reference

Whole Body Reference

Frame 15
(1) Upper Body Motion

Frame 22

Frame 60

(2) Whole Body Motion (3) Missing Frame

Time Steps

(3)

(2)

(1)

(a) Rich body control with trajectory and terrain compatibility

(b) Zero-shot animation recreation from real-world videos

Figure 1. We showcase the effectiveness of our proposed framework in synthetic and real-world driving scenarios. Our framework excels
at generating physically realistic animations that adhere to provided trajectories while offering extensive control over the upper and full
body movements. Additionally, our framework demonstrates the remarkable ability to recreate pedestrian animations with occlusions from
real-world videos in a zero-shot manner. These inherent capabilities make our framework a robust and versatile approach foron-demand
pedestrian animation in driving scenarios.

Abstract
We address the challenge of content diversity and controllability in pedestrian simulation for driving scenarios.
Recent pedestrian animation frameworks have a significant
limitation wherein they primarily focus on either following
trajectory [48] or the content of the reference video [60],
consequently overlooking the potential diversity of human
motion within such scenarios. This limitation restricts the
ability to generate pedestrian behaviors that exhibit a wider
range of variations and realistic motions and therefore restricts its usage to provide rich motion content for other
components in the driving simulation system, e.g., suddenly
changed motion to which the autonomous vehicle should
respond. In our approach, we strive to surpass the limitation by showcasing diverse human motions obtained from
various sources, such as generated human motions, in addition to following the given trajectory. The fundamental
contribution of our framework lies in combining the motion
tracking task with trajectory following, which enables the
tracking of specific motion parts (e.g., upper body) while
simultaneously following the given trajectory by a single
policy. This way, we significantly enhance both the diversity of simulated human motion within the given scenario
and the controllability of the content, including languagebased control. Our framework facilitates the generation of

a wide range of human motions, contributing to greater realism and adaptability in pedestrian simulations for driving
scenarios.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicle (AV) simulation systems have gained
increasing attention, given their potential to help develop
safe and adaptable self-driving algorithms. One of its crucial functionalities is creating realistic and diverse pedestrian animations to train self-driving algorithms to react to
a diverse array of human behaviors. It can be crucial for the
safety of AV since subtle changes in pedestrians’ moving directions or gestures could entail large changes in vehicle behaviors. However, despite the promising results [5, 47, 54]
of the background scene and vehicle motion creation in the
current simulation system, the performance of pedestrian
animation still lags behind.
While state-of-the-art pedestrian animation methods often use keyframe animations authored by artists [36], they
lack the proper reaction to the scene geometry due to the
absence of the laws of physics. Recent physics simulationbased pedestrian animation method [48] can create pedestrian animations that are human-like, physically plausible,
and conform to the geometry of the scene. Yet its animation

718

