This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaCloak: Preventing Unauthorized Subject-driven Text-to-image
Diffusion-based Synthesis via Meta-learning
Yixin Liu1,3 * Chenrui Fan2 Yutong Dai1 Xun Chen3 Pan Zhou2 Lichao Sun1
1
Lehigh University 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Samsung Research America
yila22@lehigh.edu, {fancr0422, panzhou}@hust.edu.cn
{yud319, lis221}@lehigh.edu, Xun.chen@samsung.com

Ours

Abstract
Clean
Image

Text-to-image diffusion models allow seamless generation of personalized images from scant reference photos. Yet,
these tools, in the wrong hands, can fabricate misleading
or harmful content, endangering individuals. To address
this problem, existing poisoning-based approaches perturb
user images in an imperceptible way to render them "unlearnable" from malicious uses. We identify two limitations
of these defending approaches: i) sub-optimal due to the
hand-crafted heuristics for solving the intractable bilevel
optimization and ii) lack of robustness against simple data
transformations like Gaussian filtering. To solve these challenges, we propose MetaCloak, which solves the bi-level
poisoning problem with a meta-learning framework with an
additional transformation sampling process to craft transferable and robust perturbation. Specifically, we employ
a pool of surrogate diffusion models to craft transferable
and model-agnostic perturbation. Furthermore, by incorporating an additional transformation process, we design a
simple denoising-error maximization loss that is sufficient
for causing transformation-robust semantic distortion and
degradation in a personalized generation. Extensive experiments on the VGGFace2 and CelebA-HQ datasets show
that MetaCloak outperforms existing approaches. Notably,
MetaCloak can successfully fool online training services like
Replicate, in a black-box manner, demonstrating the effectiveness of MetaCloak in real-world scenarios. Our code is
available at https://github.com/liuyixin-louis/MetaCloak.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models achieve significant success in a wide range
of applications, including image generation [8, 16, 51], image editing [6, 23, 50], and text-to-image synthesis [42].
* This work was done during Yixin’s internship at Samsung Research
America.

“a photo of sks person”

Transformations
Purification

Unusable
Generation

Perturbed
Image
Cropping

Flipping
Personalized
text-to-image

Successful
Manipulation

Smoothing

Previous Works

Figure 1. Image protected by existing methods fails to fool personalized text-to-image approaches after applying data transformations.
In contrast, our MetaCloak is still robust in such adversity.

Subject-driven text-to-image synthesis, an emerging application of diffusion models, in particular, has attracted considerable attention due to its potential to generate personalized
images from a few reference photos. Among the approaches
proposed to achieve this goal [38, 46], DreamBooth [44]
and Text Inversion [13] are two prominent training-based
methods that offer impressive personalize generation ability.
With an additional lightweight model fine-tuning process
for capturing the subject or a concept-related embedding
training phase, personalized diffusion models can retain the
generation capacity from the pre-training stage and conduct
vivid personalized generation. While these methods empower high-quality personalized generation, they also raise
privacy concerns as they can fabricate misleading or harmful content in the wrong hands, endangering individuals.
For example, recent news [3, 21, 35] indicates that AI tools
like diffusion models have been employed to generate fake
profiles of individuals for launching a new wave of fraud.
To tackle these issues, some poisoning-based approaches
[26, 28] have been recently proposed to perturb user images
in an imperceptible way to render them “unlearnable” from

24219

