This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Handwritten Mathematical Expressions From Symbol Graphs:
An End-to-End Pipeline

1

Yu Chen1,∗ , Fei Gao2,∗ , Yanguang Zhang3 , Maoying Qiao4 , Nannan Wang5,†
Beijing Waiyan Online Digital Technology; 2 Hangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University
3
Hangzhou Dianzi University; 4 University of Technology, Sydney (UTS); 5 Xidian University
{fgao, nnwang}@xidian.edu.cn, ppak1991@outlook.com, maoying.qiao@uts.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we explore a novel challenging generation task, i.e. Handwritten Mathematical Expression Generation (HMEG) from symbolic sequences. Since symbolic
sequences are naturally graph-structured data, we formulate HMEG as a graph-to-image (G2I) generation problem.
Unlike the generation of natural images, HMEG requires
critic layout clarity for synthesizing correct and recognizable formulas, but has no real masks available to supervise the learning process. To alleviate this challenge, we
propose a novel end-to-end G2I generation pipeline (i.e.
graph → layout → mask → image), which requires no
real masks or nondifferentiable alignment between layouts
and masks. Technically, to boost the capacity of predicting
detailed relations among adjacent symbols, we propose a
Less-is-More (LiM) learning strategy. In addition, we design a differentiable layout refinement module, which maps
bounding boxes to pixel-level soft masks, so as to further alleviate ambiguous layout areas. Our whole model, including layout prediction, mask refinement, and image generation, can be jointly optimized in an end-to-end manner. Experimental results show that, our model can generate highquality HME images, and outperforms previous generative
methods. Besides, a series of ablations study demonstrate
effectiveness of the proposed techniques. Finally, we validate that our generated images promisingly boosts the performance of HME recognition models, through data augmentation. Our code and results are available at: https:
//github.com/AiArt-HDU/HMEG.

1. Introduction
Handwritten Mathematical Expressions (HMEs) are common and play significant roles in our daily life, especially in
the research and education areas. HMEs generally present
complex structures, serious deformations, and diverse writ∗ Equal Contributions. † Corresponding Author.

Stage-II
human

(a)

ride
horse

Scene
Graph
2

(b)

sup
x

Symbol
Graph

Layout
Prediction

Mask
Prediction

real
layout
real
mask
Stage-I

Layout
Prediction

Image
Decoder

real
image

Image
real
image

real
layout
Layout
Discriminator

BBox-to-Mask
Transformation

Image
Decoder

Image

Figure 1. Differences between (a) typical two-stage graph-toimage generation pipeline and (b) our end-to-end pipeline. In
previous methods, the real masks are available as the input. In
contrast, we propose a novel end-to-end pipeline of graph →
layout → mask → image, and requires no real masks or nondifferentiable alignment between layouts and masks.

Input
Graph

BBox
Indices

End-to-end Training

ing styles. Such characteristics, along with data scarcity,
make HME Recognition (HMER) a grand challenge in the
OCR community. Despite the tremendous efforts that have
been made to this task, the HMER performance is still unsatisfactory [14, 27, 62].
Recently, synthetic data augmentation has shown inspiring performance in various recognition tasks [23, 51]. This
is mainly achieved by the remarkable progress of conditional image generation [21] in the past few years [58]. The
advances allow for creating realistic images through texts
[39, 57, 66], scene graphs [24, 60], layouts [28, 69], semantic masks [37, 72], sketches [61, 67], and more [12, 65].
However, there has been no effective generative model for
generating high-quality HME images.
Some previous works synthesize HMEs by recomposing real online HMEs [46, 59]. Besides, FormulaGAN
[41] generates HMEs from rendered images, via an Imageto-Image (I2I) Translation model. However, their generated images are limited in either diversity or realism. Be-

15675

