This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAP: MAsk-Pruning for Source-Free Model Intellectual Property Protection
Boyang Peng1 ,* Sanqing Qu1 * , Yong Wu1 , Tianpei Zou1 , Lianghua He1 ,
Alois Knoll2 , Guang Chen1†, Changjun Jiang1
1

Tongji University, 2 Technical University of Munich

Abstract

Unauthorized

(a)

Deep learning has achieved remarkable progress in various applications, heightening the importance of safeguarding the intellectual property (IP) of well-trained models. It
entails not only authorizing usage but also ensuring the deployment of models in authorized data domains, i.e., making
models exclusive to certain target domains. Previous methods necessitate concurrent access to source training data
and target unauthorized data when performing IP protection, making them risky and inefficient for decentralized private data. In this paper, we target a practical setting where
only a well-trained source model is available and investigate how we can realize IP protection. To achieve this, we
propose a novel MAsk Pruning (MAP) framework. MAP
stems from an intuitive hypothesis, i.e., there are targetrelated parameters in a well-trained model, locating and
pruning them is the key to IP protection. Technically, MAP
freezes the source model and learns a target-specific binary
mask to prevent unauthorized data usage while minimizing
performance degradation on authorized data. Moreover, we
introduce a new metric aimed at achieving a better balance
between source and target performance degradation. To
verify the effectiveness and versatility, we have evaluated
MAP in a variety of scenarios, including vanilla sourceavailable, practical source-free, and challenging data-free.
Extensive experiments indicate that MAP yields new stateof-the-art performance. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/ispc-lab/MAP.

1. Introduction
With the growing popularity of deep learning in various
applications (such as autonomous driving, medical robotics,
virtual reality, etc), the commercial significance of this technology has soared. However, obtaining well-trained models is a resource-intensive process. It requires considerable
time, labor, and substantial investment in terms of dedicated architecture design [12, 18], large-scale high-quality
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author: guangchen@tongji.edu.cn

Unauthorized

(b)

Generalization Area Domain

Generalization Area Domain
①
②

Transferable

Stealer
Authorized
Domain

Data Space

Source Domain Datasets

Authorized
Domain

Data Space

Source-Free & Data-Free

Figure 1. An illustration of model IP protection in source-free
and data-free situations. (a) The original model is well-trained in
the authorized (source) domain, with a wide generalization area
that allows illegal access to the model through unauthorized (target) domains. (b) Two methods are shown: (1) Source-free IP
protection, which removes an unauthorized domain from the generalization area without using source datasets; and (2) Data-Free
IP protection, which cannot access any datasets but reduces the
generalization area, preventing illegal knowledge transfer.

data [10, 21], and expensive computational resources [58].
Consequently, safeguarding the intellectual property (IP) of
well-trained models has received significant concern.
Previous studies on IP protection mainly focus on ownership verification [3, 23, 47] and usage authorization [16,
38], i.e., verifying who owns the model and authorizing who
has permission to use it. Despite some effectiveness, these
methods are vulnerable to fine-tuning or re-training. Moreover, authorized users retain the freedom to apply the model
to any data without restrictions. Consequently, they effortlessly transfer high-performance models to similar tasks,
leading to hidden infringement. Therefore, comprehensive
IP protection requires a thorough consideration of applicability authorization. It entails not only authorizing usage but
also preventing the usage of unauthorized data.
The primary challenge lies in the fact that the generalization region of well-trained models typically encompasses some unauthorized domains (as depicted in Fig. 1
(a)). It arises from the models’ innate ability to capture
domain-invariant features, thereby leading to potential applicability IP infringements. An intuitive solution is to
make the generalization bound of models more explicit

23585

