This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MM-Narrator: Narrating Long-form Videos with
Multimodal In-Context Learning
π

∫

Chaoyi Zhang *

Kevin Lin

Zhengyuan Yang

∫

Jianfeng Wang

∂

Lijuan Wang

∫

Chung-Ching Lin
π

Zicheng Liu
∫

∫

∫

Linjie Li

∫

∂

University of Sydney
Microsoft
Advanced Micro Devices
https://MM-Narrator.github.io

Figure 1. We present MM-Narrator, a training-free framework towards automatic audio description (AD) generation for long-form videos
via iterations: for each scene, it perceives multimodal inputs (i.e., seeing visual frames and hearing character dialogues), recalls the
context AD depicting past scenes, and infers AD prediction for the current scene. Zoom in for details.

Abstract
We present MM-Narrator, a novel system leveraging
GPT-4 with multimodal in-context learning for the generation of audio descriptions (AD). Unlike previous methods
that primarily focused on downstream fine-tuning with short
video clips, MM-Narrator excels in generating precise audio descriptions for videos of extensive lengths, even beyond hours, in an autoregressive manner. This capability
is made possible by the proposed memory-augmented generation process, which effectively utilizes both the short*

Work done during internship at Microsoft.

term textual context and long-term visual memory through
an efficient register-and-recall mechanism. These contextual memories compile pertinent past information, including storylines and character identities, ensuring an accurate tracking and depicting of story-coherent and charactercentric audio descriptions. Maintaining the training-free
design of MM-Narrator, we further propose a complexitybased demonstration selection strategy to largely enhance
its multi-step reasoning capability via few-shot multimodal
in-context learning (MM-ICL). Experimental results on
MAD-eval dataset demonstrate that MM-Narrator consistently outperforms both the existing fine-tuning-based approaches and LLM-based approaches in most scenarios,

13647

