This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NightCC: Nighttime Color Constancy via Adaptive Channel Masking
Shuwei Li
National University of Singapore
shuwei@u.nus.edu

Robby T. Tan
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services
National University of Singapore
robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Nighttime conditions pose a significant challenge to
color constancy due to the diversity of lighting conditions
and the presence of substantial low-light noise. Existing
color constancy methods struggle with nighttime scenes,
frequently leading to imprecise light color estimations. To
tackle nighttime color constancy, we propose a novel unsupervised domain adaptation approach that utilizes labeled
daytime data to facilitate learning on unlabeled nighttime
images. To specifically address the unique lighting conditions of nighttime and ensure the robustness of pseudo labels, we propose adaptive channel masking and light uncertainty. By selectively masking channels that are less sensitive to lighting conditions, adaptive channel masking directs the model to progressively focus on features less affected by variations in light colors and noise. Additionally, our model leverages light uncertainty to provide a
pixel-wise uncertainty estimation regarding light color prediction, which helps avoid learning from incorrect labels.
Our model demonstrates a significant improvement in accuracy, achieving 21.5% lower Mean Angular Error (MAE)
compared to the state-of-the-art method on our nighttime
dataset.

Figure 1. The comparison between our method and state-of-theart methods on a nighttime outdoor image with complex lighting
conditions. Unlike both supervised and unsupervised methods, our
model is more effective in removing the majority of color casts.

1. Introduction
Most existing color constancy methods are designed under
the assumption of well-lit conditions, a scenario that contrasts with typical nighttime settings. The differences arise
from the more complex lighting conditions and significant
low-light noise present in nighttime images. Consequently,
when applied to nighttime scenes, existing methods yield
suboptimal results, as shown in Fig. 1.
Traditional approaches, ranging from low-level statistical analysis (e.g., [10, 27, 40]) to physics-based methods
(e.g., [14, 15, 39, 43]), are mostly tailored for single light
color settings. In common nighttime scenarios with multiple light colors, they tend to fail to estimate all the light
colors. While some methods can handle multiple light col-

ors [8, 9, 17, 34], they are constrained by the necessity to
assume the number of light colors, compromising their performances.
Deep-learning-based methods (e.g., [1, 6, 19, 32, 37])
achieve superior performance on well-lit images by relying on training with labeled data. However, existing
datasets [3, 11, 23, 26] are primarily collected under singlelight daytime or multi-light indoor conditions. In contrast,
nighttime scenes present a more uneven distribution of light
colors and significant low-light noise. This discrepancy creates a significant domain gap, leading to inaccurate light
color estimations in nighttime conditions. A straightforward approach to address this issue would be to create a

25522

