This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-Enhanced Coreset Selection with Class-wise Collaboration for Online
Blurry Class Incremental Learning

1

Yutian Luo1 , Shiqi Zhao2 , Haoran Wu2 , Zhiwu Lu1, *
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
China Unicom Research Institute, Beijing, China
{luoyutian2021, luzhiwu}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional online class incremental learning assumes
class sets in different tasks are disjoint. However, recent
works have shifted towards a more realistic scenario where
tasks have shared classes, creating blurred task boundaries.
Under this setting, although existing approaches could be
directly applied, challenges like data imbalance and varying class-wise data volumes complicate the critical coreset
selection used for replay. To tackle these challenges, we
introduce DECO (Dual-Enhanced Coreset Selection with
Class-wise Collaboration), an approach that starts by establishing a class-wise balanced memory to address data
imbalances, followed by a tailored class-wise gradientbased similarity scoring system for refined coreset selection
strategies with reasonable score guidance to all classes.
DECO is distinguished by two main strategies: (1) Collaborative Diverse Score Guidance that mitigates biased
knowledge in less-exposed classes through guidance from
well-established classes, simultaneously consolidating the
knowledge in the established classes to enhance overall stability. (2) Adaptive Similarity Score Constraint that relaxes
constraints between class types, boosting learning plasticity for less-exposed classes and assisting well-established
classes in defining clearer boundaries, thereby improving
overall plasticity. Overall, DECO helps effectively identify
critical coreset samples, improving learning stability and
plasticity across all classes. Extensive experiments are conducted on four benchmark datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of DECO over other competitors
under this online blurry class incremental learning setting.

1. Introduction
Online class incremental learning (OCIL) [25, 37] presents
a practical challenge that a model needs to acquire new
knowledge while retaining previously learned information,
using most of the stream data only once. Recent works [6,
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the data distribution under blurry setting.
All classes are shared and the major classes vary across all tasks.

20] point out that traditional OCIL, with disjoint class distribution across tasks, ignores the real-world scenarios where
classes are shared across tasks and major classes vary across
tasks. To mimic such scenarios, an online blurry class incremental learning (OBCIL) setting [6] is proposed. We show
this setting in Figure 1 and follow it for further research.
Among the existing OCIL methods that can be directly
applied to the OBCIL scenario, rehearsal-based methods are
predominant due to their effective sample selection for replay. Most rehearsal-based methods concentrate on buffer
management and buffer usage. For buffer management, the
reservoir sampling [11], the mean prototype selection [29],
and the coreset selection [34, 39] provide different insights
into sampling and updating the buffer. In terms of buffer
usage, works vary among selecting the interfered samples [3, 14], adopting contrastive learning [14, 24] as augmentation, and designing new training paradigm [28]. In
our work, we follow previous works [6, 28] that adopt the
two-stage training paradigm for buffer usage due to their
success on OBCIL, but mainly focus on devising a considerable and effective buffer management method.
While the concept of OBCIL was introduced by [6], the
critical challenges within this setting remain inadequately
addressed. Concretely, we identify two main challenges in
OBCIL: (1) Data imbalance within tasks, which is exacerbated when replaying with the imbalanced buffer. Although
balanced buffers are proposed in some works [6, 29], they
often fall short of practical online learning principles due

23995

