This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M&M VTO: Multi-Garment Virtual Try-On and Editing
Yingwei Li1
Nan Liu1
Hao Peng1
Luyang Zhu1,2 *
Dawei Yang1
Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman1,2
1
2
Google Research
University of Washington

Input Person

Input Garments

Try-On Output

Input Person

Input Garments

Try-On Output

Output with Layout

Figure 1. Given an input person image, multiple garments, M&M VTO can output a virtual try-on visualization of how those garments
would look on the person. Our model performs well across various body shapes, poses, and garments. In addition, it allows layout to be
changed, e.g., “roll up the sleeves” (top rightmost column), and “tuck in the shirt and roll down the sleeves” (bottom rightmost column).

Abstract
We present M&M VTO–a mix and match virtual try-on
method that takes as input multiple garment images, text description for garment layout and an image of a person. An
example input includes: an image of a shirt, an image of a
pair of pants, “rolled sleeves, shirt tucked in”, and an image
of a person. The output is a visualization of how those garments (in the desired layout) would look like on the given
1 Work done while author was an intern at Google.

person. Key contributions of our method are: 1) a single
stage diffusion based model, with no super resolution cascading, that allows to mix and match multiple garments at
1024×512 resolution preserving and warping intricate garment details, 2) architecture design (VTO UNet Diffusion
Transformer) to disentangle denoising from person specific
features, allowing for a highly effective finetuning strategy
for identity preservation (6MB model per individual vs 4GB
achieved with, e.g., dreambooth finetuning); solving a common identity loss problem in current virtual try-on methods, 3) layout control for multiple garments via text inputs

1346

