This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MicroCinema: A Divide-and-Conquer Approach for Text-to-Video Generation
Yanhui Wang1,2∗† , Jianmin Bao2∗ , Wenming Weng1 , Ruoyu Feng1 , Dacheng Yin1 , Tao Yang3 ,
Jingxu Zhang1 , Qi Dai2 , Zhiyuan Zhao2 , Chunyu Wang2 , Kai Qiu2 , Yuhui Yuan2 ,
Xiaoyan Sun1 , Chong Luo1,2‡ , Baining Guo2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University
∗
Equal Contribution † This work was done during the internship at MSRA ‡ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Sample videos produced by MicroCinema, our proposed text-to-video generation system. They showcase MicroCinema’s ability
to create coherent and high-quality videos, with precise motion aligned with text prompts. Image reference generated by Midjourney.

Abstract
We present MicroCinema, a straightforward yet effective
framework for high-quality and coherent text-to-video generation. Unlike existing approaches that align text prompts
with video directly, MicroCinema introduces a Divide-andConquer strategy which divides the text-to-video into a twostage process: text-to-image generation and image&text-tovideo generation. This strategy offers two significant advantages. a) It allows us to take full advantage of the recent
advances in text-to-image models, such as Stable Diffusion,
Midjourney, and DALLE, to generate photorealistic and
highly detailed images. b) Leveraging the generated image,
the model can allocate less focus to fine-grained appear-

ance details, prioritizing the efficient learning of motion dynamics. To implement this strategy effectively, we introduce
two core designs. First, we propose the Appearance Injection Network, enhancing the preservation of the appearance of the given image. Second, we introduce the Appearance Noise Prior, a novel mechanism aimed at maintaining
the capabilities of pre-trained 2D diffusion models. These
design elements empower MicroCinema to generate highquality videos with precise motion, guided by the provided
text prompts. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed framework. Concretely, MicroCinema achieves SOTA zero-shot FVD of 342.86 on UCF-101
and 377.40 on MSR-VTT.

8414

