This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometry-aware Reconstruction and Fusion-refined Rendering
for Generalizable Neural Radiance Fields
Tianqi Liu

Xinyi Ye Min Shi Zihao Huang Zhiyu Pan Zhan Peng Zhiguo Cao*
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China

{tq liu,xinyiye,min shi,zihaohuang,zhiyupan,peng zhan,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalizable NeRF aims to synthesize novel views for
unseen scenes. Common practices involve constructing
variance-based cost volumes for geometry reconstruction
and encoding 3D descriptors for decoding novel views.
However, existing methods show limited generalization
ability in challenging conditions due to inaccurate geometry, sub-optimal descriptors, and decoding strategies. We
address these issues point by point. First, we find the
variance-based cost volume exhibits failure patterns as the
features of pixels corresponding to the same point can
be inconsistent across different views due to occlusions
or reflections. We introduce an Adaptive Cost Aggregation (ACA) approach to amplify the contribution of consistent pixel pairs and suppress inconsistent ones. Unlike previous methods that solely fuse 2D features into
descriptors, our approach introduces a Spatial-View Aggregator (SVA) to incorporate 3D context into descriptors
through spatial and inter-view interaction. When decoding the descriptors, we observe the two existing decoding
strategies excel in different areas, which are complementary. A Consistency-Aware Fusion (CAF) strategy is proposed to leverage the advantages of both. We incorporate
the above ACA, SVA, and CAF into a coarse-to-fine framework, termed Geometry-aware Reconstruction and Fusionrefined Rendering (GeFu). GeFu attains state-of-the-art
performance across multiple datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/TQTQliu/GeFu.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) aims to generate realistic images at novel viewpoints given a set of posed images. By encoding the density and radiance fields of scenes into implicit
representations, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [21] has
shown impressive performance in NVS. However, NeRF re* Corresponding author

(a)

Source views
24.5
24

MVSNeRF

ENeRF

PSNR_LLFF ↑

Ours
IBRNet

0.14s

MVSNeRF

23.5

(b)

23

NeuRay
7.14s

ENeRF
74.38s

22.5

0.04s
0.96s

MatchNeRF

22
21.5
25.5

GNT

4.61s

PSNR_DTU ↑

2.40s

26.5

27.5

28.5

Ours

29.5

Figure 1. Comparison with existing methods. (a) With three input source views, our generalizable model synthesizes novel views
with higher quality than existing methods [4, 16] in the severe occluded area. (b) Circle area represents inference time. The X-axis
represents the PSNR on the DTU dataset [1] and the Y-axis represents the PSNR on the Real Forward-facing dataset [20]. Our
method attains state-of-the-art performance.

quires a lengthy optimization with densely captured images
for each scene, which limits its applications.
To address this issue, some recent methods [4, 6, 8, 13,
15, 16, 19, 26–28, 34, 40] generalize NeRFs to unseen
scenes. Instead of overfitting the scene, they extract feature descriptors for 3D points in a scene-agnostic manner,
which are then decoded for rendering novel views. Pioneer methods [28, 40] utilize 2D features warped from the
source images. As this practice avoids explicit modeling of
3D geometric constraints, its generalization capability for
geometry reasoning and view synthesis in new scenes is
limited. Hence, subsequent methods [4, 16] introduce explicit geometry-aware cost volume from multi-view stereo
(MVS) to model geometry at the novel view. Despite significant progress achieved by these methods, synthesis results
remain unsatisfactory, especially in challenging areas, such

7654

