This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanoPose: Self-supervised Relative Pose Estimation for Panoramic Images
Diantao Tu 1,2,3
Hainan Cui1,2,3†
Xianwei Zheng 4
Shuhan Shen1,2,3†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CASIA-SenseTime Research Group 4 The State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University
tudiantao2020@ia.ac.cn, hncui@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, zhengxw@whu.edu.cn, shshen@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Scaled relative pose estimation, i.e., estimating relative rotation and scaled relative translation between two
images, has always been a major challenge in global
Structure-from-Motion (SfM). This difficulty arises because
the two-view relative translation computed by traditional
geometric vision methods, e.g. the five-point algorithm, is
scaleless. Many researchers have proposed diverse translation averaging methods to solve this problem. Instead
of solving the problem in the motion averaging phase, we
focus on estimating scaled relative pose with the help of
panoramic cameras and deep neural networks. In this paper, a novel network, namely PanoPose, is proposed to estimate the relative motion in a fully self-supervised manner
and a global SfM pipeline is built for panorama images. The
proposed PanoPose comprises a depth-net and a pose-net,
with self-supervision achieved by reconstructing the reference image from its neighboring images based on the estimated depth and relative pose. To maintain precise pose
estimation under large viewing angle differences, we randomly rotate the panoramic images and pre-train the posenet with images before and after the rotation. To enhance
scale accuracy, a fusion block is introduced to incorporate
depth information into pose estimation. Extensive experiments on panoramic SfM datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of PanoPose compared with state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-motion (SfM) has always been an essential research field in computer vision. SfM consists of three
key steps: feature extraction and matching, pairwise relative
pose estimation, and global pose estimation. Based on the
different strategies used in the third step, SfM can be categorized into incremental [8, 27] and global [7, 29]. Incremental SfM usually begins with two or three “seed” views
† Corresponding author.

and gradually adds more images to the model. To mitigate
the accumulated errors, the Bundle Adjustment (BA) is performed after every few images are added. The complexity
of BA problem increases with the number of images, leading to more and more time spent in BA, which finally affects
the computation efficiency.
On the other hand, global SfM simultaneously estimates
all camera poses, requiring BA only once with higher efficiency. The pose estimation in global SfM consists of rotation averaging and translation averaging, which compute
the global rotation and translation, respectively. In the ideal
case, the translation averaging holds the following equation
  \mathbf {t}_j - \mathbf {t}_i = d_{ij} \mathbf {R}_i \mathbf {v}_{ij} \ , 

(1)

where ti and tj are the camera center, Ri is the rotation
from i-th camera to the world coordinate, vij is a unit vector representing the direction of relative translation between
i-th and j-th camera, and dij = ∥tj −ti ∥2 is the scale of relative translation. However, the relative translation derived
from two images with traditional five-point algorithm[24]
only contains the direction, leaving dij unknown. The scale
ambiguity is one of the major challenges in global SfM and
becomes particularly conspicuous when the camera moves
along a straight path. Various translation averaging methods aim to resolve this by optimizing relative scales [23]
or minimizing the angular error between direction vectors
[38, 43]. Additionally, the relative pose estimation requires
a rich textured environment with numerous reliable feature
matching. In textureless scenes, relative pose estimation
will produce large errors or degradation, affecting the overall SfM process.
To tackle these challenges, we focus on estimating the
scaled relative pose. Inspired by the self-supervised monocular depth estimation [10, 42], we propose PanoPose, consisting of a depth-net and a pose-net. Different from the
aforementioned method that focuses on accurate depth estimation and design of complex depth-net architecture, we
give more attention to pose estimation and use a pre-trained
model [37] as the backbone with differentiable pose pre-

20009

