This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-Time Linear Out-of-Distribution Detection
Ke Fan1 *, Tong Liu2 *, Xingyu Qiu1 , Yikai Wang1 , Lian Huai2†, Zeyu Shangguan2 ,
Shuang Gou2 , Fengjian Liu2 , Yuqian Fu1 , Yanwei Fu1 , Xingqun Jiang2
1
Fudan University 2 BOE Technology Group
kfan21@m.fudan.edu.cn, {xyqiu20, yikaiwang19, fuyq20, yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn
{liutongcto, huailian, shangguanzeyu, goushuang, liufengjian, jiangxingqun}@boe.com.cn

RTL

Abstract
features

Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection aims to address the
excessive confidence prediction by neural networks by triggering an alert when the input sample deviates significantly
from the training distribution (in-distribution), indicating
that the output may not be reliable. Current OOD detection approaches explore all kinds of cues to identify OOD
data, such as finding irregular patterns in the feature space,
logit space, gradient space, or the raw image space. Surprisingly, we observe a linear trend between the OOD score
produced by current OOD detection algorithms and the network features on several datasets. We conduct a thorough
investigation, theoretically and empirically, to analyze and
understand the meaning of such a linear trend in OOD detection. This paper proposes a Robust Test-time Linear
method (RTL) to utilize such linear trends like a ‘free lunch’
when we have a batch of data to perform OOD detection.
By using a simple linear regression as a test time adaptation, we can make a more precise OOD prediction. We
further propose an online variant of the proposed method,
which achieves promising performance and is more practical for real applications. Theoretical analysis is given to
prove the effectiveness of our methods. Extensive experiments on several OOD datasets show the efficacy of RTL
for OOD detection tasks, significantly improving the results of base OOD detectors. Project will be available at
https://github.com/kfan21/RTL.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are renowned for their exceptional
performance on image recognition tasks [4, 7, 13, 29].
* Ke Fan and Tong Liu contribute equally.
† Lian Huai is the corresponding author.

Yanwei Fu is with School of Data Science, Fudan University,
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and Fudan
ISTBI–ZJNU Algorithm Centre for Brain-inspired Intelligence, Zhejiang
Normal University, Jinhua, China.

In distribution

Raw OOD scores

Out-of-distribution

Calibrated OOD scores

𝛽!

Figure 1. Illustration of our RTL. Blue/orange points denote
in/out-of-distribution features. The probability density plot of the
OOD score distributions of in and out-of-distribution samples are
different. We fit a linear regression between the OOD scores and
features as a robust test-time learning method. Then we calibrate
the OOD scores to get better OOD predictions.

Nevertheless, the reliability of model predictions is contingent on the input data conforming to the distribution
of the training dataset. In situations where the input data
significantly deviates from the training data, the neural
networks tend to make excessively overconfident predictions [25, 32], thereby impairing the dependability of the
deep model in real-world applications. To address this issue, several techniques [8, 11, 14, 18, 19, 21, 27, 31] have
been proposed to enable trained models to identify irregular
out-of-distribution input data and abstain from generating
predictions.
Generally, the task of detecting out-of-distribution
(OOD) data typically involves discerning a mixture of test
data comprising both in-distribution and data from a distinct dataset [8, 11, 17–19]. Currently, sophisticated algorithms, denoted as f , are predominantly used to derive an
(unnormalized) OOD score, s ∈ R, that indicates the likelihood of the data being OOD. Subsequently, a threshold is
applied to the score. To evaluate the efficacy of OOD detection algorithms, all test data must be gathered to determine
the threshold and compute false positive rate at 95% recall
(FPR95) and area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC).
The intuition of our method is illustrated in Fig. 1. Al-

23752

