This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous Optical Zooming: A Benchmark for Arbitrary-Scale Image
Super-Resolution in Real World
Huiyuan Fu1 Fei Peng1 Xianwei Li1 Yejun Li1 Xin Wang2 Huadong Ma1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Stony Brook University
{fhy, pf0607, lixianwei, liyejun2415, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn
x.wang@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Most current arbitrary-scale image super-resolution (SR)
methods has commonly relied on simulated data generated
by simple synthetic degradation models (e.g., bicubic downsampling) at continuous various scales, thereby falling short
in capturing the complex degradation of real-world images.
This limitation hinders the visual quality of these methods
when applied to real-world images. To address this issue, we
propose the Continuous Optical Zooming dataset (COZ), by
constructing an automatic imaging system to collect images
at fine-grained various focal lengths within a specific range
and providing strict image pair alignment. The COZ dataset
serves as a benchmark to provide real-world data for training and testing arbitrary-scale SR models. To enhance the
model’s robustness against real-world image degradation,
we propose a Local Mix Implicit network (LMI) based on
the MLP-mixer architecture and meta-learning, which directly learns the local texture information by simultaneously
mixing features and coordinates of multiple independent
points. The extensive experiments demonstrate the superior
performance of the arbitrary-scale SR models trained on
the COZ dataset compared to models trained on simulated
data. Our LMI model exhibits the superior effectiveness
compared to other models. This study is of great significance
in developing more efficient algorithms and improving the
performance of arbitrary-scale image SR methods in practical applications. Our dataset and codes are available at
https://github.com/pf0607/COZ.

1. Introduction
In the field of computer vision, Super-Resolution (SR) has
been a prominent area of research [7, 9, 11–13, 15, 19, 20, 22,
25, 27, 34, 35]. It aims to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR)
image from a low-resolution (LR) image. Recently, significant progress has been made in arbitrary-scale image SR, primarily based on learning the continuous representation of images. These methods typically require training with continu-

Previous Simulated Datasets

Bicubic
Simulation

LR

HR

DownSampling

Simulate

Our Real-World COZ Dataset

Zoom
× 4.3

Optical
Zoom

×1

×4
Continuous

Real

Figure 1. The result exhibits that SR model trained on simulated
dataset struggles to address the real-world arbitrary-scale problem,
displaying noticeable blurriness and artifacts. In contrast, our approach is more natural and performs comparably to the real-world
continuous optical zooming effect.

ous fine-grained scale variation LR-HR image pairs within a
specific range(i.e., ×1.0-×4.0). [5, 8, 10, 16, 18, 29, 31]
However, there still remain problems when we apply
arbitrary-scale image SR methods to the real-world application. As shown in Fig. 1, one problem is that most current
methods are trained and evaluated on several widely used SR
datasets including DIV2K [1], Urban100 [17], Manga109
[24], Set5 [3], Set14 [32], and BSD300 [23]. Typically, these
datasets apply simple synthetic degradation models (e.g.,
bicubic downsampling) to obtain data at different resolutions. However, despite that satisfactory results are obtained
on simulated data, image degradation in the real world is
more complex, resulting in poor visual results on real-world
images. Another problem is several real-world image SR
datasets have been proposed, including RealSR [4], City100
[6], SR-RAW [33], and DRealSR [30] recently. However,
these datasets are limited as they only capture image pairs
at fixed magnification scales (e.g., ×2, ×3, ×4), lacking
continuous representation of images.
Given the set of issues, we summarize them as the intri-

3035

