This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking FID: Towards a Better Evaluation Metric for Image Generation
Sadeep Jayasumana

Srikumar Ramalingam
Andreas Veit
Ayan Chakrabarti
Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research, New York

Daniel Glasner

{sadeep, rsrikumar, aveit, dglasner, ayanchakrab, sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
As with many machine learning problems, the progress
of image generation methods hinges on good evaluation
metrics. One of the most popular is the Fréchet Inception
Distance (FID). FID estimates the distance between a distribution of Inception-v3 features of real images, and those
of images generated by the algorithm. We highlight important drawbacks of FID: Inception’s poor representation of
the rich and varied content generated by modern text-toimage models, incorrect normality assumptions, and poor
sample complexity. We call for a reevaluation of FID’s use
as the primary quality metric for generated images. We empirically demonstrate that FID contradicts human raters,
it does not reflect gradual improvement of iterative text-toimage models, it does not capture distortion levels, and that
it produces inconsistent results when varying the sample
size. We also propose an alternative new metric, CMMD,
based on richer CLIP embeddings and the maximum mean
discrepancy distance with the Gaussian RBF kernel. It is
an unbiased estimator that does not make any assumptions
on the probability distribution of the embeddings and is
sample efficient. Through extensive experiments and analysis, we demonstrate that FID-based evaluations of textto-image models may be unreliable, and that CMMD offers a more robust and reliable assessment of image quality. A reference implementation of CMMD is available at:
https://github.com/google- research/googleresearch/tree/master/cmmd.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image models are progressing at breakneck speed.
Recent models such as [16, 19–21, 26] have been incredibly successful at generating realistic images that remain
faithful to text prompts. As with many problems in machine learning, a reliable evaluation metric is key to driving progress. Unfortunately, we find that the most popular
metric used in the evaluation of text-to-image models, the

Low Distortion

High Distortion

Figure 1. Behaviour of FID and CMMD (lower is better for both)
under noise in the VQGAN latent space. CMMD monotonically
increases with the distortion level, correctly identifying the degradation in image quality with increasing distortions. FID is wrong;
it improves (goes down) for the first few distortion levels, suggesting that quality improves when these more subtle distortions are
applied. See Section 6.2 for more details.

Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [12], may disagree with
the gold standard, human raters, in some important cases;
and is thus ill-suited for this purpose. We identify some important limitations of the FID through statistical tests and
empirical evaluations. To address these shortcomings, we
propose an alternative metric: CMMD, which uses CLIP
embeddings and Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) distance. Figure 1 shows one of our experiments, the details
of which are discussed in Section 6.2, in which FID does
not reflect progressive distortion applied to images while
CMMD correctly ranks the image sets based on the severity
of the distortion.
Evaluating image generation models is a uniquely challenging task. Unlike traditional vision tasks such as classification or detection, we need to evaluate multiple dimensions of performance including quality, aesthetics and faithfulness to the text prompt. Moreover, these are hard-toquantify concepts which depend on human perception. As a
result, human evaluation remains the gold standard for textto-image research. Since human evaluation is an expensive

9307

