This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperspherical Classification with Dynamic Label-to-Prototype Assignment
Mohammad Saeed Ebrahimi Saadabadi1 , Ali Dabouei2 , Sahar Rahimi Malakshan1 , Nasser M. Nasrabadi3
1,3
West Virginia University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University
1

{me00018, sr00033}@mix.wvu.edu, 2 adabouei@andrew.cmu.edu, 3 nasser.nasrabadi@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
Aiming to enhance the utilization of metric space by the
parametric softmax classifier, recent studies suggest replacing it with a non-parametric alternative. Although a nonparametric classifier may provide better metric space utilization, it introduces the challenge of capturing inter-class
relationships. A shared characteristic among prior nonparametric classifiers is the static assignment of labels to
prototypes during the training, i.e., each prototype consistently represents a class throughout the training course. Orthogonal to previous works, we present a simple yet effective method to optimize the category assigned to each prototype (label-to-prototype assignment) during the training.
To this aim, we formalize the problem as a two-step optimization objective over network parameters and label-toprototype assignment mapping. We solve this optimization
using a sequential combination of gradient descent and Bipartide matching. We demonstrate the benefits of the proposed approach by conducting experiments on balanced
and long-tail classification problems using different backbone network architectures. In particular, our method outperforms its competitors by 1.22% accuracy on CIFAR-100,
and 2.15% on ImageNet-200 using a metric space dimension half of the size of its competitors. Code

1. Introduction
Image classification is a fundamental problem in deep learning [44]. Deep image classification models conventionally
consist of a stack of non-linear feature extractors (backbone) together with a classification layer [18, 28, 53]. Despite diversified model design for their backbone, from convolutional neural networks [18, 26] to transformer architecture [11, 35], Parametric Softmax Classifier (PSC) with
Cross-Entropy (CE) loss has been the de facto choice of design for the classification layer [18, 29, 51]. This widely
adopted framework enables joint training of the PSC and
backbone through gradient-based learning algorithms [4].
Yet, it suffers from several shortcomings [23, 42, 51, 54].

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed method with the conventional PSC and the previous fixed classifier setup, using a toy example with three classes. Each color denotes a distinct class. a)
Label-to-prototype assignment remains static during training. In
PSC, optimization focuses on the network, consisting of the backbone and prototypes W. In the case of a fixed classifier, only
the backbone is optimized, and prototypes remain fixed. b) In the
proposed method, prototypes within the hypersphere are fixed, and
optimization targets the backbone and the label that each prototype
represents. c) Toy example showing changes in label-to-prototype
assignment during training.

First, it overlooks the intra-class compactness, focusing
solely on the optimization of the relative intra and interclass distances [42, 50]. Second, it fails to fully exploit the
metric space, leading to a localized solution [12, 23, 33].
Third, the standard PSC enforces a fixed dimensionality of
the output space, which hampers transferability and results
in linear growth of the classifier parameter associated with
the number of classes [47, 51]. Forth, when facing an unbalanced dataset w.r.t. sample per class, the PSC struggles with
suboptimal performance for minority classes [10, 13, 54].
To address these issues, studies suggest employing auxiliary supervisions [12, 52], sample-based objectives [10, 46],
distributed training [1, 2], active class selection [15], and
loss reweighting [9, 24]. However, these methods concentrate exclusively on addressing a single limitation and do
not generalize to all the issues [51].

17333

