This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dysen-VDM: Empowering Dynamics-aware Text-to-Video Diffusion with LLMs
Hao Fei1 Shengqiong Wu1 Wei Ji1, * Hanwang Zhang2,3 Tat-Seng Chua1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Skywork AI, Singapore 3 Nanyang Technological University
{haofei37,swu,jiwei,dcscts}@nus.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Text-to-video (T2V) synthesis has gained increasing attention in the community, in which the recently emerged diffusion models (DMs) have promisingly shown stronger performance than the past approaches. While existing stateof-the-art DMs are competent to achieve high-resolution
video generation, they may largely suffer from key limitations (e.g., action occurrence disorders, crude video motions) with respect to the intricate temporal dynamics modeling, one of the crux of video synthesis. In this work, we investigate strengthening the awareness of video dynamics for
DMs, for high-quality T2V generation. Inspired by human
intuition, we design an innovative dynamic scene manager
(dubbed as Dysen) module, which includes (step-1) extracting from input text the key actions with proper time-order
arrangement, (step-2) transforming the action schedules
into the dynamic scene graph (DSG) representations, and
(step-3) enriching the scenes in the DSG with sufficient and
reasonable details. Taking advantage of the existing powerful LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT) via in-context learning, Dysen realizes (nearly) human-level temporal dynamics understanding. Finally, the resulting video DSG with rich action scene
details is encoded as fine-grained spatio-temporal features,
integrated into the backbone T2V DM for video generating. Experiments on popular T2V datasets suggest that our
Dysen-VDM consistently outperforms prior arts with significant margins, especially in scenarios with complex actions.
Codes at http://haofei.vip/Dysen-VDM/.

1. Introduction
Recently, AI-Generated Content (AIGC) has witnessed
thrilling advancements and remarkable progress, e.g., ChatGPT [46], DELLE-2 [49] and Stable Diffusion (SD) [51].
As one of the generative topics, text-to-video synthesis that
generates video content complying with the provided textual description has received an increasing number of attention in the community. Prior researches develop a variety
of methods for T2V, including generative adversarial net* Corresponding Author.

Lower frame resolution
Unsmooth video transition
Crude video motion
Action occurrence disorder
50

60

70

80 (%)

Figure 1. Common issues in the existing text-to-video (T2V) synthesis. We run the video diffusion model (VDM) [23] with random
100 prompts, and ask users to summarize the problems.

works (GANs) [1, 42, 53], variational autoencoders (VAEs)
[8, 34, 82], flow-based models [4, 32], and auto-regressive
models (ARMs) [11, 30, 75]. More recently, diffusion models (DMs) have emerged to provide a new paradigm of
T2V. Compared with previous models, DMs advance in
superior generation quality and scaling capability to large
datasets [17, 25], and thus showing great potential on this
track [39, 41, 43, 85].
Although achieving the current state-of-the-art (SoTA)
generative performance, DM-based T2V still faces several
common yet non-negligible challenges. As summarized in
Figure 1, four typical issues can be found in a diffusionbased T2V model, such as lower frame resolution, unsmooth video transition, crude video motion and action occurrence disorder. While the latest DM-based T2V explorations paid much effort into enhancing the quality of video
frames, i.e., generating high-resolution images [43, 85, 91],
they may largely overlook the modeling of the intricate
video temporal dynamics, the real crux of high-quality
video synthesis, i.e., for relieving the last three types of
aforementioned issues. According to our observation, the
key bottleneck is rooted in the nature of video-text modality
heterogeneity: language can describe complex actions with
few succinct and abstract words (e.g., predicates and modifiers), whereas video requires specific and often redundant
frames to render an action.
Picturing that, whenever we humans create a film from
a given instruction, we always first extract the key actions
from the instruction into an event playlist with time order.
We then enrich the simple events with more possible specific scenes, i.e., with our imagination. With such integral
screenplay, it can be effortless to project the whole video

7641

