This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deciphering ‘What’ and ‘Where’ Visual Pathways from
Spectral Clustering of Layer-Distributed Neural Representations
Xiao Zhang⇤
University of Chicago

David Yunis⇤
TTI-Chicago

Michael Maire
University of Chicago

zhang7@uchicago.edu

dyunis@ttic.edu

mmaire@uchicago.edu

Full Dataset Grouping with Intra- and Inter-Image Affinity

Regions Eigs

Image

Per-Image Grouping

‘What’ Pathway

‘Where’ Pathway

Figure 1. Our novel optimization procedure, resembling spectral clustering, leverages features throughout layers of a pre-trained model to
extract dense structural representations of images. Shown are results of applying our method to Stable Diffusion [53]. Left: Analyzing
internal feature affinity for a single input image yields region grouping. Right: Extending the affinity graph across images yields coherent
dataset-level segmentation and reveals ‘what’ (object identity) and ‘where’ (spatial location) pathways, depending on the feature source.

Abstract
We present an approach for analyzing grouping information contained within a neural network’s activations, permitting extraction of spatial layout and semantic segmentation from the behavior of large pre-trained vision models.
Unlike prior work, our method conducts a wholistic analysis of a network’s activation state, leveraging features from
all layers and obviating the need to guess which part of the
model contains relevant information. Motivated by classic
spectral clustering, we formulate this analysis in terms of
an optimization objective involving a set of affinity matrices, each formed by comparing features within a different
layer. Solving this optimization problem using gradient descent allows our technique to scale from single images to
dataset-level analysis, including, in the latter, both intraand inter-image relationships. Analyzing a pre-trained generative transformer provides insight into the computational
strategy learned by such models. Equating affinity with keyquery similarity across attention layers yields eigenvectors
encoding scene spatial layout, whereas defining affinity by
value vector similarity yields eigenvectors encoding object
identity. This result suggests that key and query vectors coordinate attentional information flow according to spatial
proximity (a ‘where’ pathway), while value vectors refine a
semantic category representation (a ‘what’ pathway).
* Equal contribution. Code available at this link.

1. Introduction
An explosion in self-supervised learning techniques, including adversarial [23, 31, 32], contrastive [11, 12, 26, 72],
reconstructive [34, 66], and denoising [29, 60] approaches,
combined with the focus on training large-scale foundation
models [4] on vast collections of image data has produced
deep neural networks exhibiting dramatic new capabilities. Recent examples of such models include CLIP [51],
DINO [8], MAE [27], and Stable Diffusion [53]. As training is no longer primarily driven by annotated data, there
is a critical need to understand what these models have
learned, provide interpretable insight into how they work,
and develop techniques for porting their learned representations for use in accomplishing additional tasks.
However, interpretable analysis of neural networks is
challenging. Procedures such as guided backpropagation [61] or Grad-CAM [57] assist with interpretability with
respect to particular labels, but are limited in scope. Others propose heuristics for extracting information relevant
to particular downstream tasks, or analyze specific features
in models [2, 9, 10, 13, 19, 28, 39, 41, 63, 77]. The distributed nature of both the information encoded within deep
networks [62] and their computational structure frustrates
the development of general-purpose techniques.
It is similarly unclear how best to repurpose pre-trained
models toward downstream tasks. Task-specific heuristics,
fine-tuning on labeled data, prompt engineering (if applicable), or clustering frozen feature representations might all

4165

