This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeMan: Towards Benchmarking 3D Human Pose Estimation
under Real-World Conditions
Jiong Wang1, 2 *, Fengyu Yang1 *, Bingliang Li1 , Wenbo Gou1 , Danqi Yan1 ,
Ailing Zeng3 , Yijun Gao2 , Junle Wang2 , Yanqing Jing2 , Ruimao Zhang1†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Tencent 3 IDEA

FreeMan

HuMMan

H36M

jiongwang@link.,fengyuyang1@link.cuhk.edu.cn,ruimao.zhang@ieee.org

Figure 1. The left displays sample frames from Human3.6M [18] and HuMMan [7], which were collected under laboratory conditions, and
contrasted with our FreeMan dataset that was collected in real-world scenarios. Frames from FreeMan have been cropped into a square
format for visualization purposes, with the original resolution being 1920 × 1080 pixels. The right-hand side demonstrates the test results
on 3DPW of the HMR model [23] trained on these three datasets. Notably, the model trained using FreeMan is able to adapt flawlessly to
real-world conditions, demonstrating its superior generalization ability. Visualization uses implementation of mmHuman3D [11].

Abstract
Estimating the 3D structure of the human body from natural scenes is a fundamental aspect of visual perception. 3D
human pose estimation is a vital step in advancing fields like
AIGC and human-robot interaction, serving as a crucial technique for understanding and interacting with human actions
in real-world settings. However, the current datasets, often
collected under single laboratory conditions using complex
motion capture equipment and unvarying backgrounds, are
insufficient. The absence of datasets on variable conditions
is stalling the progress of this crucial task. To facilitate the
development of 3D pose estimation, we present FreeMan, the
first large-scale, multi-view dataset collected under the realworld conditions. FreeMan was captured by synchronizing
* First two authors contributes equally. Work done during Jiong Wang’s
MPhil study at CUHK(SZ). Wenbo Gou and Danqi Yan were research
assistant at CUHK(SZ).
† Corresponding author. Email: ruimao.zhang@ieee.org

8 smartphones across diverse scenarios. It comprises 11M
frames from 8000 sequences, viewed from different perspectives. These sequences cover 40 subjects across 10 different
scenarios, each with varying lighting conditions. We have
also established an semi-automated pipeline containing error detection to reduce the workload of manual check and
ensure precise annotation. We provide comprehensive evaluation baselines for a range of tasks, underlining the significant challenges posed by FreeMan. Further evaluations
of standard indoor/outdoor human sensing datasets reveal
that FreeMan offers robust representation transferability in
real and complex scenes. FreeMan is publicly available at
https://wangjiongw.github.io/freeman.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human poses from real scene input is a longstanding yet active research topic since its huge potential in
real applications, such as animation creation [60, 63], virtual

21978

