This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LaneCPP: Continuous 3D Lane Detection using Physical Priors
Maximilian Pittner1, 2 , Joel Janai1 , Alexandru P. Condurache1, 2
1
Bosch Mobility Solutions, Robert Bosch GmbH
2
Institute of Signal Processing, University of Lübeck
{Maximilian.Pittner, Joel.Janai, AlexandruPaul.Condurache}@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Monocular 3D lane detection has become a fundamental problem in the context of autonomous driving, which
comprises the tasks of finding the road surface and locating lane markings. One major challenge lies in a flexible
but robust line representation capable of modeling complex
lane structures, while still avoiding unpredictable behavior. While previous methods rely on fully data-driven approaches, we instead introduce a novel approach LaneCPP
that uses a continuous 3D lane detection model leveraging physical prior knowledge about the lane structure and
road geometry. While our sophisticated lane model is capable of modeling complex road structures, it also shows
robust behavior since physical constraints are incorporated
by means of a regularization scheme that can be analytically applied to our parametric representation. Moreover,
we incorporate prior knowledge about the road geometry
into the 3D feature space by modeling geometry-aware spatial features, guiding the network to learn an internal road
surface representation. In our experiments, we show the
benefits of our contributions and prove the meaningfulness
of using priors to make 3D lane detection more robust. The
results show that LaneCPP achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of F-Score and geometric errors.

1. Introduction
Robust and precise lane detection systems build one of the
most essential components in the perception stack of autonomous vehicles. While some approaches utilize LiDAR
sensors or multi-sensor setups, the application of monocular cameras has become more popular due to their lower
cost and the high-resolution visual representation that provides valuable information to detect lane markings.
In the past, lane detection was mainly treated as a 2D detection task. Deep learning based methods achieved good
results by treating the problem as a segmentation task in
pixel space [7, 11, 16, 26, 29, 33, 53], used to classify and
regress lanes using anchor-based [19, 41] representations,

or as key-points on a grid structure [13, 15, 34, 45]. However, due to the lack of depth information, these 2D representations fail to model lane markings and road geometry in
3D space, which forms an important prerequisite for later
functionalities like trajectory planning. Consequently, approaches for monocular 3D lane detection were introduced,
which adapted lane representations for the 3D domain by
modeling vertical anchors [6, 9] or local segments on a grid
[4] in a Birds-Eye-View (BEV) oriented 3D-frame.
A crucial topic for the application of lane detection algorithms in autonomous systems is safety, which requires
predictable and robust behavior in any traffic situation. One
risk of learning-based methods is the tendency to show unpredictable behavior in cases of rarely observed scenarios.
Since obtaining large amounts of data with high-quality annotations is cumbersome and expensive, publicly available
3D datasets are limited in size and accuracy. Hence, they
do not reflect the variability of real-world scenarios sufficiently. This makes learning-based models prone to overfitting, and eventually, diminishes predictability.
One common way to deal with such problems is the integration of prior knowledge. Physics provides us a profound
understanding of the 3D world, allowing us to make valid
assumptions about the lane structure and road surface geometry. Therefore, we introduce physically motivated priors into the lane detection objective to cope with the limited
data problem and achieve robust and predictable behavior.
There are certain geometric properties that should generally hold for detected lane lines. For instance, we know
that most lines progress parallel to each other, reside on a
smooth surface and should not exceed certain thresholds in
terms of curvature and slope. However, integrating such
assumptions into prevailing discrete representations is not
straight forward as strong simplifications are necessary. In
contrast, continuous 3D lane representations directly provide parametric curves using polynomials [1, 23] or more
sophisticated B-Splines [32]. These allow for analytical
computations on the curve function, which enables the integration of such priors into the lane representation. By modeling these priors explicitly instead of learning them from

10639

