This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Discriminative Dynamics with Label Corruption for Noisy Label
Detection
Suyeon Kim1 , Dongha Lee2 *, SeongKu Kang3 , Sukang Chae1 , Sanghwan Jang1 , Hwanjo Yu1 *
1
POSTECH, 2 Yonsei University, 3 University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
{kimsu, chaesgng2, s.jang, hwanjoyu}@postech.ac.kr, donalee@yonsei.ac.kr, seongku@illinois.edu

Abstract
Label noise, commonly found in real-world datasets, has
a detrimental impact on a model’s generalization. To effectively detect incorrectly labeled instances, previous works
have mostly relied on distinguishable training signals, such
as training loss, as indicators to differentiate between clean
and noisy labels. However, they have limitations in that the
training signals incompletely reveal the model’s behavior
and are not effectively generalized to various noise types,
resulting in limited detection accuracy. In this paper, we
propose DynaCor framework that distinguishes incorrectly
labeled instances from correctly labeled ones based on the
dynamics of the training signals. To cope with the absence
of supervision for clean and noisy labels, DynaCor first introduces a label corruption strategy that augments the original dataset with intentionally corrupted labels, enabling
indirect simulation of the model’s behavior on noisy labels.
Then, DynaCor learns to identify clean and noisy instances
by inducing two clearly distinguishable clusters from the
latent representations of training dynamics. Our comprehensive experiments show that DynaCor outperforms the
state-of-the-art competitors and shows strong robustness to
various noise types and noise rates.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of deep neural networks (DNNs)
is largely attributed to massive and accurately labeled
datasets. However, creating such datasets is not only expensive but also time-consuming. As a cost-effective alternative, various methods have been employed for label collection, such as crowdsourcing [11] and extracting image
labels from accompanying text on the web [27, 54]. Unfortunately, these approaches have led to the emergence of
noise in real-world datasets, with reported noise rates ranging from 8.0% to 38.5% [25, 27, 54], which severely degrades the model’s performance [1, 58].
* Corresponding authors

To cope with the detrimental effect of such noisy labels, a variety of approaches have been proposed, including noise robust learning that minimizes the impact of inaccurate information from noisy labels during the training
process [7, 29, 49, 54] and data re-annotation through algorithmic methods [16, 39, 61]. Among them, the task of
noisy label detection, which our work mainly focuses on,
aims to identify incorrectly labeled instances in a training
dataset [7, 22, 34]. This task has gained much attention in
that it can be further utilized for improving the quality of the
original dataset via cleansing or rectifying such instances.
Motivated by the memorization effect, which refers to the
phenomenon where DNNs initially grasp simple and generalized patterns in correctly labeled data and then gradually overfit to incorrectly labeled data [1], most existing
studies have utilized distinguishable training signals as indicators of label quality to differentiate between clean and
noisy labels. To elaborate, these training signals are derived
from the model’s behavior on individual instances during
the training [42, 44], involving factors such as training loss
or confidence scores. Note that it is impractical to acquire
annotations explicitly indicating whether each instance is
correctly labeled or not. Hence, numerous studies have
crafted various heuristic training signals [12, 19, 22], designed based on human prior knowledge of the model’s distinctive behaviors when faced with clean and noisy labels.
Despite their effectiveness, the training signal-based detection methods still exhibit several limitations: (1) They
only focus on a scalar signal at a single epoch (or a representative one across the entire training trajectory), which
leads to limited detection accuracy (See Appendix B.2).
Since the model’s distinct behaviors on clean and noisy labels draw different temporal trajectories of training signals,
a single scalar is insufficient to distinguish them by capturing temporal patterns within training dynamics. (2) Existing detection approaches based on heuristics are not effectively generalized to various types of label noise. Noisy
labels can originate from diverse sources, including human
annotator errors [33, 50], systematic biases [46], and unreliable annotations from web crawling [54], resulting in

22477

