This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Segment and Caption Anything
Xiaoke Huang1†
Han Hu2

Jianfeng Wang2
Jiwen Lu3

Yansong Tang1∗
Zheng Zhang2
Lijuan Wang2
Zicheng Liu4

1

2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
Microsoft
3
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Advanced Micro Devices

{hxk21@mails.,tang.yansong@sz.,lujiwen@}tsinghua.edu.cn
{jianfw,zhez,lijuanw}@microsoft.com

ancientmooner@gmail.com

zicheliu@amd.com

Abstract
We propose a method to efficiently equip the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) with the ability to generate regional
captions. SAM presents strong generalizability to segment
anything while is short for semantic understanding. By introducing a lightweight query-based feature mixer, we align
the region-specific features with the embedding space of
language models for later caption generation. As the number of trainable parameters is small (typically in the order
of tens of millions), it costs less computation, less memory
usage, and less communication bandwidth, resulting in both
fast and scalable training. To address the scarcity problem
of regional caption data, we propose to first pre-train our
model on objection detection and segmentation tasks. We
call this step weak supervision pretraining since the pretraining data only contains category names instead of fullsentence descriptions. The weak supervision pretraining allows us to leverage many publicly available object detection and segmentation datasets. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the superiority of our method and
validate each design choice. This work serves as a stepping stone towards scaling up regional captioning data and
sheds light on exploring efficient ways to augment SAM with
regional semantics. The project page, along with the associated code, can be accessed via the following link.

1. Introduction
Teaching machines to understand the visual world with natural languages has been a long-standing problem in computer vision [30, 74, 76]. Image captioning is one of the
topics that require the machine to perceive and describe images in human languages [34, 37]. With the wave of deep
† Work was done when the author interned at Microsoft.
∗ Corresponding.

Figure 1. SCA (b) is a lightweight augmentation of SAM (a) with
the ability to generate regional captions. On top of SAM architecture, we add a pre-trained language model which is frozen, and
a lightweight hybrid feature mixture. Despite the small number
of trainable parameters, the region-specific features are learned to
align with the embedding space of the language model for regional
caption generation.

learning [24, 39], enormous efforts [42, 43, 84, 96] have
been devoted to pushing its frontier in terms of model architectures, training data, training techniques, etc. However,
much less work has been devoted to the regional captioning [33, 56, 89, 104], in which models describe the regions
instead of the entire image.
Building an intelligent system that follows human intent
is an emerging research topic, as evidenced by the rapid
progress of large foundation models [7, 31, 65, 80, 99].
Major breakthroughs have been made in language modeling [7, 62, 78, 81], where the foundation language models are fine-tuned to follow the instructions of users with
both instruction supervision [62, 78] and human feed-

13405

