This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Automatic Controllable Colorization via Imagination

1

Xiaoyan Cong3 Yue Wu4 Qifeng Chen2 Chenyang Lei1 *
2
3
4
CAIR, HKISI-CAS
HKUST
Zhejiang University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
We propose a framework for automatic colorization that
allows for iterative editing and modifications. The core of
our framework lies in an imagination module: by understanding the content within a grayscale image, we utilize
a pre-trained image generation model to generate multiple images that contain the same content. These images
serve as references for coloring, mimicking the process of
human experts. As the synthesized images can be imperfect
or different from the original grayscale image, we propose a
Reference Refinement Module to select the optimal reference
composition. Unlike most previous end-to-end automatic colorization algorithms, our framework allows for iterative and
localized modifications of the colorization results because
we explicitly model the coloring samples. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our framework over
existing automatic colorization algorithms in editability and
flexibility. Project page: https://xy-cong.github.io/imaginecolorization/.

1. Introduction
Countless black-and-white photographs, relics of bygone
eras, exist today, often requiring the deft touch of skilled
artists to breathe color into them. However, such a manual process is labor-intensive and time-consuming. Given a
grayscale image, colorization methods aim to estimate the
corresponding color automatically or with other guidance.
Achieving expert-level colorization is challenging due to
the multi-modality nature of the task: there exist multiple
plausible colorization results for one grayscale image.
Automatic colorization algorithms [27, 35, 64, 72, 74,
75, 85, 86] have made significant progress in recent years
and have demonstrated impressive results in many common
scenarios. However, they are still hard to match the colorization proficiency of human experts. Many data-driven
methods struggle with issues such as grayish and desaturation because of the color ambiguity that one object may
present multiple plausible colors in datasets. GAN-based approaches tend to produce unpleasant artifacts due to the lim* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Our colorization results. By leveraging our designed
Imagination Module, our framework can achieve photorealistic and
vivid colorization results.

ited representation capacity in GAN’s prior. DDColor [32]
alleviates these shortcomings to some extent but is unable
to achieve controllable and diverse colorization. Human experts excel in colorizing black-and-white photos due to their
rich and imaginative priors, enabling them to transform
grayscale images into visually pleasant renditions. They
possess instance-aware and semantic-aware understanding
both locally and globally, imagining diverse plausible colors
and assigning the most appropriate ones based on context.
Exemplar-based colorization methods [3, 11, 47, 80] achieve
pleasing results through emulating the human experts’ priors,
wherein a highly-corresponding reference is manually provided. However, identifying a perfect reference can be both
labor-intensive and detract from an optimal user experience.
Another challenge with most automatic algorithms is
that the obtained results are often difficult to modify and
improve. For example, Su et al. [64] and Zhang et al. [85] can
only produce one deterministic result. While UniColor [27]
offers an interactive colorization, it demands users to provide
additional information, such as text or strokes.
In this paper, we propose a novel automatic colorization
framework that allows iterative editing and modifications
from users. Our framework is designed to mimic the process
of human expert imagination colorization, as shown in Figure 2. We introduce an imagination module designed to provide semantically similar, structurally aligned, and instanceaware references, mirroring human imagination. Our framework begins by composing a refined reference from multiple
candidates generated by pretrained cross-modality image
generation models, such as ControlNet [82]. The rich color
priors embedded in large pretrained Diffusion models can
be harnessed to synthesize references with diverse and col-

2609

