This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

eTraM: Event-based Traffic Monitoring Dataset
Aayush Atul Verma∗ , Bharatesh Chakravarthi∗ , Arpitsinh Vaghela∗ , Hua Wei, Yezhou Yang
Arizona State University
{averma90, bshettah, avaghel3, hua.wei, yz.yang}@asu.edu

Figure 1. Unveiling the Dynamic World of Road Traffic: A glimpse into our event-based traffic monitoring dataset featuring diverse traffic
participants including pedestrians, various sized vehicles, and micro-mobility that include cycles, wheelchairs, and e-scooters.

Abstract
Event cameras, with their high temporal and dynamic
range and minimal memory usage, have found applications in various fields. However, their potential in static
traffic monitoring remains largely unexplored. To facilitate this exploration, we present eTraM - a first-of-itskind, fully event-based traffic monitoring dataset. eTraM
offers 10 hr of data from different traffic scenarios in various lighting and weather conditions, providing a comprehensive overview of real-world situations. Providing 2M
bounding box annotations, it covers eight distinct classes
of traffic participants, ranging from vehicles to pedestrians and micro-mobility. eTraM’s utility has been assessed
using state-of-the-art methods for traffic participant detection, including RVT, RED, and YOLOv8. We quantitatively evaluate the ability of event-based models to generalize on nighttime and unseen scenes. Our findings substantiate the compelling potential of leveraging event cameras for traffic monitoring, opening new avenues for research and application. eTraM is available at https:
//eventbasedvision.github.io/eTraM .

* Equal contribution

1. Introduction
In the dynamic landscape of modern transportation, Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) play a pivotal role in
enhancing traffic flow [25, 43], route optimization [23, 40],
and safety [13, 16]. As an essential task in ITS, traffic participant detection aims to provide information assisting in
counting, measuring speed, identifying traffic incidents, and
predicting traffic flow. The detection methods must be fast
enough to operate in real-time and be insensitive to illumination change and varying weather conditions while utilizing less storage. For instance, in the span of just 1 s, a
vehicle may travel over 8.3 m, and a pedestrian could cover
over 1.43 m, leading to potential misses in fast-paced traffic
scenarios and introducing motion blur concerns [41]. Moreover, nighttime and different weather conditions make the
detection task more challenging as many features such as
edge, corner, and shadow do not work due to varying illumination. In the face of these challenges, the integration of
event cameras into ITS holds great promise for robust traffic
participant detection in real-time scenarios.
Event cameras capture an asynchronous and continuous stream of “events” or pixel-level brightness changes
instead of traditional static frames at fixed frequencies.
Each event is represented by a tuple ⟨x, y, p, t⟩ corresponding to an illuminance change greater than a fixed thresh-

22637

