This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeMoLi: What Moves Together Belongs Together
Jenny Seidenschwarz1,2 * Aljoša Ošep2

DBSCAN++

SeMoLi

1

Franceso Ferroni2

Technical University of Munich

2

Simon Lucey3

NVIDIA

3

O1

O2
O1

Laura Leal-Taixé2

University of Adelaide

O1
O2
O3

noise

noise
O1 O2
O3
O1

O2
O1

noise

Figure 1. Towards learning to pseudo-label: We propose SeMoLi, a data-driven approach for segmenting moving instances in point
clouds (top), that we utilize to learn to detect moving objects (O) in Lidar. We visually contrast SeMoLi to prior art, that tackles similar
problem via density-based clustering (DBSCAN) [24]. We visualize the whole point cloud in purple, and dynamic points, used as input to
our method and baseline to localize moving instances, in green. We color-code individual segmented instances. From left to right SeMoLi
(i) segments objects even for sparse point clouds and suffers less from under-segmentation, (ii) is able to learn to filter noise from the
filtered point cloud, (iii) leads to less over-segmentation, and (iv) generalizes better to different classes. Best seen in color, zoomed.

Abstract
We tackle semi-supervised object detection based on motion cues. Recent results suggest that heuristic-based clustering methods in conjunction with object trackers can be
used to pseudo-label instances of moving objects and use
these as supervisory signals to train 3D object detectors in
Lidar data without manual supervision. We re-think this
approach and suggest that both, object detection, as well as
motion-inspired pseudo-labeling, can be tackled in a datadriven manner. We leverage recent advances in scene flow
estimation to obtain point trajectories from which we extract long-term, class-agnostic motion patterns. Revisiting correlation clustering in the context of message passing networks, we learn to group those motion patterns to
cluster points to object instances. By estimating the full extent of the objects, we obtain per-scan 3D bounding boxes
that we use to supervise a Lidar object detection network.
Our method not only outperforms prior heuristic-based approaches (57.5 AP, +14 improvement over prior work),
more importantly, we show we can pseudo-label and train
object detectors across datasets.
∗ Correspondence to j.seidenschwarz@tum.de.

1. Introduction
We tackle semi-supervised object detection in Lidar data in
the context of embodied navigation.
Status quo. The established approach to 3D Lidar object detection is to pre-define object classes of interest and
train data-driven models with manually labeled data in a
fully supervised fashion. Thanks to Lidar-centric labeled
datasets [3, 10, 33] and developments in learning representations from unordered point sets [28, 29], the quality in
Lidar-based detection continues to improve. However, this
process that relies on manual labeling is notoriously expensive and, importantly, does not scale well to rare classes.
Before the advent of end-to-end data-driven Lidar perception, pioneering works [12, 13, 22, 23, 34, 35, 47] were inspired by the Gestalt principle [40] of spatial proximity, i.e.,
the intuition that spatially close-by points belong together.
To this end, these works utilize local, distance-based point
clustering methods to segment objects via bottom-up grouping. They are class-agnostic and general, but inherently unable to benefit from the increasing amount of available data,
and therefore, fall behind data-driven methods. Recently,
heuristic approaches resurfaced within multi-stage pipelines
for data auto-labeling in the context of semi-supervised 3D

14685

