This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIBS: Enhancing Dense Video Captioning with Unlabeled Videos via
Pseudo Boundary Enrichment and Online Refinement
1,2 ♣

2,3 ♣

2

2B

Hao Wu
, Huabin Liu
, Yu Qiao , Xiao Sun
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wuhao@mail.ustc.edu.cn, huabinliu@sjtu.edu.cn, {qiaoyu, sunxiao}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
We present Dive Into the BoundarieS (DIBS), a novel
pretraining framework for dense video captioning (DVC),
that elaborates on improving the quality of the generated
event captions and their associated pseudo event boundaries from unlabeled videos. By leveraging the capabilities of diverse large language models (LLMs), we generate rich DVC-oriented caption candidates and optimize
the corresponding pseudo boundaries under several meticulously designed objectives, considering diversity, eventcentricity, temporal ordering, and coherence. Moreover, we
further introduce a novel online boundary refinement strategy that iteratively improves the quality of pseudo boundaries during training. Comprehensive experiments have
been conducted to examine the effectiveness of the proposed technique components. By leveraging a substantial
amount of unlabeled video data, such as HowTo100M [16],
we achieve a remarkable advancement on standard DVC
datasets like YouCook2 [31] and ActivityNet [13]. We outperform the previous state-of-the-art Vid2Seq [27] across
a majority of metrics, achieving this with just 0.4% of the
unlabeled video data used for pre-training by Vid2Seq.

1. Introduction
Dense video captioning (DVC), a challenging task in video
understanding, involves the temporal localization and captioning of all events within an untrimmed video [12]. Compared to standard video captioning that generates a single
caption for a short video clip [4, 26, 30], the complexity
of dense captioning significantly increases as it requires localizing multiple events in long-term video sequences and
much more detailed captioning.
Particularly, the event boundary is paramount in dense
♣ Co-first authors. Work done as interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
B Corresponding author.

video captioning. It provides precise event localization, ensuring the generated captions are accurate, coherent, and
contextually relevant. Unfortunately, data containing precise event boundaries is rare and expensive to annotate. This
scarcity poses a substantial performance bottleneck.
Pioneering efforts have been made to address data shortage challenges in DVC. Notably, several weakly supervised
approaches [3, 6] have endeavored to approximate fully
supervised performance without relying on all the boundary annotations provided by existing datasets, thereby circumventing the need for such annotations. However, these
methods take a conservative approach to the problem by
carefully re-designing the DVC training or testing framework, aiming to theoretically develop self-sufficient techniques and reduce the reliance on precise boundary annotations. They have not yet substantially incorporated largerscale data for training purposes to drive improved performance. Instead, we take a direct approach to address the
fundamental data scarcity issues. Specifically, we introduce
an effective method for generating and enhancing pseudo
boundaries and harnessing the capabilities of LLMs to produce higher-quality coherent captions. Given the enhanced
captions, their corresponding boundaries are generated and
further optimized using a carefully designed unified metric
and optimization algorithm, ultimately achieving optimal
quality. Moreover, we deploy this approach on a substantial
volume of unannotated, large-scale video data, effectively
bolstering the training data for the DVC task and thereby
resulting in a notable performance improvement.
Similar to our motivation, Vid2Seq [27] also emphasizes
the utilization of large-scale unlabeled video data for model
training to boost performance. They first propose a singlestage DVC framework that collectively predicts all event
captions and corresponding temporal boundaries by generating a single sequence of discrete tokens. Then, this
framework is pre-trained on numerous unlabeled narrated
videos, where the target event captions and boundaries are
obtained directly from the text and timestamps of subtitles

18699

