This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dexterous Grasp Transformer
Guo-Hao Xu* 1 , Yi-Lin Wei* 1 , Dian Zheng 1 , Xiao-Ming Wu 1 , Wei-Shi Zheng † 1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{xugh23, weiylin5, zhengd35, wuxm65}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Robotic dexterous grasping stands as a fundamental and
critical task in the field of robotics and computer vision, offering a versatile and fine-grained approach with extensive
applications in industrial production and daily scenarios.
With the development of deep learning and large-scale
datasets for dexterous grasp generation, learning-based
methods achieve considerable performance in grasping
quality and generalizability [3, 11, 12]. Concurrently, ac* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Generative Models

Sample N times

Generative
Model
condition

Generative
Model
N grasps

condition

Train

Inference

(b) Vanilla Discriminative Models
Object
Encoder

FFN

Grasp Features

(c) Our DGTR Model

Grasp Features
...

Object
Encoder

Transformer
Decoder

FFN

...

In this work, we propose a novel discriminative framework for dexterous grasp generation, named Dexterous
Grasp TRansformer (DGTR), capable of predicting a diverse set of feasible grasp poses by processing the object
point cloud with only one forward pass. We formulate dexterous grasp generation as a set prediction task and design
a transformer-based grasping model for it. However, we
identify that this set prediction paradigm encounters several optimization challenges in the field of dexterous grasping and results in restricted performance. To address these
issues, we propose progressive strategies for both the training and testing phases. First, the dynamic-static matching
training (DSMT) strategy is presented to enhance the optimization stability during the training phase. Second, we introduce the adversarial-balanced test-time adaptation (ABTTA) with a pair of adversarial losses to improve grasping quality during the testing phase. Experimental results
on the DexGraspNet dataset demonstrate the capability of
DGTR to predict dexterous grasp poses with both high
quality and diversity. Notably, while keeping high quality, the diversity of grasp poses predicted by DGTR significantly outperforms previous works in multiple metrics
without any data pre-processing. Codes are available at
https://github.com/iSEE-Laboratory/DGTR.

wszheng@ieee.org

...

Learnable Grasp Queries

Figure 1. Comparison of DGTR and other dexterous grasping
frameworks. The generative models (a) usually learn the distribution of the grasp poses conditioned on the object point cloud.
At test time, they mainly infer multiple times to generate several
grasps but produce nearly identical grasp poses with the same condition. The vanilla discriminative models (b) mainly learn to predict one grasp pose for the input point cloud. Our DGTR model (c)
adopts a transformer decoder and learnable queries, and learns to
predict a set of diverse grasps poses with one forward pass.

quiring grasping diversity (especially grasping from various
directions) is also a crucial task [18, 41] as it provides the
robot with robustness and task flexibility during the manipulation task. Previous learning-based approaches mostly utilize generative models to model the grasp distribution conditioned on the object point cloud as shown in Figure 1 (a).
However, conditional generative models may consistently
generate nearly identical outputs (given the same input) at
inference time due to the powerful condition [31, 42], except for a diffusion-based model [11], which can generate
diverse grasps but with low quality. Alternatively, vanilla
discriminative models shown in Figure 1 (b) can only predict a single grasp pose for one input object [19]. Therefore, to obtain diversity, both of them have to rotate the

17933

