This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Image Restoration through
Removing Degradations in Textual Representations
Jingbo Lin1 , Zhilu Zhang1 , Yuxiang Wei1 , Dongwei Ren1, *, Dongsheng Jiang2 , Qi Tian2 , Wangmeng Zuo1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Huawei Cloud Computing Co., Ltd.
jblincs1996@gmail.com, cszlzhang@outlook.com, yuxiang.wei.cs@gmail.com,
rendongweihit@gmail.com, dongsheng jiang@outlook.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com, cswmzuo@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new perspective for improving image restoration by removing degradation in the
textual representations of a given degraded image. Intuitively, restoration is much easier on text modality than image one. For example, it can be easily conducted by removing degradation-related words while keeping the contentaware words. Hence, we combine the advantages of images in detail description and ones of text in degradation
removal to perform restoration. To address the cross-modal
assistance, we propose to map the degraded images into
textual representations for removing the degradations, and
then convert the restored textual representations into a guidance image for assisting image restoration. In particular, We ingeniously embed an image-to-text mapper and
text restoration module into CLIP-equipped text-to-image
models to generate the guidance. Then, we adopt a simple coarse-to-fine approach to dynamically inject multiscale information from guidance to image restoration networks. Extensive experiments are conducted on various image restoration tasks, including deblurring, dehazing, deraining, and denoising, and all-in-one image restoration.
The results showcase that our method outperforms stateof-the-art ones across all these tasks. The codes and models are available at https://github.com/mrluin/
TextualDegRemoval.

1. Introduction
Image restoration aims to reconstruct a high-quality clean
image from its degraded observations. Most existing methods design deep networks for specific restoration tasks, including image denoising [55, 111, 115, 117, 119], deblurring [13, 14, 18, 93, 110], deraining [16, 93, 98, 110], dehazing [8, 19, 36, 88, 90], etc. Recent works [15, 50, 69,
71, 114, 124] expect to explore a unified model for multiple
* Correspondence author.

degradations. However, the severely ill-posed nature of the
task makes it non-trivial to separate degradations and desired image content. Especially for unified models, the potential conflicts in dealing with various degradations bring
more uncertainty.
From a broader perspective, the purpose of the restoration is to enhance the clarity of scenes for human perception
and recognition, while performing it on image modality is
just one option. Moreover, degradations in image modality are tightly coupled with desirable content, making their
removal challenging. When recording the scenes in some
other modalities, this problem can be alleviated. Let us take
the text modality as an example. Assume the textual description of a clean scene is represented by ‘a scene of ∗’.
When this scene is subjected to rainfall, the description can
be converted into ‘a rainy scene of ∗’. Thus, deraining can
be readily achieved by simply removing the rain-related text
‘rainy’. Furthermore, it is also convenient to remove multiple degradations in textual space with one unified model.
Note that text modality may only describe rough aspects and
ignore some details. We can further introduce image modality to combine their complementary potential in degradation
removal and image restoration.
Motivated by the above, we propose to perform restoration first in a modality where degradations and content are
loosely coupled, and then utilize the corrected content to
guide image restoration. In particular, we adopt the commonly used textual modality. Note that the text corresponding to the scene is not always available and the cross-modal
assistance is difficult to achieve directly. The gap between
text and image should be bridged. First, degraded images
should be mapped into textual space for removing degradations. Second, the restored text should be mapped into a
guidance image to assist restoration of the degraded image.
As shown in Fig. 1, for the former, we have tried to convert
degraded images to textual captions by image-to-text (I2T)
models (e.g., BLIP [51, 52]), and find the captions can explicitly express both degradation types (e.g., blur, rain, haze,
and noise) and content information. For the latter, we can

2866

