This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Shot Structure-Aware Stylized Image Synthesis
Hansam Cho1,2∗ , Jonghyun Lee1,2∗ , Seunggyu Chang1 , Yonghyun Jeong1†
1
NAVER Cloud, 2 School of Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea University
{chosam95, tomtom1103}@korea.ac.kr,
{seunggyu.chang, yonghyun.jeong}@navercorp.com
Input

Style

MTG

JoJoGAN

DiffuseIT

InST

OSASIS (Ours)

(a) One-shot image stylization

(b) One-shot image stylization with OOD reference image

Figure 1. OSASIS is able to (a) stylize an input image with a single reference image while robustly preserving the structure and content of
the input image. It is also able to (b) incorporate out-of-domain (OOD) data as the reference image while other baseline methods fail

Abstract
While GAN-based models have been successful in image
stylization tasks, they often struggle with structure preservation while stylizing a wide range of input images. Recently, diffusion models have been adopted for image stylization but still lack the capability to maintain the original
quality of input images. Building on this, we propose OSASIS: a novel one-shot stylization method that is robust in
structure preservation. We show that OSASIS is able to effectively disentangle the semantics from the structure of an
image, allowing it to control the level of content and style
implemented to a given input. We apply OSASIS to various experimental settings, including stylization with outof-domain reference images and stylization with text-driven
manipulation. Results show that OSASIS outperforms other
stylization methods, especially for input images that were
rarely encountered during training, providing a promising
solution to stylization via diffusion models. The source code
can be found at https://github.com/hansam95/OSASIS.
* Work done during an internship at NAVER Cloud.
† Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
In the literature of generative models, image stylization
refers to training a model in order to transfer the style of
a reference image to various input images during inference [21, 22, 28]. However, collecting a sufficient number of images that share a particular style for training
can be difficult. Consequently, one-shot stylization has
emerged as a viable and practical solution, with generative adversarial networks (GANs) showing promising results [2, 16, 36, 38, 39].
Despite significant advancements in GAN-based stylization techniques, the accurate preservation of an input image’s structure continues to pose a significant challenge.
This difficulty is particularly pronounced for input images
that contain elements infrequently encountered during training, often characterized by complex structural nuances that
diverge from those observed in more commonly presented
images. Figure 1(a) illustrates this challenge, where entities
such as hands and microphones, when processed through
GAN-based stylization, diverge considerably from their
original structural integrity. In addition, GAN-based styl-

8302

