This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D IFFUSE M IX: Label-Preserving Data Augmentation with Diffusion Models
Khawar Islam1
1

FloppyDisk.AI
1

Muhammad Zaigham Zaheer2
2

Arif Mahmood3

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2

khawarr.islam@gmail.com

3

Karthik Nandakumar2

Information Technology University, Punjab

{zaigham.zaheer, karthik.nandakumar}@mbzuai.ac.ae

3

arif.mahmood@itu.edu.pk

Source (S)

CutMix (S+T)

Mixup (S+T)

GridMix (S+T)

ResizeMix (S+T)

PuzzleMix (S+T)

SmoothMix (S+T)

AdaAutoMix (S+T)

Target (T)

AugMix (T)

PixMix (T)

IPMix (T)

DiffuseMix (S)

DiffuseMix (S)

DiffuseMix (T)

DiffuseMix (T)

Figure 1. Top row: existing mixup methods interpolate two different training images [22, 48]. Bottom row: label-preserving methods.
For each input image, D IFFUSE M IX employs conditional prompts to obtain generated images. The input image is then concatenated with
a generated image to obtain a hybrid image. Each hybrid image is blended with a random fractal to obtain the final training image.

Abstract
Recently, a number of image-mixing-based augmentation techniques have been introduced to improve the generalization of deep neural networks. In these techniques,
two or more randomly selected natural images are mixed
together to generate an augmented image. Such methods may not only omit important portions of the input images but also introduce label ambiguities by mixing images
across labels resulting in misleading supervisory signals.
To address these limitations, we propose D IFFUSE M IX, a
novel data augmentation technique that leverages a diffusion model to reshape training images, supervised by our
bespoke conditional prompts. First, concatenation of a
partial natural image and its generated counterpart is obtained which helps in avoiding the generation of unrealistic
images or label ambiguities. Then, to enhance resilience
against adversarial attacks and improves safety measures,
a randomly selected structural pattern from a set of fractal images is blended into the concatenated image to form
the final augmented image for training. Our empirical results on seven different datasets reveal that D IFFUSE M IX
achieves superior performance compared to existing stateof-the-art methods on tasks including general classification,
fine-grained classification, fine-tuning, data scarcity, and
adversarial robustness. Augmented datasets and codes are
available here: https://diffusemix.github.io/

1. Introduction
In the era of deep learning, image-mixing-based data augmentation techniques stand out for their simplicity and
effectiveness in addressing the generalization of learning
models toward testing scenarios [3, 6, 19, 21–23, 23, 34,
40, 46, 50]. These techniques ingeniously mix randomly
selected natural images and their respective labels from the
training dataset using a number of mixing combinations to
synthesize new augmented images and labels. Such a process often implies linear interpolation of data, resulting in
the generation of novel training images. These approaches
have been proven to be effective in improving the performance of deep models [13, 19, 36, 45, 48],.
However, these techniques may face a number of challenges such as the omission of salient image regions (Figure 1) and label ambiguities due to random placements of
images [23]. A few researchers have attempted to alleviate
these issues by introducing saliency-based mixup strategies
in which important regions of one image are pasted onto
the less important portions (mainly context) of another image [21, 23, 40]. These methods not only suffer from the
costs but also the shortcomings of saliency detection methods. Moreover, as these methods still rely on mixing of two
or more images belonging to different classes, the underlying issue of omitting the important context still persists.
Recently, Diffusion Models [11, 12, 31, 37, 38] have
emerged as transformative approaches offering image-to-

27621

