This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L-MAGIC: Language Model Assisted Generation of Images with Coherence
Zhipeng Cai* Matthias Mueller Reiner Birkl Diana Wofk Shao-Yen Tseng
Junda Cheng Gabriela Ben-Melech Stan Vasudev Lai Michael Paulitsch
Intel Labs
Abstract

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have achieved state-of-the-art performance in image generation. However, generating a 360
panoramic scene from a single perspective image remains
a challenge, which is an important problem in many computer vision applications, such as architecture design, movie
scene creation, and virtual reality (VR).
Training a model to directly generate panoramic images is challenging due to the lack of diverse large-scale
datasets. Hence, most existing works separate panoramic
scenes into multiple perspective views, and inpaint them us* Corresponding author (zhipeng.cai@intel.com)

es Dep
tim th
ati
on

In the current era of generative AI breakthroughs, generating panoramic scenes from a single input image remains
a key challenge. Most existing methods use diffusion-based
iterative or simultaneous multi-view inpainting. However,
the lack of global scene layout priors leads to subpar outputs with duplicated objects (e.g., multiple beds in a bedroom) or requires time-consuming human text inputs for
each view. We propose L-MAGIC, a novel method leveraging large language models for guidance while diffusing multiple coherent views of 360 panoramic scenes. L-MAGIC
harnesses pre-trained diffusion and language models without fine-tuning, ensuring zero-shot performance. The output
quality is further enhanced by super-resolution and multiview fusion techniques. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the resulting panoramic scenes feature better scene layouts and perspective view rendering quality compared to related works, with >70% preference in human evaluations.
Combined with conditional diffusion models, L-MAGIC can
accept various input modalities, including but not limited
to text, depth maps, sketches, and colored scripts. Applying depth estimation further enables 3D point cloud generation and dynamic scene exploration with fluid camera
motion. Code is available at https://github.com/
ZhipengCai/L-MAGIC-code-release.

L-MAGIC

Figure 1. Teaser. L-MAGIC is a novel method to generate a 360
panoramic scene from a single input image. L-MAGIC utilizes
large language models to control perspective diffusion models to
generate multiple views with coherent 360 layout. L-MAGIC is
also compatible with images synthesized by conditional generative models, making it capable of creating panoramic scenes from
various input modalities. A set of perspective images rather than
a single panoramic image also allows our method to leverage offthe-shelf monocular depth estimation models to enable immersive
experiences, e.g., scene fly-through or 3D point cloud generation.

ing pre-trained diffusion models. To ensure generalization,
the diffusion model is either frozen without any architecture change [11] or combined with extra modules trained on
small datasets for integrating multi-view information [25].
A common approach to encode the scene information during multi-view inpainting is to provide a textconditioned diffusion model with the description of the input image, which is generated by a user or an image captioning model [13]. Though effective for extending local
scene content, such approaches suffer from incoherence
in the overall scene layout. Specifically, using the same
text description for diffusing different views along the 360
panorama leads to artifacts and unnecessarily repeated objects. Current inpainting methods have no mechanism to
leverage global scene information in individual views.
In this work, we show that state-of-the-art (vision) language models, without fine-tuning, can be used to control
multi-view diffusion and effectively address the above problem. We propose L-MAGIC (Fig. 1), a novel framework

7049

