This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing the Unseen: Visual Common Sense for Semantic Placement
Ram Ramrakhya1∗ Aniruddha Kembhavi2 Dhruv Batra1 Zsolt Kira1 Kuo-Hao Zeng2† Luca Weihs2†
1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology

{ram.ramrakhya,dbatra,zk15}@gatech.edu

2

PRIOR @ Allen Institute of AI
2

{anik,khzeng,lucaw}@allenai.org

Project Page: ram81.github.io/projects/seeing-unseen

Where can I put cushions?

Embodied Semantic Placement

Full of cushions

Full of cushions
Cushion should go on
armchair for comfort.

Cushion would look better
on the couch.

right side of the gray sofa
leaning against the armrest
also presents a tidy option
for a cushion.

in the center of the gray
sofa's seat, which is
currently unoccupied.

(c)
(b)
(a)
Figure 1. Semantic Placement. Consider asking an agent to place cushions in a living room. In (a), the couch on the right is already full
with cushions, and a natural human preference would be to place the cushion against the backrest of the armchair. In (b), a natural placement
preference would be center of the couch. We propose the problem of Semantic Placement (SP) – given an image and a name of an object, a
vision system must predict a semantic mask indicating a valid placement for the object in the image. For both (a) and (b) GPT4V gives
meaningful natural language responses but, as we show, struggles to localize regions precisely in pixel space. (c) Our SP predictions enable
a Stretch robot [1] from Hello Robot to perform Embodied Semantic Placement (eSP) task within a photorealistic simulated environment.

Abstract
Computer vision tasks typically involve describing what is
present in an image (e.g. classification, detection, segmentation, and captioning). We study a visual common sense task
that requires understanding ‘what is not present’. Specifically, given an image (e.g. of a living room) and a name
of an object ("cushion"), a vision system is asked to predict
semantically-meaningful regions (masks or bounding boxes)
in the image where that object could be placed or is likely
be placed by humans (e.g. on the sofa). We call this task: Semantic Placement (SP) and believe that such common-sense
visual understanding is critical for assitive robots (tidying a
house), AR devices (automatically rendering an object in the
user’s space), and visually-grounded chatbots with common
sense. Studying the invisible is hard. Datasets for image
description are typically constructed by curating relevant
images (e.g. via image search with object names) and asking
humans to annotate the contents of the image; neither of
those two steps are straightforward for objects not present in

the image. We overcome this challenge by operating in the
opposite direction: we start with an image of an object in
context, which is easy to find online, and then remove that object from the image via inpainting. This automated pipeline
converts unstructured web data into a dataset comprising
pairs of images with/without the object. With this proposed
data generation pipeline, we collect a novel dataset, containing ∼1.3M images across 9 object categories. We then train
a SP prediction model, called CLIP-UNet, on our dataset.
The CLIP-UNet outperforms existing VLMs and baselines
that combine semantic priors with object detectors, generalizes well to real-world and simulated images and exhibits
semantics-aware reasoning for object placement. In our
user studies, we find that the SP masks predicted by CLIPUNet are favored 43.7% and 31.3% times when comparing
against the 4 SP baselines on real and simulated images. In
addition, leveraging SP mask predictions from CLIP-UNet
enables downstream applications like building tidying robots
in indoor environments.

∗ Work done as part of the internship at PRIOR @ AI2
† Equal advising

16273

