This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DFIRES: Few Image 3D REconstruction for Scenes with Hidden Surfaces
Linyi Jin1 , Nilesh Kulkarni1 , David F. Fouhey2
University of Michigan1 , New York University2
{jinlinyi,nileshk}@umich.edu, david.fouhey@nyu.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces 3DFIRES, a novel system for
scene-level 3D reconstruction from posed images. Designed
to work with as few as one view, 3DFIRES reconstructs
the complete geometry of unseen scenes, including hidden surfaces. With multiple view inputs, our method produces full reconstruction within all camera frustums. A
key feature of our approach is the fusion of multi-view information at the feature level, enabling the production of
coherent and comprehensive 3D reconstruction. We train
our system on non-watertight scans from large-scale real
scene dataset. We show it matches the efficacy of singleview reconstruction methods with only one input and surpasses existing techniques in both quantitative and qualitative measures for sparse-view 3D reconstruction. Project
page: https://jinlinyi.github.io/3DFIRES/

1. Introduction
Consider two views of the scene in Fig. 1. Part of the bedroom in View 1 is occluded by the wall, and so you may
be uncertain what is behind it, although you might guess
the wall continues. Now consider adding in View 2. You
can see a bedside table, but little else. However, you can
fuse these pieces together to create a consistent 3D sense of
the scene viewed by the images, including both the visible
and invisible parts. We use this sense when shopping for
real estate or looking at a friend’s photos. We estimate the
structure of the scene from parts that are visible to all views;
integrate information across images for parts that visible in
one view but not others; and take educated guesses for completely occluded regions. Importantly, as the available data
increases from one camera to a handful, we can seamlessly
integrate the evidence across views.
This task poses a challenge for current computer vision
since it requires making judgments about visible and occluded 3D structures and integrating information across images with large pose change. These abilities are usually
independently investigated in two separate strands of research. With single image reconstruction techniques [15,

View 1

View 2

?

3DFIRES

View 1 Frustum Prediction

Full Prediction

Figure 1. Reconstructing 3D from sparsely posed images.
Given a sparse set of posed image views, our method is able to
reconstruct the full 3D of the scene. On the top, we show two
sparse views of the scene in View 1 and View 2. On the bottom
left is the 3D reconstruction from our network in the frustum of
View 1. We show that our method can generate the occluded side
table (zoom in). On the bottom right is the full reconstruction. We
color occluded surfaces with surface normals.

20, 26, 41, 43], one can predict both visible and occluded
3D structure from an image, but stacking such outputs from
multiple images can produce inconsistent outputs. When
handled independently, methods cannot identify the best
view to reason about an occluded region. Non-line-of-sight
imaging involves transmitting and receiving signals to reveal hidden scenes, incompatible with standard camera images [14]. Sparse view reconstruction methods [1, 17, 39]
can create consistent reconstructions from two views; however, these approaches are limited to the visible parts of the
scene that can decomposed into planes. Moreover, these
methods are usually specialized to a particular number of
images that can be accepted.
Recently, there has been considerable progress in generalized radiance fields, which produce full 3D representations. This occupancy representation and per-scene optimization has shown promising results by optimizing for

9742

