This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVDTree: Semantic Voxel Diffusion for Single Image Tree Reconstruction
Yuan Li1†

Zhihao Liu2†

Bedrich Benes3

Xiaopeng Zhang1,4

Jianwei Guo1,4∗

1

3

MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 The University of Tokyo
Computer Science, Purdue University 4 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Figure 1. SVDTree for single image tree reconstruction. Given a masked image, we use a diffusion model to automatically infer a semantic
voxel structure of the tree, which guides a hybrid geometry reconstruction algorithm to produce a 3D tree with high visual fidelity.

Abstract
Efficiently representing and reconstructing the 3D geometry of biological trees remains a challenging problem
in computer vision and graphics. We propose a novel approach for generating realistic tree models from singleview photographs. We cast the 3D information inference
problem to a semantic voxel diffusion process, which converts an input image of a tree to a novel Semantic Voxel
Structure (SVS) in 3D space. The SVS encodes the geometric appearance and semantic structural information
(e.g., classifying trunks, branches, and leaves), which retains the intricate internal tree features. Tailored to the SVS,
we present SVDTree a new hybrid tree modeling approach
by combining structure-oriented branch reconstruction and
self-organization-based foliage reconstruction. We validate
SVDTree by using images from both synthetic and real trees.
The comparison results show that our approach can better
preserve tree details and achieve more realistic and accurate reconstruction results than previous methods.

1. Introduction
Vegetation is an indispensable part of natural and urban
scenes. However, capturing the vegetation is a complex task
that is dominated by procedural models [46, 48, 52, 66]. Recently, plant reconstruction methods have seen a significant
improvement and have found applications in areas such as
† Joint first authors with equal contributions.
∗ Corresponding author: jianwei.guo@nlpr.ia.ac.cn.

plant geometry and topology for vision-assisted plant phenotyping [19, 37], forestry [24] or counting [44].
Research on 3D tree model acquisition has received considerable attention for decades, but accurately reconstructing trees is still challenging because of the tree’s topological and geometric complexity. Previous works often separate the branch and foliage reconstruction, by first to reconstructing high-level branching structures from sensor data
and then modeling the foliage by synthesizing twigs and
leaves using a procedural model. For example, reconstruction from LiDAR point clouds achieves faithful skeletal
branches using graph-based methods [32, 63], while the foliage can be approximated as 3D envelopes for populating
geometry details with predefined rules [33]. The 2D skeletons can be efficiently estimated and fused into a 3D branching structure from multi-view photographs [22, 34, 57].
However, scans often generate incomplete point clouds due
to occlusion [3]. Furthermore, image matching and registration from multiple images do not perform robustly on trees
with complexity, translucency, and self-occlusions, leading
to an unsatisfying point cloud with large reconstruction errors. Moreover, multiple views are not always available,
making the single-view reconstruction often a more flexible and cost-effective solution to generate 3D tree models,
especially on a large scale [2].
We introduce the SVDTree framework that reconstructs
high-fidelity trees from single-image photographs. Our approach is motivated by the record-breaking performance
of diffusion models in many digital content generation
tasks [64]. We formulate the estimation problem as a semantic voxel diffusion process to recover 3D information

4692

