This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Don’t Look into the Dark: Latent Codes for Pluralistic Image Inpainting
Haiwei Chen, Yajie Zhao
University of Southern California
USC Institute for Creative Technologies
{chenh,zhao}@ict.usc.edu

Input

Ours

Input

Ours₁

Ours2

Ours3

Ours4

Figure 1. Inpainting results on the Places Dataset [50] (first two rows) and the CelebA-HQ Dataset [18] (third row). Our method is able to
diversely complete partial image with free-form, large holes with state-of-the-art visual quality.

Abstract
We present a method for large-mask pluralistic image inpainting based on the generative framework of discrete latent codes. Our method learns latent priors, discretized as
tokens, by only performing computations at the visible locations of the image. This is realized by a restrictive partial
encoder that predicts the token label for each visible block,
a bidirectional transformer that infers the missing labels by
only looking at these tokens, and a dedicated synthesis network that couples the tokens with the partial image priors
to generate coherent and pluralistic complete image even
under extreme mask settings. Experiments on public benchmarks validate our design choices as the proposed method
outperforms strong baselines in both visual quality and diversity metrics.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting is the task of filling the missing pixels of
a masked image with appropriate contents that are coherent to its visible regions. As a long-studied topic in computer vision, image inpainting has evolved from a restoration technique solely relying on existing information from
the input image (e.g. [3]) to data-driven generative methods
(e.g. [23, 27, 36, 41, 44, 48]) that hallucinates detailed contents from not only the observable pixels but also learned,
rich image priors.
Pluralistic inpainting refers to the ability of a model to
generate multiple plausible results that complete a partial
image. It offers a view of image inpainting as a generative method that models the smooth distributions of the
complete images given the partial image as prior information [48]. However, modeling such distributions is challeng-

7591

