This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RobustSAM: Segment Anything Robustly on Degraded Images
Wei-Ting Chen1,2†
1

Yu-Jiet Vong1

Sy-Yen Kuo1

National Taiwan University

Haze

Jian Wang2*

Snap Inc.

Low-light

Rain

RobustSAM

SAM

Input

Blur

2

Sizhou Ma2*

Figure 1. Comparative results of SAM and RobustSAM under different degradations using unseen datasets: RobustSAM outperforms with precise boundaries and intact structures, where SAM falters with errors and fragmentation. Red star points and bounding boxes
are our examples’ input prompts.

Abstract
Segment Anything Model (SAM) has emerged as a transformative approach in image segmentation, acclaimed for
its robust zero-shot segmentation capabilities and flexible
prompting system. Nonetheless, its performance is challenged by images with degraded quality. Addressing this
limitation, we propose the Robust Segment Anything Model
(RobustSAM), which enhances SAM’s performance on lowquality images while preserving its promptability and zeroshot generalization. Our method leverages the pre-trained
SAM model with only marginal parameter increments and
computational requirements. The additional parameters
of RobustSAM can be optimized within 30 hours on eight
GPUs, demonstrating its feasibility and practicality for typ-

ical research laboratories. We also introduce the RobustSeg dataset, a collection of 688K image-mask pairs with
different degradations designed to train and evaluate our
model optimally. Extensive experiments across various segmentation tasks and datasets confirm RobustSAM’s superior performance, especially under zero-shot conditions,
underscoring its potential for extensive real-world application. Additionally, our method has been shown to effectively
improve the performance of SAM-based downstream tasks
such as single image dehazing and deblurring.

Project Page: https://robustsam.github.io
† Part of the work done during internship at Snap Research.
* Co-corresponding authors

4081

