This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamControl: Control-Based Text-to-3D Generation with 3D Self-Prior
Tianyu Huang1,3 Yihan Zeng2 Zhilu Zhang1 Wan Xu1 Hang Xu2
Songcen Xu2 Rynson W. H. Lau3 Wangmeng Zuo1†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 City University of Hong Kong

Abstract

1. Introduction
Digital 3D content plays a crucial role in various fields,
including medicine, education, entertainment, etc. Generating 3D content in an automatic system is thus raising more and more attention. Recently, with the success
of score distillation sampling [26] (SDS), 2D-lifting technique [2, 16, 20, 26, 33] becomes a promising route to
3D generation, where the pre-trained 2D diffusion models [24, 27, 29] are utilized to optimize 3D representations.
Compared with methods [5, 10, 12, 23, 34] that are supervised with 3D assets, 2D-lifting technique is capable of generating high-fidelity 3D textures in open-world scenarios.
Nonetheless, the results generated by 2D-lifting meth-

Viewpoint Bias

“A corgi

low confidence

, back view”
, front view”
, side view”

Iter 400

Overfitting

3D generation has raised great attention in recent years.
With the success of text-to-image diffusion models, the 2Dlifting technique becomes a promising route to controllable 3D generation. However, these methods tend to
present inconsistent geometry, which is also known as the
Janus problem. We observe that the problem is caused
mainly by two aspects, i.e., viewpoint bias in 2D diffusion models and overfitting of the optimization objective.
To address it, we propose a two-stage 2D-lifting framework, namely DreamControl, which optimizes coarse NeRF
scenes as 3D self-prior and then generates fine-grained
objects with control-based score distillation. Specifically,
adaptive viewpoint sampling and boundary integrity metric
are proposed to ensure the consistency of generated priors.
The priors are then regarded as input conditions to maintain reasonable geometries, in which conditional LoRA and
weighted score are further proposed to optimize detailed
textures. DreamControl can generate high-quality 3D content in terms of both geometry consistency and texture fidelity. Moreover, our control-based optimization guidance
is applicable to more downstream tasks, including userguided generation and 3D animation. The project page is
available at https://github.com/tyhuang0428/
DreamControl.

high confidence

…

…

3D Space
Iter 800

…

2D Spaces
Iter 1200

…

Figure 1. Main causes of inconsistent 3D generation. Images sampled by 2D diffusion models are biased in viewpoint distribution.
The generation confidence decreases as the viewpoint turns from
front to back. 3D representations are thus gradually overfitted to
the highest probability image during the optimization, generating
artifacts as shown in red b-boxes.

ods tend to present inconsistent 3D geometry, e.g., multiface, also known as the Janus problem. Some recent
works [14, 17–19, 31, 41] attribute this problem primarily
to the lack of view awareness in 2D diffusion models. They
propose to incorporate 3D prior knowledge into 2D diffusion models, thus learning to perceive view-dependent conditions. Albeit the improvement of geometry consistency,
it compromises texture fidelity and fine-grained details, as
the used 3D contents are mostly created manually in a cartoonish style. Moreover, the limited scale of available 3D
assets affects the generalizability of these methods, making
it challenging to acquire a comprehensive 3D prior.
Rethinking the optimization target of SDS, i.e., creating
3D models that look like good images when rendered from
random angles, we observe that the causes of 3D inconsistency can be further divided into two terms: (1) viewpoint

5364

