This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLaMA-Excitor: General Instruction Tuning via Indirect Feature Interaction
Bo Zou *
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Chao Yang *
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Shanghai, China

Yu Qiao
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Shanghai, China

zoub21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

yangchao@pjlab.org.cn

qiaoyu@pjlab.org.cn

Chengbin Quan
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
quancb@tsinghua.edu.cn

Youjian Zhao †
Tsinghua University
Zhongguancun Laboratory
Beijing, China
zhaoyoujian@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing methods to fine-tune LLMs, like Adapter, Prefixtuning, and LoRA, which introduce extra modules or additional input sequences to inject new skills or knowledge,
may compromise the innate abilities of LLMs. In this paper,
we propose LLaMA-Excitor, a lightweight method that stimulates the LLMs’ potential to better follow instructions by
gradually paying more attention to worthwhile information.
Specifically, LLaMA-Excitor does not directly change the
intermediate hidden state during the self-attention calculation. We designed the Excitor block as a bypass module that
reconstructs Keys and changes the importance of Values in
self-attention using learnable prompts. LLaMA-Excitor ensures a self-adaptive allocation of additional attention to
input instructions, thus effectively preserving LLMs’ pretrained knowledge when fine-tuning LLMs on low-quality
instruction-following datasets. Furthermore, we unify the
modeling of multi-modal and language-only tuning, extending LLaMA-Excitor to a powerful visual instruction follower without the need for complex multi-modal alignment.
Our approach is evaluated in language-only and multimodal scenarios. Compared with the original LLaMA-7B,
LLaMA-Excitor is the only PEFT method that maintains
basic capabilities and achieves +3.12% relative improvement on the MMLU benchmark. In the visual instruction
tuning, we achieve a new state-of-the-art image captioning performance on MSCOCO (157.5 CIDEr), and a comparable performance on ScienceQA (88.39%) to cuttingedge models with more parameters and extensive visionlanguage pertaining. The code will be available at https:
//zoubo9034.github.io/Excitor/.
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

This work was done during an internship at Shanghai AI Lab.

Figure 1. Overview of LLaMA-Excitor. We integrate Excitor
blocks into L out of N attention layers of LLaMA. Differing from
previous PEFT techniques, LLaMA-Excitor indirectly involves
learnable information in the reasoning process by changing the
similarity matrices. It ensures that the hidden states are within the
original distribution of LLaMA.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are highly advanced tools
that enable contextual information processing, understanding, and generation. They serve as powerful knowledge
bases that can be used to gain valuable insights and create new content [9, 10, 37, 39, 52]. Fine-tuning them for
downstream tasks has also achieved great success in vari-

14089

