This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AMU-Tuning: Effective Logit Bias for CLIP-based Few-shot Learning
Yuwei Tang∗ , Zhenyi Lin∗ , Qilong Wang† , Pengfei Zhu, Qinghua Hu
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
{tangyuwei, linzhenyi, qlwang, zhupengfei, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, pre-trained vision-language models (e.g.,
CLIP) have shown great potential in few-shot learning and
attracted a lot of research interest. Although efforts have
been made to improve few-shot ability of CLIP, key factors
on the effectiveness of existing methods have not been well
studied, limiting further exploration of CLIP’s potential in
few-shot learning. In this paper, we first introduce a unified formulation to analyze CLIP-based few-shot learning
methods from a perspective of logit bias, which encourages
us to learn an effective logit bias for further improving performance of CLIP-based few-shot learning methods. To this
end, we disassemble three key components involved in computation of logit bias (i.e., logit features, logit predictor,
and logit fusion) and empirically analyze the effect on performance of few-shot classification. Based on analysis of
key components, this paper proposes a novel AMU-Tuning
method to learn effective logit bias for CLIP-based fewshot classification. Specifically, our AMU-Tuning predicts
logit bias by exploiting the appropriate Auxiliary features,
which are fed into an efficient feature-initialized linear classifier with Multi-branch training. Finally, an Uncertaintybased fusion is developed to incorporate logit bias into
CLIP for few-shot classification. The experiments are conducted on several widely used benchmarks, and the results show AMU-Tuning clearly outperforms its counterparts while achieving state-of-the-art performance of CLIPbased few-shot learning without bells and whistles.

1. Introduction
In recent years, large-scale vision-language models [1, 11,
27, 38, 43, 59, 62] have attracted large amounts of research attention in computer vision community (especially
∗ Equal contributions made by Y. Tang and Z. Lin, † Corresponding author is Q. Wang. This work was supported in part by National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62276186, 61925602,
62222608, in part by CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open Fund under Grant
CAAIXSJLJJ-2022-010 C, in part by Tianjin Natural Science Funds for
Distinguished Young Scholar under Grant 23JCJQJC00270, and in part by
the Haihe Lab of ITAI under Grant 22HHXCJC00002.

Prompt

+

CLIP

(a) Prompt Tuning

CLIP

CLIP

+ Adapter

(b) Adapter Tuning

Aux

+

CLIP

DINO
Cache

(c) Cache Tuning

Learnable

MTFi
Predictor

Frozen

(d) AMU-Tuning (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of the existing CLIP-based few-shot learning methods in terms of architecture design.

CLIP [43]), due to the remarkable performance on downstream tasks, e.g., zero-shot generalization ability [18, 56,
61]. Recently, some efforts have been made to improve the
transfer learning ability of CLIP given a limited set of training samples [17, 63, 64, 66, 67], i.e., CLIP-based few-shot
learning. These methods can be roughly divided into three
categories: (1) prompt tuning [66, 67]; (2) adapter-based
tuning [17, 63]; (3) cache-based tuning [63, 64]. Specifically, as illustrated in Fig. 1, prompt-tuning methods improve the few-shot learning ability of CLIP by introducing
learnable text prompt [66, 67] for the text encoder of CLIP.
For adapter-based tuning, some lightweight modules, e.g.,
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) [17], are built at the end of
text and visual encoders to adjust text and visual features for
downstream tasks. Subsequently, cache-based tuning methods [63, 64] present “soft” K-nearest neighbor classifiers
storing visual features and labels of training samples, which
are combined with zero-shot CLIP for final classification.
Although many works have been studied to improve
the few-shot generalization ability of CLIP, the relationship
among the existing methods seems a bit loose. More importantly, the key factors on the effectiveness of existing
methods have not been well studied, which limits further
exploring the potential of CLIP to few-shot learning. Therefore, this paper introduces a unified formulation to analyze
CLIP-based few-shot learning methods from a perspective

23323

