This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Predicated Diffusion: Predicate Logic-Based Attention Guidance for
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Kota Sueyoshi, Takashi Matsubara
Osaka University
1-3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531 Japan.
sueyoshi@hopf.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp, matsubara@sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success
in generating high-quality, diverse, and creative images.
However, in text-based image generation, they often struggle to accurately capture the intended meaning of the text.
For instance, a specified object might not be generated,
or an adjective might incorrectly alter unintended objects.
Moreover, we found that relationships indicating possession between objects are frequently overlooked. Despite the
diversity of users’ intentions in text, existing methods often focus on only some aspects of these intentions. In this
paper, we propose Predicated Diffusion, a unified framework designed to more effectively express users’ intentions.
It represents the intended meaning as propositions using
predicate logic and treats the pixels in attention maps as
fuzzy predicates. This approach provides a differentiable
loss function that offers guidance for the image generation
process to better fulfill the propositions. Comparative evaluations with existing methods demonstrated that Predicated
Diffusion excels in generating images faithful to various text
prompts, while maintaining high image quality, as validated
by human evaluators and pretrained image-text models.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in deep learning have paved the way
for generating high-quality, diverse, and creative images.
This progress is primarily attributed to diffusion models [13, 35], which recursively update images to remove
noise and to make them more realistic. Diffusion models are
significantly more stable and scalable compared to previous
methods, such as generative adversarial networks [9, 26]
or autoregressive models [16, 36]. Moreover, the field of
text-based image generation is attracting considerable attention, with the goal being to generate images faithful to
a text prompt given as input. Even in this area, the contributions of diffusion models are notable [28]. We can

Prompts

Missing
Objects
a yellow car
and
a blue bird

Object
Mixture
a bird
and
a cat

Attribute
Possession
Leakage
Failure
a green balloon
a boy
and
grasping
a purple clock a soccer ball

Stable
Diffusion

Predicated
Diffusion
(Ours)

Figure 1. Visualizations of typical challenges in text-based image
generation using diffusion models. The proposed Predicated Diffusion can address all of these challenges.

benefit from commercial applications such as DALL-E [29]
and Imagen [33], as well as the state-of-the-art open-source
model, Stable Diffusion [24, 31]. These models are trained
on large-scale and diverse image-text datasets, which allows
them to respond to a variety of prompts and to generate images of objects with colors, shapes, and materials not found
in the existing datasets.
However, many previous studies have pointed out that
these models often generate images that ignore the intended meanings of a given prompt, as exemplified in
Fig. 1 [2, 6, 30, 39]. When multiple objects are specified in a
prompt, only some are generated, with the others disappearing (see the column missing objects in Fig. 1). Also, two
specified objects are sometimes mixed together to form one
object in the generated image (object mixture). Given an adjective in a prompt, it alters a different object than the one
the adjective was originally intended to modify (attribute
leakage). We have found a novel challenge: while a prompt
specifies an object being held by someone, the object is depicted as if discarded on the ground (possession failure).
Since retraining diffusion models on large-scale datasets is
prohibitively expensive, many studies have proposed meth-

8651

