This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single-Model and Any-Modality for Video Object Tracking
Zongwei Wu1 Jilai Zheng2 Xiangxuan Ren2 Florin-Alexandru Vasluianu1
Chao Ma2 * Danda Pani Paudel3 Luc Van Gool3,4 Radu Timofte1
1 Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Wurzburg
3 INSAIT, Sofia University

2 AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

4 CVL, ETH Zurich

Abstract
In the realm of video object tracking, auxiliary modalities such as depth, thermal, or event data have emerged
as valuable assets to complement the RGB trackers. In
practice, most existing RGB trackers learn a single set
of parameters to use them across datasets and applications. However, a similar single-model unification for multimodality tracking presents several challenges. These challenges stem from the inherent heterogeneity of inputs – each
with modality-specific representations, the scarcity of multimodal datasets, and the absence of all the modalities at
all times. In this work, we introduce Un-Track, a Unified
Tracker of a single set of parameters for any modality. To
handle any modality, our method learns their common latent space through low-rank factorization and reconstruction techniques. More importantly, we use only the RGBX pairs to learn the common latent space. This unique
shared representation seamlessly binds all modalities together, enabling effective unification and accommodating
any missing modality, all within a single transformer-based
architecture. Our Un-Track achieves +8.1 absolute F-score
gain, on the DepthTrack dataset, by introducing only +2.14
(over 21.50) GFLOPs with +6.6M (over 93M) parameters,
through a simple yet efficient prompting strategy. Extensive comparisons on five benchmark datasets with different
modalities show that Un-Track surpasses both SOTA unified
trackers and modality-specific counterparts, validating our
effectiveness and practicality. The source code is publicly
available at https://github.com/Zongwei97/
UnTrack.

1. Introduction
Video object tracking [9, 12, 86, 90] is a fundamental task
in computer vision with wide-ranging applications spanning
from surveillance [89] to augmented reality [23], where
accuracy and robustness are paramount. While traditional
* Corresponding author.

RGB-Event

RGB-Thermal

Training with Paired RGB-X Data

RGB-Depth

Track with RGB-T

Un-Track
One Tracker with Any Modality

Track with RGB-D

Track with RGB-E

Figure 1. Un-Track is a unified tracker with a single parameter set
that seamlessly integrates any modality (of RGB-X).

RGB trackers have shown promise in general settings, they
often struggle with challenging scenarios such as occlusions [40, 47], low visibility [83, 92], or fast-moving objects
[10, 48]. For more reliable tracking under such challenging
conditions, the integration of auxiliary modalities (X) like
depth [20, 68], thermal [83, 87], and event [79, 98] have
proven effective in multimodal tracking.
While the idea of fusing RGB with other modalities
holds promise [82, 84], the main challenge is the discrepancy in the representation of information across different
modalities. Despite the success of previous fusion works
[15, 60] tailored for each specific scenario to improve RGB
trackers, their reliance on modality-specific designs limits
adaptability. Recent initiatives [69, 91] towards a uniform
architecture for various modalities show promise but necessitate modality-specific fine-tuning. This approach leads to
multiple parameter sets, as shown in Fig. 1(a), thereby compromising practicality in diverse real-world applications.
In this work, we aim to avoid such modality-specific
fine-tuning to keep only one model-parameter set at all
times. Another practical constraint arises from the differ-

19156

