This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Order-Preserving and Transferability for Neural Architecture Search:
a Joint Architecture Refined Search and Fine-tuning Approach
Beichen Zhang, Xiaoxing Wang, Xiaohan Qin, Junchi Yan*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zhangbeichen,figure1 wxx,galaxy-1,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/beichenzbc/Supernet-shifting

Abstract
Supernet is a core component in many recent Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods. It not only helps embody
the search space but also provides a (relative) estimation
of the final performance of candidate architectures. Thus,
it is critical that the top architectures ranked by a supernet should be consistent with those ranked by true performance, which is known as the order-preserving ability. In
this work, we analyze the order-preserving ability on the
whole search space (global) and a sub-space of top architectures (local), and empirically show that the local orderpreserving for current two-stage NAS methods still need to
be improved. To rectify this, we propose a novel concept of
Supernet Shifting, a refined search strategy combining architecture searching with supernet fine-tuning. Specifically,
apart from evaluating, the training loss is also accumulated
in searching and the supernet is updated every iteration.
Since superior architectures are sampled more frequently in
evolutionary searching, the supernet is encouraged to focus
on top architectures, thus improving local order-preserving.
Besides, a pre-trained supernet is often un-reusable for oneshot methods. We show that Supernet Shifting can fulfill
transferring supernet to a new dataset. Specifically, the last
classifier layer will be unset and trained through evolutionary searching. Comprehensive experiments show that our
method has better order-preserving ability and can find a
dominating architecture. Moreover, the pre-trained supernet can be easily transferred into a new dataset with no loss
of performance.

* Correspondence author. The work was partly supported by NSFC
(92370201, 62222607).

Figure 1. An illustration of global and local order-preserving ability. For global one, we care about coarse-grained comparison to
wipe out poor architectures in entire search space. For local one,
we care about fine-grained comparison to rank the architectures in
a subspace of top architectures.

1. Introduction
Apart from traditional manually designed neural networks
e.g. VGG [27] and RESNET [13], Neural Architecture
Search (NAS), as an important part of Automated Machine
Learning (AutoML), aims to automatically search an optimal architecture in a certain search space.
Early NAS approaches [2, 19, 39, 40] adopt a timeconsuming pipeline by sampling architectures and training
their weights separately. To speed up the search procedure,
many recent approaches introduce performance estimators
for each architecture. Though there exists a performance estimation gap, the search stage focuses more on the relative
ranking of architectures rather than true performance.
Some works [18, 23, 30] propose zero-cost proxies,
which only require one forward step or one backward step.
Nevertheless, it cannot perform consistently well on diverse tasks [1]. Other works [3, 6, 24] build up a supernet that contains all candidate operations and connections
in the search space. Once a supernet is trained, all architectures can be quickly evaluated by loading the supernet
weight. Since such a supernet-based performance estimator
is widely used, the order-preserving ability, i.e. whether the

5662

