This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploiting Style Latent Flows for Generalizing Deepfake Video Detection
Jongwook Choi1,2
1

Taehoon Kim1

Yonghyun Jeong3

Seungryul Baek4

Jongwon Choi1,2 *

Dept. of Advanced Imaging, Chung-Ang Univ, Korea 2 GS. of AI, Chung-Ang Univ, Korea
3

Image Vision, NAVER Cloud, Korea 4 AI Graduate School, UNIST, Korea

{cjw, kimth}@vilab.cau.ac.kr, yonghyun.jeong@navercorp.com, srbaek@unist.ac.kr, choijw@cau.ac.kr

Abstract

DFD-real
DFD-fake

1.0

Style latent variance

This paper presents a new approach for the detection of
fake videos, based on the analysis of style latent vectors and
their abnormal behavior in temporal changes in the generated videos. We discovered that the generated facial videos
suffer from the temporal distinctiveness in the temporal
changes of style latent vectors, which are inevitable during
the generation of temporally stable videos with various facial expressions and geometric transformations. Our framework utilizes the StyleGRU module, trained by contrastive
learning, to represent the dynamic properties of style latent
vectors. Additionally, we introduce a style attention module
that integrates StyleGRU-generated features with contentbased features, enabling the detection of visual and temporal artifacts. We demonstrate our approach across various
benchmark scenarios in deepfake detection, showing its superiority in cross-dataset and cross-manipulation scenarios. Through further analysis, we also validate the importance of using temporal changes of style latent vectors to
improve the generality of deepfake video detection.

1.5

0.5
0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

Youtube-real
Celeb-Synthesis

0.4
0.2
0.0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

Style latent level

Figure 1. Variance of style flow for each style latent level. The xaxis shows the level of style latent vectors for fine style representations. We noticed that the level-wise differences vary across deepfake domains, but the variance of style latent vectors is particularly
lower in certain levels of the style latent vectors for fake videos
than in real videos. This happens due to the temporal smoothness of the style latent vectors to create temporally stable deepfake
videos, and our results demonstrate that deepfake videos have a
distinct variance in style flow compared to real videos.

1. Introduction
Recent generative algorithms are capable of producing
high-quality videos; while this advancement has led to social concerns, as it becomes increasingly challenging to distinguish between generated videos and authentic ones. Generative models have the potential to expedite industries such
as entertainment, gaming, fashion, design, and education.
However, their misuse can have adverse effects on society.
The high quality of the videos intensifies the potential for
inappropriate utilization of the technique. To resolve the
issue, researchers are actively engaged in developing the
deepfake video detection algorithms [19, 29, 40].
Early deepfake detection research addressed spatial artifacts such as unnatural aspects [30] and frequency-level
checkerboard of the generative model [33] in the genera* Corresponding author

tion of a single frame. While spatial artifact-based detection methods have shown reasonable performance for single images, they failed in accounting for temporal artifacts
in deepfake videos that consist of multiple frames. To address the limitation, recent studies [15, 41] integrate temporal cues such as flickering [14, 57] and discontinuity [16] to
enhance the accuracy of deepfake video detection task.
Nevertheless, existing methods [28, 51] that exploit
visual and temporal cues of generated videos encountered performance degradation when attempting to identify
videos produced by recent deepfake generation algorithms,
which effectively suppress visual and temporal artifacts.
Recent observations [36, 39] have presented a decline in
the effectiveness of visual artifact-based algorithms against
newly developed high-quality generation techniques [11,
37]. Temporal artifact-based algorithms [16] also experi-

1133

