This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LaRE2 : Latent Reconstruction Error Based Method
for Diffusion-Generated Image Detection
Yunpeng Luo

Junlong Du Ke Yan* Shouhong Ding
Tencent YouTu Lab

{petterluo, jeffdu, kerwinyan, ericshding}@tencent.com

Abstract
The evolution of Diffusion Models has dramatically improved image generation quality, making it increasingly difficult to differentiate between real and generated images.
This development, while impressive, also raises significant
privacy and security concerns. In response to this, we propose a novel Latent REconstruction error guided feature
REfinement method (LaRE2 ) for detecting the diffusiongenerated images. We come up with the Latent Reconstruction Error (LaRE), the first reconstruction-error based feature in the latent space for generated image detection. LaRE
surpasses existing methods in terms of feature extraction efficiency while preserving crucial cues required to differentiate between the real and the fake. To exploit LaRE, we propose an Error-Guided feature REfinement module (EGRE),
which can refine the image feature guided by LaRE to enhance the discriminativeness of the feature. Our EGRE utilizes an align-then-refine mechanism, which effectively refines the image feature for generated-image detection from
both spatial and channel perspectives. Extensive experiments on the large-scale GenImage benchmark demonstrate the superiority of our LaRE 2 , which surpasses the
best SoTA method by up to 11.9%/12.1% average ACC/AP
across 8 different image generators. LaRE also surpasses
existing methods in terms of feature extraction cost, delivering an impressive speed enhancement of 8 times.

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of Diffusion Models has heralded a new era in the domain of image generation. Through
concerted efforts in refining model architecture [9, 32, 33],
optimizing training strategies [15, 27], and enhancing sampling methods [20, 34], contemporary Diffusion Models are
now capable of generating images of unprecedented quality,
surpassing the boundaries of human imagination. However,
this progress raises significant concerns regarding privacy
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. (a) The comparison of reconstruction-based feature extraction. Existing method [40] chooses to completely reconstruct
an image by first gradually adding noise to the image and then denoising it, which involves dozens of sampling steps. Our method
can directly calculate noisy images and denoise them with a single sample step. (b) Statistical analysis of the relationship between
the single-step reconstruction loss (1000 images are used) and time
step. The obvious gap between the two lines indicates that singlestep reconstruction can also reflect the differences between real
and generated images. (c) Comparison of the cost of per image
feature extraction. Our method is 8x faster than DIRE [40].

and security associated with the generated images [16]. The
potential for the dissemination of toxic content and misinformation through these images poses a threat to society and
could mislead the public. Consequently, there is an urgent
need to develop techniques to detect the images generated
by these models.
A flurry of works [6, 7, 21, 31, 40, 41] has been proposed to detect or study the properties of images generated
by diffusion models. Recently, DIRE [40] has been proposed to leverage the reconstruction error as a discriminative feature for diffusion-generated image detection. It is
based on the assumption that the diffusion-generated images are more easily to be reconstructed by a diffusion

17006

