This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Infinigen Indoors: Photorealistic Indoor Scenes using Procedural Generation
Alexander Raistrick∗ , Lingjie Mei∗ , Karhan Kayan∗ , (∗ equal contribution; random order)
David Yan, Yiming Zuo, Beining Han, Hongyu Wen, Meenal Parakh,
Stamatis Alexandropoulos, Lahav Lipson, Zeyu Ma, Jia Deng
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University

Abstract
We introduce Infinigen Indoors, a Blender-based procedural generator of photorealistic indoor scenes. It builds
upon the existing Infinigen system, which focuses on natural
scenes, but expands its coverage to indoor scenes by introducing a diverse library of procedural indoor assets, including furniture, architecture elements, appliances, and other
day-to-day objects. It also introduces a constraint-based
arrangement system, which consists of a domain-specific
language for expressing diverse constraints on scene composition, and a solver that generates scene compositions
that maximally satisfy the constraints. We provide an export tool that allows the generated 3D objects and scenes
to be directly used for training embodied agents in realtime simulators such as Omniverse and Unreal. Infinigen
Indoors is open-sourced under the BSD license. Please visit
infinigen.org for code and videos.

1. Introduction
Synthetic data rendered by conventional computer graphics has seen increasing adoption in computer vision[10,
38, 41, 42, 46, 48, 61] and AI research[20, 28, 76], especially for 3D vision[26, 45, 71, 73–75, 83] and embodied
AI[12, 32, 36, 68, 70, 87]. Synthetic data can be rendered
in unlimited quantities and can automatically provide highquality 3D ground truth, enabling large-scale training of
computer vision models and embodied agents. Notably,
many state-of-the-art 3D vision systems[72, 75] and robotic
systems [33, 39] have been trained purely in simulation yet
perform surprisingly well in the real world zero-shot.
A promising direction for creating synthetic data is procedural generation, which uses mathematical rules to create
3D objects and scenes, as opposed to manual sculpting or
real-world scanning. These mathematical rules can have parameters that are randomized to allow infinite variations. For
example, trees can be generated through a recursive set of
rules that randomly branch off. Compared to reusing a fixed,
static set of 3D assets, procedural generation can greatly

improve the diversity of the synthetic data and the simulated
environments.
Infinigen [60] is a recent work that pushed the idea of
procedural generation to the limit. Infinigen is an opensource system that generates photorealistic 3D scenes fully
procedurally, meaning that every 3D asset, from shape to
material, from large structures to small details, is completely
procedural, without using any external static asset. Being
fully procedural means that every aspect of the 3D scene,
from the details of individual objects to their arrangements
in a scene, can be customized and controlled by simply
modifying the underlying mathematical rules. As a result,
a 3D scene can be randomized at all levels down to the
smallest details, as opposed to only at the level of object
arrangement, which was common in earlier work that used
procedural generation.
However, the current Infinigen system is limited to natural
scenes and objects (terrains, animals, plants, etc.). Although
natural scenes could be sufficient for training foundation
models as evidenced by natural evolution [60], this hypothesis remains unproven and may require additional advances
in learning algorithms and architecture designs. Evidence
from the current literature suggests that synthetic training
data that more closely approximates the application domain
is still likely to lead to better downstream performance.
To overcome this limitation, we introduce Infinigen Indoors, a procedural generator of photorealistic indoor scenes.
It expands the coverage of Infinigen to indoor scenes, which
are relevant for many high-impact applications including
robotics and augmented reality. Infinigen Indoors generates
diverse indoor objects, including furniture, appliances, cookware, dining utensils, architectural elements, and other common day-to-day objects. It also generates full indoor scenes,
including the interior of multi-room, multi-floor buildings,
with object arrangements that are physically and semantically plausible. Fig. 1 shows random samples of generated
scenes, and Fig. 2 shows some automatic annotations.
Like the original Infinigen, Infinigen Indoors is not a
fixed set of 3D models or scenes; instead, it is an opensource generator that can create unlimited variations both

21783

