This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cam4DOcc: Benchmark for Camera-Only 4D Occupancy Forecasting
in Autonomous Driving Applications
Junyi Ma1,3 * Xieyuanli Chen2 * Jiawei Huang3 Jingyi Xu4 Zhen Luo5
Jintao Xu3 Weihao Gu3 Rui Ai3 Hesheng Wang1†
1
IRMV Lab, Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
3
HAOMO.AI 4 NAV, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 IVRC, Beijing Institute of Technology
Abstract

Cam4DOcc
Dataset in Novel Format

Understanding how the surrounding environment
changes is crucial for performing downstream tasks safely
and reliably in autonomous driving applications. Recent
occupancy estimation techniques using only camera images
as input can provide dense occupancy representations
of large-scale scenes based on the current observation.
However, they are mostly limited to representing the
current 3D space and do not consider the future state
of surrounding objects along the time axis. To extend
camera-only occupancy estimation into spatiotemporal
prediction, we propose Cam4DOcc, a new benchmark
for camera-only 4D occupancy forecasting, evaluating
the surrounding scene changes in a near future. We
build our benchmark based on multiple publicly available
datasets, including nuScenes, nuScenes-Occupancy, and
Lyft-Level5, which provides sequential occupancy states
of general movable and static objects, as well as their 3D
backward centripetal flow. To establish this benchmark
for future research with comprehensive comparisons, we
introduce four baseline types from diverse camera-based
perception and prediction implementations, including a
static-world occupancy model, voxelization of point cloud
prediction, 2D-3D instance-based prediction, and our
proposed novel end-to-end 4D occupancy forecasting network. Furthermore, the standardized evaluation protocol
for preset multiple tasks is also provided to compare the
performance of all the proposed baselines on present and
future occupancy estimation with respect to objects of
interest in autonomous driving scenarios. The dataset and
our implementation of all four baselines in the proposed
Cam4DOcc benchmark are released as open source at
https://github.com/haomo-ai/Cam4DOcc.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: wanghesheng@sjtu.edu.cn

Sequential
Camera Images

Occupancy Prediction

Point Cloud Prediction

BEV-Based Semantic
Prediction

End-to-End Occupancy
Forecasting

Standardized
Evaluation
Protocol

Figure 1. Cam4DOcc focuses on providing a novel dataset format,
creating baselines modified from off-the-shelf camera-based perception and prediction approaches, and proposing a standardized
evaluation protocol for the 4D occupancy forecasting task.

1. Introduction
Accurately perceiving the status of objects in surrounding
environments using cameras is important for autonomous
vehicles or robots to make reasonable downstream planning and action decisions. Traditional camera-based perception methods for object detection [30, 37, 44, 51], semantic segmentation [5, 24, 31, 49], and panoptic segmentation [9, 16, 27, 43] focus on predefined specific object
categories, making them less effective at recognizing uncommon objects. To tackle this limitation, a shift towards
camera-based occupancy estimation [17, 29, 41, 45, 47] has
emerged by estimating the spatial occupancy states over
classifying specific objects. It reduces the complexity of
multi-class classification tasks and emphasizes general occupied state estimation, enhancing the reliability and adaptability of autonomous mobile systems.
Despite the increasing attention to camera-based occupancy estimation, existing methods only estimate the current and past occupancy status. However, advanced collision avoidance and trajectory optimization methods employed by autonomous vehicles [10, 11, 39] require the

21486

