This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-to-3D using Gaussian Splatting
Zilong Chen, Feng Wang, Yikai Wang, Huaping Liu†
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
chenzl22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hpliu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Project Page: gsgen3d.github.io

Figure 1. Delicate 3D assets generated by the proposed G SGEN. See the project page for videos.

Abstract
Automatic text-to-3D generation that combines Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) with the optimization of volume
rendering has achieved remarkable progress in synthesizing
realistic 3D objects. Yet most existing text-to-3D methods by
SDS and volume rendering suffer from inaccurate geometry,
e.g., the Janus issue, since it is hard to explicitly integrate 3D
priors into implicit 3D representations. Besides, it is usually
time-consuming for them to generate elaborate 3D models
with rich colors. In response, this paper proposes G SGEN, a
novel method that adopts Gaussian Splatting, a recent stateof-the-art representation, to text-to-3D generation. G SGEN
aims at generating high-quality 3D objects and addressing existing shortcomings by exploiting the explicit nature
of Gaussian Splatting that enables the incorporation of 3D
prior. Specifically, our method adopts a progressive optimization strategy, which includes a geometry optimization stage
and an appearance refinement stage. In geometry optimiza† Corresponding author

tion, a coarse representation is established under 3D point
cloud diffusion prior along with the ordinary 2D SDS optimization, ensuring a sensible and 3D-consistent rough shape.
Subsequently, the obtained Gaussians undergo an iterative
appearance refinement to enrich texture details. In this stage,
we increase the number of Gaussians by compactness-based
densification to enhance continuity and improve fidelity. With
these designs, our approach can generate 3D assets with delicate details and accurate geometry. Extensive evaluations
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, especially for
capturing high-frequency components. Our code is available
at https://github.com/gsgen3d/gsgen.

1. Introduction
Diffusion model based text-to-image generation [1, 55, 57,
58] has achieved remarkable success in synthesizing photorealistic images from textual prompts. Nevertheless, for highquality text-to-3D content generation, the advancements lag
behind that of image generation due to the inherent complex-

21401

