This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniVS: Unified and Universal Video Segmentation with Prompts as Queries
Minghan Li1,2 ,* Shuai Li1,2∗ , Xindong Zhang2 and Lei Zhang1,2†
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 OPPO Research Institute
liminghan0330@gmail.com, xindongzhang@foxmail.com, {csshuaili, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Figure 1. Illustration of different video segmentation (VS) tasks. Category-specified VS includes VIS, VSS and VPS tasks, while promptspecified VS consists of VOS, RefVOS and PVOS tasks. Please find more video demos on our project page https://sites.google.
com/view/unified-video-seg-univs.

Abstract
Despite the recent advances in unified image segmentation (IS), developing a unified video segmentation (VS)
model remains a challenge. This is mainly because generic
category-specified VS tasks need to detect all objects and
track them across consecutive frames, while prompt-guided
VS tasks require re-identifying the target with visual/text
prompts throughout the entire video, making it hard to handle the different tasks with the same architecture. We make
an attempt to address these issues and present a novel unified VS architecture, namely UniVS, by using prompts as
queries. UniVS averages the prompt features of the target from previous frames as its initial query to explicitly
decode masks, and introduces a target-wise prompt crossattention layer in the mask decoder to integrate prompt features in the memory pool. By taking the predicted masks
of entities from previous frames as their visual prompts,
UniVS converts different VS tasks into prompt-guided target
segmentation, eliminating the heuristic inter-frame match* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.

ing process. Our framework not only unifies the different VS tasks but also naturally achieves universal training
and testing, ensuring robust performance across different
scenarios. UniVS shows a commendable balance between
performance and universality on 10 challenging VS benchmarks, covering video instance, semantic, panoptic, object,
and referring segmentation tasks. Code can be found at
https://github.com/MinghanLi/UniVS.

1. Introduction
Video segmentation (VS) partitions a video sequence into
different regions or segments, facilitating many applications such as semantic-guided video restoration [35, 66, 75],
video generation [54, 61], video editing and augmented
reality [18, 69, 91], etc. VS tasks can be divided into
two groups: category-specified VS and prompt-specified
VS. The former focuses on segmenting and tracking entities from a predefined set of categories. Typical tasks
along this line include video instance [58, 81], semantic
[52] and panoptic segmentation [26, 51] (VIS/VSS/VPS),
13227

