This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing Unseen: Discover Novel Biomedical Concepts via GeometryConstrained Probabilistic Modeling
Jianan Fan1 , Dongnan Liu1 , Hang Chang2 , Heng Huang3 , Mei Chen4 , and Weidong Cai1
1

University of Sydney

2

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

3

University of Maryland at College Park

4

Microsoft

jfan6480@uni.sydney.edu.au
dongnan.liu@sydney.edu.au
hchang@lbl.gov
henghuanghh@gmail.com
Mei.Chen@microsoft.com
tom.cai@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Machine learning holds tremendous promise for transforming the fundamental practice of scientific discovery by
virtue of its data-driven nature. With the ever-increasing
stream of research data collection, it would be appealing
to autonomously explore patterns and insights from observational data for discovering novel classes of phenotypes
and concepts. However, in the biomedical domain, there
are several challenges inherently presented in the cumulated data which hamper the progress of novel class discovery. The non-i.i.d. data distribution accompanied by
the severe imbalance among different groups of classes essentially leads to ambiguous and biased semantic representations. In this work, we present a geometry-constrained
probabilistic modeling treatment to resolve the identified issues. First, we propose to parameterize the approximated
posterior of instance embedding as a marginal von MisesFisher distribution to account for the interference of distributional latent bias. Then, we incorporate a suite of critical
geometric properties to impose proper constraints on the
layout of constructed embedding space, which in turn minimizes the uncontrollable risk for unknown class learning
and structuring. Furthermore, a spectral graph-theoretic
method is devised to estimate the number of potential novel
classes. It inherits two intriguing merits compared to existent approaches, namely high computational efficiency and
flexibility for taxonomy-adaptive estimation. Extensive experiments across various biomedical scenarios substantiate
the effectiveness and general applicability of our method.

1. Introduction
The rapid progress in deep learning (DL) has invigorated enormous interests for automating essential stages in
biomedical image analysis through data-driven methodologies [7, 42]. However, the transformative potential of DL
to facilitate scientific discovery at the fundamental level remains largely untapped. Specifically, the success of existing works hinges on expert-curated data annotations in

Non i.i.d.

Base Space

Open Space

Embeddings on
Hypersphere
Proxies deﬁned
a priori
vMF
probabilistic
modeling
Non-uniform
class
distribution

class 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
base
novel

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of the main insight. In the
biomedical domain, violation of the i.i.d. assumption incurred
by inconsistent imaging protocols across cohorts and non-uniform
class distributions due to scarcity of rare classes could deteriorate the generalizability of learned representations for novel class
discovery. We propose to address those issues via probabilistic
modeling on a hyperspherical manifold and incorporation of geometrical inductive biases for countering semantic ambiguity and
open space risk.

which associated biomedical structures (e.g., cells, tissues)
and disease categories are defined a priori [30, 13]. They
have little to offer for exploring unknown concepts and discovering expressive profiles for novel/undefined biomedical phenotypes from observational data alone. For instance,
cell, the basic unit of human biological system, exhibits
vast diversity with hundreds of different types and states
[33]. Compared with cumbersome manual pattern identification and grouping of cell populations, autonomously mining new classes of cells with their morphological and functional characteristics could greatly speed up the scientific
discovery progress of biomedical research.
To this end, we study the problem of discovering novel
concepts from biomedical imaging data, under the Generalized Novel Class Discovery setting [44]. Given a reference dataset within a set of well-defined base categories,

11524

