This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CA-Jaccard: Camera-aware Jaccard Distance for Person Re-identification
Yiyu Chen, Zheyi Fan, Zhaoru Chen, Yixuan Zhu
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
{yiyuchen1998, Cchenzhaoru}@gmail.com, {funye, zhuyixuan}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (re-ID) is a challenging task that
aims to learn discriminative features for person retrieval.
In person re-ID, Jaccard distance is a widely used distance metric, especially in re-ranking and clustering scenarios. However, we discover that camera variation has
a significant negative impact on the reliability of Jaccard
distance. In particular, Jaccard distance calculates the distance based on the overlap of relevant neighbors. Due to
camera variation, intra-camera samples dominate the relevant neighbors, which reduces the reliability of the neighbors by introducing intra-camera negative samples and excluding inter-camera positive samples. To overcome this
problem, we propose a novel camera-aware Jaccard (CAJaccard) distance that leverages camera information to enhance the reliability of Jaccard distance. Specifically, we
design camera-aware k-reciprocal nearest neighbors (CKRNNs) to find k-reciprocal nearest neighbors on the intracamera and inter-camera ranking lists, which improves the
reliability of relevant neighbors and guarantees the contribution of inter-camera samples in the overlap. Moreover, we propose a camera-aware local query expansion
(CLQE) to mine reliable samples in relevant neighbors by
exploiting camera variation as a strong constraint and assign these samples higher weights in overlap, further improving the reliability. Our CA-Jaccard distance is simple
yet effective and can serve as a general distance metric for
person re-ID methods with high reliability and low computational cost. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Code is available at https:
//github.com/chen960/CA-Jaccard/.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims to retrieve persons
across non-overlapping camera views. It has drawn wide
attention due to the growing demand for intelligent surveillance systems. Thanks to the advancement of deep learning,
supervised re-ID methods [6, 25, 30, 33, 50] have achieved
remarkable performance. However, these methods rely on

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the average proportion of intra-camera
and inter-camera samples in k-nearest neighbors of all samples.
Due to camera variation, the average proportion of intra-camera
samples in all samples’ k-nearest neighbors is significantly higher
than that of inter-camera samples. (b) Comparison of the feature spaces of using Jaccard distance and our CA-Jaccard distance.
Different colors represent different identities and different shapes
indicate different camera labels.

sufficient person identity annotations, limiting their application in real world scenarios. Hence, recent studies have
focused on unsupervised re-ID, seeking to learn discriminative features using unlabeled data.
Recently, most state-of-the-art unsupervised re-ID methods, i.e. clustering-based re-ID methods [10, 13, 15, 44, 46],
generally employ a iterative two-stage training procedure:
1) generating pseudo labels based on the Jaccard distance
[51] between all training samples using a clustering algorithm [3, 11, 23]; 2) training the re-ID model with the generated pseudo labels. Despite their effectiveness, these methods still suffer from label noise. To overcome the above
problem, numerous approaches [8, 14, 15, 17, 38, 43, 45]
have been proposed. These approaches focus on improving
or refining pseudo labels after clustering.
Moreover, there also have some re-ranking methods [24,
28, 51] are proposed to further improve the performance of
re-ID methods. K-reciprocal re-ranking [51] is a popular

17532

