This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compressed 3D Gaussian Splatting for Accelerated Novel View Synthesis
Simon Niedermayr

Josef Stumpfegger

Rüdiger Westermann

simon.niedermayr@tum.de

ga87tux@mytum.de

westermann@tum.de

Technical University of Munich

Abstract
Recently, high-fidelity scene reconstruction with an optimized 3D Gaussian splat representation has been introduced for novel view synthesis from sparse image sets. Making such representations suitable for applications like network streaming and rendering on low-power devices requires significantly reduced memory consumption as well
as improved rendering efficiency. We propose a compressed
3D Gaussian splat representation that utilizes sensitivityaware vector clustering with quantization-aware training
to compress directional colors and Gaussian parameters.
The learned codebooks have low bitrates and achieve a
compression rate of up to 31× on real-world scenes with
only minimal degradation of visual quality. We demonstrate
that the compressed splat representation can be efficiently
rendered with hardware rasterization on lightweight GPUs
at up to 4× higher framerates than reported via an optimized GPU compute pipeline. Extensive experiments across
multiple datasets demonstrate the robustness and rendering
speed of the proposed approach.

54 FPS

93 FPS

211 FPS

321 FPS

31× Compression

25.2 PSNR / 1.5 GB

25.0 PSNR / 47 MB

Figure 1. Our method achieves a 31× compression at indiscernible
loss in image quality and greatly improves rendering speed compared to [13]. Framerates in grey and white, respectively, are taken
on NVIDIA’s RTX 3070M and RTX A5000 at 1080p resolution.

1. Introduction

memory resources. This affects both the training and rendering times and often prohibits the use of such representations in applications like network streaming and mobile
rendering. To overcome these limitations, dedicated compression schemes for the learned parametrizations on regular grids have been proposed, including vector quantized
feature encoding [15], learned tensor decomposition [3] or
frequency domain transformations[20, 32].

Novel view synthesis aims to generate new views of a 3D
scene or object by interpolating from a sparse set of images
with known camera parameters. NeRF [16] and its variants
have proposed the use of direct volume rendering to learn
a volumetric radiance field from which novel views can be
rendered. However, expensive neural network evaluations
prohibit efficient training and rendering. Recent research
utilizes explicit scene representations such as voxel-based
[24] or point-based structures [29] to enhance rendering efficiency. The use of 3D voxel grids on the GPU in combination with a multiresolution hash encoding of the input
[17] significantly reduces the operations needed and permits
real-time performance.
While achieving excellent reconstruction quality and
speed, many NeRF-style approaches require exhaustive

Recently, differentiable 3D Gaussian splatting [13] has
been introduced to generate a sparse adaptive scene representation that can be rendered at high speed on the GPU.The
scene is modeled as a set of 3D Gaussians with shape and
appearance parameters, which are optimized via differentiable rendering to match a set of recorded images. The
optimized scenes usually consist of millions of Gaussians
and require up to several gigabytes of storage and memory. This makes rendering difficult or even impossible on
low-end devices with limited video memory, such as handhelds or head-mounted displays. Gaussians are rendered using a specialized compute pipeline, which shows real-time
performance on high-end GPUs. This pipeline, however,
cannot be seamlessly integrated into VR/AR environments
or games to work in tandem with hardware rasterization of

10349

