This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Up-Sampling Operations in CNN-based Generative Network for
Generalizable Deepfake Detection
Chuangchuang Tan1,2 , Huan Liu1,2 , Yao Zhao1,2 *, Shikui Wei1,2 , Guanghua Gu3,4 , Ping Liu5 , Yunchao Wei1,2
1
2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University

Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3
4

School of Information Science and Engineering, Yanshan University

Hebei Key Laboratory of Information Transmission and Signal Processing
5

CSE department, University of Nevada, Reno, USA

tanchuangchuang@bjtu.edu.cn, yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn

Neighboring Pixel Relationship(NPR)

1. Introduction
With the rapid evolution of image synthetic technologies,
such as GAN[14, 25, 26], Diffusion[20, 53], AI-generated
* Corresponding author

Fake

Recently, the proliferation of highly realistic synthetic
images, facilitated through a variety of GANs and Diffusions, has significantly heightened the susceptibility to misuse. While the primary focus of deepfake detection has traditionally centered on the design of detection algorithms,
an investigative inquiry into the generator architectures has
remained conspicuously absent in recent years. This paper
contributes to this lacuna by rethinking the architectures of
CNN-based generator, thereby establishing a generalized
representation of synthetic artifacts. Our findings illuminate that the up-sampling operator can, beyond frequencybased artifacts, produce generalized forgery artifacts. In
particular, the local interdependence among image pixels
caused by upsampling operators is significantly demonstrated in synthetic images generated by GAN or diffusion.
Building upon this observation, we introduce the concept of
Neighboring Pixel Relationships(NPR) as a means to capture and characterize the generalized structural artifacts
stemming from up-sampling operations. A comprehensive
analysis is conducted on an open-world dataset, comprising
samples generated by 28 distinct generative models. This
analysis culminates in the establishment of a novel state-ofthe-art performance, showcasing a remarkable 12.8% improvement over existing methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/chuangchuangtan/NPRDeepfakeDetection.

Real

Abstract

(a) Images

(b)NPR-R

(c)NPR-G

(d)NPR-B

subtraction

(e)Different NPRs bewteen Real and Fake

Figure 1. The visualization of Neighboring Pixel Relationship
(NPR) of real image and its inversion [72]. To fully understand
the NPR, (a) we invert the real image by [72], and (b-d) present
NPR heatmap for the R, G, B channel of images. In addition,
to show that NPR can be used as artifacts representation, (e) the
differential NPRs between real and fake images is shown. The
proposed NPR Effectively reveals the differences between real and
fake images.

images have reached a level of realism that makes them
virtually indistinguishable from authentic images to human
observers. Nevertheless, the misuse of these capabilities
poses potential threats in political and economic domains.
Addressing this issue requires the development of generalizable deepfake detection methods. In recent years, notable
strides [9, 12, 13, 34–36] have been made in forgery detection, particularly in the face forgery detection.
In the realm of deepfake detection, a significant chal-

28130

