This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AHIVE: Anatomy-aware Hierarchical Vision Encoding for Interactive Radiology
Report Retrieval
Sixing Yan1,2,5 *, William K. Cheung1 , Ivor W. Tsang2,3,4 , Keith Chiu5 , Terence M. Tong6 ,
Ka Chun Cheung1,7 , and Simon See7
1
Hong Kong Baptist University, 2 CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology
and Research, Singapore, 3 SCSE, Nanyang Technological University,
4
AAII, University of Technology Sydney, 5 Queen Elizabeth and Kwong Wah Hospitals, Hong Kong,
6
Tuen Mun Hospital, Hong Kong, 7 NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA Corporation
{cssxyan, william}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, ivor tsang@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, kwhchiu@hku.hk,
tmc877@ha.org.hk, {chcheung,ssee}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Automatic radiology report generation using deep learning models has been recently explored and found promising. Neural decoders are commonly used for the report
generation, where irrelevant and unfaithful contents are unavoidable. The retrieval-based approach alleviates the limitation by identifying reports which are relevant to the input to assist the generation. To achieve clinically accurate
report retrieval, we make reference to clinicians’ diagnostic steps of examining a radiology image where anatomical
and diagnostic details are typically focused, and propose
a novel hierarchical visual concept representation called
anatomy-aware hierarchical vision encoding (AHIVE). To
learn AHIVE, we first derive a methodology to extract hierarchical diagnostic descriptions from radiology reports and
develop a CLIP-based framework for the model training.
Also, the hierarchical architecture of AHIVE is designed
to support interactive report retrieval so that report revision made at one layer can be propagated to the subsequent
ones to trigger other necessary revisions. We conduct extensive experiments and show that AHIVE can outperform the
SOTA vision-language retrieval methods in terms of clinical
accuracy by a large margin. We provide also a case study
to illustrate how it enables interactive report retrieval.

1. Introduction
Automatic generation of radiology reports aims to assist radiologists with the time-consuming reporting task and expedite the diagnosis workflow. Given a radiology image, the
* Work done during a visiting student at CFAR, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research, Singapore.

task is to analyze its visual features, identify abnormalities,
and generate a diagnostic report accordingly. Clinical accuracy of the generated report is one major goal to achieve.
Enabling users to make interactive revision effectively and
confirming the report is always desirable.
Deep learning methods have been explored for report
generation. One common approach is to adopt the encoderdecoder structure with a convolutional neural network as the
encoder and a language model as the decoder [3, 19, 21].
Medical knowledge represented as knowledge graphs [16,
20, 44] and the use of pre-defined clinical templates [14, 34]
have been explored to enhance the clinical accuracy. Yet it
is unavoidable for the neural decoder to generate irrelevant
or unfaithful content [26]. To alleviate the limitation, the
retrieval-based approach has been recently explored to retrieve the reports relevant to the input. The retrieved reports
can then be used as drafts for further revision to produce
the final report [8, 9, 33]. Clinical accuracy of the retrieved
reports remains to be one of the key areas to be addressed.
In this paper, inspired by the practice of radiologists in
preparing diagnostic reports, we propose a deep retrieval
model to encode a radiology image (e.g., X-ray) using a
hierarchical visual concept embedding which can capture
anatomical and diagnostic details for clinically accurate report retrieval, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
i) Anatomical details: Chest-related abnormalities may appear in multiple anatomical parts. Radiologists usually assess all visible anatomical parts to ensure completeness and
consistency [4]. While various approaches have been proposed to extract features from different anatomical parts for
the report generation [5, 28, 30, 36], the spatial relationship
among them is seldom considered.
ii) Diagnostic details: Radiologists typically go through
steps of examining diagnostic-related visual clues (i.e.,

14324

