This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Doubly Abductive Counterfactual Inference for Text-based Image Editing
Xue Song1 , Jiequan Cui3 , Hanwang Zhang2,3 , Jingjing Chen1 ,* Richang Hong4 , Yu-Gang Jiang1
1
2

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University

Skywork AI

3

Nanyang Technological University

4

Hefei University of Technology

{xsong18, chenjingjing, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg, {jiequancui, hongrc.hfut}@gmail.com

Abstract
We study text-based image editing (TBIE) of a single image by counterfactual inference because it is an elegant formulation to precisely address the requirement: the edited
image should retain the fidelity of the original one. Through
the lens of the formulation, we find that the crux of TBIE
is that existing techniques hardly achieve a good trade-off
between editability and fidelity, mainly due to the overfitting of the single-image fine-tuning. To this end, we propose a Doubly Abductive Counterfactual inference framework (DAC). We first parameterize an exogenous variable
as a UNet LoRA, whose abduction can encode all the image details. Second, we abduct another exogenous variable parameterized by a text encoder LoRA, which recovers the lost editability caused by the overfitted first abduction. Thanks to the second abduction, which exclusively encodes the visual transition from post-edit to preedit, its inversion—subtracting the LoRA—effectively reverts pre-edit back to post-edit, thereby accomplishing the
edit. Through extensive experiments, our DAC achieves a
good trade-off between editability and fidelity. Thus, we can
support a wide spectrum of user editing intents, including
addition, removal, manipulation, replacement, style transfer, and facial change, which are extensively validated in
both qualitative and quantitative evaluations. Codes are in
https://github.com/xuesong39/DAC.

1. Introduction
Text-based image editing (TBIE) modifies a user-uploaded
real image to match a textual prompt while keeping minimal visual changes—the fidelity of the original image. As
shown in Figure 1, the source image I in (a) is edited with
the prompt “I want the castle covered by snow”. We consider the edited image I ′ in (b) to be better than that in
(c) because the former keeps a better structure of the castle, leading to minimal changes to the source image. With* Corresponding author

(a) Source image

(b) Edited image

(c) Edited image

Figure 1. Illustration of the TBIE task. (a): source image I. (b)
and (c): edited images according to the target prompt “a castle
covered by snow”. TBIE considers (b) to be better than (c).

(a) Abduction

(b) Action & Prediction

Figure 2. Counterfactual inference framework for TBIE.

out loss of generality1 , we denote the prompt into two subprompts P and P ′ , where P describes the image content of
user’s editing intent and P ′ describes it after editing. For example, P is “a castle” and P ′ is “a castle covered by snow”.
TBIE is a challenging task as it is inherently zero-shot:
a source image I and a prompt (P , P ′ ) are the only input
and there is no ground-truth image for the target image I ′ .
Fortunately, thanks to the large-scale text-to-image generative models, e.g., DALL-E [24], Imagen [27], and Stable
Diffusion [25], language embeddings and visual features
are well-aligned. So, they provide a channel to modify images via natural language. However, the editing efficacy of
existing methods is still far from satisfactory, for example,
they can only support limited edits like style transfer [15],
add/remove objects [1]; do not support user-uploaded images [9], or require extra supervision [26] and spatial masks
to localize where to edit [1].
Yet, there is no theory that explains why TBIE is chal1 Any LLM with proper instruction tuning or in-context learning can
interpret the user intent into P and P ′ . We have deliberately excluded this
module from our formulation.

9162

