This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Generative Approach for Wikipedia-Scale Visual Entity Recognition
Mathilde Caron

Ahmet Iscen Alireza Fathi
Google Research

Abstract

Generative vision-language models such as GPT-4 [30],
Flamingo [2] or PALI [5], are becoming increasingly popular for computer vision applications. They show an impressive ability to generate free-form text for describing the
contents of an image (captioning), or answering questions
based on an image (visual-question answering). Nevertheless, their potential for recognition tasks [12], which usually
require a more concise, structured output, remains underexplored. The focus of this paper is to explore their application for the challenging task of web-scale entity recognition.
A recent benchmark, Open-domain Visual Entity recognitioN (OVEN) [12], challenges models to associate an image
with a Wikipedia entity from a pool of over six million entities. Models must establish a robust association between
images across millions of coarse-grained and fine-grained
entities, encompassing a wide spectrum of concepts such as
animals, buildings, locations, and a multitude of others [12].
Code: github.com/google-research/scenic/tree/main/scenic/projects/gerald

Entity: Q845292
Name: American
black duck

Visual entity recognition

[99 18 31]

Entity: Q521977
Name: Black
colobus

[86 5 18]

Entity: Q358813
Name: Black-andwhite colobus

[86 5 3]

[86 5 3]
Generative
auto-regressive
model

…

1. Introduction

Creating semantic compact codes for 6M Wikipedia Entities

…

In this paper, we address web-scale visual entity recognition, specifically the task of mapping a given query image
to one of the 6 million existing entities in Wikipedia. One
way of approaching a problem of such scale is using dualencoder models (e.g. CLIP), where all the entity names and
query images are embedded into a unified space, paving the
way for an approximate kNN search. Alternatively, it is also
possible to re-purpose a captioning model to directly generate the entity names for a given image. In contrast, we introduce a novel Generative Entity Recognition (GER) framework, which given an input image learns to auto-regressively
decode a semantic and discriminative “code” identifying
the target entity. Our experiments demonstrate the efficacy
of this GER paradigm, showcasing state-of-the-art performance on the challenging OVEN benchmark. GER surpasses
strong captioning, dual-encoder, visual matching and hierarchical classification baselines, affirming its advantage in
tackling the complexities of web-scale recognition.

Cordelia Schmid

Figure 1. We introduce GER, a novel generative paradigm for webscale visual entity recognition. We create compact semantic codes
for each entity, and learn to auto-regressively generate them for a
given query image at inference.

Traditionally, the predominant methods employed to
address the challenge of visual entity recognition have
revolved around either classification or contrastive dualencoder paradigm like CLIP [32]. While classification offers a straightforward approach, it grapples with limitations
when confronted with extensive label spaces such as that of
OVEN, resulting in substantial parameter counts and practical engineering complexities. The dual-encoder approach
on the other hand, learns a unified image-text feature space,
thereby facilitating efficient nearest neighbor searches for
recognition. Nonetheless, this approach exhibits its own
drawbacks: (a) it does not directly optimize for the final
recognition task but instead relies on indirect optimization
through contrastive loss where a set of negative data has to
be subsampled at training time [11, 29, 32], (b) compressing
either the image or text into an embedding vector results in
loss of information, detrimentally affecting performance for
fine-grained recognition [15] and (c) the memory requirements for storing dense representations scale proportionally
with the size of the entity set.
These challenges of the dual-encoder paradigm have kindled interest in alternative strategies. Notably, in Natural Language Processing (NLP) domain, recent works challenge the dual-encoder approach and use generative models instead for information retrieval [6, 25, 31, 33, 41, 42].
These works represent each element of the corpus by a compact code of integers, and learn an auto-regressive generative model to decode the target code for a given query. This

17313

