This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point-VOS: Pointing Up Video Object Segmentation
Sabarinath Mahadevan1, * Idil Esen Zulfikar1, * Paul Voigtlaender2, * Bastian Leibe1
1
RWTH Aachen University, Germany 2 Google Research
1 {mahadevan,

zulfikar, leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de

2 voigtlaender@google.com

pointvos.github.io

Abstract

BEFORE
Training

Current state-of-the-art Video Object Segmentation
(VOS) methods rely on dense per-object mask annotations both during training and testing. This requires timeconsuming and costly video annotation mechanisms. We
propose a novel Point-VOS task with a spatio-temporally
sparse point-wise annotation scheme that substantially reduces the annotation effort. We apply our annotation
scheme to two large-scale video datasets with text descriptions and annotate over 19M points across 133K objects in
32K videos. Based on our annotations, we propose a new
Point-VOS benchmark, and a corresponding point-based
training mechanism, which we use to establish strong baseline results. We show that existing VOS methods can easily
be adapted to leverage our point annotations during training, and can achieve results close to the fully-supervised
performance when trained on pseudo-masks generated from
these points. In addition, we show that our data can be
used to improve models that connect vision and language,
by evaluating it on the Video Narrative Grounding (VNG)
task. We will make our code and annotations available at
https://pointvos.github.io.

1. Introduction
Video Object Segmentation (VOS) has grown into a very
popular research field [5, 34, 46, 48] that has shown considerable progress over the past few years [10, 12, 61],
branching out into new downstream tasks with language
referring expressions [22] or user interactions [7]. New
datasets have been instrumental in advancing progress in
VOS [3, 15, 19, 47, 53, 59]. However, the relatively costly
annotation process necessary for creating VOS datasets has
so far been a major limiting factor. The traditional VOS
task requires temporally dense object segmentation masks
for the frames of each training video. As a result, existing
video segmentation datasets [19, 34, 35, 47] are usually relatively small in scale, and past community efforts to scale
them up to at least several thousand videos required substantial annotation effort [3, 13, 15, 59]. Given the community’s clear trend to connect vision to language [37, 54] and
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

(a):
VOS
First Frame
Reference

NOW

Training

(b):
Point-VOS
First Frame
Reference

Figure 1. Comparison of the conventional VOS task with our
new Point-VOS task. (a) The conventional VOS task utilizes
dense segmentation mask for each frame during training and initializes the first-frame reference with dense masks. (b) We propose
to change this paradigm and use only spatially sparse point annotations on a sparse subset of frames during training, and only a few
points for the first-frame reference initialization. Green and blue
dots represent foreground points and red dots background points.

the consequent need for even larger datasets [39], there is
thus an urgent need to reduce the annotation cost for videos.
Some approaches try to mitigate this problem by reducing the reliance of vision models on annotated training data, e.g., by self-supervised learning [55, 58] or exploiting image-level mask annotations [1]. Another strategy
has been to create semi-automatic annotation pipelines [53]
that generate pseudo ground-truth masks from more readily
available data, such as existing bounding box annotations.
Nevertheless, neither of those presents a general solution.
In this work, we address the annotation cost problem by
proposing an entirely point-based VOS framework, PointVOS. Inspired by recent point-guided image segmentation
methods [4, 9], Point-VOS moves away from using full
mask supervision and instead relies on spatio-temporally
sparse point annotations as weak supervision signals for
VOS (see Fig. 1). Our point-based formulation enables us to
design an efficient semi-automatic annotation pipeline (see
Fig. 4) that requires substantially less annotation effort to
create human-validated ground-truth video annotations.

22217

