This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Capturing Closely Interacted Two-Person Motions with Reaction Priors
Qi Fang1

Yinghui Fan1 Yanjun Li1 Junting Dong2
Weidong Zhang1 Kang Chen1
1

2

NetEase Games AI Lab

Dingwei Wu1

Shanghai AI Lab

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on capturing closely interacted
two-person motions from monocular videos, an important yet understudied topic. Unlike less-interacted motions, closely interacted motions contain frequently occurring inter-human occlusions, which pose significant challenges to existing capturing algorithms. To address this
problem, our key observation is that close physical interactions between two subjects typically happen under very
specific situations (e.g., handshake, hug, etc.), and such
situational contexts contain strong prior semantics to help
infer the poses of occluded joints. In this spirit, we introduce reaction priors, which are invertible neural networks that bi-directionally model the pose probability distributions of one person given the pose of the other. The
learned reaction priors are then incorporated into a querybased pose estimator, which is a decoder-only Transformer
with self-attentions on both intra-joint and inter-joint relationships. We demonstrate that our design achieves considerably higher performance than previous methods on
multiple benchmarks. What’s more, as existing datasets
lack sufficient cases of close human-human interactions,
we also build a new dataset called Dual-Human to better
evaluate different methods. Dual-Human contains around
2k sequences of closely interacted two-person motions,
each with synthetic multi-view renderings, contact annotations, and text descriptions. We believe that this new
public dataset can significantly promote further research in
this area. Our project page is at https://neteasegameai.github.io/Dual-Human/.

1. Introduction
Despite the profound progress achieved in recovering human motions from monocular videos, two-person motion
capture (MoCap), especially under close interactions, has
rarely been addressed in the computer vision community.
Currently, to tackle this task, one can either use singleperson methods [11, 28, 32, 50] to separately obtain the mo-

Front View

Side View

Front View

Dual-Human Dataset
2k Motions

Front View

Side View

Side View

Reaction
Priors

Front View

Side View

Figure 1. The proposed reaction priors can optimize the human
motions from pose estimators for both less-occluded cases (blue
box) and severely occluded cases (orange box).

tions of two actors, or use multi-person methods [39, 54, 55,
71] to simultaneously recover the poses of all seen people
in the scene. Unfortunately, neither solution can robustly
yield the desired results. Specifically, existing single-person
methods are vulnerable to heavy occlusions since they do
not take any interpersonal information into account, while
multi-person methods concentrate much more on the correctness of the relative inter-person joint positions (i.e., ordinal depth) than the precise pose interactions, though they
typically exploit the situational contexts in some sense.
Fortunately, recent research has proven that humanobject interaction semantics show great success in assisting the pose prediction for both the occluded human and
the occluded object [44, 62]. Likewise, prior information
(e.g., the actions and reactions between two closely inter-

655

