This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SwitchLight: Co-design of Physics-driven Architecture and
Pre-training Framework for Human Portrait Relighting
Hoon Kim1

Minje Jang1
1

Wonjun Yoon1
Beeble AI

Jisoo Lee1
2

Donghyun Na1

Sanghyun Woo2

New York University

Figure 1. Be Anywhere at Any Time. SwitchLight processes a human portrait by decomposing it into detailed intrinsic components, and
re-renders the image under a designated target illumination, ensuring a seamless composition of the subject into any new environment.

Abstract
We introduce a co-designed approach for human portrait
relighting that combines a physics-guided architecture with
a pre-training framework. Drawing on the Cook-Torrance
reflectance model, we have meticulously configured the architecture design to precisely simulate light-surface interactions. Furthermore, to overcome the limitation of scarce
high-quality lightstage data, we have developed a selfsupervised pre-training strategy. This novel combination of
accurate physical modeling and expanded training dataset
establishes a new benchmark in relighting realism.
* All authors contributed equally to this work
* https://www.beeble.ai

1. Introduction
Relighting is more than an aesthetic tool; it unlocks infinite narrative possibilities and enables seamless integration
of subjects into diverse environments (see Fig. 1). This advancement resonates with our innate desire to transcend the
physical constraints of space and time, while also providing
tangible solutions to practical challenges in digital content
creation. It is particularly transformative in virtual (VR)
and augmented reality (AR) applications, where relighting
facilitates the real-time adaptation of lighting, ensuring that
users and digital elements coexist naturally within any environment, offering a next level of telepresence.
In this work, we focus on human portrait relighting.

25096

