This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mocap Everyone Everywhere:
Lightweight Motion Capture With Smartwatches and a Head-Mounted Camera
Jiye Lee
Seoul National University

Hanbyul Joo
Seoul National University

kay2353@snu.ac.kr

hbjoo@snu.ac.kr

Figure 1. We present a lightweight and affordable motion capture method based on two smartwatches and a head-mounted camera.

Abstract
We present a lightweight and affordable motion capture
method based on two smartwatches and a head-mounted
camera. In contrast to the existing approaches that use six
or more expert-level IMU devices, our approach is much
more cost-effective and convenient. Our method can make
wearable motion capture accessible to everyone everywhere, enabling 3D full-body motion capture in diverse environments. As a key idea to overcome the extreme sparsity and ambiguities of sensor inputs with different modalities, we integrate 6D head poses obtained from the headmounted cameras for motion estimation. To enable capture in expansive indoor and outdoor scenes, we propose
an algorithm to track and update floor level changes to define head poses, coupled with a multi-stage Transformerbased regression module. We also introduce novel strategies leveraging visual cues of egocentric images to further
enhance the motion capture quality while reducing ambiguities. We demonstrate the performance of our method on
various challenging scenarios, including complex outdoor
environments and everyday motions including object interactions and social interactions among multiple individuals.

1. Introduction
Human motion encapsulates the diverse and rich stories
of human life in real-world situations. Thus, it is essential
Project Page: https://jiyewise.github.io/projects/MocapEvery

for machines not only to decipher the subtle nuances within
these movements but also to authentically mimic them for
seamless interaction and assistance with humans. However,
the advancement in the research to make machines fully
understand human motions lags considerably behind other
AI domains focused on images or languages. The primary
obstacle lies in the fact that 3D human motion datasets
that reflect real-world scenarios remain exceedingly scarce,
compared to the abundance of massive image or language
datasets that capture diverse aspects of human life. This
scarcity stems from the inherent challenge of acquiring motion capture data, necessitating specialized equipment and
tools that are not readily available to the public. Despite
notable efforts in collecting and refining motion capture
datasets that are actively used in learning-based approaches
(e.g., [33, 45]), the scale of these datasets remains in orders
of magnitude smaller than the vast repositories of Internet
images and language datasets.
In our endeavor to democratize motion capture for the
general public free from the constraints of expert-level
equipment and intricate settings, we present a lightweight
and affordable motion capture method that utilizes Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) sensors of smartwatches on
wrists and a head-mounted camera. Our method can make
wearable motion capture accessible to everyone, given the
widespread availability and popularity of smartwatches, as
well as the existence of action cameras and camera glasses
(e.g., GoPro or Smart Glasses [2, 3] equipped with cameras). Our system can be applied for large-scale and long-

1091

