This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Balancing Act: Distribution-Guided Debiasing in Diffusion Models
Rishubh Parihar*,1 Abhijnya Bhat∗,1
Jogendra Nath Kundu2
1

Abhipsa Basu1 Saswat Mallick1
R. Venkatesh Babu1
2

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

Meta Reality Labs

Abstract
Diffusion Models (DMs) have emerged as powerful generative models with unprecedented image generation capability. These models are widely used for data augmentation and creative applications. However, DMs reflect
the biases present in the training
datasets. This is espeFrozen Diffusion
cially concerning in the context
of faces, where the DM
Model
prefers one demographic subgroup vs others (eg. female
vs male). In this work, we present a method for debiasing DMs without relying on additional reference data
or model retraining. Specifically, we propose Distribution Guidance, which enforces the generated images to follow the prescribed attribute distribution. To realize this, we
build on the key insight that the latent features of denoising UNet hold rich demographic semantics, and the same
can be leveraged to guide debiased generation. We train
Attribute Distribution Predictor (ADP) - a small mlp that
maps the latent features to the distribution of attributes.
ADP is trained with pseudo labels generated from existing
attribute classifiers. The proposed Distribution Guidance
with ADP enables us to do fair generation. Our method
reduces bias across single/multiple attributes and outperforms the baseline by a significant margin for unconditional
and text-conditional diffusion models. Further, we present
a downstream task of training a fair attribute classifier by
augmenting the training set with our generated data.
Code is available at - project page.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Diffusion Models (DM) [12, 37,
47] have garnered much interest among researchers in evaluating the quality of the generated content. These models
are not only used to generate realistic content but also to
augment real datasets [27, 50] for downstream tasks. However, existing DMs have been found to synthesize biased
content with respect to multiple demographic factors like
gender, race, etc., which can be detrimental to society once
these models are deployed in the real world [24, 32, 38].
* Equal contribution

92%

f

8%

Female Male

Distribution
Guidance

a
pref
50%

50%

f

Female Male

b)

Imbalanced Attribute
Distribution

Random Sampling

a)

Frozen Diffusion
Model

Reference
Attribute Distribution

pӨa
50%

Put real
Photos

50%

f

Female Male

c)

Distribution Guided Sampling

Generated Attribute
Distribution

Figure 1. a) Random sampling from a pretrained DM [37] generates images with gender imbalance. b) Proposed method takes
a user-defined reference attribute paref and performs distribution
guidance on a pretrained DM. c) Sampling with distribution guidance results in fair generation that follow user define paref .

The problem is largely caused by the images used to train
these models, as the outputs of these models are governed
by these training datasets [25, 32]. Effects of such harmful
biases have been shown by multiple recent works involving studies on DMs [24, 32, 38], GANs and other generative models [5, 13, 25]. In fact, Perera et al. [32] show that
unconditional DMs–even when trained with balanced data–
amplify racial biases, leading to the generation of more
white-skinned faces than dark-skinned ones. Biases in the
generated data are even more evident in large text-to-image
DMs, e.g., models mostly tend to generate a specific gender
with a given profession (like male and doctor) [26, 44, 57].
Existing works on debiasing, either require a reference
dataset [5, 57] and/or allow retraining of the model [5, 55,

6668

