This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StableVITON: Learning Semantic Correspondence
with Latent Diffusion Model for Virtual Try-On
Jeongho Kim

Gyojung Gu
Minho Park
Sunghyun Park
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea

Jaegul Choo

{rlawjdghek, gyojung.gu, m.park, psh01087, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

\

Figure 1. Generated results of StableVITON: VITON-HD (the first row), SHHQ-1.0 (the first two images in the second row), and webcrawled images (the last two images in the second row). All results are generated using StableVITON trained on VITON-HD dataset.

Abstract
Given a clothing image and a person image, an imagebased virtual try-on aims to generate a customized image
that appears natural and accurately reflects the characteristics of the clothing image. In this work, we aim to expand the applicability of the pre-trained diffusion model so
that it can be utilized independently for the virtual try-on
task. The main challenge is to preserve the clothing details
while effectively utilizing the robust generative capability
of the pre-trained model. In order to tackle these issues,
we propose StableVITON, learning the semantic correspondence between the clothing and the human body within the
latent space of the pre-trained diffusion model in an end-to-

end manner. Our proposed zero cross-attention blocks not
only preserve the clothing details by learning the semantic
correspondence but also generate high-fidelity images by
utilizing the inherent knowledge of the pre-trained model
in the warping process. Through our proposed novel attention total variation loss and applying augmentation, we
achieve the sharp attention map, resulting in a more precise representation of clothing details. StableVITON outperforms the baselines in qualitative and quantitative evaluation, showing promising quality in arbitrary person images. Our code is available at https://github.com/
rlawjdghek/StableVITON .

8176

