This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniSDF: Scene Reconstruction using
Omnidirectional Signed Distance Functions and Adaptive Binoctrees
Hakyeong Kim
KAIST

Andreas Meuleman
INRIA

Hyeonjoong Jang James Tompkin
KAIST
Brown University

Min H. Kim
KAIST

Abstract
We present a method to reconstruct indoor and outdoor
static scene geometry and appearance from an omnidirectional video moving in a small circular sweep. This setting is challenging because of the small baseline and large
depth ranges, making it difficult to find ray crossings. To
better constrain the optimization, we estimate geometry as
a signed distance field within a spherical binoctree data
structure and use a complementary efficient tree traversal strategy based on a breadth-first search for sampling.
Unlike regular grids or trees, the shape of this structure
well-matches the camera setting, creating a better memoryquality trade-off. From an initial depth estimate, the binoctree is adaptively subdivided throughout the optimization;
previous methods use a fixed depth that leaves the scene
undersampled. In comparison with three neural optimization methods and two non-neural methods, ours shows decreased geometry error on average, especially in a detailed
scene, while significantly reducing the required number of
voxels to represent such details.

1. Introduction
When reconstructing the geometry of a static unbound
scene, say an outdoor space, most image-based multi-view
reconstruction pipelines use perspective cameras. Given
their limited field of view, they suffer from high data acquisition costs as many images must be captured and calibrated. But, given their physically-compact size, it is possible to move to different spatial sampling positions and
capture many light ray crossings from which to accurately
constrain the surface geometry location. To solve for the
location, modern auto-differentiation systems let us flexibly implement algorithms like sphere tracing with neural
signed-distance functions (SDFs).
Given enough ray crossings, these algorithms show
promise in capturing geometry from real-world perspective images, both in geometry detail [15] and in large-scale
structures [24], thanks to the robust fitting properties of neural networks. If memory is not a concern, we can exploit

Input 360 video

COLMAP

Egocentric

Our 3D reconstruction

NeuS-facto

Ours

Figure 1. We introduce a memory-efficient neural 3D reconstruction method tailored to work with short egocentric omnidirectional
video inputs. The geometry is estimated using a signed distance
field and a novel adaptive spherical binoctree data structure subdivided through iterative optimization. We show that our method
outperforms other state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction methods in
balancing detail and memory cost [8, 21, 33].

voxel grid structures for rapid position indexing [15, 24],
but unbound scenes require careful memory consideration.
To help overcome the acquisition cost, one alternative is
to use an omnidirectional camera that captures a view of
all angles of the surroundings. This is a critical capability when comprehensive spatial understanding is necessary,
such as in virtual reality and robotic navigation. But, now
a wider field of view is represented within a limited camera
sensor resolution, such that the angular extent of each pixel
is typically greater than in a perspective camera (≈ 5×).
To gain parallax for distance estimation, suppose we additionally consider a limited spatial sampling setting, e.g.,
an omnidirectional video of a circular camera motion—this
would be convenient for data capture [7]. But, as the baseline between spatial positions is small with respect to the
large range of scene distances, and as each pixel covers a
greater angular extent, it is difficult to accurately constrain
the location of the geometry or to reproduce its fine detail.
These factors decrease the effectiveness of ray marching
techniques and, within an optimization, often necessitate an
impractical number of samples for successful training convergence. This issue is further compounded by rapid and

20227

