This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S NIFFER: Multimodal Large Language Model
for Explainable Out-of-Context Misinformation Detection
Peng Qi

Zehong Yan Wynne Hsu Mong Li Lee
National University of Singapore
peng.qi@nus.edu.sg, e0787894@u.nus.edu,{whsu,leeml}@comp.nus.edu.sg
https://pengqi.site/Sniffer
Does this caption match its image?

Caption: Jeffrey E Thompson on Monday pleaded guilty in federal court to funding
a shadow campaign to help Vincent C Gray win the 2010 mayoral election.

Exis%ng detectors
No!

No, the image is wrongly
used in a diﬀerent news
context. The given news
capCon and image are
inconsistent in person.
The person in capCon is
Jeﬀrey E Thompson, and
the person in image is
Vincent C Gray.

InstructBLIP

GPT-4V
No, the image is wrongly used
in a different news context. The
given news caption and image
are inconsistent in person. The
person in caption is Jeffrey E
Thompson, and the person in
image is Vincent C Gray. To
elaborate, the news caption is
about Jeffrey E Thompson
pleading guilty to funding a
shadow campaign, but the
person depicted in the image is
Vincent C Gray, who is
mentioned in the caption as the
beneficiary of the campaign.

Sniﬀer

No, the image is wrongly used (our detector)
in a diﬀerent news context.
On the one hand, the person
in capCon, Jeﬀrey E
Thompson, does not match
the person in the image,
Harry Thomas Jr. On the
other hand, the imageretrieved webpages contain a
series of news arCcles about
Harry Thomas Jr, which are
not relevant to the given
capCon. Therefore, the image
is more likely to be wrongly
used in the capCon.

Figure 1. Comparison between the proposed S NIFFER and other detectors1 . In this out-of-context misinformation, the individual in
the image is Harry Thomas Jr, which contradicts the caption. Existing detectors often give a judgment without explanation. While
InstructBLIP and GPT-4V correctly identify the inconsistent news element (i.e. person) in the given image-text pair, they mistakenly
associate the person in the image with a different individual mentioned in the caption. In contrast, S NIFFER analyzes both the consistency
of the image-text content and the claim-evidence relevance, and accurately identifies the person in the image as Harry Thomas Jr, thereby
providing a precise and persuasive explanation.

Abstract
Misinformation is a prevalent societal issue due to its
potential high risks. Out-Of-Context (OOC) misinformation, where authentic images are repurposed with false text,
is one of the easiest and most effective ways to mislead
audiences. Current methods focus on assessing imagetext consistency but lack convincing explanations for their
judgments, which are essential for debunking misinformation. While Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
have rich knowledge and innate capability for visual reasoning and explanation generation, they still lack sophistication in understanding and discovering the subtle crossmodal differences. In this paper, we introduce S NIFFER, a
novel multimodal large language model specifically engineered for OOC misinformation detection and explanation.
1 Due to space constraints, we have made minor edits to the models’
responses for brevity without altering their original meaning.

S NIFFER employs two-stage instruction tuning on InstructBLIP. The first stage refines the model’s concept alignment
of generic objects with news-domain entities and the second stage leverages OOC-specific instruction data generated by language-only GPT-4 to fine-tune the model’s discriminatory powers. Enhanced by external tools and retrieval, S NIFFER not only detects inconsistencies between
text and image but also utilizes external knowledge for contextual verification. Our experiments show that S NIFFER
surpasses the original MLLM by over 40% and outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in detection accuracy. S NIFFER
also provides accurate and persuasive explanations as validated by quantitative and human evaluations.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Deepfake and other media manipulation
technologies [43, 46, 47, 53] have garnered considerable at-

13052

