This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Holistic Features are almost Sufficient for Text-to-Video Retrieval
Kaibin Tian1 *†

Ruixiang Zhao1∗ Zijie Xin1,2 Bangxiang Lan1
1
MoE Key Lab of DEKE, Renmin University of China
2
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University

Xirong Li1‡

https://github.com/ruc-aimc-lab/TeachCLIP

Abstract

Cap4Video, CVPR23

For text-to-video retrieval (T2VR), which aims to retrieve
unlabeled videos by ad-hoc textual queries, CLIP-based
methods currently lead the way. Compared to CLIP4Clip
which is efficient and compact, state-of-the-art models tend
to compute video-text similarity through fine-grained crossmodal feature interaction and matching, putting their scalability for large-scale T2VR applications into doubt. We
propose TeachCLIP, enabling a CLIP4Clip based student
network to learn from more advanced yet computationally
intensive models. In order to create a learning channel to
convey fine-grained cross-modal knowledge from a heavy
model to the student, we add to CLIP4Clip a simple Attentional frame-Feature Aggregation (AFA) block, which by design adds no extra storage / computation overhead at the retrieval stage. Frame-text relevance scores calculated by the
teacher network are used as soft labels to supervise the attentive weights produced by AFA. Extensive experiments on
multiple public datasets justify the viability of the proposed
method. TeachCLIP has the same efficiency and compactness as CLIP4Clip, yet has near-SOTA effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Are holistic features, i.e. representing a given video / textual
query by a single feature vector, sufficient for text-to-video
retrieval (T2VR)? The question is scientifically interesting
due to the cross-modal nature of the T2VR task: video and
query have to be encoded into a semantically aligned common feature space for video-text matching [6]. The question
is also practically valuable as matching by holistic features
is much more scalable than matching by local features.
Due to the great success of the Contrastive LanguageImage Pre-Training (CLIP) model [29] in the image domain, we see encouraging efforts on re-purposing CLIP for
* Equal contributions.
† Kaibin Tian is currently with Kuaishou.
‡ Corresponding author: Xirong Li (xirong@ruc.edu.cn)

E ff e c t i v e n e s s ( S u m R )

205
200

TeachCLIP
LAFF, ECCV22

TS2-Net, ECCV22
DRL, Arxiv22

X-CLIP, MM22

CenterCLIP, SIGIR22

195

X-Pool, CVPR22

PromptSwitch, ICCV23
CLIP4Clip, Neurocom22

2KB

190

8KB

32KB

MMT, ECCV20

185

W2VV++, MM19

103

104
105
106
Efficiency (Estimated FLOPs per video-text matching, log scale)

Figure 1. Effectiveness, efficiency and video-feature storage footprint of current (CLIP based) text-to-video retrieval
(T2VR) models. Backbone: CLIP(ViT-B/32) [29]. Dataset:
MSRVTT-1k [37]. Yellow circles indicate models using finegrained cross-modal feature interaction and matching. The proposed TeachCLIP strikes a good balance between the three factors.

video-text matching [7, 9, 22, 24, 25, 36]. As an initial effort, CLIP4Clip [24] encodes a given video by first using
CLIP’s visual encoder to extract image features per frame.
The frame-level features, enhanced by Transformer blocks,
are aggregated into a video-level feature by mean pooling.
The video feature, with a typical size of 512, can be computed and stored in advance, making CLIP4Clip efficient
for T2VR. Recent methods, e.g. X-CLIP [25], TS2-Net [22]
and X-Pool [9], improve over CLIP4Clip by considering
fine-grained frame-text similarities. Despite their better retrieval performance on multiple benchmark datasets [1, 35],
these models introduce substantial overhead w.r.t. offline
storage and online computation, see Fig. 1 and Tab. 1,
putting their scalability for large-scale T2VR into doubt.
Luckily, the importance of holistic features for CLIPbased T2VR has not gone unnoticed. In a contemporary
work [4], a novel method termed PromptSwitch has been
developed. There, a spatial-temporal prompt cube is added

17138

