This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bilateral Adaptation for Human-Object Interaction Detection
with Occlusion-Robustness
Guangzhi Wang1 Yangyang Guo2 Ziwei Xu2 Mohan Kankanhalli2
1
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
guangzhi.wang@u.nus.edu, guoyang.eric@gmail.com, {ziwei-xu,mohan}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

(a) Semantic Adaptation

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) Detection constitutes
an important aspect of human-centric scene understanding, which requires precise object detection and interaction recognition. Despite increasing advancement in detection, recognizing subtle and intricate interactions remains
challenging. Recent methods have endeavored to leverage the rich semantic representation from pre-trained CLIP,
yet fail to efficiently capture finer-grained spatial features
that are highly informative for interaction discrimination.
In this work, instead of solely using representations from
CLIP, we fill the gap by proposing a spatial adapter that
efficiently utilizes the multi-scale spatial information in the
pre-trained detector. This leads to a bilateral adaptation
that mutually produces complementary features. To further
improve interaction recognition under occlusion, which is
common in crowded scenarios, we propose an Occluded
Part Extrapolation module that guides the model to recover
the spatial details from manually occluded feature maps.
Moreover, we design a Conditional Contextual Mining module that further mines informative contextual clues from
the spatial features via a tailored cross-attention mechanism. Extensive experiments on V-COCO and HICO-DET
benchmarks demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms prior art on both standard and zero-shot settings,
resulting in new state-of-the-art performance. Additional
ablation studies further validate the effectiveness of each
component in our method.

CLIP Visual
Encoder

1. Introduction
The rapid progress of modern detection systems [5, 11, 46]
has spawned a growing interest in the research of HumanObject Interaction (HOI) detection. There are generally two
dispensable objectives in this emerging task: (1) detecting humans and objects in a given image and (2) recognizing human-object interactions, which are articulated as

Semantic
Adapter

Input Image

Detector
Backbone
Spatial
Adapter

(c) Bilateral Adaptation
(Ours)
Confidence Scores

(a)

(b)

(c)

<ride, bicycle> 0.83
<wear, backpack> 0.01

0.42
0.44

0.81
0.45

(b) Spatial Adaptation

Figure 1. (a) Representations from CLIP focus on high-level semantics but ignore fine-grained details, resulting in a high score
(0.83) on salient interaction ⟨ride, bicycle⟩, but a low score (0.01)
on small-scale interaction ⟨wear, backpack⟩. (c) Our bilateral
adaptation complements the semantic branch with spatial adaptation (b), resulting in comprehensive interaction understanding
(high scores on both interactions).

verb-object phrases. HOI Detection is important to humancentric scene understanding and underpins a variety of highlevel tasks such as image captioning [53] and visual question answering [1].
As indicated by the two objectives, existing methods improve HOI detection from either better object detection or
improved interaction recognition. Methods in the former
group introduce various detector architectures [5, 11, 46]
with proper adaptation for precise human-object detection [27, 33, 34, 48, 50, 63, 68, 69]. Pertaining to the methods in the latter group, early work designs graph-based architectures [14, 44, 51, 64] to enable information propagation between humans and objects, subsequent methods with
the transformer-based architectures [27, 34, 48, 56, 63] utilize the attention mechanism [52] for better interaction understanding. To improve the representation discriminability, various human cues extracted from external knowledge
sources have been utilized, such as pose [13, 17, 42, 54, 59],
intentions [61], 3D representations [32], and motions [38].
Until recently, the CLIP [45] model has delivered im-

27970

