This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstructDiffusion: A Generalist Modeling Interface for Vision Tasks
Zigang Geng1,5 *, Binxin Yang1,5 *, Tiankai Hang2,5 *, Chen Li3,5 *, Shuyang Gu5†,
Ting Zhang4 , Jianmin Bao5 , Zheng Zhang5 , Houqiang Li1 , Han Hu5 , Dong Chen5 , Baining Guo5
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Southeast University
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University 4 Beijing Normal University 5 Microsoft Research Asia
https://gengzigang.github.io/instructdiffusion.github.io/

Input

Transform it to Van gogh, starry night style

Help the elephant wear a crown
and maintain the appearance of others

Mark the pixels of cat in the mirror to blue Use yellow to encircle the left knee of the people on the far
and leave the rest unchanged
left and draw a blue circle over the nose of the tallest people

Paint the pixels of right cheetah in blue and
maintain the current appearance of the other pixels

Withdraw the watermark applied
to this photograph

Figure 1. We introduce InstructDiffusion, a generalist modeling interface for vision tasks. Given input image and human instruction, our
unified model effectively accomplishes tasks such as image editing, segmentation, keypoint estimation, and low-level vision.

Abstract
We present InstructDiffusion, a unified and generic
framework for aligning computer vision tasks with human instructions. Unlike existing approaches that integrate
prior knowledge and pre-define the output space (e.g., categories and coordinates) for each vision task, we cast diverse
vision tasks into a human-intuitive image-manipulating process whose output space is a flexible and interactive pixel
space. Concretely, the model is built upon the diffusion
process and is trained to predict pixels according to user
instructions, such as encircling the man’s left shoulder in
red or applying a blue mask to the left car. InstructDiffusion could handle a variety of vision tasks, including understanding tasks (such as segmentation and keypoint detection) and generative tasks (such as editing and enhancement) and outperforms prior methods on novel datasets.
This represents a solid step towards a generalist modeling
interface for vision tasks, advancing artificial general intelligence in the field of computer vision.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

1. Introduction
Recently, the field of artificial intelligence has witnessed
remarkable advancements, particularly in natural language
processing (NLP) [7, 13, 52, 53]. The Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) has unified multiple NLP tasks
using a single, coherent framework. Inspired by this, our research aims to achieve a similar unification in the realm of
computer vision, i.e. [10, 11], developing a unified model
capable of tackling multiple vision tasks simultaneously.
However, unifying computer vision tasks is more challenging than NLP tasks due to the diversity of various tasks.
Diversity of Tasks and Outputs: Computer vision incorporates a wide range of tasks like segmentation, image generation, and keypoint detection. These tasks possess varying output formats, including masks, images, and coordinates. This diversity makes it challenging to find a uniform
representation. In contrast, NLP tasks often have text-based
outputs that can be easily represented in a standard format.
Different Methodologies and Techniques: Computer vision tasks often require unique methodologies and techniques depending on the specific problem. For example, image generation tasks are commonly dominated by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [17, 28, 29] and Denois-

12709

