This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P ER A DA: Parameter-Efficient Federated Learning Personalization with
Generalization Guarantees
Chulin Xie†,‡ , De-An Huang , Wenda Chu~ , Daguang Xu ,
Chaowei Xiao,¶,⇤ , Bo Li†,§,⇤ , Anima Anandkumar~,⇤
†
¶
UIUC  NVIDIA ~ Caltech
UW-Madison § UChicago
Abstract
Personalized Federated Learning (pFL) has emerged as a
promising solution to tackle data heterogeneity across clients
in FL. However, existing pFL methods either (1) introduce
high computation and communication costs or (2) overfit
to local data, which can be limited in scope and vulnerable
to evolved test samples with natural distribution shifts. In
this paper, we propose P ER A DA, a parameter-efficient pFL
framework that reduces communication and computational
costs and exhibits superior generalization performance, especially under test-time distribution shifts. P ER A DA reduces
the costs by leveraging the power of pretrained models and
only updates and communicates a small number of additional parameters from adapters. P ER A DA achieves high
generalization by regularizing each client’s personalized
adapter with a global adapter, while the global adapter uses
knowledge distillation to aggregate generalized information
from all clients. Theoretically, we provide generalization
bounds of P ER A DA, and we prove its convergence to stationary points under non-convex settings. Empirically, P ER A DA
demonstrates higher personalized performance (+4.85% on
CheXpert) and enables better out-of-distribution generalization (+5.23% on CIFAR-10-C) on different datasets across
natural and medical domains compared with baselines,
while only updating 12.6% of parameters per model. Our
code is available at https://github.com/NVlabs/PerAda.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) allows clients to collaboratively
train machine learning models without direct access to their
data, especially for privacy-sensitive tasks [45]. FL was initially designed to train a single global model for all clients.
However, such a one-model-fits-all paradigm is not effective
when there is client heterogeneity, i.e., the local data are nonIID across clients with heterogeneous features or label distributions [35]. Personalized Federated Learning (pFL) [43]
‡ work done during an internship at NVIDIA; ⇤ equal advising.

Figure 1. Accuracy of personalized models on Office-Home.
“Full”/“Partial” denotes full/partial model personalization. P ER A DA achieves the highest personalized performance and generalization by updating the smallest number of model parameters.

has emerged as an effective solution to tackle client heterogeneity. In pFL, each client trains a personalized model
on its local data to ensure personalized performance, while
leveraging the aggregated knowledge from other clients to
improve its generalization.
Existing works in pFL commonly use full model personalization, where each client trains a personalized model as
well as a copy of the global model from the server for regularization [33, 59]. However, these methods are parameterexpensive, leading to high computational and communicational costs, which is impractical for clients with limited
computation resources and network bandwidth [26]. Later
on, partial model personalization alleviates this issue by
splitting each client’s one model into personalized parameters and shared parameters, where only the set of shared
parameters would be communicated with the server [48].
Nonetheless, these methods tend to overfit more to the local training samples since the set of shared parameters does
not encode generalized knowledge well compared to a full
global model. This hurts the performance of partially personalized models in real-world FL deployment, where the
incoming local test samples are evolving with natural shifts
from the local training distribution [25], e.g., images taken
under varying weather or lighting conditions.
Our Approach. In this work, we propose P ER A DA, a pFL
framework that reduces communication and computation
costs for clients while personalizing the model and maintaining its generalization to test-time distribution shifts, as shown

23838

