This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discriminative Pattern Calibration Mechanism for Source-Free
Domain Adaptation

1

Haifeng Xia1 , Siyu Xia1 *, Zhengming Ding2
School of Automation, Southeast University, 2 Department of Computer Science, Tulane University
{hfxia,xsy}@seu.edu.cn, zding1@tulane.edu

Abstract
Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) assumes that
model adaptation only accesses the well-learned source
model and unlabeled target instances for knowledge transfer. However, cross-domain distribution shift easily triggers
invalid discriminative semantics from source model on recognizing the target samples. Hence, understanding the specific content of discriminative pattern and adjusting their
representation in target domain become the important key to
overcome SFDA. To achieve such a vision, this paper proposes a novel explanation paradigm “Discriminative Pattern Calibration (DPC)” mechanism on solving SFDA issue. Concretely, DPC first utilizes learning network to infer
the discriminative regions on the target images and specifically emphasizes them in feature space to enhance their representation. Moreover, DPC relies on the attention-reversed
mixup mechanism to augment more samples and improve
the robustness of the classifier. Considerable experimental
results and studies suggest that the effectiveness of our DPC
in enhancing the performance of existing SFDA baselines.

1. Introduction
Deep learning [1, 14] recently attracts considerable attentions due to its powerful representation capability, especially ResNet [9] and ViT [46]. Their appearance indeed
provides a promising direction on solving the challenging
tasks, i.e., image classification [31], object detection [35],
semantic segmentation [27], from computer vision and machine learning community. However, deploying them into
the real-world scenarios always suffers from obstruction.
The primary reason results in that it is difficult to collect
sufficient well-annotated instances for the optimization of
abundant network parameters [7, 15, 43].
This demand naturally stimulates the exploration of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). It aims to reuse
knowledge learned from the off-the-shelf source domain
* Corresponding Author.

with supervisions to address similar task on one novel target domain [39]. The main challenge lies in that crossdomain shift easily induces performance degradation of
source model [50]. Fortunately, UDA methods can simply
observe source and target images to learn domain-invariant
attributions by eliminating distribution divergence [37, 41].
However, real applications fail to satisfy such assumption
when considering data privacy and storage. For example, as
the improvement of intelligent computing power, multiple
basic large models will be embedded into several specific
industries such as medical system. Although large models achieve high-generalization ability, it still needs conduct
essential model adaptation due to distribution shift across
training set and samples of subdivided areas. It is worth
noting that such knowledge transfer hardly accesses original
training instances. Hence, UDA strategies become invalid
under these conditions and this application scenario is further formulated as source-free domain adaptation (SFDA).
Formally, SFDA merely provides permission to access
the well-trained source model and unlabeled target images
for knowledge transfer [48]. To overcome this setting, the
core is discovering meaningful and transferable information from source model and matching them with target visual signals to perform decision. Along with this direction,
SHOT [21] freezes source classifier to preserve its recognition ability and fine-tunes feature extractor to adjust target representations closer to source distribution. In order
to increase the flexibility of model, Co-learning [47] introduces one ImageNet pre-trained network with classifier to
be updated and utilizes the collaboration of it and source
model to reach domain adaptation. Similarly, A2 Net [38]
constructs an auxiliary learnable target classifier and explores the adversarial relation between dual-classifier and
generator to achieve cross-domain alignment. Moreover,
the other branch expects to boost model performance via
self-learning fashion on target domain. Specifically, NRC
[44] adopts clustering constraint over target features to allocate samples from the identical category into one tight
subspace. And, AaD [45] considers the consistency between paired features and their predictions and theoretically

23648

