This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiway Point Cloud Mosaicking with Diffusion and Global Optimization
Shengze Jin1 Iro Armeni2 Marc Pollefeys1,3 Dániel Baráth1
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University
3
Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Lab, Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
We introduce a novel framework for multiway point
cloud mosaicking (named Wednesday), designed to co-align
sets of partially overlapping point clouds – typically obtained from 3D scanners or moving RGB-D cameras – into
a unified coordinate system. At the core of our approach
is ODIN, a learned pairwise registration algorithm that
iteratively identifies overlaps and refines attention scores,
employing a diffusion-based process for denoising pairwise correlation matrices to enhance matching accuracy.
Further steps include constructing a pose graph from all
point clouds, performing rotation averaging, a novel robust
algorithm for re-estimating translations optimally in terms
of consensus maximization and translation optimization.
Finally, the point cloud rotations and positions are optimized jointly by a diffusion-based approach. Tested on four
diverse, large-scale datasets, our method achieves state-ofthe-art pairwise and multiway registration results by a large
margin on all benchmarks. Our code and models are available at https://github.com/jinsz/Multiway-Point-CloudMosaicking-with-Diffusion-and-Global-Optimization.

1. Introduction
Registering multiple partially overlapping 3D point cloud
fragments into a unified coordinate system is crucial to comprehensively representing an environment. This procedure
has a wide range of applications in computer vision and
robotics, such as in 3D scene understanding [41, 63], augmented reality [59, 62], and autonomous driving [48, 52,
74]. In particular, LiDAR or RGB-D-based mapping is often employed to build large-scale maps in self-driving and
mobile robotics due to their direct and accurate 3D point
cloud sensing capability. There are typically two steps in
building such maps: pairwise and multiway registration.
The pairwise registration of partially overlapping point
clouds is a thoroughly investigated problem, with several
methods proposed over time. Conventional approaches to
the pairwise problem are based on imposing geometric con-

Figure 1. The proposed multiway registration method, Wednesday, starts with pairwise registration of an unordered set of
partially overlapping point clouds using the proposed matcher
(ODIN). The process then optimizes the constructed pose graph,
which includes global point cloud poses (vertices) and relative
transforms (edges), through a sequence of steps: (a) global rotation averaging, (b) a novel optimal robust translation re-estimation
method conceptualized as finding maximal sphere overlaps, (c)
position averaging, and (d) diffusion-based pose graph optimization. The output is the point clouds in a unified coordinate system.

straints [56, 66, 83] on hand-engineered feature descriptors [30, 43, 58, 68] employing robust estimators [7, 16, 29].
In recent years, research on local descriptors for pairwise
registration of 3D point clouds has shifted towards deep
learning methodologies [23, 24, 32, 37, 44, 47, 55, 78, 81,
82, 84]. Such approaches have demonstrated impressive results by implicitly learning local and global scene characteristics, which are then distilled into highly distinctive local descriptors. Although these methods have proven to be
effective, directly applying them to the multiway problem
has conceptual drawbacks: (i) low overlap between adja-

20838

