This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HUNTER: Unsupervised Human-centric 3D Detection via Transferring
Knowledge from Synthetic Instances to Real Scenes
Yichen Yao1 , Zimo Jiang1,2,3 , Yujing Sun4 , Zhencai Zhu3 , Xinge Zhu5 , Runnan Chen4 , Yuexin Ma1, *
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Innovation Academy for Microsatellites, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
The University of Hong Kong 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{yaoych2023,mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Human-centric 3D scene understanding has recently
drawn increasing attention, driven by its critical impact on
robotics. However, human-centric real-life scenarios are
extremely diverse and complicated, and humans have intricate motions and interactions. With limited labeled data,
supervised methods are difficult to generalize to general
scenarios, hindering real-life applications. Mimicking human intelligence, we propose an unsupervised 3D detection method for human-centric scenarios by transferring the
knowledge from synthetic human instances to real scenes.
To bridge the gap between the distinct data representations
and feature distributions of synthetic models and real point
clouds, we introduce novel modules for effective instanceto-scene representation transfer and synthetic-to-real feature alignment. Remarkably, our method exhibits superior performance compared to current state-of-the-art techniques, achieving 87.8% improvement in mAP and closely
approaching the performance of fully supervised methods
(62.15 mAP vs. 69.02 mAP) on HuCenLife Dataset.

1. Introduction
The field of 3D scene understanding in human-centric scenarios has garnered increasing attention in recent years, owing to its pivotal role in the advancement of research on humanoid robots, assistive robots, and human-robot collaboration. To navigate safely within 3D space and effectively
interact with humans, it is crucial for robots to possess the
capability to accurately perceive and localize individuals.
Consequently, some LiDAR-based human-centric 3D per* Corresponding
author.
This work was supported by
NSFC (No.62206173), Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai
(No.22dz1201900), Shanghai Sailing Program (No.22YF1428700),
MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Human-Machine
Collaboration (ShanghaiTech University), Shanghai Frontiers Science
Center of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence (ShangHAI).

Figure 1. Human has the ability to identify objects in 3D scenes,
relying merely on their understanding of the objects’ shapes and
sizes. We aspire for machines to possess the capability to perform
3D perception solely based on synthetic models, independent of
any scene-level annotations.

ception datasets and methods [10, 41] have been proposed
in recent years, aimed at propelling progress in this domain.
In contrast to the domain of traffic perception for autonomous driving [1, 3, 49, 50], the realm of humancentric perception presents a significantly more formidable
challenge. Unlike the relative regular object distribution and background context in traffic scenarios, real-life
human-centric settings encompass a vast spectrum of indoor and outdoor environments with intricate and diverse
backgrounds. Moreover, unlike rigid vehicles, humans exhibit ever-changing poses, movements, and trajectories, and
engage in multifaceted interactions with objects and their
surroundings. All these factors cause difficulties for data
acquisition and data annotation, concurrently posing challenges to the precision and generalization capacity of perception methodologies. Therefore, the research for effective unsupervised methods of human-centric 3D perception

28120

