This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Generalization via Meta-Learning on Hard Samples
Nishant Jain

Arun S. Suggala
Pradeep Shenoy
Google Research India

{nishantjn,arunss,shenoypradeep}@google.com

Abstract
Learned reweighting (LRW) approaches to supervised
learning use an optimization criterion to assign weights for
training instances, in order to maximize performance on
a representative validation dataset. We pose and formalize the problem of optimized selection of the validation set
used in LRW training, to improve classifier generalization.
In particular, we show that using hard-to-classify instances
in the validation set has both a theoretical connection to,
and strong empirical evidence of generalization. We provide an efficient algorithm for training this meta-optimized
model, as well as a simple train-twice heuristic for careful comparative study. We demonstrate that LRW with easy
validation data performs consistently worse than LRW with
hard validation data, establishing the validity of our metaoptimization problem. Our proposed algorithm outperforms
a wide range of baselines on a range of datasets and domain shift challenges (Imagenet-1K, CIFAR-100, Clothing1M, CAMELYON, WILDS, etc.), with 1% gains using VIT-B
on Imagenet. We also show that using naturally hard examples for validation (Imagenet-R / Imagenet-A) in LRW training for Imagenet improves performance on both clean and
naturally hard test instances by 1-2%. Secondary analyses
show that using hard validation data in an LRW framework
improves margins on test data, hinting at the mechanism underlying our empirical gains. We believe this work opens up
new research directions for the meta-optimization of metalearning in a supervised learning context.

1. Introduction
Overparameterized models, common in supervised learning [27], carry the risk of overfitting to training data. Typically, model generalization is measured on a validation
dataset separate from the training data, for purposes of hyperparameter selection. Increasingly, this validation dataset
is itself used as part of the learning objective in nested
formulations, e.g., for hyperparameter tuning via gradient
descent on the validation loss [11]. In particular, learned
reweighting (LRW) approaches learn importance weights

associated with training instances [14, 16, 17, 31, 32, 40]
or groups of training instances [25, 41] by optimizing
a weighted training loss alongside an unweighted metaloss on the validation data. This bilevel optimization
aligns training loss with the validation data distribution
via reweighting, a useful property in addressing covariate
shift [34], and for group DRO [9, 41]. Even for in-domain
test data, Ren et al. [31] show that using “clean” validation data with bilevel optimization can overcome significant
amounts of label noise in training data.
Thus the choice of validation set in a LRW paradigm can
greatly influence the quality and properties of the learned
classifier. We therefore ask the question: can we optimize
the choice of validation data in LRW so as to maximize generalization of the resulting classifier? We refer to this problem of validation set selection as meta-optimization, since it
produces data that is the input of another optimization (the
meta-learning approach underlying LRW). The closest related work to our proposal is [40] which constructs a validation dataset on the fly during training of an LRW classifier,
with a criterion of choosing representative instances.
Our primary hypothesis is that we can improve classifier generalization by using a validation set consisting
of hard-to-classify instances from the training distribution.
We therefore pose and formalize the problem of MetaOptimized LEarned REweighting (MOLERE) where the
partitioning of data into train and validation splits, and the
LRW classifier corresponding to that split, are jointly optimized. We design an efficient algorithm to tackle this metaoptimization, and make the following contributions:
• We formalize the problem statement of validation set optimization in learned reweighting (LRW) classifiers for
improved generalization. We prove that asymptotically
our optimization objective exactly achieves our stated
goal of maximizing accuracy on the hardest samples.
• We simplify the nested optimization of our proposal into
a tractable bi-level optimization with a min-max game between two auxiliary networks: a “splitter” that finds the
hardest samples, and a “reweighter” that minimizes loss
on those samples using LRW. We also provide a simple
train-twice heuristic that can be used for careful analysis

27600

