This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Equilibrium Diffusion Restoration with Parallel Sampling
Jiezhang Cao1 , Yue Shi1,2 , Kai Zhang3, *, Yulun Zhang2 , Radu Timofte1,4 , Luc Van Gool1,5
1
ETH Zürich, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3 Nanjing University, 4 University of Würzburg, 5 KU Leuven
https://github.com/caojiezhang/DeqIR

1. Introduction
Image restoration (IR) aims at recovering a high-quality
(HQ) image from a degraded input. Recently, diffusion
models [37, 61] are attracting great attention because they
can generate higher quality images than GANs [23] and
likelihood-based models [44]. Based on diffusion models
[37, 61], many IR methods [20, 41, 68] achieve compelling
performance on different tasks. Directly using diffusion
models in IR, however, suffers from some limitations.
First, diffusion model-based image restoration (DMIR)
models rely on a long sampling chain to synthesize HQ images step-by-step, as shown in Figure 2 (a). As a result,
it will lead to expensive sampling time during the infer* Corresponding author.

0.4

22

0.3

40

DPS DDRM DDNM Ours

(a) 4x SR (ImageNet)

0.2
0.3
0.2

38

0.1

37

0.0

LPIPS
FID

39

DDRM PaletteRePaint Ours

(c) Inpainting (CelebA)

40
35
30
25
20
80
70
60
50
40

0.4

LPIPS

25

0.2
DPS DDRM DDNM Ours

(b) Deblurring (ImageNet)

0.0
0.3
0.2

LPIPS

0.5

LPIPS
PSNR

28

19

PSNR

Diffusion model-based image restoration (IR) aims to use
diffusion models to recover high-quality (HQ) images from
degraded images, achieving promising performance. Due
to the inherent property of diffusion models, most existing
methods need long serial sampling chains to restore HQ
images step-by-step, resulting in expensive sampling time
and high computation costs. Moreover, such long sampling
chains hinder understanding the relationship between inputs
and restoration results since it is hard to compute the gradients in the whole chains. In this work, we aim to rethink
the diffusion model-based IR models through a different perspective, i.e., a deep equilibrium (DEQ) fixed point system,
called DeqIR. Specifically, we derive an analytical solution
by modeling the entire sampling chain in these IR models as
a joint multivariate fixed point system. Based on the analytical solution, we can conduct parallel sampling and restore
HQ images without training. Furthermore, we compute fast
gradients via DEQ inversion and found that initialization
optimization can boost image quality and control the generation direction. Extensive experiments on benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on typical IR
tasks and real-world settings.

PSNR

Abstract

0.1
DGP DDRM DDNM Ours

(d) Colorization (CelebA)

Figure 1. Comparisons of different zero-shot DMIR methods in
various IR applications on different datasets.

ence. For example, DPS [20] based on DDPM [37] needs
1k sampling steps. To accelerate the sampling, some DMIR
methods [41, 68, 87] use DDIM [61] to make a trade-off between computational cost and the restoration quality. Based
on this, these methods can reduce sampling steps to 100
or even fewer. Unfortunately, it may degrade the sample
quality when reducing the sampling steps [52]. It raises an
interesting question: is it possible to develop an alternative
sampling method without sacrificing the sample quality?
Second, the long sampling chain makes understanding the
relationship between the restoration and inputs difficult. In
practice, sampling different Gaussian noises as inputs may
have diverse results for some IR tasks (e.g., inpainting and
colorization). Such diversity is not necessary for some IR
tasks, e.g., super-resolution (SR) or deblurring. Nevertheless,
different initializations may affect the quality of SR and
deblurring. It raises the second question: is it possible to
optimize the initialization such that the generation can be
improved or controlled? However, it is difficult for existing
methods to compute the gradient along the long sampling
chain as they require storing the entire computational graph.
In this paper, we rethink the sampling process in IR from a
deep equilibrium (DEQ) based on [57]. Specifically, we first
derive a proposition to model the sampling chain as a fixed
point system, achieving parallel sampling. Then, we use a
DEQ solver to find the fixed point of the sampling chain.
Last, we use modern automatic differentiation packages to
compute the gradients with backpropagating and understand
the relationship between input noise and restoration.

2824

