This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PlatoNeRF: 3D Reconstruction in Plato’s Cave via Single-View Two-Bounce Lidar
Tzofi Klinghoffer1 Xiaoyu Xiang* 2 Siddharth Somasundaram* 1 Yuchen Fan2
Christian Richardt3 Ramesh Raskar1 Rakesh Ranjan2
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

2

Meta

3

Codec Avatars Lab, Meta

Project page: https://platonerf.github.io

Figure 1. PlatoNeRF. We propose PlatoNeRF: a method to recover scene geometry from a single view using two-bounce signals captured
by a single-photon lidar. (a) A laser illuminates a scene point, which diffusely reflects light in all directions. The reflected light illuminates
the rest of the scene and casts shadows. Light that returns to the lidar sensor provides information about the visible scene, and cast shadows
provide information about occluded portions of the scene. (b) The lidar sensor captures 3D time-of-flight images. (c) By aggregating several
such images (by scanning the position of the laser), we are able to reconstruct the entire 3D scene geometry with volumetric rendering.

Abstract
3D reconstruction from a single-view is challenging because
of the ambiguity from monocular cues and lack of information about occluded regions. Neural radiance fields (NeRF),
while popular for view synthesis and 3D reconstruction,
are typically reliant on multi-view images. Existing methods for single-view 3D reconstruction with NeRF rely on
either data priors to hallucinate views of occluded regions,
which may not be physically accurate, or shadows observed
by RGB cameras, which are difficult to detect in ambient
light and low albedo backgrounds. We propose using time-offlight data captured by a single-photon avalanche diode to
overcome these limitations. Our method models two-bounce
optical paths with NeRF, using lidar transient data for supervision. By leveraging the advantages of both NeRF and
two-bounce light measured by lidar, we demonstrate that
we can reconstruct visible and occluded geometry without
data priors or reliance on controlled ambient lighting or
scene albedo. In addition, we demonstrate improved generalization under practical constraints on sensor spatialand temporal-resolution. We believe our method is a promising direction as single-photon lidars become ubiquitous on
consumer devices, such as phones, tablets, and headsets.
PlatoNeRF is named after the allegory of Plato’s Cave, in which reality is
discerned from shadows cast on a cave wall.
* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D scene geometry from a single-view is critical
for many applications, ranging from autonomous vehicles
(AV) to extended reality (XR). Consider playing a game of
catch with a virtual ball in XR: if the ball drops and bounces
behind your couch, it should bounce out in a physically
realistic manner, dependent on the occluded geometry. Maintaining a complete and up-to-date scan of the scene is tedious
for XR users and infeasible in many other applications, such
as robotics and AV. Thus, methods are needed that recover
geometry from single or few views; we address the former.
While neural radiance fields (NeRF) [26] are a popular
representation for scene geometry, single-view 3D reconstruction with NeRF is challenging and remains an open
problem. Existing methods in single-view 3D reconstruction
with NeRF either rely on data priors [9, 21, 42, 47] or use visual cues, such as shadows, to infer occluded geometry from
a single view [19, 20, 38, 44]. Approaches such as diffusion,
generative adversarial networks, and transformers rely on
data priors to exploit correlations between observations and
a large corpus of training data. As a result, these methods
are known to hallucinate content which, while statistically
likely, may not be physically accurate. Other methods use
shadows to infer occluded geometry when training NeRF
[19, 20, 38, 44]. However, these methods struggle when the
shadow is difficult to detect, such as in ambient light or low
albedo backgrounds. In addition, these methods typically

14565

