This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Self-calibration of Focal Lengths from the Fundamental Matrix
Viktor Kocur1,2 Daniel Kyselica1 Zuzana Kukelova2
1
Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University in Bratislava
2
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
{viktor.kocur, daniel.kyselica}@fmph.uniba.sk

Abstract
The problem of self-calibration of two cameras from a
given fundamental matrix is one of the basic problems in
geometric computer vision. Under the assumption of known
principal points and square pixels, the Bougnoux formula
offers a means to compute the two unknown focal lengths.
However, in many practical situations, the formula yields
inaccurate results due to commonly occurring singularities.
Moreover, the estimates are sensitive to noise in the computed fundamental matrix and to the assumed positions of
the principal points. In this paper, we therefore propose
an efficient and robust iterative method to estimate the focal
lengths along with the principal points of the cameras given
a fundamental matrix and priors for the estimated camera
intrinsics. In addition, we study a computationally efficient
check of models generated within RANSAC that improves
the accuracy of the estimated models while reducing the total computational time. Extensive experiments on real and
synthetic data show that our iterative method brings significant improvements in terms of the accuracy of the estimated
focal lengths over the Bougnoux formula and other stateof-the-art methods, even when relying on inaccurate priors.
The code for the methods and experiments is available at
https:// github.com/ kocurvik/ robust self calibration

1. Introduction
Camera calibration, i.e., the estimation of camera intrinsic
parameters, is a fundamental problem in computer vision
with many applications. The precision of estimated intrinsic parameters, such as focal length and principal point, significantly affects the precision of tasks in structure-frommotion (SfM) [38],visual localization [34], 3D object detection [45], augmented reality [6], and other applications [39].
Classical calibration methods [46] use known calibration patterns, e.g. checkerboards, or additional knowledge
of the observed scene to estimate the camera intrinsics. As
such, they are often impractical. In contrast, self-calibration
methods do not require additional knowledge of the scene

kukelzuz@fel.cvut.cz

geometry and rely on automatic detection of image features.
Thus, they are preferable in many applications.
In this paper, we study the problem of self-calibration of
two cameras, with potentially different intrinsic parameters
that capture the same scene. Although this is a well-studied
problem, with first solutions dated back to the nineties, to
the best of our knowledge, all its existing solutions suffer
from some instabilities and robustness problems.
The geometry of two uncalibrated cameras is captured by
the fundamental matrix [28]. In 1998 Bougnoux [2] showed
that assuming square pixels and known principal points of
both cameras, it is possible to obtain the focal lengths of the
two cameras from the fundamental matrix using a closedform formula. This provides a convenient way to determine
the focal length, as the principal point can usually be assumed to lie in the image center. However, the precision of
the estimated focal lengths using the Bougnoux formula [2]
and other similar methods [10, 18, 29] is often marred by inaccuracies, sometimes even resulting in physically implausible imaginary focal lengths. This stems from singularities
and susceptibility of these methods to noise in fundamental
matrices and assumed positions of principal points. Moreover, singularities occur in very common camera configurations when the principal axes of the cameras are coplanar
(i.e. they intersect), which is common when images of a single object of interest are taken from different views.
An alternative approach [15] relies on iterative optimization of a multi-term loss, allowing one to estimate both
the focal lengths of the cameras as well as their principal
points. This approach addresses some of the drawbacks of
the aforementioned methods but still relies on the Bougnoux formula [2] within the iterative process. Thus, it is susceptible to inaccuracies, especially in the aforementioned
degenerate camera configurations.
Similarly to [15], we formulate the problem of estimating focal lengths and principal points from a given fundamental matrix as a constrained optimization problem using priors. Constraints ensure that the solution satisfies the
Kruppa equations [27]. To solve the constrained optimization problem, we search for the stationary points of its La-

5220

