This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Localize Objects Improves Spatial Reasoning in Visual-LLMs
Kanchana Ranasinghe1,2 Satya Narayan Shukla1 Omid Poursaeed1
Michael S. Ryoo2
Tsung-Yu Lin1
1

Meta

2

Stony Brook University

{kranasinghe, mryoo}@cs.stonybrook.edu, {satyanshukla, opoursaeed, tsungyulin}@meta.com

Abstract

Query: Describe [x1,y1,x2,y2]
location in image.

Integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) into visual domain tasks, resulting in visual-LLMs (V-LLMs), has
enabled exceptional performance in vision-language tasks,
particularly for visual question answering (VQA). However,
existing V-LLMs (e.g. BLIP-2, LLaVA) demonstrate weak
spatial reasoning and localization awareness. Despite generating highly descriptive and elaborate textual answers,
these models fail at simple tasks like distinguishing a left vs
right location. In this work, we explore how image-space
coordinate based instruction fine-tuning objectives could
inject spatial awareness into V-LLMs. We discover optimal coordinate representations, data-efficient instruction
fine-tuning objectives, and pseudo-data generation strategies that lead to improved spatial awareness in V-LLMs.
Additionally, our resulting model improves VQA across image and video domains, reduces undesired hallucination,
and generates better contextual object descriptions. Experiments across 5 vision-language tasks involving 14 different datasets establish the clear performance improvements
achieved by our proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Holistic visual understanding requires learning beyond
simply content of an image to encompass awareness on
spatial locations of objects and their relations [41]. In the
context of visual question answering (VQA), such spatial
awareness allows better reasoning involving structural and
contextual information contained within an image [8].
Since the introduction of powerful large-language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 [5], Chat-GPT [44], Vicuna [11],
and LLaMA [55, 56] that are capable of human style conversation, their visual counterparts such as BLIP-2 [33],
LLaVA [38] have enabled novel tasks within the vision
modality. However, despite their [33, 38] highly generic
visual understanding, these models exhibit poor languagebased spatial reasoning [8]. In fact, they fail at simple tasks
such as distinguishing whether an object lies to the left or
right of another object (see Tab. 4).

Ours: A blue plaid blanket
behind a teddy bear.

Query: Which side of the
potted plant is the stove?
LLaVa: The stove is on the
left side of potted plant.
Ours: The stove is on the
right side of potted plant.

Figure 1. We illustrate one unique ability of our model: contextual
region description (top). Note the contextual information used in
describing the selected region in each image. Explicitly teaching
localization to Visual-LLMs also improves spatial awareness in
VQA settings (bottom). Color boxes only for illustration purposes.

In the case of contrastive language image models (such
as CLIP [46], ALIGN [26]), recent works explore how injecting explicit spatial awareness [39, 43, 48, 74] can enable
more holistic visual understanding. In fact, [48] shows how
such improved spatial awareness benefits model robustness
in adversarial domains. This raises the question of how
generative language image models, particularly those connecting LLMs to visual encoders [33, 38] can benefit from
such spatial awareness specific training. We refer to models of this category that generate textual outputs given joint
image-text inputs (e.g. [33, 38]) as visual-LLMs (V-LLMs).
In this work, we explore location specific instruction
fine-tuning objectives that explicitly enforce V-LLMs to

12977

