This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning the 3D Fauna of the Web
Zizhang Li1 * Dor Litvak1,2 * Ruining Li3 Yunzhi Zhang1 Tomas Jakab3 Christian Rupprecht3
Shangzhe Wu1† Andrea Vedaldi3† Jiajun Wu1†
1

Stanford University

2

UT Austin

3

University of Oxford

kyleleey.github.io/3DFauna/

Figure 1. Learning Diverse 3D Animals from the Internet. Our method, 3D-Fauna, learns a pan-category deformable 3D model of more
than 100 different animal species using only 2D Internet images as training data. At test time, the model can turn a single image of an
quadruped instance into an articulated, textured 3D mesh in a feed-forward manner, ready for animation and rendering.

Abstract
Learning 3D models of all animals in nature requires
massively scaling up existing solutions. With this ultimate
goal in mind, we develop 3D-Fauna, an approach that
learns a pan-category deformable 3D animal model for
more than 100 animal species jointly. One crucial bottleneck of modeling animals is the limited availability of training data, which we overcome by learning our model from
2D Internet images. We show that prior approaches, which
are category-specific, fail to generalize to rare species with
limited training images. We address this challenge by introducing the Semantic Bank of Skinned Models (SBSM),
which automatically discovers a small set of base animal
shapes by combining geometric inductive priors with semantic knowledge implicitly captured by an off-the-shelf
self-supervised feature extractor. To train such a model,
we also contribute a new large-scale dataset of diverse animal species. At inference time, given a single image of any
quadruped animal, our model reconstructs an articulated
3D mesh in a feed-forward manner in seconds.

1. Introduction
Computer vision models can nowadays reconstruct humans
in monocular images and videos robustly and accurately, re* Equal contribution

covering their 3D shape, articulated pose, and even appearance [3, 11, 12, 14, 21, 34]. However, humans are but a tiny
fraction of the animals that exist in nature, and 3D models
remain essentially blind to the vast majority of biodiversity.
While in principle the same approaches that work for humans could work for many other animal species, in practice scaling it to each of the 2.1 million different animal
species on Earth is nearly hopeless. In fact, building a human model such as SMPL [34] and a corresponding pose
predictor [3, 14] requires collecting 3D scans of many people in laboratory [21], crafting a corresponding articulated
deformable model semi-automatically, and collecting extensive manual labels to train corresponding pose regressors. Of all animals, only humans are currently of sufficient
importance in applications to justify the costs.
A technically harder but much more practical approach
is to learn animal models automatically from images and
videos readily available on the Internet. Several authors
have demonstrated that at least rough models can be learned
from such uncontrolled image collections [22, 60, 70]. Even
so, many limitations remain, starting from the fact that these
methods can only reconstruct one or a few specific animal
exemplars [70], or at most a single class of animals at a
given time [22, 60]. The latter restriction is particularly
glaring, as it defeats the purpose of using the Internet as
a vast data source for modeling biodiversity.

† Equal advising

We introduce 3D-Fauna, a method that learns a pan-

9752

