This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultiPLY: A Multisensory Object-Centric
Embodied Large Language Model in 3D World
Yining Hong2,3 , Zishuo Zheng1 , Peihao Chen4 , Yian Wang1 , Junyan Li1 , Chuang Gan1,3
1
UMass Amherst, 2 UCLA, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 4 SCUT
https://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/multiply

Tactile

Temperature
The donut is cold.

It is hard when
touching it.

Visual

Multisensory Question-Answering

Opening it, I
see a donut.

Is the heater turned on?
I found two heaters. The left
one is hot and working while
the right one is not.

Audio
I heard microwave
beeping and walk to it.

Multisensory Navigation

No, you need
to reheat it.

Lead me to the sound source.

Is the donut
ready?

I heard the sound.
It may be emitted by a phone.
The phone may in the living room s

Multisensory Chatting
What tools can I use to drive
a nail in wall?
There are two bottles. Which
one should I use?

Multisensory Captioning

You can use hammer but no hammer in this
room. You can also use a hard bottle

It is a pink piggy saving jar.
It is hard and made of ceramic.

Let me touch and hit them.
You should use bottle 1 as it is hard and
made of metal

Describe
this toy

Figure 1. We propose MultiPLY, a multisensory embodied LLM that encodes object-centric multisensory representations (e.g., visual,
audio, tactile, and thermal), by deploying an embodied agent to engage with the 3D environment. MultiPLY excels at multiple tasks
including multisensory captioning, question answering, dialogue, manipulation, navigation, tool use, task decomposition, and so on.

Abstract
Human beings possess the capability to multiply a
mélange of multisensory cues while actively exploring and
interacting with the 3D world. Current multi-modal large
language models, however, passively absorb sensory data
as inputs, lacking the capacity to actively interact with the
objects in the 3D environment and dynamically collect their
multisensory information. To usher in the study of this area,
we propose MultiPLY, a multisensory embodied large language model that could incorporate multisensory interactive data, including visual, audio, tactile, and thermal information into large language models, thereby establishing
the correlation among words, actions, and percepts. To this
end, we first collect Multisensory Universe, a large-scale
multisensory interaction dataset comprising 500k data by
deploying an LLM-powered embodied agent to engage with

the 3D environment. To perform instruction tuning with pretrained LLM on such generated data, we first encode the 3D
scene as abstracted object-centric representations, and then
introduce action tokens denoting that the embodied agent
takes certain actions within the environment, as well as state
tokens that represent the multisensory state observations of
the agent at each time step. In the inference time, MultiPLY
could generate action tokens, instructing the agent to take
the action in the environment and obtain the next multisensory state observation. The observation is then appended
back to the LLM via state tokens to generate subsequent
text or action tokens. We demonstrate that MultiPLY outperforms baselines by a large margin through a diverse set
of embodied tasks involving object retrieval, tool use, multisensory captioning, and task decomposition.

26406

