This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training-Free Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
with Offline Diffusion-Augmented Prototype Generation
Luca Barsellotti1 * Roberto Amoroso1∗ Marcella Cornia1 Lorenzo Baraldi1 Rita Cucchiara1,2
1
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy 2 IIT-CNR, Italy
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Image

Abstract
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation aims at segmenting arbitrary categories expressed in textual form. Previous works have trained over large amounts of imagecaption pairs to enforce pixel-level multimodal alignments.
However, captions provide global information about the
semantics of a given image but lack direct localization
of individual concepts. Further, training on large-scale
datasets inevitably brings significant computational costs.
In this paper, we propose FreeDA, a training-free diffusionaugmented method for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation, which leverages the ability of diffusion models to visually localize generated concepts and local-global similarities to match class-agnostic regions with semantic classes.
Our approach involves an offline stage in which textualvisual reference embeddings are collected, starting from a
large set of captions and leveraging visual and semantic
contexts. At test time, these are queried to support the visual
matching process, which is carried out by jointly considering class-agnostic regions and global semantic similarities.
Extensive analyses demonstrate that FreeDA achieves stateof-the-art performance on five datasets, surpassing previous methods by more than 7.0 average points in terms of
mIoU and without requiring any training. Our source code
is available at aimagelab.github.io/freeda.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a core problem in Computer Vision, which aims at partitioning an image into coherent regions according to a set of semantic categories [25, 32]. As
manually annotating large-scale amounts of training data is
expensive, scaling segmentation to large sets of concepts
in a fully supervised manner is impracticable. This has recently moved the focus of the community towards openvocabulary solutions [10, 13, 19, 24, 46, 49] that, learning
from a narrow set of seen categories or weak forms of su* Equal contribution.

Ground Truth

TCL

FreeDA (ours)

Figure 1. Open-vocabulary segmentation with: (a) TCL [6],
which performs end-to-end learning of region-text alignment; (b)
our FreeDA, which leverages generated textual-visual embeddings
with global-local similarities and does not require any training.

pervision, are able to segment novel and unseen categories.
One of the major challenges in this setting is how to
transfer the ability to match texts and images of large-scale
vision-language models (e.g., CLIP [34] and ALIGN [16])
to a text-pixel alignment. Given a large-scale set of webcrawled image-caption pairs, previous approaches [6, 27,
35, 43, 44, 52] force the ability to localize textual concepts
to emerge through contrastive learning techniques combined with grounding mechanisms [6, 43, 44]. However,
captions often capture the global scene and might present
ambiguities with respect to fine-grained elements, making
this approach sub-optimal and computationally intensive.
On a different note, advances in diffusion models [14,
36] have shown remarkable results in text-to-image generation, and recent works have shown that their features encompass knowledge regarding the positioning of the generated objects [21, 39, 42]. This information can be exploited to generate large sets of attribution maps, which are
more active in the area corresponding to a semantic class,
thus providing a valuable source of information for semantic segmentation. We propose to explore this mechanism as

3689

