This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoReF: Geometric Alignment Across Shape Variation for Category-level
Object Pose Refinement
Linfang Zheng1,3
1

Tze Ho Elden Tse* 3
Chen Wang∗ 1,2
Yinghan Sun1
3
†1
Aleš Leonardis
Wei Zhang
Hyung Jin Chang3

Hua Chen1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Control Theory and Intelligent Systems, School of System Design and
Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Computer Science, the University of Hong Kong, China
3
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK
{lxz948, txt994}@student.bham.ac.uk, cwang5@cs.hku.hk, sunyh2021@mail.sustech.edu.cn
{chenh6,zhangw3}@sustech.edu.cn,{a.leonadis,h.j.chang}@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Camera

Object pose refinement is essential for robust object pose
estimation. Previous work has made significant progress towards instance-level object pose refinement. Yet, categorylevel pose refinement is a more challenging problem due to
large shape variations within a category and the discrepancies between the target object and the shape prior. To
address these challenges, we introduce a novel architecture
for category-level object pose refinement. Our approach integrates an HS-layer and learnable affine transformations,
which aims to enhance the extraction and alignment of geometric information. Additionally, we introduce a crosscloud transformation mechanism that efficiently merges diverse data sources. Finally, we push the limits of our model
by incorporating the shape prior information for translation and size error prediction. We conducted extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
framework. Through extensive quantitative experiments,
we demonstrate significant improvement over the baseline
method by a large margin across all metrics. 1

1. Introduction
Understanding an object’s pose is crucial for a wide range of
real-world applications, including robotic manipulation [18,
32, 52, 56], augmented reality [30, 33], and autonomous
driving [19, 39]. Significant progress has been made for
object pose estimation [5, 11, 15, 48, 53, 55] and pose refinement [2, 17, 22, 37, 51, 60] using the object’s CAD
* Equal contribution, order by dice rolling.
† The corresponding author.
1 Project page: https://lynne-zheng-linfang.github.io/georef.github.io

Mug

SP-m

SP-1

SP-2

Figure 1. Illustration of the shape variation. SP-m represents the category’s mean shape, SP-1 and SP-2 represents the randomly sampled object
shapes from the CAMERA25 training set.

model. Despite the promising performance, the reliance on
accurate instance-level CAD models limits their generalizability to everyday objects. Category-level methods [7, 23–
25, 29, 59, 61] is therefore been proposed to overcome this
limitation. The objective of this line of work focuses on estimating object poses within a category given category-level
shape priors. As a result, they face unique challenges as
there exist diverse shape variations in each object category.
We illustrate these shape variations in Fig. 1.
Recently, there have been remarkable advancements in
category-level object pose estimation [9, 10, 25, 58, 61], primarily due to effective utilization of geometric information
through 3D graph convolution [26]. In applications that require high precision, it is common to employ an object pose
refinement procedure in conjunction with pose estimation.
This involves an initial pose estimation algorithm determining the object pose, followed by a refinement step to further
enhance the accuracy of the initially estimated pose by predicting and correcting its error. However, while instancelevel object pose refinement has been extensively studied,

10693

