This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiG-IN: Diffusion Guidance for Investigating Networks - Uncovering Classifier
Differences, Neuron Visualisations, and Visual Counterfactual Explanations
Maximilian Augustin

Yannic Neuhaus
Tübingen AI Center – University of Tübingen

Abstract
While deep learning has led to huge progress in complex
image classification tasks like ImageNet, unexpected failure
modes, e.g. via spurious features, call into question how
reliably these classifiers work in the wild. Furthermore, for
safety-critical tasks the black-box nature of their decisions
is problematic, and explanations or at least methods which
make decisions plausible are needed urgently. In this paper,
we address these problems by generating images that optimize a classifier-derived objective using a framework for
guided image generation. We analyze the decisions of image classifiers by visual counterfactual explanations (VCEs),
detection of systematic mistakes by analyzing images where
classifiers maximally disagree, and visualization of neurons
and spurious features. In this way, we validate existing observations, e.g. the shape bias of adversarially robust models,
as well as novel failure modes, e.g. systematic errors of
zero-shot CLIP classifiers. Moreover, our VCEs outperform
previous work while being more versatile.

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based image classifiers suffer from several
failure modes such as non-robustness to image corruptions
[32, 40], spurious features and shortcuts [28, 54, 76], overconfidence on out-of-distribution inputs [31, 33, 55], adversarial examples [50, 82] or biases [27], among others.
While there has been a lot of work on detecting these
failure modes, there remain two important problems that are
addressed in this paper: i) systematic high-confidence predictions of classifiers, e.g. due to harmful spurious features
[54], often occur on subgroups of out-of-distribution data. It
is inherently difficult to find these subgroups as no data is
available for them; ii) the visualization of the semantic meaning of concepts, e.g. of single neurons, or counterfactual
explanations for image classifiers is extremely challenging
as one has to optimize on the set of natural images and the
optimization in pixel space leads to adversarial samples.

Matthias Hein

In this paper, we tackle these problems by leveraging
recent progress in generative models [13, 61, 64, 67]. Our
goal is to visualize properties of one or multiple image classifiers by optimizing on the approximation of the “natural
image manifold” given by a latent diffusion model like Stable Diffusion [64]. This allows us to search for “unknown
unknowns”, i.e. failure cases that correspond to a subpopulation of natural images which is neither easy to find in
existing datasets nor allows for a textual description and is
thus not amenable to direct prompting. We achieve this by
using a generic framework for optimizing the inputs to a
latent diffusion model to create realistic-looking images that
minimize a loss function L, e.g. for the generation of images
maximizing classifier disagreement, and VCEs and neuron
visualizations, see Fig. 1 for an overview.
Using our DiG-IN framework we detect systematic failure
cases of a zero-shot CLIP ImageNet classifier by maximizing the difference in the predicted probability for a given
class, produce realistic visual counterfactuals for any image
classifier outperforming [5], and provide neuron visualizations for a SE-ResNet and introduce Neuron Counterfactuals
and evaluate them for neurons labeled as spurious in [76] of
a ResNet50 ImageNet classifier.

2. Related Work
Detection of systematic errors: [26] develop a pipeline to
iteratively retrieve real images from LAION-5B and label
failure cases where the retrieval is refined based on the labels and additional LLM captions. [44] use a 3D simulator
to generate and evaluate controlled scenes containing class
objects to find systematic model vulnerabilities and validate
these synthetic scenes in the real world by manual reconstruction of the scenes, whereas [73] try to find transformations which leave one classifier invariant but change another
classifier. [22] leverage an error-aware mixture model on a
multi-modal embedding to discover systematic errors in data
subsets. [14, 51, 85] use a fixed set of attributes or properties
of objects to search for systematic errors for subpopulations
by generating corresponding user-interpretable prompts with

11093

