This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-guided Image Reflection Separation
Haofeng Zhong1,2,3 # Yuchen Hong1,2 # Shuchen Weng1,2 Jinxiu Liang1,2 Boxin Shi1,2,3 ∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
AI Innovation Center, School of Computer Science, Peking University
{hfzhong, shuchenweng, cssherryliang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, yuchenhong.cn@gmail.com

Abstract

Mixture image

This paper studies the problem of language-guided reflection separation, which aims at addressing the ill-posed
reflection separation problem by introducing language descriptions to provide layer content. We propose a unified
framework to solve this problem, which leverages the crossattention mechanism with contrastive learning strategies to
construct the correspondence between language descriptions and image layers. A gated network design and a randomized training strategy are employed to tackle the recognizable layer ambiguity. The effectiveness of the proposed method is validated by the significant performance
advantage over existing reflection separation methods on
both quantitative and qualitative comparisons.

Description

Not provided

White cars
before a building

Existing method
Transmission

When photographing through transparent materials like
glass windows or showcases, the presence of reflections can
significantly degrade the image quality of captured images
and disrupt downstream computer vision tasks like face
recognition [53] or depth estimation [2]. As an attractive
topic in computational photography, reflection separation
aims at decomposing the contaminated mixture image (denoted as M) into two components that correspond to scenes
located at different sides of the glass, i.e., the reflection
layer (denoted as R) and the transmission layer (denoted as
T). Since reflection separation is a severely ill-posed problem, it is imperative to exploit effective priors or auxiliary
information for distinguishing the two components.
The primary challenge of solving the reflection separation problem lies in the exploration of distinct clues for distinguishing transmission and reflection layers. Multi-image
methods handle this problem by introducing additional constraints. Some of them acquire a series of mixture images
in different viewpoints [32, 34, 45] to harness the distinct
motions of the two layers, while others adopt specialized
capturing setups to obtain complementary scene informa#

Equal contributions. ∗ Corresponding author.

Existing method

Reflection

Transmission

Reflection

Transmission

Ours
Transmission

Description
A green trashbin

Reflection

Ours

(a) One layer is recognizable

1. Introduction

Mixture image

A row of shirts on a
black hanger

Reflection

(b) Both layers are recognizable

Figure 1. The recognizable layer ambiguity problem causes uncertain quantities of input language descriptions for language-guided
image reflection separation. Given language descriptions of either
(a) one layer or (b) both two layers, the proposed method achieves
robust reflection separation compared with an existing reflection
separation method [10].

tion [19, 27, 28, 36]. However, the specialized data capture requirements limit the application scope of these methods, especially for images downloaded from the Internet.
Single-image methods attempt to tackle reflection separation by utilizing handcrafted priors derived from natural image statistics [30, 33, 44] or leveraging the modeling capacity of neural networks to learn content priors about reflections from a large scale of training data [10, 22, 31].
However, they are prone to fail due to the lack of auxiliary
content information about transmission or reflection scenes
for solving such a highly ill-posed problem. Recently, language descriptions have shown their effectiveness in providing content information for various vision tasks such as image editing [46, 47, 60, 61], semantic segmentation [57, 65],
and image colorization [4–6, 62], which inspires us to think
about: Can we leverage the auxiliary content information
brought by language descriptions to facilitate the reflection
separation problem?

24913

