This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AM-RADIO: Agglomerative Vision Foundation Model
Reduce All Domains Into One
Mike Ranzinger˚ , Greg Heinrich˚ , Jan Kautz, Pavlo Molchanov
NVIDIA
{mranzinger,gheinrich,jkautz,pmolchanov}@nvidia.com

Figure 1. PCA feature visualization of different models. Our proposed RADIO model can process any resolution and aspect ratio, and
produces semantically rich dense encodings. Not only is the model capable of producing state-of-the-art feature representations at arbitrary
resolutions, but the adaptor heads may be used to simulate other models at resolutions they don’t support, such as SAM at larger than
1024px.

Abstract
A handful of visual foundation models (VFMs) have recently emerged as the backbones for numerous downstream
tasks. VFMs like CLIP, DINOv2, SAM are trained with distinct objectives, exhibiting unique characteristics for various downstream tasks. We find that despite their conceptual
differences, these models can be effectively merged into a
unified model through multi-teacher distillation. We name
this approach AM-RADIO (Agglomerative Model – Reduce
All Domains Into One). This integrative approach not only
surpasses the performance of individual teacher models
but also amalgamates their distinctive features, such as
zero-shot vision-language comprehension, detailed pixellevel understanding, and open vocabulary segmentation capabilities. Additionally, in pursuit of the most hardwareefficient backbone, we evaluated numerous architectures in
* Equal contribution

our multi-teacher distillation pipeline using the same training recipe. This led to the development of a novel architecture (E-RADIO) that exceeds the performance of its predecessors and is at least 6x faster than the teacher models at
matched resolution. Our comprehensive benchmarking process covers downstream tasks including ImageNet classification, semantic segmentation linear probing, COCO object detection and integration into LLaVa-1.5.
Code: https://github.com/NVlabs/RADIO.

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation [24] has been a very successful
and popular technique for transferring the knowledge of a
“teacher” model (or ensemble of models) into a typically
smaller “student” model. In the original formulation, both
the student and the teacher operate on the same in-domain
dataset, and the student simultaneously matches the logits
of the teacher, and the ground truth labels. Instead of us-

12490

