This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Telling Left from Right: Identifying Geometry-Aware Semantic Correspondence
Junyi Zhang†
Charles Herrmann‡
Junhwa Hur‡
Eric Chen§
Varun Jampani¶
Deqing Sun‡ *
Ming-Hsuan Yang‡,§ ∗
†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

‡

Google Research

§

UIUC

¶

Stability AI

§

UC Merced

Abstract

(a) The state-of-the-art method [61] fails at matching keypoints with geometric ambiguity, or, “telling left from right” (red solid lines).
Performance (PCKbbox@0.10)

While pre-trained large-scale vision models have shown
significant promise for semantic correspondence, their features often struggle to grasp the geometry and orientation
of instances. This paper identifies the importance of being
geometry-aware for semantic correspondence and reveals
a limitation of the features of current foundation models
under simple post-processing. We show that incorporating this information can markedly enhance semantic correspondence performance with simple but effective solutions
in both zero-shot and supervised settings. We also construct
a new challenging benchmark for semantic correspondence
built from an existing animal pose estimation dataset, for
both pre-training validating models. Our method achieves a
PCK@0.10 score of 65.4 (zero-shot) and 85.6 (supervised)
on the challenging SPair-71k dataset, surpassing the state
of the art by 5.5p and 11.0p absolute gains, respectively.
Our code and datasets are publicly available at: https:
//telling-left-from-right.github.io.

1.0

0.8

Geo. SPair-71k
Std. SPair-71k
Geo. AP-10K
Std. AP-10K

Unsupervised

Supervised

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
DIFT

DINOv2

SD+DINO

Ours

DHF

SD+DINO(S)

Ours(S)

(b) The performance gap between geometry-aware set (Geo.) and
standard set (Std.) of state-of-the-art methods. The geometry-aware
set accounts for 59.6% and 45.7% of the total keypoint pairs on SPair71k [32] and AP-10K [60], respectively.

Figure 1. Illustration of geometry-aware correspondence.

1. Introduction
Since the advent of high fidelity text-to-image (T2I) generative models [40, 41] and large vision foundation models [36], there has been significant interest in understanding both what these models are learning and what they are
not. Numerous works show that these models have powerful feature embeddings that can be used for many computer
vision tasks including depth estimation [36, 62], semantic segmentation [49, 56], and semantic correspondences
[2, 10, 14, 18, 30, 35, 61]. While many works have shown
their strengths, less analysis has been done on their weaknesses; in particular, what do these features struggle with?
We propose using semantic correspondence as a promising test bed. Semantic correspondence, the establishment of
pixel-level matches between two images with semantically
similar objects, is an important Computer Vision problem
with a variety of downstream applications, e.g., image editing [10, 34, 35, 61] and style transfer [9, 24]. It also has
* Equal contribution.

many difficult challenges, e.g., from large intra-class variations to different backgrounds, lighting, or viewpoints.
Despite these challenges, the large foundation model features currently achieve state-of-the-art performance [61].
However, a closer examination shows that this performance
is inconsistent across all challenges. In particular, we find
that these foundation model’s features significantly underperform on “geometry-aware”1 semantic correspondences:
correspondences which share semantic properties but have
different relations to the overall geometry of the object, e.g.,
the “left” paw vs. the “right” paw as shown in Fig. 1a.
Motivated by this, we conduct an in-depth analysis of
these correspondences (Fig. 1b). We find that surprisingly,
such cases account for a significant portion of the benchmark datasets (nearly 60% in SPair71k), and state-of-the-art
methods with the deep features perform considerably worse
on this challenging subset (up to 30% worse, Fig. 1b).
1 We use the term geometry in the loose sense and do not refer to 3D
geometric properties, such as shape and surface normal.

3076

