This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMSum: A Dataset for Multimodal Summarization
and Thumbnail Generation of Videos
Jielin Qiu1,2 , Jiacheng Zhu3 , William Han1 , Aditesh Kumar1 , Karthik Mittal1 , Claire Jin1 ,
Zhengyuan Yang2 , Linjie Li2 , Jianfeng Wang2 , Ding Zhao1 , Bo Li4 , Lijuan Wang2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Microsoft Azure AI, 3 MIT CSAIL, 4 University of Chicago
{jielinq,wjhan,dingzhao}@andrew.cmu.edu, zjc@mit.edu lbo@illinois.edu
{zhengyang,lindsey.li,jianfw,lijuanw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Multimodal summarization with multimodal output
(MSMO) has emerged as a promising research direction.
Nonetheless, numerous limitations exist within existing public MSMO datasets, including insufficient maintenance,
data inaccessibility, limited size, and the absence of proper
categorization, which pose significant challenges. To address these challenges and provide a comprehensive dataset
for this new direction, we have meticulously curated the
MMSum dataset. Our new dataset features (1) Humanvalidated summaries for both video and textual content,
providing superior human instruction and labels for multimodal learning. (2) Comprehensively and meticulously
arranged categorization, spanning 17 principal categories
and 170 subcategories to encapsulate a diverse array of
real-world scenarios. (3) Benchmark tests performed on
the proposed dataset to assess various tasks and methods,
including video summarization, text summarization, and
multimodal summarization. To champion accessibility and
collaboration, we released the MMSum dataset and the
data collection tool as fully open-source resources, fostering transparency and accelerating future developments, at
https://mmsum-dataset.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Multimodal summarization with multimodal output
(MSMO) is an emerging research topic spurred by advancements in multimodal learning [10, 30, 36, 62, 130] and the
increasing demand for real-world applications such as medical reporting [49], educational materials [81], and social
behavior analysis [51]. Most MSMO studies focus on video
data and text data, aiming to select the most informative
visual keyframes and condense the text content into key
points. In this study, we focus on MSMO, which integrates
both visual and textual information to provide users with
comprehensive and representative summaries to enhance

Figure 1. Task comparison of traditional video summarization,
text summarization, and MSMO tasks.

user experience [19, 43, 130].
Despite the respective accomplishments of conventional
unimodal summarization techniques on video data [35, 69,
83,118,123,127,131] and text data [14,55,60,61,125], multimodal summarization continues to pose challenges due to
a number of complexities. (1) The intricate nature of multimodal learning necessitates an algorithm capable of exploiting correlated information across different modalities, (2)
There is a scarcity of appropriate multimodal datasets that
reliably exhibit cross-modal correlations across diverse categories, and (3) There exists a gap in comprehensive evaluation protocols that accurately reflect the efficacy of MSMO
methods in terms of their performance on both intermediate
interpretations and downstream tasks.
Merging existing video and text datasets appears to be a
feasible approach. However, assuring the presence of crossmodal correlations proves challenging [62], not to mention
the absence of necessary human verification [67], a vital element in machine learning research. Furthermore, the existing datasets pose several issues, such as inadequate maintenance leading to data unavailability, limited size, and lack of
categorization. To address these concerns and offer a comprehensive dataset for this area of study, we have undertaken
the task of collecting a new dataset, named MMSum. Our
contributions are summarised as follows:
• A new MSMO dataset Introducing MMSum, our
newly curated MSMO dataset, specifically designed to

21909

