This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GraCo: Granularity-Controllable Interactive Segmentation
Yian Zhao1,3
1

Zesen Cheng1,3 Pengchong Qiao1,2,3 Xiawu Zheng4
Chang Liu5 Li Yuan1,2,3 Jie Chen1,2,3

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
3

4

Kehan Li1,3
Rongrong Ji4

2

Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
5

Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
zhaoyian@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Interactive Segmentation (IS) segments specific objects
or parts in the image according to user input. Current IS
pipelines fall into two categories: single-granularity output and multi-granularity output. The latter aims to alleviate the spatial ambiguity present in the former. However,
the multi-granularity output pipeline suffers from limited
interaction flexibility and produces redundant results. In
this work, we introduce Granularity-Controllable Interactive Segmentation (GraCo), a novel approach that allows
precise control of prediction granularity by introducing additional parameters to input. This enhances the customization of the interactive system and eliminates redundancy
while resolving ambiguity. Nevertheless, the exorbitant cost
of annotating multi-granularity masks and the lack of available datasets with granularity annotations make it difficult
for models to acquire the necessary guidance to control output granularity. To address this problem, we design an
any-granularity mask generator that exploits the semantic
property of the pre-trained IS model to automatically generate abundant mask-granularity pairs without requiring
additional manual annotation. Based on these pairs, we
propose a granularity-controllable learning strategy that
efficiently imparts the granularity controllability to the IS
model. Extensive experiments on intricate scenarios at object and part levels demonstrate that our GraCo has significant advantages over previous methods. This highlights the
potential of GraCo to be a flexible annotation tool, capable
of adapting to diverse segmentation scenarios. The project
page: https://zhao-yian.github.io/GraCo.

1. Introduction
Interactive Segmentation (IS) aims to segment specific objects or parts according to user interactions, providing a
Corresponding author.

jiechen2019@pku.edu.cn
Image + Clicks

Segmentation

User Expectation

Interactive
Segmenter
(a) Single-granularity IS.
Interactive
Segmenter

1

2

3

1 1.0

2 0.8

3 0.6

4 0.4

5 0.2

6 0.1

(b) Multi-granularity IS.
Granularity

Interactive
Segmenter

...

(c) Our Granularity-Controllable IS.

Figure 1. (a): Single-granularity IS ignores spatial ambiguity. (b):
Multi-granularity IS is limited in the number of outputs and produces redundant results. (c): Our Granularity-Controllable IS allows precise control of output granularity to match user expectations by attaching additional parameters to the input.

pixel-level interactive AI system that follows human intent. Recently, remarkable progress has been achieved in
IS, resulting in various applications such as controllable
image generation [42, 49], image editing [4, 20], and the
well-known pixel-level annotation. Extensive research has
been undertaken on various types of interactive information,
such as bounding boxes [23, 48], scribbles [1, 11, 31], and
clicks [6, 7, 19, 35, 36, 38, 45, 47]. Among them, the clickbased interaction becomes mainstream due to its simplicity
and well-established training and evaluation protocols.
The current click-based IS methods are based on deep
learning technology. Xu et al. [47] first introduces this technology to formulate IS and establishes training and evaluation protocols. Specifically, clicks are typically encoded
into distance maps and then combined with the image to
send the semantic segmentation model for interactive association training between clicks and GT masks. The emer-

3501

