This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Self-Supervision for Single-View Scene Completion
via Knowledge Distillation
Keonhee Han*,1
Dominik Muhle*,1,2
Felix Wimbauer1,2
1
2
TU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning

Daniel Cremers1,2

{keonhee.han, dominik.muhle, felix.wimbauer, cremers}@tum.de
a) self-supervised scene
reconstruction

b) knowledge distillation
direct
supervision

rendering
sampled points

density

color

density field

multi-view scene reconstruction

single-view scene reconstruction

Figure 1. Knowledge Distillation from Multi-View to Single-View. We propose to boost single-view scene completion by exploiting
additional information from multiple images. a) we first train a novel multi-view scene reconstruction algorithm that is able to fuse density
fields from multiple images in a fully self-supervised manner. b) we then employ knowledge distillation to directly supervise a state-ofthe-art single-view reconstruction model in 3D to boost its performance. https://keonhee-han.github.io/publications/kdbts/

Abstract
Inferring scene geometry from images via Structure from
Motion is a long-standing and fundamental problem in computer vision. While classical approaches and, more recently, depth map predictions only focus on the visible parts
of a scene, the task of scene completion aims to reason
about geometry even in occluded regions. With the popularity of neural radiance fields (NeRFs), implicit representations also became popular for scene completion by predicting so-called density fields. Unlike explicit approaches
e.g. voxel-based methods, density fields also allow for accurate depth prediction and novel-view synthesis via imagebased rendering. In this work, we propose to fuse the scene
reconstruction from multiple images and distill this knowledge into a more accurate single-view scene reconstruction. To this end, we propose Multi-View Behind the Scenes
(MVBTS) to fuse density fields from multiple posed images,
trained fully self-supervised only from image data. Using
knowledge distillation, we use MVBTS to train a singleview scene completion network via direct supervision called
KDBTS. It achieves state-of-the-art performance on occupancy prediction, especially in occluded regions.

1. Introduction
Obtaining accurate 3D geometry of a scene is crucial to
achieving a holistic understanding of our surroundings.
This knowledge enables a plethora of tasks both in robotics
and autonomous driving. Reconstructing the scene’s geometry from raw images, also called Structure-from-Motion
[42], is a long-standing task in computer vision. Classical methods of scene reconstruction rely on multiple images
and triangulation of matched keypoints, such as Harris Corner Detection, SIFT, and ORB [17, 34, 41], to infer the geometry of a scene. More recently, the breakthrough of deep
learning gave rise to monocular depth estimation (MDE)
methods [12, 13], that allowed to predict a dense per pixel
depth from only a single image. These are either trained
with ground truth supervision or in a self-supervised manner from video data [13, 14, 16, 35, 44, 49, 56, 57, 63].
Despite the impressive results of MDE for geometry estimation, the depth map representations are limited in their
expressiveness. Projecting them into other frames will lead
to holes or possibly wrong estimates due to occlusions in
the scene. Furthermore, they cannot make any statements
* equal contribution.

9837

