This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupling Static and Hierarchical Motion Perception for
Referring Video Segmentation

1

Shuting He1
Nanyang Technological University

Henghui Ding1,2
2
Institute of Big Data, Fudan University

Abstract

Referring video segmentation [8, 14, 23, 47] is a continually
evolving area that lies at the crossroads of computer vision
and natural language processing. This emerging realm of
study is concentrated on segmenting and tracking specific
objects of interest within video content, guided by natural
language expressions. While it shares a historical connection with video object segmentation, it distinguishes itself
by leveraging natural language expressions as guidance,
which can offer motion-related cues like “walking” and
“jumping”. Notably, recent datasets like MeViS [8] have
Corresponding author (henghui.ding@gmail.com).

T=2

T=3

T=4

(a) Previous
①

Static

1. Introduction

T=1

“Giraffes turning around”

Referring video segmentation relies on natural language
expressions to identify and segment objects, often emphasizing motion clues. Previous works treat a sentence as
a whole and directly perform identification at the videolevel, mixing up static image-level cues with temporal
motion cues. However, image-level features cannot well
comprehend motion cues in sentences, and static cues
are not crucial for temporal perception. In fact, static
cues can sometimes interfere with temporal perception by
overshadowing motion cues. In this work, we propose to decouple video-level referring expression understanding into
static and motion perception, with a specific emphasis on
enhancing temporal comprehension. Firstly, we introduce
an expression-decoupling module to make static cues and
motion cues perform their distinct role, alleviating the issue
of sentence embeddings overlooking motion cues. Secondly,
we propose a hierarchical motion perception module to
capture temporal information effectively across varying
timescales. Furthermore, we employ contrastive learning
to distinguish the motions of visually similar objects. These
contributions yield state-of-the-art performance across five
datasets, including a remarkable 9.2% J &F improvement
on the challenging MeViS dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/heshuting555/DsHmp.

Video-level Referring Expression Understanding
“Giraffes turning around”

#O 1

O
(b) Ground Truth

#O 2

P
#O 3

P
②“Giraffes turning around”

(c) Ours

Motion

Figure 1. Previous works treat a sentence as a whole and perform
referring understanding at the video-level. However, image-level
features struggle to understand motion cues, and static cues can
sometimes disrupt temporal perception by overshadowing motion
cues. We introduce a decoupling of static and motion perception,
with a particular focus on enhancing temporal understanding.

emphasized the role of motion expressions in this evolving field, underscoring the significance of comprehending
multi-modal motion information in this context.
Current approaches [8, 15, 29, 43, 49, 55, 56] in referring
video segmentation typically oversimplify the complex nature of language by reducing it to a single sentence embedding. For example, ReferFormer [56] and LMPM [8] both
employ the strategy of duplicating a single sentence embedding for multiple query embeddings within a Transformer
architecture. This approach tends to overshadow the distinct
importance and unique static or motion cues offered by the
sentence. For instance, consider the sentences: “The little
girl in red standing near the chair and drinking” and “The
little girl in red moving near the chair and drinking”. These
two sentences share 10 out of 11 words, leading to highly
similar sentence embeddings, despite potentially referring
to different targets. To address this issue, we propose
to decouple image-level segmentation and temporal-level
motion understanding. As shown in Fig. 1, we let the
given sentence focus on two distinct components: static and

13332

