This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NRDF: Neural Riemannian Distance Fields for Learning Articulated Pose Priors
Yannan He 1,2

Garvita Tiwari 1,2,3
1
3

Tolga Birdal 4

University of Tübingen, Germany,

Jan Eric Lenssen 3
2

Gerard Pons-Moll 1,2,3

Tübingen AI Center, Germany,

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
4

Imperial College London, United Kingdom

https://virtualhumans.mpi-inf.mpg.de/nrdf
d of Riemannian Quaterni
ons
anifol
ct M
u
d
Pro

Quaternion Geodesic
Distance

Manifold of Plausible Articulated Poses

Figure 1. Left: We present Neural Riemannian Distance Fields (NRDFs), a principled method to learn data-driven priors
as subspace of high-dimensional Riemannian manifolds. Right: NRDFs can effectively model the pose of different articulated shapes. We present diverse samples generated using NRDFs trained on human, hand, and animal poses respectively.

Abstract
Faithfully modeling the space of articulations is a crucial task that allows recovery and generation of realistic
poses, and remains a notorious challenge. To this end,
we introduce Neural Riemannian Distance Fields (NRDFs),
data-driven priors modeling the space of plausible articulations, represented as the zero-level-set of a neural field
in a high-dimensional product-quaternion space. To train
NRDFs only on positive examples, we introduce a new sampling algorithm, ensuring that the geodesic distances follow a desired distribution, yielding a principled distance
field learning paradigm. We then devise a projection algorithm to map any random pose onto the level-set by
an adaptive-step Riemannian optimizer, adhering to the
product manifold of joint rotations at all times. NRDFs
can compute the Riemannian gradient via backpropagation and by mathematical analogy, are related to Riemannian flow matching, a recent generative model. We conduct
a comprehensive evaluation of NRDF against other pose
priors in various downstream tasks, i.e., pose generation,
image-based pose estimation, and solving inverse kinemat-

ics, highlighting NRDF’s superior performance. Besides
humans, NRDF’s versatility extends to hand and animal
poses, as it can effectively represent any articulation.

1. Introduction
Pose and motion are ubiquitous yet very challenging and
intriguing aspects of understanding articulated agents such
as humans, animals or hands. Pose is intrinsic to the human experience, our interaction with each other and the
environment. Understanding it is vital for applications in
fields such as medicine, entertainment, AR/VR, etc. As a
result, human pose understanding, generation, and acquisition have been extensively studied in the domain of computer vision and graphics.
Acquisition using IMUs [33], mocap markers [45], and
scans [14] have accelerated the research direction by providing an enormous amount of data. These datasets are used
to learn pose distributions, which are further used as priors in downstream tasks such as solving inverse-kinematics
(IK), image HPS [51], motion denoising, etc. Previous
work in this domain have used GMMs [13], VAEs [51] and

1661

