This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Finsler-Laplace-Beltrami Operators with Application to Shape Analysis
Simon Weber1,2*

Thomas Dagès3*

Maolin Gao1,2

Daniel Cremers1,2

sim.weber@tum.de

thomas.dages@cs.technion.ac.il

maolin.gao@tum.de

cremers@tum.de

Riemann metric

ℛx(v) =

Heuristic ALBO

v ⊤M(x)v
Anisotropic di usivity
(heuristic)

Laplace-Beltrami operator

ΔX f = − divX ( ∇X f )

v

x

Heat
equation

Dαθ
Skew

ΔD f = − divX (D ∇X f)

Finsler metric

ℱx(v) =

v M(x)v+ω (x)v
⊤

⊤

ΔF f = − divX (ℱ*
x ( ∇X f ) ∇ℱ*
x ( ∇X f ))

v

x

Heat
equation
(optional: further skew Dαθ )
fi

Anisotropic di usivity
(Finsler-based)

Laplace-Finsler operator

ω(x)

Δαθ f

if ω = 0
Finsler-based LBO (Ours)

ΔFLBO f

⊤

Dℱ*x = M* − ω*ω*
Simpli ed
special
case

ff

Figure 1. Simplified overview of the derivation of the Finsler-Laplace-Beltrami operator (FLBO), built from a Finsler metric. It generalizes
the traditional heuristic anisotropic Laplace-Beltrami operators (ALBO) [6, 29] (top). The FLBO can directly replace the ALBOs in surface
processing tasks like shape correspondence, notably by constructing shape-dependent anisotropic convolutions in their spectral domain.

Abstract
The Laplace-Beltrami operator (LBO) emerges from
studying manifolds equipped with a Riemannian metric. It
is often called the swiss army knife of geometry processing as it allows to capture intrinsic shape information and
gives rise to heat diffusion, geodesic distances, and a multitude of shape descriptors. It also plays a central role in
geometric deep learning. In this work, we explore Finsler
manifolds as a generalization of Riemannian manifolds. We
revisit the Finsler heat equation and derive a Finsler heat
kernel and a Finsler-Laplace-Beltrami Operator (FLBO):
a novel theoretically justified anisotropic Laplace-Beltrami
operator (ALBO). In experimental evaluations we demonstrate that the proposed FLBO is a valuable alternative to
the traditional Riemannian-based LBO and ALBOs for spatial filtering and shape correspondence estimation. We hope
that the proposed Finsler heat kernel and the FLBO will
* equal contribution.
1 Technical University of Munich
2 Munich Center for Machine Learning
3 Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

inspire further exploration of Finsler geometry in the computer vision community.

1. Introduction
1.1. Finsler versus Riemann
In his PhD thesis of 1918, Paul Finsler introduced
the notion of a differentiable manifold equipped with a
Minkowski norm on each tangent space [22]. It constitutes
a generalization of Riemannian manifolds [39] that Elie
Cartan later referred to as Finsler manifolds [12]. While
Riemannian manifolds are omni-present in computer vision
and machine learning, Finsler manifolds have remained
largely unexplored.
Essentially, a Finsler metric is the same as a Riemannian
one without the quadratic assumption. The consequence is
that the metric not only depends on the location, but also
on the tangential direction of motion. This implies that the
length of a curve between two points A and B may change
whether we are traversing it from A to B or the other way
round, thus geodesic curves from A to B may differ from

3131

