This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optimal Transport Aggregation for Visual Place Recognition
Sergio Izquierdo
Javier Civera
I3A, University of Zaragoza, Spain
{izquierdo, jcivera}@unizar.es

Abstract

Baseline

Ours

ResNet

DINOv2 ViT

SOFTM AX

S
A
SALAD
A
D

R@1 R@5 R@10

R@1 R@5 R@10

The task of Visual Place Recognition (VPR) aims to
match a query image against references from an extensive
database of images from different places, relying solely on
visual cues. State-of-the-art pipelines focus on the aggregation of features extracted from a deep backbone, in order
to form a global descriptor for each image. In this context, we introduce SALAD (Sinkhorn Algorithm for Locally
Aggregated Descriptors), which reformulates NetVLAD’s
soft-assignment of local features to clusters as an optimal
transport problem. In SALAD, we consider both featureto-cluster and cluster-to-feature relations and we also introduce a ‘dustbin’ cluster, designed to selectively discard
features deemed non-informative, enhancing the overall descriptor quality. Additionally, we leverage and fine-tune
DINOv2 as a backbone, which provides enhanced description power for the local features, and dramatically reduces
the required training time. As a result, our single-stage
method not only surpasses single-stage baselines in public VPR datasets, but also surpasses two-stage methods that
add a re-ranking with significantly higher cost. Code and
models are available at https://github.com/serizba/salad.

1. Introduction
Recognizing a place solely from images becomes a challenging task when scenes undergo substantial changes in
their structure or appearance. Such capability is referred
to in the scientific and technical literature as visual place
recognition (and by its acronym VPR), and is essential
for agents to navigate and understand their surroundings
autonomously in a wide array of applications, such as
robotics [12–14, 22, 29] or augmented reality [19]. Specifically, it is present in simultaneous localization and mapping
[9, 10] and absolute pose estimation [25, 44] pipelines.
In practice, VPR is framed as an image retrieval problem,
wherein typically a query image serves as the input and the
goal is to obtain an ordered list of top-k matches against
a pre-existing database of geo-localized reference images.

NetVLAD

Optimal
Transport

D
U
S
T
B
I
N

Figure 1. Illustration of a VPR baseline (left) and our contribution (right). The left column outlines a typical VPR baseline, a
ResNet backbone followed by NetVLAD aggregation [4]. On the
right column, we replace ResNet with a partially fine-tuned DINOv2 [41] backbone, and incorporate SALAD, our novel optimal
transport aggregation using the Sinkhorn Algorithm. Our model
achieves unprecedented state-of-the-art results on common VPR
benchmarks.

Images are represented as an aggregation of appearance pattern descriptors, which are subsequently compared via nearest neighbour. The effectiveness of this matching relies on
generating discriminative per-image descriptors that exhibit
robust performance even for challenging variations such as
fluctuating illumination, structural transformations, temporal changes, weather and seasonal shifts. Most recent research on VPR have thus focused on the two key compo-

17658

