This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EarthLoc: Astronaut Photography Localization by Indexing Earth from Space
Gabriele Berton1 Alex Stoken2 Barbara Caputo1 Carlo Masone1
1
Politecnico di Torino 2 Jacobs Technology, NASA Johnson Space Center
gabriele.berton@polito.it

Abstract
Astronaut photography, spanning six decades of human
spaceflight, presents a unique Earth observations dataset
with immense value for both scientific research and disaster
response. Despite their significance, accurately localizing
the geographical extent of these images, which is crucial
for effective utilization, poses substantial challenges. Current, manual localization efforts are time-consuming, motivating the need for automated solutions. We propose a
novel approach – leveraging image retrieval – to address
this challenge efficiently. We introduce innovative training
techniques which contribute to the development of a highperformance model, EarthLoc. We develop six evaluation
datasets and perform a comprehensive benchmark comparing EarthLoc to existing methods, showcasing its superior
efficiency and accuracy. Our approach marks a significant advancement in automating the localization of astronaut photography, which will help bridge a critical gap in
Earth observations data. Code and datasets are available
at https://github.com/gmberton/EarthLoc.

1. Introduction
Astronaut photography of Earth is a unique remote sensing
dataset that spans 60 years of human spaceflight, offering a
rare perspective on our planet to the public and valuable
data to Earth and atmospheric science researchers. This
dataset contains over 4.5 million images and is growing by
the tens of thousands per month, as astronauts are continually tasked with taking new photographs that enable scientific research as well as assist in natural disaster response
efforts in the wake of events like floods and wildfires. To effectively use these images, the geographical area depicted in
them needs to be identified. Unfortunately, this task - Astronaut Photography Localization (APL) - is very challenging.
For each photo, only a coarse estimate of location is known,
given by the point on Earth directly under the International
Space Station (ISS) at the time the photo is taken. This
point – called the nadir – can be easily computed using the
image’s timestamp and the ISS’s orbit path. However, two

Figure 1. Overview of the astronaut photography localization
task. Astronauts take hundreds of photos a day from the International Space Station (ISS) cupola (top-left) with hand-held cameras. For each image (example bottom right), the geographic location depicted is not known, and needs to be searched for across
a huge area centered at the ISS’s (known) nadir point at the moment that the photo is taken. A simulated view of the astronaut’s
perspective when the ISS is above Europe is shown. The goal of
our paper is to automate the task of localizing these images, which
could be anywhere within the view. In the figure’s example, the
photo the astronaut took is indicated by the green line and shown
in inset – other possible photo extents are in red, illustrating the
wide array of potential locations to search.

images taken with the same nadir can be thousands of kilometers apart, as even a slight inclination of the astronaut’s
hand-held camera can move the image’s location hundreds
of kilometers in any direction, as depicted in Fig. 1. Localization must thus be performed over a wide area, and is
additionally complicated by (i) astronauts using hand-held
cameras and a variety of zoom lenses, (ii) the large, 2500
kilometer (km) visibility range in all directions, (iii) most
photographs being oblique, and (iv) the Earth’s appearance

12754

