This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Passive Snapshot Coded Aperture Dual-Pixel RGB-D Imaging
Bhargav Ghanekar
Rice University
Houston TX USA

Salman Siddique Khan
Rice University
Houston TX USA

Vivek Boominathan
Rice University
Houston TX USA

Pranav Sharma
IIT Madras
Chennai India

Kaushik Mitra
IIT Madras
Chennai India

Shreyas Singh
IIT Madras
Chennai India

Ashok Veeraraghavan
Rice University
Houston TX USA

(A) Coded Aperture Dual-Pixel Sensing

Coded Dual-Pixel Capture
Left view

Right view

Abstract

1. Introduction
Extracting 3D information from 2D images has widespread
applications in several domains such as microscopy, medi-

Coded
Amplitude
Mask

3D Scene

Dual-Pixel (DP)
Sensor

CADS Imaging System

Left, Right DP views

(C) Experimental results

(B) Depth, AIF Deblurring performance analysis

Pred

f/10
f/8

f/6

33

f/10
f/8

f/5

f/6

31

Approx. GT

Predicted
Naive Dual-Pixel
(no code)

f/5

Approx. GT

52 cm

Depth

Pred All-in-focus PSNR (dB)

Imager

Pred All-in-focus

35 Ideal RGBD

CADS (ours)
29
2.5

2.7

2.9

3.1

Pred Depth Mean Abs Error (% of depth range)

32 cm

(D) 3D endoscopy, dermoscopy applications - experimental results
7 mm

2.5 mm

Predicted Depth

Predicted AIF

Predicted Depth

20 mm

Predicted AIF

Passive, compact, single-shot 3D sensing is useful in
many application areas such as microscopy, medical imaging, surgical navigation, and autonomous driving where
form factor, time, and power constraints can exist. Obtaining RGB-D scene information over a short imaging distance, in an ultra-compact form factor, and in a passive,
snapshot manner is challenging. Dual-pixel (DP) sensors
are a potential solution to achieve the same. DP sensors
collect light rays from two different halves of the lens in
two interleaved pixel arrays, thus capturing two slightly
different views of the scene, like a stereo camera system.
However, imaging with a DP sensor implies that the defocus blur size is directly proportional to the disparity seen
between the views. This creates a trade-off between disparity estimation vs. deblurring accuracy. To improve this
trade-off effect, we propose CADS (Coded Aperture DualPixel Sensing), in which we use a coded aperture in the
imaging lens along with a DP sensor. In our approach,
we jointly learn an optimal coded pattern and the reconstruction algorithm in an end-to-end optimization setting.
Our resulting CADS imaging system demonstrates improvement of >1.5 dB PSNR in all-in-focus (AIF) estimates and
5-6% in depth estimation quality over naive DP sensing for
a wide range of aperture settings. Furthermore, we build
the proposed CADS prototypes for DSLR photography settings and in an endoscope and a dermoscope form factor.
Our novel coded dual-pixel sensing approach demonstrates
accurate RGB-D reconstruction results in simulations and
real-world experiments in a passive, snapshot, and compact
manner.

3mm

Figure 1. (A). We propose CADS - an imaging approach that leverages DP sensors and coded aperture masks for passive snapshot
3D imaging. (B) Coded DP sensing improves on naive dual-pixel
sensing for simultaneous depth estimation and deblurring. Our
CADS imaging prototype can recover accurate depth maps and
all-in-focus images in (C) DSLR photography settings, as well as
for (D) 3D endoscopy and dermoscopy. Read more on our website
https://shadowfax11.github.io/cads/.

cal imaging, and autonomous driving. Conventional methods like passive stereo, structured illumination [5, 24], photometric stereo [3], and time-of-flight sensing do an excellent job estimating depth maps from 2D images for several
computer vision tasks. However, these 3D imaging methods have a bulkier form factor due to the use of multiple
cameras/illumination sources, and their estimation accuracy
suffers when they are used in systems with size restrictions.

25348

