This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Content for HDR Deghosting from Frequency View
Tao Hu1† Qingsen Yan1† * Yuankai Qi2 Yanning Zhang1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Macquarie University
hutaoxauat@gmail.com,1 {qingsenyan,ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn,2 yuankai.qi@mq.edu.au

Abstract
Recovering ghost-free High Dynamic Range (HDR) images from multiple Low Dynamic Range (LDR) images becomes challenging when the LDR images exhibit saturation
and significant motion. Recent Diffusion Models (DMs)
have been introduced in HDR imaging field, demonstrating promising performance, particularly in achieving visually perceptible results compared to previous DNN-based
methods. However, DMs require extensive iterations with
large models to estimate entire images, resulting in inefficiency that hinders their practical application. To address
this challenge, we propose the Low-Frequency aware Diffusion (LF-Diff) model for ghost-free HDR imaging. The
key idea of LF-Diff is implementing the DMs in a highly
compacted latent space and integrating it into a regressionbased model to enhance the details of reconstructed images. Specifically, as low-frequency information is closely
related to human visual perception we propose to utilize
DMs to create compact low-frequency priors for the reconstruction process. In addition, to take full advantage of the
above low-frequency priors, the Dynamic HDR Reconstruction Network (DHRNet) is carried out in a regression-based
manner to obtain final HDR images. Extensive experiments
conducted on synthetic and real-world benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our LF-Diff performs favorably against
several state-of-the-art methods and is 10× faster than previous DM-based methods.

1. Introduction
Multiple exposure High Dynamic Range (HDR) imaging aims to restore missing details from exposure-varied
Low Dynamic Range (LDR) images. However, in dynamic scenes, it often causes ghosting artifacts due to object or camera movement, limiting practical applications.
Researchers are actively exploring ghost-free image recon* Corresponding author.
† The first two authors contributed
equally to this work. This work was partially supported by NSFC
(62301432,62306240), NSBRPS (2023-JC-QN-0685, QCYRCXM-2023057). Y. Qi is not supported by the above mentioned fundings.

Figure 1. Average PSNR vs. inference time on the Kalantari’s
dataset [11]. Our method performs favorably and is 10× faster
than the previous diffusion-model-based method DiffHDR [44].

struction methods to enable seamless capture of dynamic
scenes with high dynamic ranges.
In recent years, the rise of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has brought significant advancements to
HDR imaging field. Numerous DNN-based methods
have emerged, employing Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [11, 41, 47] or Vision Transformers (ViTs) [16, 28]
for HDR image reconstruction. Despite their advancements,
DNN-based approaches face challenges when essential information (e.g., content, details) for overexposed areas is
missing due to object or camera movement. More recently,
Diffusion Models (DMs) [8, 26] have exhibited impressive
performance in image synthesis [4, 29] and image reconstruction tasks (including HDR imaging) [24, 44, 46]. DMs
achieve this by iteratively denoising Gaussian noise to generate high-fidelity images. Yan et al. [44] reconstruct complete HDR images from pure Gaussian noise, yielding impressive results. Note that, compared to previous Deep generative models [14, 21], DMs generate a more accurate target distribution without facing issues like optimization instability or mode collapse, making them a promising choice
for enhancing HDR image quality. Nonetheless, DMs demand a substantial number of iteration steps on denoising models to capture intricate data details, which is timeconsuming even with a high-end GPU card. For example,
as shown in Fig. 1, DiffHDR [44] takes about 7.5 seconds
to generate an HDR image on a single A100 GPU.

25732

