This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HPNet: Dynamic Trajectory Forecasting with Historical Prediction Attention
Xiaolong Tang1,2

Meina Kan1,2 Shiguang Shan1,2 Zhilong Ji3 Jinfeng Bai3 Xilin CHEN1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Tomorrow Advancing Life
{tangxiaolong22s, kanmeina, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Predicting the trajectories of road agents is essential for
autonomous driving systems. The recent mainstream methods follow a static paradigm, which predicts the future trajectory by using a fixed duration of historical frames. These
methods make the predictions independently even at adjacent time steps, which leads to potential instability and temporal inconsistency. As successive time steps have largely
overlapping historical frames, their forecasting should have
intrinsic correlation, such as overlapping predicted trajectories should be consistent, or be different but share the
same motion goal depending on the road situation. Motivated by this, in this work, we introduce HPNet, a novel dynamic trajectory forecasting method. Aiming for stable and
accurate trajectory forecasting, our method leverages not
only historical frames including maps and agent states, but
also historical predictions. Specifically, we newly design
a Historical Prediction Attention module to automatically
encode the dynamic relationship between successive predictions. Besides, it also extends the attention range beyond the
currently visible window benefitting from the use of historical predictions. The proposed Historical Prediction Attention together with the Agent Attention and Mode Attention is
further formulated as the Triple Factorized Attention module, serving as the core design of HPNet. Experiments on
the Argoverse and INTERACTION datasets show that HPNet achieves state-of-the-art performance, and generates
accurate and stable future trajectories. Our code are available at https://github.com/XiaolongTang23/
HPNet.

1. Introduction
Accurate and reliable trajectory prediction of road agents
such as cars and pedestrians is critical to the decisionmaking and safety of autonomous driving systems. However, trajectory prediction is extremely challenging. On the
one hand, an agent’s motion is influenced not only by road
geometry and rules but also by surrounding agents. On the

Figure 1. The difference between previous methods and ours. Previous methods (upper) treat trajectory prediction as a static task,
predicting future trajectories based on a fixed-length sequence of
historical frames. They independently forecast trajectories even
at adjacent timesteps, despite the considerable overlap in input
data. In contrast, HPNet (lower) views trajectory prediction as
a dynamic task. It not only leverages historical frames but also
historical prediction embeddings to forecast trajectories.

other hand, the agent’s intentions are unknown, leading to
high levels of future uncertainty.
Recently, researches such as Macformer [10], HiVT
[44], and Multipath++ [32] have achieved notable results
by employing intricately designed network architectures to
seamlessly fuse heterogeneous information including agent
history, agent-agent interactions, and agent-map interactions. Wayformer [25] further explores the unified architecture for fusing the heterogeneous information. In
addition, to account for future uncertainties, recent work
[3, 17, 20, 24–27, 32, 34, 36, 41, 43, 45] have shifted to-

15261

