This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Label Propagation for Zero-shot Classification with Vision-Language Models
Giorgos Tolias1
2

VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague

62

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance on zero-shot classification, i.e. classification when provided merely with a list of class names.
In this paper, we tackle the case of zero-shot classification in the presence of unlabeled data. We leverage the
graph structure of the unlabeled data and introduce ZLaP,
a method based on label propagation (LP) that utilizes
geodesic distances for classification. We tailor LP to graphs
containing both text and image features and further propose an efficient method for performing inductive inference based on a dual solution and a sparsification step.
We perform extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of our method on 14 common datasets and show
that ZLaP outperforms the latest related works. Code:
https://github.com/vladan-stojnic/ZLaP

60
accuracy

Abstract

NAVER LABS Europe

58
56
54

Transductive

In
M
+ aP
ZL
aP

C
+ LIP
ZL
aP

52
C
+ LIP
ZL
aP

1

Yannis Kalantidis2

In
M
+ aP
ZL
aP

Vladan Stojnić1

Inductive

Figure 1. Zero-shot classification performance over 14 datasets
using the proposed ZLaP classifier over CLIP [31], as well as over
the (concurrent) InMaP [30] approach. Our method offers performance gains for both transductive (left) and inductive (right)
inference. Average accuracy over 14 common datasets is reported.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance on a variety of computer vision tasks.
They are usually trained on large datasets of image-text
pairs and contain visual and textual encoders that map to
a common feature space. Visual encoders from such models have been shown to produce strong visual representations for perception tasks [31]. Given labeled data from a
downstream dataset, one can fine-tune the model or learn
classifiers and achieve really high classification accuracy.
Besides using the visual encoder in isolation, the joint
text and visual encoder feature space of VLMs enables us
to define text-based “classifiers”, e.g. using the class names
as textual prompts. This means that we only need a list of
class names to perform zero-shot classification for a target
dataset, i.e. without access to any labeled images. Although
utilizing priors or devising better textual prompts can improve zero-shot performance [8, 24, 29, 46], here, we are
interested in the case where we further have access to unlabeled data. Our goal is to find the best way of utilizing such
data for zero-shot classification.

In this paper, we leverage the inherent structure of the
unlabeled data represented by a proximity graph and apply
label propagation (LP) between the text-based classifiers
and unlabeled images to derive geodesic distances we then
use for classification. We tailor LP to VLMs and graphs
containing both text and image features, and show that without proper handling of the bimodality, vanilla application of
LP fails dramatically. We introduce ZLaP, a novel classification method based on label propagation that can perform
both transductive and inductive inference. We perform the
former with the standard (primal) solution of LP for classification and devise a more efficient dual solution for the
latter. Our method is not only highly effective but also efficient, making LP a more attractive inductive classifier in
terms of complexity.
We implement our methods using publicly available
VLMs as feature encoders, primarily the ResNet and ViT
CLIP [31] models, and perform extensive experiments to
evaluate the effectiveness of our method on 14 common

23209

