This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIGC: Multi-Instance Generation Controller for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Dewei Zhou1
You Li1
Fan Ma1 Xiaoting Zhang2 Yi Yang1†
1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China 2 Huawei Technologies Ltd., China
Orange
cat

Blue Green
cat
cat

Green cake

Blue cake

Dog

Red cake

Yellow couch

BirdBird Bird Bird Bird

Yellow cake
Cat

Dog

Cuboid

Dog

Cat

Cylinder

Triangular Sphere
pyramid

Orange cake

Count

Color

Stone

Five towels
Striped
Dot

Cyberpunk
style urban

Metal
Checkered

Floral

Realistic
Corgi

Shape

Van gogh starry Blue
Sunglasses
night
forehead
Green
Watercolor
Cartoon elephant Cartoon cat suitcase
car
Red scarf
Yellow
wing
Realistic
lake

Material & Texture

Style

Square
cake

Triangle
cake

Red cake
Pure
Five vases
Wooden Glasses Woven blue

Circular
cake

Messi

Red Blue
shoe shoe

Blue
bear

Football

Interaction

Figure 1. Multi-Instance Generation (MIG) with our MIGC. MIGC enables precise position control while ensuring the correctness
of various attributes like color, shape, material, texture, and style in Multi-Instance Generation tasks. It can also control the number
of instances and improve interaction between instances. We label the instance with a corresponding color box, while the black box
represents that the instance does not have a specified color.

Abstract
We present a Multi-Instance Generation (MIG) task, simultaneously generating multiple instances with diverse
controls in one image. Given a set of predefined coordinates and their corresponding descriptions, the task is to
ensure that generated instances are accurately at the designated locations and that all instances’ attributes adhere to
their corresponding description. This broadens the scope
of current research on Single-instance generation, elevating it to a more versatile and practical dimension. Inspired
by the idea of divide and conquer, we introduce an innovative approach named Multi-Instance Generation Controller
(MIGC) to address the challenges of the MIG task. Initially, we break down the MIG task into several subtasks,
each involving the shading of a single instance. To ensure
precise shading for each instance, we introduce an instance
enhancement attention mechanism. Lastly, we aggregate all
the shaded instances to provide the necessary information
for accurately generating multiple instances in stable dif† Yi Yang is the corresponding author.

fusion (SD). To evaluate how well generation models perform on the MIG task, we provide a COCO-MIG benchmark along with an evaluation pipeline. Extensive experiments were conducted on the proposed COCO-MIG benchmark, as well as on various commonly used benchmarks.
The evaluation results illustrate the exceptional control capabilities of our model in terms of quantity, position, attribute, and interaction. Code and demos will be released
at https://migcproject.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Stable diffusion [40] has exhibited extraordinary capabilities in wild scenarios, including photography, painting, and
others [11, 28, 37, 54, 57, 58]. The current research mainly
focuses on Single-Instance Generation, where the generated
content is only required to align with the single description,
including image editing, personalized image generation, 3D
generation [8, 12, 19–21, 23, 28, 41, 45, 46, 51], etc. However, more practical cases where multiple instances are simultaneously generated in one image with diverse controls

6818

