This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross Initialization for Face Personalization of Text-to-Image Models
Lianyu Pang1 , Jian Yin1,2 , Haoran Xie3 , Qiping Wang4 , Qing Li5 , Xudong Mao1,2 *
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
3
Lingnan University 4 East China Normal University 5 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
1

Single Input

… with an excited
expression

… with a surprised
expression

… with a worried
expression

… latte art

Ice sculpture
of …

Greek sculpture
of …

… and Bill Gates go … stands with Keanu
… and Sergey
to an art exhibition Reeves on a street Brin sit on a sofa

Manga drawing
of …

Watercolor
painting of …

… in assassin's
creed

Figure 1. Personalization results of our method using a single input image. Our method enables a variety of novel personalized face
generations with high visual fidelity, such as facial expression editing, interaction with other individuals, and stylization. Moreover, it
significantly speeds up the personalization process by reducing the optimization steps from 5,000 to 320.

Abstract
Recently, there has been a surge in face personalization techniques, benefiting from the advanced capabilities
of pretrained text-to-image diffusion models. Among these,
a notable method is Textual Inversion, which generates personalized images by inverting given images into textual embeddings. However, methods based on Textual Inversion
still struggle with balancing the trade-off between reconstruction quality and editability. In this study, we examine
this issue through the lens of initialization. Upon closely
examining traditional initialization methods, we identified a
significant disparity between the initial and learned embeddings in terms of both scale and orientation. The scale of
the learned embedding can be up to 100 times greater than
that of the initial embedding. Such a significant change in
the embedding could increase the risk of overfitting, thereby
compromising the editability. Driven by this observation,
we introduce a novel initialization method, termed Cross
Initialization, that significantly narrows the gap between
the initial and learned embeddings. This method not only
improves both reconstruction and editability but also reduces the optimization steps from 5,000 to 320. Further⇤ Corresponding author (xudong.xdmao@gmail.com).

more, we apply a regularization term to keep the learned
embedding close to the initial embedding. We show that
when combined with Cross Initialization, this regularization term can effectively improve editability. We provide
comprehensive empirical evidence to demonstrate the superior performance of our method compared to the baseline methods. Notably, in our experiments, Cross Initialization is the only method that successfully edits an individual’s facial expression. Additionally, a fast version of
our method allows for capturing an input image in roughly
26 seconds, while surpassing the baseline methods in terms
of both reconstruction and editability. Code is available at
https://github.com/lyuPang/CrossInitialization.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large-scale diffusion models [43,
48, 51] have significantly advanced the field of text-toimage generation, paving the way for a variety of generative tasks [7, 17, 23]. Text-to-image personalization [17],
when provided with several images of a target concept, enables users to produce personalized images in novel contexts or styles. This personalization is achieved either
by inverting the target concept into the textual embedding

8393

