This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Generalizing to Unseen Domains with Few Labels
Chamuditha Jayanga Galappaththige1,2∗ , Sanoojan Baliah1∗ , Malitha Gunawardhana1,3 ,
Muhammad Haris Khan1
1
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of AI 2 Queensland University of Technology 3 University of Auckland
{chamuditha.jayanga,sanoojan.baliah,malitha.gunawardhana,muhammad.haris}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
We approach the challenge of addressing semisupervised domain generalization (SSDG). Specifically, our
aim is to obtain a model that learns domain-generalizable
features by leveraging a limited subset of labelled data
alongside a substantially larger pool of unlabeled data. Existing domain generalization (DG) methods which are unable to exploit unlabeled data perform poorly compared to
semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods under SSDG setting. Nevertheless, SSL methods have considerable room
for performance improvement when compared to fullysupervised DG training. To tackle this underexplored, yet
highly practical problem of SSDG, we make the following core contributions. First, we propose a feature-based
conformity technique that matches the posterior distributions from the feature space with the pseudo-label from the
model’s output space. Second, we develop a semantics
alignment loss to learn semantically-compatible representations by regularizing the semantic structure in the feature
space. Our method is plug-and-play and can be readily integrated with different SSL-based SSDG baselines without
introducing any additional parameters. Extensive experimental results across five challenging DG benchmarks with
four strong SSL baselines suggest that our method provides
consistent and notable gains in two different SSDG settings.
Our code is available at FBC-SA.

1. Introduction
Top-performing visual object recognition models [13, 18,
31] tend to sacrifice performance when there is a difference between the training and testing data distributions, also
termed as the domain shift problem [49, 52]. To handle
the domain shift problem, the research line of domain generalization (DG), amongst others, has been explored with
greater interest. As such, DG places fewer assumptions and
so it is potentially more widely applicable than the other
alternatives e.g., unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
* Equally contributing authors

Figure 1. Visual illustration of Semi-supervised Domain Generalization (SSDG) setting.

[53]. In DG, the goal is to learn a generalizable model,
relying on data from multiple source domains for training,
that is capable of performing well on data from an unseen
target domain [7, 23, 28]. In the recent past, several promising DG methods have been proposed that leverage different
feature-level constraints [28], adapt meta-learning frameworks [4, 24], leverage proxy tasks [8, 40], or develop data
augmentation mechanisms [20, 56]. Note that almost all existing DG methods operate under fully supervised settings
i.e. the data from all source domains are completely labeled.
In many real-world use-cases, for instance, in healthcare, it is often hard, if not impossible, to acquire a sufficiently large set of labeled data from all source domains
[46]. Usually, only a small subset of data is labelled, and
the remaining large fraction of data is unlabelled. Therefore, besides, aiming to achieve cross-domain generalization, a model should be able to rely on limited labels [48].
The topic of semi-supervised learning (SSL) is quite relevant in this case [6, 22, 32, 33], which aims to leverage
abundantly available unlabeled data with a small fraction of
labeled data to achieve learning.
In our work, we aim to study the problem of semisupervised domain generalization (SSDG), which unifies
domain generalization and data efficiency under the same
framework [57]. SSDG is similar to DG in terms of core
objective i.e. learning a generalizable model by leverag-

23691

