This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Out-of-Distribution Generalization in Graphs
via Hierarchical Semantic Environments
Yinhua Piao1 , Sangseon Lee2 , Yijingxiu Lu1 , Sun Kim1,3,4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University1
Institute of Computer Technology, Seoul National University2 , AIGENDRUG Co., Ltd.3
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University4
{2018-27910, sangseon486, solanoon0113, sunkim.bioinfo}@snu.ac.kr

Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization in the graph
domain is challenging due to complex distribution shifts and
a lack of environmental contexts. Recent methods attempt
to enhance graph OOD generalization by generating flat
environments. However, such flat environments come with
inherent limitations to capture more complex data distributions. Considering the DrugOOD dataset, which contains
diverse training environments (e.g., scaffold, size, etc.), flat
contexts cannot sufficiently address its high heterogeneity.
Thus, a new challenge is posed to generate more semantically enriched environments to enhance graph invariant
learning for handling distribution shifts. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach to generate hierarchical semantic environments for each graph. Firstly, given an input
graph, we explicitly extract variant subgraphs from the input graph to generate proxy predictions on local environments. Then, stochastic attention mechanisms are employed
to re-extract the subgraphs for regenerating global environments in a hierarchical manner. In addition, we introduce
a new learning objective that guides our model to learn the
diversity of environments within the same hierarchy while
maintaining consistency across different hierarchies. This
approach enables our model to consider the relationships
between environments and facilitates robust graph invariant
learning. Extensive experiments on real-world graph data
have demonstrated the effectiveness of our framework. Particularly, in the challenging dataset DrugOOD, our method
achieves up to 1.29% and 2.83% improvement over the best
baselines on IC50 and EC50 prediction tasks, respectively.

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in real-world applications, from social networks to biological networks and

(a)

(b) Flat environments from existing approaches
71

IC50-SCA
ERM

70
Test ROC-AUC

Abstract

69

#Ereal = 10

#Erandom = 2

#Einfer = 2

(c) Hierarchical environments from our approaches

68
67
66

Real

Rand#2 Infer#2

Ours

#Eours_0 = 10

#Eours_1 = 6

#Eours_2 = 2

Figure 1. (a) Results on IC50- SCA dataset from DrugOOD [20].
(b) Flat environments from existing approaches. (c) Hierarchical
environments from our methods. For visualization, we set #real
environments as 10.

chemical molecules [14, 16, 21, 48]. One notable advancement in this area is the emergence of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). GNN-based models have pioneered end-toend learning strategies to extract valuable information from
graphs and have demonstrated remarkable success across
various applications [13, 24, 42]. However, the success of
GNNs encounters challenges in out-of-distribution (OOD)
scenarios primarily due to the intricate nature of graph distribution shifts [3, 9, 28]. Graph data, characterized by
nodes, edges, and potential attributes, poses additional challenges compared to other domains such as natural language
processing (NLP) or computer vision (CV). Unlike those
domains where context is often provided by sentences, paragraphs, or spatial information in images [4, 15, 36], graph
lacks a built-in contextual framework, making it inherently
challenging to discern the relevance and context of individual graph elements in OOD scenarios [12, 49].
Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) [2] is a widely used
strategy in the Euclidean domain, relying on the assumption that training data is sourced from distinct environments
with varied data distributions. Motivated by the success of

27631

