This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedAS: Bridging Inconsistency in Personalized Federated Learning
Xiyuan Yang1 Wenke Huang1 Mang Ye1,2 *
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Taikang Center for Life and Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{yangxiyuan,wenkehuang,yemang}@whu.edu.cn
https://github.com/xiyuanyang45/FedAS

Abstract
Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) is primarily designed to provide customized models for each client to better fit the non-iid distributed client data, which is a inherent
challenge in Federated Learning. However, current PFL
methods suffer from inconsistencies in both intra-client and
inter-client levels: 1) The intra-client inconsistency stems
from the asynchronous update strategy for personalized and
shared parameters. In PFL, clients update their shared parameters to communicate and learn from others, while keeping personalized parts unchanged, leading to poor coordination between these two components. 2) The Inter-client
inconsistency arises from “stragglers” - inactive clients
that communicate and train with the server less frequently.
This results in their under-trained personalized models and
impedes the collaborative training stage for other clients.
In this paper, we present a novel PFL framework named
FedAS, which uses Federated Parameter-Alignment and
Client-Synchronization to overcome above challenges. Initially, we enhance the localization of global parameters by
infusing them with local insights. We make the shared parts
learn from previous model, thereby increasing their local
relevance and reducing the impact of parameter inconsistency. Furthermore, we design a robust aggregation method
to mitigate the impact of stragglers by preventing the incorporation of their under-trained knowledge into aggregated
model. Experimental results on Cifar10 and Cifar100 validate the effectiveness of our FedAS in achieving better performance and robustness against data heterogeneity.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed manner that facilitates collaborative model training across decentralized
clients, all while preserving privacy. As a cornerstone so* Corresponding Author

(a) Intra-client Inconsistency

(b) Inter-client Inconsistency

Figure 1. Problem Illustration of Intra-client and Inter-client Inconsistency. The asynchronous parameter update in the personalized federated learning leads to the Intra-client Inconsistency between personalized and shared parts. The stragglers results in the
Inter-client Inconsistency, which distorts aggregated update in the
collaborative learning stage.

lution, the FedAvg [36] algorithm maintains a global model
in the central server, during the training process, this global
model is distributed to the participating clients for further
local training. After client-wise updating, the server collects and aggregates the optimized client network parameter to update the global model. Notably, the model optimized via the FedAvg shows a performance degradation
due to data heterogeneity [15–17, 20, 27, 55, 65]. Specifically, as data is collected from different parties, e.g., users,
devices, organizations, and other diverse sources, it in-

11986

