This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GSNeRF: Generalizable Semantic Neural Radiance Fields
with Enhanced 3D Scene Understanding
Zi-Ting Chou*1 *,
1

Sheng-Yu Huang*1 ,

I-Jieh Liu1 ,

Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2 ,

Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University

2

NVIDIA, Taiwan

{r11942101, f08942095, r11942087}@ntu.edu.tw frankwang@nvidia.com

Abstract
Utilizing multi-view inputs to synthesize novel-view images, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have emerged as a
popular research topic in 3D vision. In this work, we introduce a Generalizable Semantic Neural Radiance Fields
(GSNeRF), which uniquely takes image semantics into the
synthesis process so that both novel view image and the associated semantic maps can be produced for unseen scenes.
Our GSNeRF is composed of two stages: Semantic GeoReasoning and Depth-Guided Visual rendering. The former
is able to observe multi-view image inputs to extract semantic and geometry features from a scene. Guided by the
resulting image geometry information, the latter performs
both image and semantic rendering with improved performances. Our experiments not only confirm that GSNeRF
performs favorably against prior works on both novel-view
image and semantic segmentation synthesis but the effectiveness of our sampling strategy for visual rendering is further verified.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding plays a pivotal role in many visionrelated tasks, including 3D reconstruction and 3D reasoning. The former domain focuses on low-level understanding, including developing efficient models that interpret
and reconstruct observations from various data sources,
such as RGB, RGBD, and physical sensors. In contrast,
the latter emphasizes high-level understanding, like encoding, segmentation, and common sense knowledge learning.
For real-world applications like robotic navigation or augmented reality, both these facets - reconstruction and reasoning - are crucial to enhance interactions with the real
world [10]. Among the challenges in the reconstruction
domain, novel view synthesis has consistently been a challenging objective. Being able to generate a novel view image based on a few existing views shows that a model com* Equal Contribution

prehends the scene’s geometry and possesses a foundational
understanding akin to reconstruction.
The Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [1, 4, 8, 19–22, 28,
35] has recently risen as an exciting research area, providing a novel way to tackle the task of novel view synthesis.
By encoding the density and emitted radiance at each spatial
location, NeRF is able to compress a scene into a learnable
model given several images and the corresponding camera
poses of the scene. By incorporating a volumetric rendering
skill, images of unseen camera views can be generated with
convincing quality. However, NeRF primarily focuses on
reconstructing the color information of novel views and understanding the associated high-level semantic information
(e.g., semantic segmentation or object detection) remains a
significant challenge.
Recent works [9, 15, 25, 30, 31, 37] aim to amplify the
high-level scene understanding ability of NeRF by integrating NeRF with semantic segmentation. By sharing the information between the semantic object class and their corresponding appearances, these two tasks are capable of benefiting from each other’s insights [17]. Nevertheless, these
semantic understanding methods stick closely to the original NeRF paradigm, focusing on exploiting the model to
represent a specific scene. As mentioned in [17], such a
strategy requires additional annotations of semantic segmentation maps when applied to a new scene, limiting realworld applicability and generalizability.
To tackle this problem, generalizable NeRFs [3, 14, 18,
27, 32, 33, 36] have emerged as a promising solution. They
adopt an on-the-fly approach for building a neural radiance
field conditioned on extracted features from input images of
different scenes rather than encoding the scene representation directly into the model. For instance, PixelNeRF [36]
introduces the idea of conditioning a NeRF model with
multi-view images across multiple scenes. This innovation
boosts NeRF’s ability to generalize to unseen scenes and
avoids retraining for each individual scene. Yet, it leaves
uncertainties in its application to semantic understanding.
As a pioneer in integrating a generalizable NeRF
with semantic segmentation capabilities, Semantic-Ray (S-

20806

