This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Fusion of Single-View and Multi-View Depth for Autonomous Driving
Junda Cheng1,2 ,* Wei Yin2 ,* Kaixuan Wang2 , Xiaozhi Chen2 , Shijie Wang1 , Xin Yang1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology

2

DJI Technology

{Junda Cheng, sjw, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn, yvanwy@outlook.com

③
②

①

①

②

③

③
②

①
①

③
②

Figure 1. Visualization of reconstructed 3D point clouds of DDAD [12] scenes. We fuse the results of 10 frames (including the dynamic
object cars) and zoom in on some details for visualization. It shows that our method can achieve high-quality results on both static and
dynamic parts.

Abstract
Multi-view depth estimation has achieved impressive
performance over various benchmarks. However, almost
all current multi-view systems rely on given ideal camera
poses, which are unavailable in many real-world scenarios,
such as autonomous driving. In this work, we propose a
new robustness benchmark to evaluate the depth estimation
system under various noisy pose settings. Surprisingly, we
find current multi-view depth estimation methods or singleview and multi-view fusion methods will fail when given
noisy pose settings. To address this challenge, we propose
a single-view and multi-view fused depth estimation system,

which adaptively integrates high-confident multi-view and
single-view results for both robust and accurate depth estimations. The adaptive fusion module performs fusion by
dynamically selecting high-confidence regions between two
branches based on a wrapping confidence map. Thus, the
system tends to choose the more reliable branch when facing textureless scenes, inaccurate calibration, dynamic objects, and other degradation or challenging conditions. Our
method outperforms state-of-the-art multi-view and fusion
methods under robustness testing. Furthermore, we achieve
state-of-the-art performance on challenging benchmarks
(KITTI and DDAD) when given accurate pose estimations.
Project website: https://github.com/Junda24/AFNet/.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

10138

