This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LEAD: Learning Decomposition for Source-free Universal Domain Adaptation
Sanqing Qu1 , Tianpei Zou1 , Lianghua He1 , Florian Röhrbein2 ,
Alois Knoll3 , Guang Chen1 *, Changjun Jiang1
1

Tongji University, 2 Chemnitz University of Technology, 3 Technical University of Munich
100

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have yielded impressive results in a variety of computer vision tasks [12, 18, 22, 42].
However, DNNs often fail to generalize well to new domains due to the discrepancy between training (source) and
test (target) data distributions (i.e., covariate shift). Such
a shift poses significant challenges for some safety-critical
applications like autonomous driving [9, 10], or medical imaging [13, 31]. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(DA) [16, 23] aims to address this challenge by transferring
task-specific knowledge from a labeled source domain to an
unlabeled target domain. Despite promising results, most
* Corresponding author: guangchen@tongji.edu.cn

60
40
20
0

0

5

10

15 20
Epoch

25

Target Common Data
Target Private Data

16
Frequency(%)

80
Accuracy(%)

Universal Domain Adaptation (UniDA) targets knowledge transfer in the presence of both covariate and label shifts. Recently, Source-free Universal Domain Adaptation (SF-UniDA) has emerged to achieve UniDA without access to source data, which tends to be more practical due to data protection policies. The main challenge
lies in determining whether covariate-shifted samples belong to target-private unknown categories. Existing methods tackle this either through hand-crafted thresholding or
by developing time-consuming iterative clustering strategies. In this paper, we propose a new idea of LEArning Decomposition (LEAD), which decouples features into
source-known and -unknown components to identify targetprivate data. Technically, LEAD initially leverages the orthogonal decomposition analysis for feature decomposition.
Then, LEAD builds instance-level decision boundaries to
adaptively identify target-private data. Extensive experiments across various UniDA scenarios have demonstrated
the effectiveness and superiority of LEAD. Notably, in the
OPDA scenario on VisDA dataset, LEAD outperforms GLC
by 3.5% overall H-score and reduces 75% time to derive
pseudo-labeling decision boundaries. Besides, LEAD is
also appealing in that it is complementary to most existing
methods. The code is available at https://github.
com/ispc-lab/LEAD.

20

GLC
LEAD (Ours)

30

12
8
4
0

0.65

0.75

0.85

0.95

Normalized Feature Magnitude
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. (a) Pseudo-label accuracy curves for target-private data
in the OPDA scenario on VisDA dataset. An observation is that
clustering-based GLC does not work well in deriving decision
boundaries for target-private data. This may be due to the curse
of dimensionality, leading K-means to faintly discerning clusters.
(b) Frequency distribution for the normalized feature magnitude of
target data in the source-unknown space (orthogonal complement
of the space spanned by source model weights). Features are on
task (A → D) in the OPDA scenario of Office-31. The results
show that target-private data are expected to involve more components from source-unknown space, even with covariate shifts.

existing favorable DA methods [16, 20, 27, 45] assume that
the label spaces are identical across the source and target
domain, thus being only applicable to closed-set scenarios
and limiting applicability to practical applications.
To handle generalized cases, Universal Domain Adaptation (UniDA) [47] was proposed to allow all potential label
shifts between source and target domains. Different from
existing methods specialized for Partial Domain Adaptation
(PDA) [3, 4], Open-set Domain Adaptation (OSDA) [35,
46], or Open-Partial Domain Adaptation (OPDA) [44, 54],
in UniDA, we have no prior knowledge about the label shift,
e.g., information on matched common classes or the number of categories in the target domain. Nonetheless, most
existing UniDA works [7, 25, 47] necessitate concurrent access to source and target data. This requirement becomes increasingly impractical in light of strict data protection policies [50]. In this paper, we focus on Source-free Universal Domain Adaptation (SF-UniDA) [28, 41], where only a
pre-trained source model is provided for knowledge transfer
rather than labeled source data.
The primary objective for UniDA is to recognize target data belonging to common categories and separate
them from target-private “unknown” data. Existing meth-

23334

