This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Byzantine-robust Decentralized Federated Learning via Dual-domain Clustering
and Trust Bootstrapping
Peng Sun†,♯ , Xinyang Liu§,‡,♯ , Zhibo Wang≀ , Bo Liu‡,∗
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, China
§
Department of Aeronautical and Aviation Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, China
≀
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
‡
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society (AIRS), China
†

psun@hnu.edu.cn, codex.lxy@gmail.com, zhibowang@zju.edu.cn, liubo@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Decentralized federated learning (DFL) facilitates collaborative model training across multiple connected clients
without a central coordination server, thereby avoiding the
single point of failure in traditional centralized federated
learning (CFL). However, DFL exhibits increased susceptibility to Byzantine attacks owing to the lack of a responsible central server. Furthermore, a benign client in DFL
may be dominated by Byzantine clients (more than half of
its neighbors are malicious), posing significant challenges
for robust model training. In this work, we propose DFLDual, a novel Byzantine-robust DFL method through dualdomain client clustering and trust bootstrapping. Specifically, we first propose to leverage both data-domain and
model-domain distance metrics to identify client discrepancies. Then, we design a trust evaluation mechanism
centered on benign clients, which enables them to evaluate their neighbors. Building upon the dual-domain distance metric and trust evaluation mechanism, we further
develop a two-stage clustering and trust bootstrapping technique to exclude Byzantine clients from local model aggregation. We extensively evaluate the proposed DFL-Dual
method through rigorous experimentation, demonstrating
its remarkable performance superiority over existing robust
CFL and DFL schemes.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a popular distributed machine
learning paradigm that enables collaborative model training
across multiple clients without centralizing their raw training data [7, 15, 20, 39]. The traditional centralized feder♯ Authors with equal contribution.
∗ Bo Liu is the corresponding author, Email: liubo@cuhk.edu.cn.

ated learning (CFL) framework relies on a central server to
coordinate the distributed model training process [3]. This
dependence on a central entity may incur a single point of
failures [16, 22]. Specifically, the normal model training
process can be disrupted in cases where the central server
experiences a crash or is hacked. Decentralized federated
learning (DFL) [10, 12, 26] facilitates collaborative model
training among connected clients without a central coordination server, thereby avoiding the single-point-of-failure
issue. DFL has given rise to a new wave of distributed learning methods [17, 25, 35] that achieve comparable model
accuracy to state-of-the-art CFL approaches while offering
several significant advantages (e.g., fault tolerance, scalability, and flexibility) [18].
However, similar to CFL, DFL remains vulnerable to
Byzantine attacks due to the inaccessibility of peer clients’
local training data and the uninspectable local training process [9, 23, 24]. Specifically, malicious clients may tamper with local training data (i.e., data poisoning attacks) or
falsify model parameters (i.e., model poisoning attacks) to
craft malicious models to disrupt the model training process. Furthermore, DFL exhibits increased susceptibility to
Byzantine attacks owing to the lack of a responsible central server. Consequently, effective Byzantine-robust DFL
schemes (i.e., defense mechanisms) are highly desired to
attain satisfactory DFL model training performance.
Thus far, researchers have developed diverse defense
mechanisms against Byzantine attacks in CFL [5, 28, 34,
38]. The basic idea of these Byzantine-robust CFL approaches is that the central server tries to identify and exclude malicious local models from aggregation. However,
their direct application to DFL is impeded due to the absence of coordination from a central entity. Furthermore,
a benign client in DFL may be overwhelmed by Byzantine
clients (i.e., most of its neighbors are malicious), which exacerbates the difficulty in identifying malicious clients.

24756

