This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LEOD: Label-Efficient Object Detection for Event Cameras

Abstract
Object detection with event cameras benefits from the
sensor’s low latency and high dynamic range. However,
it is costly to fully label event streams for supervised training due to their high temporal resolution. To reduce this
cost, we present LEOD, the first method for label-efficient
event-based detection. Our approach unifies weakly- and
semi-supervised object detection with a self-training mechanism. We first utilize a detector pre-trained on limited labels to produce pseudo ground truth on unlabeled events.
Then, the detector is re-trained with both real and generated
labels. Leveraging the temporal consistency of events, we
run bi-directional inference and apply tracking-based postprocessing to enhance the quality of pseudo labels. To stabilize training against label noise, we further design a soft
anchor assignment strategy. We introduce new experimental
protocols to evaluate the task of label-efficient event-based
detection on Gen1 and 1Mpx datasets. LEOD consistently
outperforms supervised baselines across various labeling
ratios. For example, on Gen1, it improves mAP by 8.6% and
7.8% for RVT-S trained with 1% and 2% labels. On 1Mpx,
RVT-S with 10% labels even surpasses its fully-supervised
counterpart using 100% labels. LEOD maintains its effectiveness even when all labeled data are available, reaching new state-of-the-art results. Finally, we show that our
method readily scales to improve larger detectors as well.
Code: https://github.com/Wuziyi616/LEOD.

1. Introduction
Object detection is key to scene understanding. It provides
a compact representation of raw sensor measurements as
semantically meaningful bounding boxes. Speed is crucial in object detection, especially in safety-critical applications such as self-driving. Recently, event cameras have
gained significant interest in computer vision due to their
low latency, low energy consumption, and high dynamic
range [11]. Leveraging these benefits, event-based object
detectors [14, 16, 29, 42, 49, 76] have been developed to
complement conventional frame-based detectors. Despite
tremendous progress, much of their success heavily relies

Gen1 Weakly-Supervised Det mAP (%)

Ziyi Wu1,2 , Mathias Gehrig3 , Qing Lyu1 , Xudong Liu1 , Igor Gilitschenski1,2
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 University of Zurich
50
45

Supervised Baseline
Vanilla Self-Training
LEOD (Ours)

35.2

35

39.0

45.5

43.8

42.2
39.4

40

30

48.7

41.4

46.4 45.9

43.2
40.8

37.9

34.4

30.8

1%

2%
5%
10%
Ratio of Labeled Data Used (%)

100%

Figure 1. Detection performance of LEOD and baselines trained
only on labeled events or conducting naive self-training. Under the
weakly-supervised setting, our method consistently improves the
RVT-S detector [14] across all labeling ratios on the Gen1 dataset.

on large datasets that are manually annotated. However,
due to the high temporal resolution of event data, labeling objects at every timestamp is impractical. For example,
Gen1 dataset [8] provides object labels at lower than 4 Hz.
As a result, existing methods only train their models on labeled events, and discard the remaining unlabeled data. In
contrast, we view this task as a weakly-supervised learning
problem, which calls for detection methods that can leverage a mix of labeled and unlabeled events during training.
In this work, we address the challenge by proposing
a Label-efficient Event-based Object Detection (LEOD)
framework. We consider two settings characterized by limited labels: (i) weakly-supervised, where object bounding
boxes are sparsely labeled in all event streams, and (ii) semisupervised, where some event streams have object boxes
densely labeled while others remain fully unlabeled. Our
approach unifies the two settings through a self-training
paradigm. With limited labels, we first pre-train a detector and use it to generate pseudo annotations on unlabeled
events. Then, we re-train the detector on a combination of
real and pseudo labels. However, naı̈vely generated labels
contain noise, making their direct use suboptimal.
To obtain high-quality pseudo labels, we exploit the temporal dimension of event data. Recent work [29] has shown
the importance of temporal information in event-based detection using recurrent modules [52]. Additionally, offline
label generation enables us to further refine predictions with

16933

