This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffSHEG: A Diffusion-Based Approach for Real-Time Speech-driven Holistic
3D Expression and Gesture Generation

1

Junming Chen1,2 * Yunfei Liu1 Jianan Wang1 Ailing Zeng1 Yu Li1† Qifeng Chen2†
International Digital Economy Academy 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{jchenfo, cqf}@ust.hk

{liuyunfei, wangjianan, zengailing, liyu}@idea.edu.cn

https://jeremycjm.github.io/proj/DiffSHEG

Abstract
We propose DiffSHEG, a Diffusion-based approach for
Speech-driven Holistic 3D Expression and Gesture generation with arbitrary length. While previous works focused on
co-speech gesture or expression generation individually, the
joint generation of synchronized expressions and gestures
remains barely explored. To address this, our diffusionbased co-speech motion generation transformer enables
uni-directional information flow from expression to gesture,
facilitating improved matching of joint expression-gesture
distributions. Furthermore, we introduce an outpaintingbased sampling strategy for arbitrary long sequence generation in diffusion models, offering flexibility and computational efficiency. Our method provides a practical solution that produces high-quality synchronized expression
and gesture generation driven by speech. Evaluated on two
public datasets, our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance both quantitatively and qualitatively. Additionally, a user study confirms the superiority of DiffSHEG over
prior approaches. By enabling the real-time generation of
expressive and synchronized motions, DiffSHEG showcases
its potential for various applications in the development of
digital humans and embodied agents.

1. Introduction
Non-verbal cues such as facial expressions, body language,
and hand gestures play a vital role in effective communication alongside verbal language [13, 43]. Speech-driven
gesture and expression generation has gained significant interest in applications like the metaverse, digital human development, gaming, and human-computer interaction. Generating synchronized and realistic gestures and expressions
based on speech is key to bringing virtual agents and digital
humans to life in virtual environments.
* The work was done during Junming’s internship at the International
Digital Economy Academy.
† Corresponding authors.

…
… want to be a journalist …

…
Diffusion
Procedure

Expression Generator

… journalist never tell lie …

…
Gesture Generator

Figure 1. DiffSHEG is a unified co-speech expression and gesture
generation system based on diffusion models. It captures the joint
expression-gesture distribution by enabling the uni-directional information flow from expression to gesture inside the model.

Existing research on co-speech motion synthesis has focused on generating either expressions or gestures independently. Rule-based approaches [8, 18, 22, 38, 44] were
prevalent initially, but recent advancements have leveraged
data-driven techniques using deep neural networks. However, co-speech gesture generation poses a challenge due
to its inherently many-to-many mapping. State-of-the-art
methods have explored generative models such as normalizing flow models [48], VQ-VAE [2], GAN [14] and
Diffusion models [1, 3, 47, 54]. These approaches have
made progress in improving synchronization and diversifying generated gestures. However, none of them specifically
target the co-speech generation of both expressions and gestures simultaneously.
Recently, some works have aimed to generate co-speech
holistic 3D expressions and gestures [14, 49]. These methods either combine independent co-speech expression and
gesture models [49] or formulate the problem as a multitask learning one [14]. However, these approaches separate
the generation process of expressions and gestures, neglecting the potential relationship between them. This can lead
to disharmony and deviation in the joint expression-gesture
distribution. Additionally, deterministic CNN-based models [14] may not be well-suited for approximating the manyto-many mapping inherent in co-speech gesture generation.

7352

