This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bidirectional Multi-Scale Implicit Neural Representations for Image Deraining
Xiang Chen Jinshan Pan∗ Jiangxin Dong
Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
INR

How to effectively explore multi-scale representations of
rain streaks is important for image deraining. In contrast
to existing Transformer-based methods that depend mostly
on single-scale rain appearance, we develop an end-to-end
multi-scale Transformer that leverages the potentially useful features in various scales to facilitate high-quality image reconstruction. To better explore the common degradation representations from spatially-varying rain streaks,
we incorporate intra-scale implicit neural representations
based on pixel coordinates with the degraded inputs in a
closed-loop design, enabling the learned features to facilitate rain removal and improve the robustness of the model
in complex scenarios. To ensure richer collaborative representation from different scales, we embed a simple yet effective inter-scale bidirectional feedback operation into our
multi-scale Transformer by performing coarse-to-fine and
fine-to-coarse information communication. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach, named as NeRDRain, performs favorably against the state-of-the-art ones
on both synthetic and real-world benchmark datasets. The
source code and trained models are available at https:
//github.com/cschenxiang/NeRD-Rain.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in image
deraining due to the development of numerous deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [15, 22, 51, 60, 63].
However, as the basic operation in CNNs, the convolution
is spatially invariant and has limited receptive fields, which
cannot effectively model the spatially-variant property and
non-local structures of clear images [49, 62]. Moreover,
simply increasing the network depth to obtain larger receptive fields does not always lead to better performance.
To alleviate this problem, several recent approaches utilize Transformers to solve single image deraining [5, 8, 20,
55, 56, 62], since Transformers can model the non-local information for better image restoration. Although these approaches achieve better performance than most of the CNN∗ Corresponding author.

INR

(a) Coarse-to-fine

(b) Multi-patch

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed approach and the currently
existing multi-scale solutions. (a) coarse-to-fine scheme [22, 63];
(b) multi-patch scheme [61]; (c) our method. Compared to previous approaches, the method one integrates implicit neural representations (INR) into our bidirectional multi-scale model to form
a closed-loop framework, which allows for better exploration of
multi-scale information and modeling of complex rain streaks.

based ones, they mostly explore feature representations at a
fixed image scale (i.e., a single-input single-output architecture), while ignoring potentially useful information from
other scales. As the rain effect decreases significantly at
coarser image scales, exploring the multi-scale representation would facilitate the rain removal.
To this end, several approaches introduce the coarse-tofine mechanism [12, 47] or multi-patch strategy [61] into
deep neural networks to exploit multi-scale rain features.
As shown in Figure 1, the decoder’s feature or derained image is initially estimated at a coarse scale and then used as
the input at a finer scale for guidance. Although impressive performance has been achieved, these methods are less
effective when handling complex and random rain streaks
because these rain streaks cannot be removed by downsampling operations and inaccurate estimation of a coarser
scale will result in suboptimal restoration performance at
finer scales. Despite the spatially-varying rain streaks exhibit a variety of scale properties (e.g., size, shape, length,
and density), the degraded rainy images tend to share some
similar visual degradation characteristics (i.e., common rain
degradation representation) [52, 53, 56]. However, existing
methods do not effectively model the common degradation
as they usually rely on traditional representation forms that
are sensitive to the input variation rather than capturing underlying implicit functions, which limits their performance
on complex scenarios. Thus, it is of great interest to learn
the underlying correlations among features to encode rain

25627

