This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiaLoc: An Iterative Approach to Embodied Dialog Localization
Chao Zhang

Mohan Li
Ignas Budvytis
Toshiba Europe Ltd

Stephan Liwicki

firstname.lastname@toshiba.eu

Abstract
Multimodal learning has advanced the performance for
many vision-language tasks. However, most existing works
in embodied dialog research focus on navigation and leave
the localization task understudied. The few existing dialogbased localization approaches assume the availability of
entire dialog prior to localizaiton, which is impractical for
deployed dialog-based localization. In this paper, we propose DiaLoc, a new dialog-based localization framework
which aligns with a real human operator behavior. Specifically, we produce an iterative refinement of location predictions which can visualize current pose believes after each
dialog turn. DiaLoc effectively utilizes the multimodal data
for multi-shot localization, where a fusion encoder fuses vision and dialog information iteratively. We achieve state-ofthe-art results on embodied dialog-based localization task,
in single-shot (+7.08% in Acc5@valUnseen) and multishot settings (+10.85% in Acc5@valUnseen). DiaLoc narrows the gap between simulation and real-world applications, opening doors for future research on collaborative
localization and navigation.

Figure 1. Illustration of iterative embodied dialog localization.
The locator with top-down map and the observer with egocentric
view engage in a cooperative dialog to assist in determining the
observer’s location. The locator iteratively forms predictions to
enhance the estimations. The preceding dialog exchanges and cumulative predictions also influence the manner in which the locator
poses new questions. As depicted, the locator predicts 3 possible
locations based on the first turn. The second question is asked to
disambiguate the predictions and the correct location is predicted
given the answer from the observer.

1. Introduction
Picture yourself becoming lost within a novel building during a visit to a friend’s place of residence or work place. In
this scenario, you reach out to your friend and detail the elements of your environment. Through a series of exchanges,
it is anticipated that your friend will eventually figure out
your whereabouts. The completion of this collaborative endeavor depends on the skillful use of targeted inquiries and
unequivocal linguistic responses. In this study, we formulate this task as an iterative embodied dialog localization
problem involving two agents: an Observer, randomly situated within an environment, and a Locator, whose job is to
localize the observer with a provided top-down map through
dialog.
Iterative embodied dialog localization is of clear relevance to numerous real-world applications, including the
utilization of mobile robots for search and rescue opera-

tions [17, 19]. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that dialogbased localization, in comparison to navigation, is still a
relatively understudied area. The dataset WAY sourced dialogs from human annotations and formulated dialog-based
localization through employing a full dialogue and a topdown map to determine an agent’s precise location. The
sparsity and problem formulation pose however two challenges: Firstly, its utilization of multimodal information
to overcome information imbalances stemming from egocentric and top-down viewpoints. Secondly, the dataset’s
scarcity restricts the capacity of trained models to generalize to unfamiliar environments.
In an initial attempt to address the challenge of localization through embodied dialog, Hahn et al. [9] introduced a
novel approach by framing the task as an image-to-image

12585

