This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GART: Gaussian Articulated Template Models
Jiahui Lei1 Yufu Wang1 Georgios Pavlakos2 Lingjie Liu1 Kostas Daniilidis1,3
1
2
3
University of Pennsylvania
UC Berkeley
Archimedes, Athena RC
{leijh, yufu, lingjie.liu, kostas}@cis.upenn.edu, pavlakos@berkeley.edu

Figure 1. We propose GART, an explicit, efficient, and expressive model for articulated object capturing and rendering from monocular
videos. Code available on the project page https://www.cis.upenn.edu/˜leijh/projects/gart/.

Abstract
We introduce Gaussian Articulated Template Model
(GART), an explicit, efficient, and expressive representation for non-rigid articulated subject capturing and rendering from monocular videos. GART utilizes a mixture of moving 3D Gaussians to explicitly approximate a deformable
subject’s geometry and appearance. It takes advantage of
a categorical template model prior (SMPL, SMAL, etc.)
with learnable forward skinning while further generalizing
to more complex non-rigid deformations with novel latent
bones. GART can be reconstructed via differentiable rendering from monocular videos in seconds or minutes and
rendered in novel poses faster than 150fps.

1. Introduction
Humans and animals are the most common deformable entities in real-world dynamic scenes, hence the plethora of
approaches to modeling their geometry, appearance, and
motion. This paper studies how to represent and reconstruct such deformable subjects from monocular videos.
Since they share category-level structures, morphable template models are developed and widely applied, such as
SMPL [42] for humans and SMAL [89] for quadrupedal
animals. While they are useful for pose estimation, categorical template models cannot capture detailed appearance
and geometry during a variety of deformations.
Recent studies proposed to address this problem by
building additional implicit representations on templates
in order to model geometry deformation and appearance.

Most of these representations are based on neural fields [45,
46, 49, 71]. Implicit representations enhance quality but
suffer from slow rendering because of costly query operations. Animating neural fields is challenging and requires
specialized forward or backward skinning [8, 9]. Moreover,
these methods usually depend on accurate template pose estimation since they can easily create artifacts in the empty
space when the stereo is wrong. On the contrary, explicit
representations [2, 19, 85] are efficient to render, easy to
deform, and more robust to pose estimation errors because
of the deformation-based optimization process. However,
explicit representations often have sub-optimal quality and
are restricted by fixed mesh topology [2], constrained by using too many points [85], or heavily rely on the multi-view
studio camera system [19].
Our main insight into the articulation modeling was that
an explicit approximation for the implicit radiance field
would overcome the weaknesses of both worlds. We propose Gaussian Articulated Template Models (GART), a new
renderable representation for non-rigid articulated subjects.
GART takes advantage of classical template models by using its kinematic skeleton and models the detailed appearance via a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) in the canonical space that approximates the underlying radiance field
(Sec. 3.2). Because a GMM does not have a fixed topology
and each component can smoothly approximate a neighborhood, GART is as expressive as NeRFs while maintaining
simplicity and interpretability.
As an explicit representation, GART can be animated via
forward skinning similar to template meshes. However, the

19876

