This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MLIP: Enhancing Medical Visual Representation with Divergence Encoder and
Knowledge-guided Contrastive Learning
Zhe Li 1 , Laurence T. Yang 1,2, ∗ , Bocheng Ren 1 , Xin Nie 1 , Zhangyang Gao 3 , Cheng Tan 3 , Stan Z. Li 3
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Zhengzhou University
3
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University
*keycharon0122@gmail.com, ltyang@ieee.org,

bc.Revincent@gmail.com,

niexin@hust.edu.cn,

{gaozhangyang,tancheng,stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Positive

Abstract
The scarcity of annotated data has sparked significant interest in unsupervised pre-training methods that
leverage medical reports as auxiliary signals for medical visual representation learning. However, existing research overlooks the multi-granularity nature of medical
visual representation and lacks suitable contrastive learning techniques to improve the models’ generalizability
across different granularities, leading to the underutilization of image-text information. To address this, we propose MLIP, a novel framework leveraging domain-specific
medical knowledge as guiding signals to integrate language information into the visual domain through imagetext contrastive learning. Our model includes global contrastive learning with our designed divergence encoder, local token-knowledge-patch alignment contrastive learning,
and knowledge-guided category-level contrastive learning
with expert knowledge. Experimental evaluations reveal
the efficacy of our model in enhancing transfer performance
for tasks such as image classification, object detection, and
semantic segmentation. Notably, MLIP surpasses state-ofthe-art methods even with limited annotated data, highlighting the potential of multimodal pre-training in advancing
medical representation learning.1

1. Introduction
Representation learning for medical radiographs has gained
significant attention recently, owing to the availability of
abundant annotated data. Numerous approaches [20, 23,
46, 48] have employed deep learning in a supervised manner to learn representations for downstream tasks. However, the acquisition of large-scale annotated data is time* Corresponding Author.
1 Codes are available at https://github.com/gentlefress/MLIP

Negative

Negative

The lung volumes remain low. Signs of mild fluid
overload and the extent of the known left pleural
effusion have improved.

Negative

Positive

False Negative
Negative

Report

Negative

False Negative

Report

Positive

False
Negative

Report

Negative

Figure 1. Detailed illustration of false negatives in medical image-text. Conventional approaches consider false negative
samples as negatives that are distant from positive samples in the
lower left corner. In contrast, in the lower right corner, our proposed method distinguishes false negatives from negatives, effectively bringing them closer to positives.

consuming and costly. unsupervised pre-training methods
have emerged as a promising alternative. These methods,
which do not rely on annotated data, harness medical reports as ancillary signals that provide targeted supervision
for visual representation learning. By incorporating language information, these models can acquire more universal
visual representations that are transferable to downstream
tasks and capable of domain transfer.
There are three mainstream paradigms in visual representation learning. Masked image modeling [29, 38, 60]
follows mask-and-predict paradigm, randomly masking
some patches and predicting missing information. Multimodal contrastive learning [10, 32, 64, 65] conducts
embed-and-compare proxy tasks to maximize the mutual
information between medical images and reports through

11704

