This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Seen Primitive Concepts and Attribute-Object Compositional Learning
Nirat Saini

Khoi Pham

Abhinav Shrivastava

University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
Learning from seen attribute-object pairs to generalize to unseen compositions has been studied extensively in
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL). However, CZSL
setup is still limited to seen attributes and objects, and cannot generalize to unseen concepts and their compositions.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a new task, Open
Vocabulary-Compositional Zero-shot Learning (OV-CZSL),
where unseen attributes, objects, and unseen compositions
are evaluated. To show that OV-CZSL is a challenging
yet solvable problem, we propose three new benchmarks
based on existing datasets MIT-States [20], C-GQA [29]
and VAW-CZSL [37, 43], along with new baselines and
evaluation setup. We use language embeddings and external vocabulary with our novel neighborhood expansion loss
to allow any method to learn semantic correlations between
seen and unseen primitives. Project website: https://ovczsl.github.io.

1. Introduction
Attributes explain the semantic properties of objects and are
essential for efficient in-the-wild object recognition [1, 8,
23]. For instance, an unseen image of a dog can be identified for its novel attributes, “a fluffy brown dog” even if
the breed is unknown. However, data annotation for objectattribute is prohibitively expensive. It is challenging to
scale annotated data because: (1) labels for each attribute
and object are required individually, and (2) annotated data
is required for all possible object-attribute compositions.
Prior works [20, 31, 42, 55] circumvent the first challenge
by assuming a limited vocabulary of attributes and objects
(‘seen’ primitives) and focus primarily on the second challenge of unseen compositions, which is referred to as Compositional Zero-shot Learning (CZSL). However, dealing
with unseen attributes, unseen objects, and unseen compositions together is still an open problem. In this paper, we propose a new task, Open Vocabulary-Compositional Zero-shot
Learning (OV-CZSL), which attempts to address aforementioned challenges simultaneously, (1) dealing with unseen
attributes and unseen objects, and (2) recognizing unseen
attribute-object compositions.

Train

Test

Lemon

Potato

Attributes
Sliced

Peeled

Ripe

Objects
Apple

Compositional Zero-shot Learning Task
Open Vocabulary Compositional Zero-shot Learning

Figure 1. We propose a new task, Open Vocabulary-Compositional
Zero-shot Learning (OV-CZSL), that expands upon Compositional
Zero-shot Learning (CZSL). CZSL focuses on evaluating unseen
compositions ripe lemon, peeled apple of seen attributes
(ripe, peeled) and seen objects (apple, lemon), using training samples (ripe apple,peeled lemon). The novel OVCZSL is trained with the same data as CZSL. However, it can
be evaluated on unseen attributes (sliced), objects (potato)
and their unseen compositions. These unseen compositions also
include seen attribute-unseen object (peeled potato), unseen attribute-seen object (sliced lemon) and unseen attributeunseen objects (sliced potato).

Recognizing unseen classes (Zero-shot learning) and
composing unseen relations between primitive seen classes
(compositional learning) are both well known challenges
in computer vision. Towards a more generic understanding of the unseen concepts, we introduce OV-CZSL that
bridges the gap between ZSl and CZSL. Drawing inspiration from neuroscience, humans prototype and learn abstract concepts (fruit) while learning concrete concepts (apple, banana) [44, 58] (also known as concept learning). For
instance, we can associate visually similar concepts (apple, orange) as an abstract concept(fruit), by linking them
via language semantically. By extending this idea, with
a seen concept peeled lemon, we can relate lemon
with another vegetable, e.g. potato. Even though an image of peeled potato is never seen; by understanding

14466

