This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Effective Usage of Human-Centric Priors in Diffusion Models for
Text-based Human Image Generation
Junyan Wang 1
1

Zhenhong Sun 2 Zhiyu Tan 3 Xuanbai Chen 4
Hao Li 6 * Cheng Zhang 4 Yang Song 1

University of New South Wales
4
Carnegie Mellon University

2
5

Australian National University 3 INF Technology
Alibaba DAMO Academy 6 Fudan University
A female dancer in a
purple dress is jumping

Abstract
Vanilla text-to-image diffusion models struggle with generating accurate human images, commonly resulting in imperfect anatomies such as unnatural postures or disproportionate limbs. Existing methods address this issue mostly
by fine-tuning the model with extra images or adding additional controls — human-centric priors such as pose or
depth maps — during the image generation phase. This paper explores the integration of these human-centric priors
directly into the model fine-tuning stage, essentially eliminating the need for extra conditions at the inference stage.
We realize this idea by proposing a human-centric alignment loss to strengthen human-related information from the
textual prompts within the cross-attention maps. To ensure
semantic detail richness and human structural accuracy
during fine-tuning, we introduce scale-aware and step-wise
constraints within the diffusion process, according to an indepth analysis of the cross-attention layer. Extensive experiments show that our method largely improves over state-ofthe-art text-to-image models to synthesize high-quality human images based on user-written prompts. Project page:
https://hcplayercvpr2024.github.io.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in diffusion models have significantly
improved text-to-image (T2I) generation, consistently enhancing the quality and precision of visual synthesis from
textual descriptions [28, 31, 36, 39]. Within the paradigm of
T2I, generating human images emerges as a specific focus,
drawing substantial attention for its potential in applications
such as virtual try-on [53] and entertainment [27]. Despite
the remarkable advancements, human image generation still
faces challenges, including the incomplete rendering of the
human body, inaccuracies in the portrayal, and limb dispro* Corresponding author

Weihua Chen 5

Imperfect Case

Latent

U-Net

Augmented Case
Training-only

jumping

HcP Layer

Alignment Loss

Figure 1. Existing text-to-image models often struggle to generate human images with accurate anatomy (upper branch). We incorporate human-centric priors into the model fine-tuning stage to
rectify this imperfection (bottom branch). The learned model can
synthesize high-quality human images from text without requiring
additional conditions at the inference stage.

portions, such as the imperfect case shown in Figure 1. The
challenges in generating human images arise from the diffusion model’s inherent emphasis on broad generalization
across diverse data, leading to a lack of detailed attention to
human structure in the generated images. Resolving these
issues is essential for advancing the field toward producing
more realistic and accurate human images from textual descriptions.
The straightforward method to tackle the challenges in
human image generation involves using additional conditions during both the training and inference phases, e.g.,
ControlNet [48]. While employing extra conditions like
pose image guidance indeed improves the structural integrity of human, their reliance on additional conditions
does not address the challenges inherent in human image
generation. It restricts the direct creation of diverse images
from text prompts, and requires extra conditions beyond
text during inference, making the process tedious and less
end-user friendly. Alternatively, another efficient approach
employs fine-tuning methods, e.g., LoRA [17], which adjust
pre-trained models on specialized human-centric datasets

8446

