This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Affine Equivariant Networks Based on Differential Invariants
Yikang Li1 , Yeqing Qiu2,3 , Yuxuan Chen1 , Lingshen He1 , Zhouchen Lin1,4,5 *
1
National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 3 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
liyk18@pku.edu.cn, yeqingqiu@link.cuhk.edu.cn, edmondx.chen@gmail.com
lingshenhe@pku.edu.cn, zlin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks benefit from translation
equivariance, achieving tremendous success. Equivariant
networks further extend this property to other transformation groups. However, most existing methods require discretization or sampling of groups, leading to increased
model sizes for larger groups, such as the affine group.
In this paper, we build affine equivariant networks based
on differential invariants from the viewpoint of symmetric
PDEs, without discretizing or sampling the group. To address the division-by-zero issue arising from fractional differential invariants of the affine group, we construct a new
kind of affine invariants by normalizing polynomial relative differential invariants to replace classical differential
invariants. For further flexibility, we design an equivariant
layer, which can be directly integrated into convolutional
networks of various architectures. Moreover, our framework for the affine group is also applicable to its continuous subgroups. We implement equivariant networks for the
scale group, the rotation-scale group, and the affine group.
Numerical experiments demonstrate the outstanding performance of our framework across classification tasks involving transformations of these groups. Remarkably, under the
out-of-distribution setting, our model achieves a 3.37% improvement in accuracy over the main counterpart affConv
on the affNIST dataset.

1. Introduction
The success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
can be attributed to their utilization of translation symmetry. This profound insight emphasizes the significance of
incorporating symmetry priors into the design of models.
With this insight, equivariant networks extend the exploitation of more symmetries, leading to great improvement
* Corresponding author.

on performance and efficiency. Development of equivariant networks begins with the approach of group convolutions, which views feature maps as functions defined on a
group and conducts convolution operation over the group
[3, 64]. Further advancements in equivariant networks effectively achieve equivariance on the Euclidean group and
its subgroups [4, 11, 12, 62, 63, 68, 69]. However, existing methods have certain limitations when dealing with
more complicated groups. One representative group is the
affine group. While group convolutions typically require
discretization of continuous groups, it becomes impractical for the affine group due to its high dimension. Finzi
et al. [16] conduct group convolutions by sampling from
Haar measure on the group. But it relies on easy access
to Haar measure, which is unsuitable for the affine group.
MacDonald et al. [37] overcome the limitation by computing the integral on the Lie algebra, thereby obtaining the
affine equivariant model, affConv. Nevertheless, this approach still requires sampling from the group and encounters an exponential growth in memory requirements as the
number of convolutional layers increases. A recent work
[39] addresses the issue of exponential memory growth, but
it also relies on sampling based on specific measures. In
particular, sampling from the GL(n, R)-invariant measure
of positive definite matrices is infeasible, and the authors
adopt the log-normal distribution as a substitute, leading to
imperfect equivariance theoretically.
In another branch, some works adopt partial differential
operators (PDOs) to design equivariant networks [25, 27,
50]. They achieve equivariance on Euclidean groups by imposing constraints on the weights of PDOs. In fact, specific functional combinations of partial derivatives remain
constant under group actions — a concept known as “differential invariants.” Under the guidance of the differential
invariant theory, Liu et al. [33, 34] design a shift and rotationally equivariant system of learnable partial differential
equations (PDEs) with linear combinations of differential
invariants. The evolution process of PDEs can be used to

5546

