This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DyBluRF: Dynamic Neural Radiance Fields from Blurry Monocular Video
Huiqiang Sun1 Xingyi Li1 Liao Shen1 Xinyi Ye1 Ke Xian2 Zhiguo Cao1 *
1
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{shq1031,xingyi li,leoshen,xinyiye,kxian,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn
https://huiqiang-sun.github.io/dyblurf

LPIPS: 0.225

Blurry input

HyperNeRF

LPIPS: 0.193

LPIPS: 0.206

NSFF

RoDynRF

LPIPS: 0.070

DyBluRF (ours)

Ground truth

Figure 1. Given a monocular video capturing a dynamic scene with motion blur, our proposed method, DyBluRF, effectively synthesizes
high-quality and sharp novel views compared to previous dynamic NeRF approaches that often yield low-quality and blurry results.

Abstract
Recent advancements in dynamic neural radiance field
methods have yielded remarkable outcomes. However,
these approaches rely on the assumption of sharp input images. When faced with motion blur, existing dynamic NeRF
methods often struggle to generate high-quality novel views.
In this paper, we propose DyBluRF, a dynamic radiance
field approach that synthesizes sharp novel views from a
monocular video affected by motion blur. To account for
motion blur in input images, we simultaneously capture
the camera trajectory and object Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) trajectories within the scene. Additionally, we
employ a global cross-time rendering approach to ensure
consistent temporal coherence across the entire scene. We
curate a dataset comprising diverse dynamic scenes that
are specifically tailored for our task. Experimental results
on our dataset demonstrate that our method outperforms
existing approaches in generating sharp novel views from
motion-blurred inputs while maintaining spatial-temporal
consistency of the scene.

* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
The research on novel view synthesis for dynamic scenes
has gained substantial importance in the community, with
practical applications in a wide range of AR/VR contexts.
Recent breakthroughs can be attributed to Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) [27]. NeRFs have made a profound impact
on novel view synthesis, and recent years have witnessed
rapid advancements in NeRF, including several works dedicated to dynamic scene representation [10, 21, 24, 32, 34].
Despite producing high-quality novel views, these dynamic
NeRF methods may exhibit significant performance degradation when presented with inputs containing motion blur,
as shown in Fig. 1. Recently, some NeRF-based methods have emerged to tackle the motion deblurring of static
scenes [18, 19, 25, 46]. However, these methods cannot
address blurring caused by object motion and lack the capability to effectively represent dynamic scenes.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no NeRF-based
method dedicated to dynamic scene deblurring. Yet, in reallife video captures of dynamic scenarios, extended camera
exposure time often introduces motion blur. Consequently,
obtaining a sharp dynamic radiance field from inputs affected by motion blur remains a pressing problem. Existing dynamic NeRF methods heavily rely on sharp inputs

7517

