This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance Tracking in 3D Scenes from Egocentric Videos

1

UC Irvine

Yunhan Zhao1 Haoyu Ma1 Shu Kong2,3,4 Charless Fowlkes1
2
Texas A&M University 3 Institute of Collaborative Innovation 4 University of Macau
{yunhaz5, haoyum3, fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
Egocentric sensors such as AR/VR devices capture
human-object interactions and offer the potential to provide task-assistance by recalling 3D locations of objects
of interest in the surrounding environment. This capability
requires instance tracking in real-world 3D scenes from egocentric videos (IT3DEgo). We explore this problem by first
introducing a new benchmark dataset, consisting of RGB
and depth videos, per-frame camera pose, and instance-level
annotations in both 2D camera and 3D world coordinates.
We present an evaluation protocol which evaluates tracking
performance in 3D coordinates with two settings for enrolling instances to track: (1) single-view online enrollment
where an instance is specified on-the-fly based on the human
wearer’s interactions. and (2) multi-view pre-enrollment
where images of an instance to be tracked are stored in
memory ahead of time. To address IT3DEgo, we first repurpose methods from relevant areas, e.g., single object
tracking (SOT) — running SOT methods to track instances
in 2D frames and lifting them to 3D using camera pose and
depth. We also present a simple method that leverages pretrained segmentation and detection models to generate proposals from RGB frames and match proposals with enrolled
instance images. Our experiments show that our method
(with no finetuning) significantly outperforms SOT-based approaches in the egocentric setting. We conclude by arguing
that the problem of egocentric instance tracking is made
easier by leveraging camera pose and using a 3D allocentric
(world) coordinate representation. Dataset and open-source
code: https://github.com/IT3DEgo/IT3DEgo.

1. Introduction
Egocentric video obtained from AR/VR devices provides
a unique perspective that captures the interaction between the
human wearer and the surrounding 3D environment. With
the rapid development of AR/VR hardware, there is increasing interest in building assistive agents [41, 57, 59, 68], that
track the user’s environment and provide contextual guidance
on the location of objects of interest (illustrated in Figure 1).
We argue that developing such an agent requires solving the

skong@um.edu.mo

largely unexplored problem of tracking object instances in
3D from egocentric video.
Why this problem? First, tracking in egocentric video is
a novel and underexplored problem, compared to the wellstudied tracking from fixed, third-person viewpoints. More
broadly, egocentric visual understanding tasks, such as human pose estimation and trajectory prediction [4, 15, 64] are
a growing area of interest. Second, tracking in 3D scenes
is essential in robotics, autonomous driving, and AR/VR
applications. Compared to the 2D counterpart, tracking objects in 3D is crucial for an agent to not only understand the
surrounding 3D environment but also to determine precise
locations for planning and navigation. Combining the two
perspectives above, there is a broader question of what information processing constraints govern how the human visual
system integrates egocentric sensory data into a seemingly
allocentric perception of the world around us.
Challenges and new opportunities. (1) Egocentric video
often features motion blur, hand occlusions, and frequent
object disappearances and reappearances which make the
2D tracking problem very challenging from pure visual signals [15, 60]. Tracking in 3D offers an opportunity to fuse
additional sensor streams, such as depth and camera pose,
to improve accuracy. Unlike 2D tracking with a moving
camera, 3D tracking in world coordinates allows the model
to leverage the unique prior information – an object should
remain still unless being interacted with the human operator.
(2) For the downstream application of task guidance, we
propose exploring novel approaches to identify or enroll object instances to be tracked. One approach is automatically
enrolling objects with which the user interacts or identifies
via hand gestures such as pointing. Alternatively, object
instances relevant to a particular task could be pre-enrolled
based on a collection of images that specify the visual appearance of the object in advance.
Contribution 1: Dataset collection. To our best knowledge, no existing dataset supports exploring the problem of
IT3DEgo (c.f. Table 1). The recent Ego4D dataset [23] highlights some of these challenges. However, the Ego4D dataset
only provides RGB frames1 and sparse annotations (may
1 Ego4D does provide a sparse set of camera poses (less than 15% of
frames) estimated with COLMAP and predicted depth maps using monocu-

21933

