This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

E-GPS: Explainable Geometry Problem Solving via Top-Down Solver and
Bottom-Up Generator
Wenjun Wu1,3 , Lingling Zhang1,3 *, Jun Liu1,3 , Xi Tang1,3 , Yaxian Wang1,3
Shaowei Wang1,3 , Qianying Wang2
1
3

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China

2

Lenovo Research

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Ministry of Education, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

Abstract
Geometry Problem Solving has drawn growing attention
recently due to its application prospects in intelligent education field. However, existing methods are still inadequate to meet the needs of practical application, suffering
from the following limitations: 1) explainability is not ensured which is essential in real teaching scenarios; 2) the
small scale and incomplete annotation of existing datasets
make it hard for model to comprehend geometric knowledge. To tackle the above problems, we propose a novel
method called Explainable Geometry Problem Solving (EGPS). E-GPS first parses the geometric diagram and problem text into unified formal language representations. Then,
the answer and explainable reasoning and solving steps are
obtained by a Top-Down Problem Solver (TD-PS), which
innovatively solves the problem from the target and focuses
on what is needed. To alleviate the data issues, a BottomUp Problem Generator (BU-PG) is devised to augment the
data set with various well-annotated constructed geometry problems. It enables us to train an enhanced theorem
predictor with a better grasp of theorem knowledge, which
further improves the efficiency of TD-PS. Extensive experiments demonstrate that E-GPS maintains comparable solving performances with fewer steps and provides outstanding
explainability.

1. Introduction
Geometry Problem Solving (GPS) aims to obtain the answer of problem based on the given geometric diagram and
textual problem description. It has drawn growing attention recently [4, 15, 22, 31] due to its application prospects
in intelligent education field in high schools [2, 20]. Different from general question answering (QA) tasks, GPS
requires the model to possess the abilities of symbolic abstraction, logical reasoning and algebraic calculation simul* Corresponding author. Email: zhanglling@xjtu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Output examples of two mainstream GPS methods. Case
1 and case 2 are chosen from Inter-GPS [22] and NGS [4], respectively. Content with red background is seen as inexplicable.

taneously [6, 24], making it a challenging task even for large
multimodal models (LMMs) like GPT-4V [37]. Therefore,
recent works attempt to combine the procedural power of
symbolic models with the general power of neural models.
Among these, symbolic-based approaches [22, 25, 29, 32]
first parse the geometric diagram and problem text into formal language representations, and then continuously predict and apply predefined theorem rules to obtain the final
answer. Neural-based approaches [4, 5, 40] tend to transfer the original problem into multi-modal features, and feed
them into generative models to acquire an executable program sequence for an answer. However, they both suffer
from the following two limitations which hinder their application in practical scenarios.
At methodological level, previous methods are unable to
ensure basic explainability which is essential. As shown in
Fig. 1, examples of two mainstream GPS methods are listed.
The first one is a typical symbolic-based model Inter-GPS

13828

