This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Policy-Driven Adaptive Multi-Instance Learning for Whole Slide
Image Classification
Tingting Zheng1 Kui Jiang1 Hongxun Yao1*
1
Harbin Institute of Technology
23b903051@stu.hit.edu.cn, {jiangkui, h.yao}@hit.edu.cn
https://vilab.hit.edu.cn/projects/pamil

Abstract

Histopathology slides provide detailed information on
the morphology and scale of the tumor, being the gold standard for disease diagnosis [5, 33]. However, complex bio*Corresponding authors

MIL
Prediction
(a) Bag-Level Method
Pseudo-Bags

MIL
Prediction

...
...
...

1. Introduction

Feature Representation Decision-Making

...
...
...
(b) Pseudo-Bags-Level Method
Feedback

t

Policy

Multi-Instance Learning (MIL) has shown impressive
performance for histopathology whole slide image (WSI)
analysis using bags or pseudo-bags. It involves instance
sampling, feature representation, and decision-making.
However, existing MIL-based technologies at least suffer
from one or more of the following problems: 1) requiring high storage and intensive pre-processing for numerous
instances (sampling); 2) potential over-fitting with limited
knowledge to predict bag labels (feature representation); 3)
pseudo-bag counts and prior biases affect model robustness
and generalizability (decision-making). Inspired by clinical
diagnostics, using the past sampling instances can facilitate the final WSI analysis, but it is barely explored in prior
technologies. To break free these limitations, we integrate
the dynamic instance sampling and reinforcement learning
into a unified framework to improve the instance selection
and feature aggregation, forming a novel Dynamic Policy
Instance Selection (DPIS) scheme for better and more credible decision-making. Specifically, the measurement of feature distance and reward function are employed to boost
continuous instance sampling. To alleviate the over-fitting,
we explore the latent global relations among instances for
more robust and discriminative feature representation while
establishing reward and punishment mechanisms to correct
biases in pseudo-bags using contrastive learning. These
strategies form the final Dynamic Policy-Driven Adaptive
Multi-Instance Learning (PAMIL) method for WSI tasks.
Extensive experiments reveal that our PAMIL method outperforms the state-of-the-art by 3.8% on CAMELYON16
and 4.4% on TCGA lung cancer datasets.

Sampling

WSI

t+1: Next Sampling
Tumor
Normal

MIL
Prediction

(c) Dynamic Policy-Driven Adaptive Method (Ours)
Error Pseudo-Label
Dynamic Interaction
t: Sampling
Noise
t+1: Next Sampling
Feature Representation
Instance Processing

Figure 1. Different schemes for Multi-Instance Learning (MIL).
(a) Each bag is treated as a group. (b) Each bag is divided into
pseudo-bags. (c) The proposed Dynamic Policy-Driven Adaptive Multi-Instance Learning (PAMIL) Method.

logical structures in slides present a challenge for pathologists to discern intricate variances [6,22]. Recently, with the
development of bioimaging and computation display technologies, digital whole slide images (WSIs) have emerged
as effective diagnostic aids [13,15]. In particular, a substantial progress has been achieved by introducing deep learning approaches for WSI analysis [7, 9, 11, 16, 40]. However, due to irregularities of tumor tissue and gigapixel resolution for WSIs, the collection of high-precision is laborious and time-consuming [5, 33]. Weakly supervised solutions have drawn widespread attention than supervised
schemes [18, 29]. In particular, multi-instance learning
(MIL) [24] schemes emerge as the times require, providing
alternative solutions for WSI analysis. Specifically, each
WSI is described as a “bag” containing numerous instances
(or “patches”) sampled from the WSI [15]. A “bag” is labeled with a positive or negative tip, but its instances are
label-free. The core mission of MIL-based methods is to aggregate information from all instances to provide bag-level
predictions. According to grouping the instances, these
methods can be broadly divided into two categories: baglevel and pseudo-bags-level methods, as illustrated in Fig-

8028

