This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dancing with Still Images:
Video Distillation via Static-Dynamic Disentanglement
Ziyu Wang* Yue Xu* Cewu Lu Yong-Lu Li†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{wangxiaoyi2021, silicxuyue, lucewu, yonglu li}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, dataset distillation has paved the way towards
efficient machine learning, especially for image datasets.
However, the distillation for videos, characterized by an exclusive temporal dimension, remains an underexplored domain. In this work, we provide the first systematic study
of video distillation and introduce a taxonomy to categorize temporal compression. Our investigation reveals
that the temporal information is usually not well learned
during distillation, and the temporal dimension of synthetic data contributes little. The observations motivate
our unified framework of disentangling the dynamic and
static information in the videos. It first distills the videos
into still images as static memory and then compensates
the dynamic and motion information with a learnable dynamic memory block. Our method achieves state-of-theart on video datasets at different scales, with a notably
smaller memory storage budget. Our code is available at
https://github.com/yuz1wan/video distillation.

1. Introduction
Dataset distillation, as an emerging direction recently, compresses the original dataset into a smaller one while maintaining training effectiveness. It alleviates the challenges
of costly training due to the increasingly large datasets and
models. It is widely adopted in various downstream fields
including federated learning and continual learning.
Recent works on dataset distillation mainly focus on
distilling images [4, 6, 7, 10, 13, 15–17, 23, 25, 29–32].
Though some methods seem to seamlessly adapt to other
data formats or modalities [12, 27, 28], few works studied video distillation. Compared to image data, videos
possess an additional temporal dimension, which significantly adds to the time and space complexity of the distillation algorithms and is already hardly affordable when the
* The first two authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.

Real Video

Real Video

Real Video

Match
Match

Gradient
Trajectory
Feature
......

Match
Dynamic Static
Memory Frame

Interpolator

Synthetic Video

Synthetic Video

(a) Naïve Approach

(b) Segmented Matching
and Interpolation

Interpolator
Synthetic Video

(c) Ours

Figure 1. (a) Naive video distillation methods simply match the
training dynamics (gradient, feature, trajectory, etc.) of the real
and synthetic videos. (b) To exploit the temporal redundancy of
videos, we propose a paradigm with segmented matching and interpolation techniques to cover all levels of temporal condensation.
(c) Based on this paradigm and our observations, we propose an
approach of efficient static frame distillation and motion compensation, with better efficiency and performance.

instance-per-class (IPC) is large. Besides, the scale of video
datasets [3, 11, 19] is usually more intimidating. However,
the high temporal redundancy of videos is very suitable for
and can be well exploited by dataset distillation methods,
providing a good opportunity for dataset distillation. Therefore, in this work, we firstly and systematically study the
dataset distillation on video data, especially involving the
compression of the video temporal redundancy.
Currently, dataset distillation approaches directly align
the training dynamics (gradient [31], trajectory [4], feature [30], etc.) of real and synthetic. On video datasets,
these methods simply match all the real and synthetic
frames and the frame correspondence can be depicted as
a complete bipartite graph. Therefore, to condense the temporal dimension, we can either reduce the synthetic frames
or prune the bipartite correspondence graph between real
and synthetic frames. For the further analysis of temporal condensation in video distillation, we put these two
schemes under one unified framework, namely “segmented

6296

