This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MV-Adapter: Multimodal Video Transfer Learning for Video Text Retrieval
Xiaojie Jin1∗ , Bowen Zhang1∗ , Weibo Gong1 , Kai Xu1 , Xueqing Deng1 ,
Peng Wang1 , Zhao Zhang2 , Xiaohui Shen1 , Jiashi Feng1
1
Bytedance Inc., 2 Hefei University of Technology
{jinxiaojie,zhangbowen.17,gongweibo,xukai.1993,xueqingdeng}@bytedance.com
{peng.wang,shenxiaohui.kevin,jshfeng}@bytedance.com

cszzhang@gmail.com

𝑒ℓ

𝑒ℓ

Abstract
State-of-the-art video-text retrieval (VTR) methods typically involve fully fine-tuning a pre-trained model (e.g.
CLIP) on specific datasets. However, this can result in significant storage costs in practical applications as a separate model per task must be stored. To address this issue,
we present our pioneering work that enables parameterefficient VTR using a pre-trained model, with only a small
number of tunable parameters during training. Towards
this goal, we propose a new method dubbed Multimodal
Video Adapter (MV-Adapter) for efficiently transferring
the knowledge in the pre-trained CLIP from image-text
to video-text. Specifically, MV-Adapter utilizes bottleneck
structures in both video and text branches, along with two
novel components. The first is a Temporal Adaptation Module that is incorporated in the video branch to introduce
global and local temporal contexts. We also train weights
calibrations to adjust to dynamic variations across frames.
The second is Cross Modality Tying that generates weights
for video/text branches through sharing cross modality factors, for better aligning between modalities. Thanks to
above innovations, MV-Adapter can achieve comparable or
better performance than standard full fine-tuning with negligible parameters overhead. Notably, MV-Adapter consistently outperforms various competing methods in V2T/T2V
tasks with large margins on five widely used VTR benchmarks (MSR-VTT, MSVD, LSMDC, DiDemo, and ActivityNet). Codes will be released.

1. Introduction
Video text retrieval (VTR) [9, 10, 13, 18, 26, 27, 31, 32, 34,
37, 44, 47], aiming to obtain the rankings of videos/texts
in a repository given text/video queries (i.e. T2V and V2T
respectively) has a wide range of practical applications. Recently, with the surge of large-scale pre-trained image-text
∗ Equal contribution. Bowen Zhang did the work during an internship.

Corresponding author: Xiaojie Jin.

MV-Adapter

FFN

FFN
LN

Up

LN

TRM
MHA

Down

MHA

LN

Branch Mainflow

LN

𝑒ℓ

𝑒ℓ

Figure 1. The overall pipeline of MV-adapter with the illustration of the
basic structure of video/text branches. Only a small part of model is tunable during training, highlighted by the “unlock” symbol.

models, particularly CLIP [38], transferring the knowledge
learned in CLIP to VTR tasks by fully fine-tuning has become the de-facto paradigm and adopted by state-of-the-art
methods [10, 31, 32, 34, 37, 44].
However, these methods suffer from substantial storage
overhead in practical applications as each task necessitates
the storage of a distinct model. This issue becomes more
severe when the pre-trained model size increases and multiple VTR tasks need to be solved, thus hindering the application in real-world scenarios. For instance, in mobile apps,
model size is restricted to reduce downloading time and/or
app package size, as a larger size may decrease active users.
In cloud services, many models need to be trained to solve
functionally similar but customized tasks, making standard
fine-tuning unfavorable in such cases. Additionally, since
most VTR tasks have relatively small training sets, performing full fine-tuning on these datasets results in instability
and poor performance, as demonstrated in [6, 36].
To solve this problem, we introduce a new task to perform Parameter Efficient transfer learning of VTR (PEVTR), i.e. only a small number of parameters are tunable
during training while the majority weights are frozen. This
results in high degree of parameter sharing between mod-

27144

