This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointOBB: Learning Oriented Object Detection via Single Point Supervision
Junwei Luo1 , Xue Yang2 *, Yi Yu3 , Qingyun Li4 , Junchi Yan5,2 , Yansheng Li1†
1
Wuhan University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Southeast University 4 Harbin Institute of Technology 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
luojunwei@whu.edu.cn
yangxue@pjlab.org.cn
yuyi@seu.edu.cn
21b905003@stu.hit.edu.cn
yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn
yansheng.li@whu.edu.cn
https://github.com/Luo-Z13/pointobb

Abstract
Single point-supervised object detection is gaining attention due to its cost-effectiveness. However, existing approaches focus on generating horizontal bounding boxes
(HBBs) while ignoring oriented bounding boxes (OBBs)
commonly used for objects in aerial images. This paper
proposes PointOBB, the first single Point-based OBB generation method, for oriented object detection. PointOBB
operates through the collaborative utilization of three distinctive views: an original view, a resized view, and a rotated/flipped (rot/flp) view. Upon the original view, we
leverage the resized and rot/flp views to build a scale augmentation module and an angle acquisition module, respectively. In the former module, a Scale-Sensitive Consistency
(SSC) loss is designed to enhance the deep network’s ability to perceive the object scale. For accurate object angle
predictions, the latter module incorporates self-supervised
learning to predict angles, which is associated with a scaleguided Dense-to-Sparse (DS) matching strategy for aggregating dense angles corresponding to sparse objects. The
resized and rot/flp views are switched using a progressive
multi-view switching strategy during training to achieve
coupled optimization of scale and angle. Experimental results on the DIOR-R and DOTA-v1.0 datasets demonstrate
that PointOBB achieves promising performance, and significantly outperforms potential point-supervised baselines.

1. Introduction
Oriented object detection in aerial images aims to locate the
objects of interest using oriented bounding boxes (OBBs)
and identify the categories. There have been numerous out* Project lead. † Corresponding author. This work was supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants (42371321,
62306069, 62222607, 72342023), National Key R&D Program of China
(2022ZD0160100). The numerical calculations in this paper have been
done on the supercomputing system in the Supercomputing Center of
Wuhan University.

Figure 1. The main paradigmatic types of existing oriented object detection. Existing methods are primarily divided into rotated
boxes (RBox)-supervised, horizontal boxes (HBox)-supervised,
and Point-supervised approaches. Compared to RBox and HBox
labels, point labels have lower costs and higher efficiency.

standing research studies in this field [10, 17, 27, 28, 43, 47–
49]. However, manually annotating the fine-grained OBBs
is time-consuming and expensive.
As to reducing the annotation cost, weakly-supervised
horizontal object detection using image-level annotations
has been well-developed [2, 6, 13, 14, 26, 37, 38, 41],
but these methods have limited performance in complex
aerial scenes and cannot predict the orientation of objects. In recent years, there has been growing attention
to weakly supervised oriented object detection. As illus-

16730

