This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Building Bridges across Spatial and Temporal Resolutions: Reference-Based
Super-Resolution via Change Priors and Conditional Diffusion Model
Runmin Dong1,5 , Shuai Yuan2 , Bin Luo1 , Mengxuan Chen1,5 , Jinxiao Zhang1,5 ,
Lixian Zhang4,5∗ , Weijia Li3 , Juepeng Zheng3,5 , Haohuan Fu1,5 *
1
Tsinghua University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Sun Yat-Sen University
4
National Supercomputing Center in Shenzhen
5
Tsinghua University - Xi’an Institute of Surveying and Mapping Joint Research Center
drm@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, haohuan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Ref

Abstract
Reference-based super-resolution (RefSR) has the potential to build bridges across spatial and temporal resolutions
of remote sensing images. However, existing RefSR methods are limited by the faithfulness of content reconstruction and the effectiveness of texture transfer in large scaling factors. Conditional diffusion models have opened up
new opportunities for generating realistic high-resolution
images, but effectively utilizing reference images within
these models remains an area for further exploration. Furthermore, content fidelity is difficult to guarantee in areas
without relevant reference information. To solve these issues, we propose a change-aware diffusion model named
Ref-Diff for RefSR, using the land cover change priors to
guide the denoising process explicitly. Specifically, we inject the priors into the denoising model to improve the utilization of reference information in unchanged areas and
regulate the reconstruction of semantically relevant content
in changed areas. With this powerful guidance, we decouple the semantics-guided denoising and reference textureguided denoising processes to improve the model performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior
effectiveness and robustness of the proposed method compared with state-of-the-art RefSR methods in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations. The code and data are
available at https://github.com/dongrunmin/RefDiff.

1. Introduction
Spatiotemporal integrity of high-resolution remote sensing images is crucial for fine-grained urban management,
long-time-series urban development study, disaster monitoring, and other remote sensing applications [6, 13, 49].
* Corresponding authors

LR

Reference textureguided denoising

Land cover change priors

Semantics-guided
denoising

𝐹! (𝑥 "#$ 𝑥", 𝑦%& , 𝑦&'( , 𝑝)*+,
Noise

HR

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed change-aware diffusion
model for RefSR. LR is a low-resolution image and HR is the
corresponding high-resolution image. Ref represents a geographically matched reference high-resolution image acquired at another
time.

However, due to limitations in remote sensing technologies and high hardware costs, we cannot simultaneously
achieve high temporal resolution and high spatial resolution images on a large scale [24, 47]. To tackle this issue, reference-based super-resolution (RefSR) can leverage geography-paired high-resolution reference (Ref) images and low-resolution (LR) images to integrate fine spatial content and high revisit frequency from different sensors [7]. Although various RefSR methods achieve great
progress, two major challenges remain to be solved for this
scenario.
The first challenge is the land cover changes between
Ref and LR images. Unlike the natural image domain,
where Ref images are collected through image retrieval or
captured from different viewpoints, Ref and LR images in
remote sensing scenarios utilize geographic information to

27684

