This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MarkovGen: Structured Prediction for Efficient Text-to-Image Generation
Sadeep Jayasumana

Daniel Glasner
Srikumar Ramalingam
Ayan Chakrabarti
Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research, New York

Andreas Veit

{sadeep, dglasner, rsrikumar, aveit, ayanchakrab, sanjivk}@google.com

Full Muse: All steps

Early Exit Muse: Fewer steps
1.5x faster

MarkovGen: Fewer steps + MRF
1.5x faster

Figure 1. MarkovGen improves the speed and quality of token-based image generation models such as Muse, by reducing the number of
sampling steps and replacing them with a light-weight Markov Random Field (MRF) model.

Abstract
Modern text-to-image generation models produce highquality images that are both photorealistic and faithful to
the text prompts. However, this quality comes at significant computational cost: nearly all of these models are iterative and require running sampling multiple times with
large models. This iterative process is needed to ensure
that different regions of the image are not only aligned with
the text prompt, but also compatible with each other. In
this work, we propose a light-weight approach to achieving this compatibility between different regions of an image,
using a Markov Random Field (MRF) model. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this method on top of the latent
token-based Muse text-to-image model. The MRF richly

encodes the compatibility among image tokens at different
spatial locations to improve quality and significantly reduce
the required number of Muse sampling steps. Inference
with the MRF is significantly cheaper, and its parameters
can be quickly learned through back-propagation by modeling MRF inference as a differentiable neural-network layer.
Our full model, MarkovGen, uses this proposed MRF model
to both speed up Muse by 1.5× and produce higher quality
images by decreasing undesirable image artifacts.

1. Introduction
Recent image-to-text models [18, 21, 24, 25, 34] are
remarkably successful at producing high-quality, photorealistic images that are faithful to the provided text

9316

