This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Point Cloud Diffusion
for Disentangled 3D Shape and Appearance Generation
Philipp Schröppel1

Christopher Wewer2

Jan Eric Lenssen2

Eddy Ilg3

Thomas Brox1

1

2

University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
3
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany

Figure 1. We present a method to model 3D radiance field distributions using neural point denoising diffusion (left). Since our representation disentangles coarse object shape from local appearance, we can sample from the individual distributions separately (right).

Abstract
Controllable generation of 3D assets is important for
many practical applications like content creation in movies,
games and engineering, as well as in AR/VR. Recently, diffusion models have shown remarkable results in generation
quality of 3D objects. However, none of the existing models
enable disentangled generation to control the shape and appearance separately. For the first time, we present a suitable
representation for 3D diffusion models to enable such disentanglement by introducing a hybrid point cloud and neural radiance field approach. We model a diffusion process
over point positions jointly with a high-dimensional feature
space for a local density and radiance decoder. While the
point positions represent the coarse shape of the object, the
point features allow modeling the geometry and appearance
details. This disentanglement enables us to sample both independently and therefore to control both separately. Our
approach sets a new state of the art in generation compared to previous disentanglement-capable methods by reduced FID scores of 30-90% and is on-par with other nondisentanglement-capable state-of-the art methods.

1. Introduction
3D assets are used in many practical applications, ranging
from engineering to movies and computer games, and will
become even more important in virtual spaces and virtual

telepresence that will be enabled by AR/VR technology in
the future. However, manually creating such assets is a
labor-intensive and costly task that requires expert skills. It
is even more important that such content cannot just be generated but that the generation can also be controlled to obtain the desired outcome. With the impressive image generation capabilities of diffusion models [9, 13, 33–35, 48], it is
appealing to consider such models. Generally, the extension
to 3D is still limited and not straightforward [11, 27, 37].
Even more so, none of the current diffusion models allow
for disentangled generation of shape and appearance and
controlling them separately.
The general challenge for 3D diffusion models lies in
selecting the right 3D representation. One track of work explores diffusion models to generate 3D point clouds [4, 23,
27, 47, 49]. While such methods are able to generate the
sparse point clouds well, they are not able to model dense
geometry or appearance. Another track uses implicit representations [10, 11, 15], triplanes [8, 37] or voxel grids [26]
to define the geometry and appearance continuously for
each coordinate in a volume that encloses the object. The
downside of all of these representations is that they do not
provide disentanglement of shape and appearance. The reason for this limitation is the missing invariance of a single
factor of variation to changes in others: Global neural field
representations, for example, model shape and appearance
in joint parameters. Thus, one of these factors cannot be
changed independently. Voxel grids or triplanes provide

8785

