This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Design2Cloth: 3D Cloth Generation from 2D Masks
Jiali Zheng,

Rolandos Alexandros Potamias,
Imperial College London

Stefanos Zafeiriou

{jiali.zheng, r.potamias, s.zafeirou}@imperial.ac.uk

Figure 1. We proposed Design2Cloth: a high fidelity 3D generative model for garment generation from simple 2D masks, trained on a
large scale 3D cloth dataset of real-world scans. Figure illustrates interpolation between shirt (Left), trousers (Right) and shapes.

Abstract

trained model will become publicly available. 1

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a significant shift in the
field of digital avatar research, towards modeling, animating and reconstructing clothed human representations, as a
key step towards creating realistic avatars. However, current 3D cloth generation methods are garment specific or
trained completely on synthetic data, hence lacking fine
details and realism. In this work, we make a step towards automatic realistic garment design and propose Design2Cloth, a high fidelity 3D generative model trained on
a real world dataset from more than 2000 subject scans. To
provide vital contribution to the fashion industry, we developed a user-friendly adversarial model capable of generating diverse and detailed clothes simply by drawing a 2D
cloth mask. Under a series of both qualitative and quantitative experiments, we showcase that Design2Cloth outperforms current state-of-the-art cloth generative models by a
large margin. In addition to the generative properties of
our network, we showcase that the proposed method can
be used to achieve high quality reconstructions from single
in-the-wild images and 3D scans. Dataset, code and pre-

The advent of 3D digital human avatars has facilitated the
generation of realistic humans that continuously progress
the gaming and filming industries [29, 36, 53]. Within this
context, digitized garments emerge as a pivotal component
to enhance realism. However, the diverse and perplexing
nature of human garments makes modeling and generation
of realistic clothed humans remains non-trivial task.
While 2D cloth generation has been extensively studied
obtaining remarkable results [10, 11, 19, 21, 26, 31, 38, 47],
the need for precise virtual try-ons necessitates the adoption
of 3D cloth models that accurately simulate fabric properties, and enable more realistic digital experience. Recently, several methods have attempted to extend cloth modeling to 3D human avatars [14, 40, 54]. Nevertheless,
these approaches prove inadequate when it comes to accurately reconstructing garments in diverse, real-world settings. The primary cause lies in the lack of large 3D garment datasets, compared to the abundance of 2D garment
1 Project Page: https://jiali-zheng.github.io/Design2Cloth/

1748

