This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improved Visual Grounding through Self-Consistent Explanations
Ruozhen He1

Paola Cascante-Bonilla1
1
Rice University

Ziyan Yang1 Alexander C. Berg2
2
University of California, Irvine

Vicente Ordonez1

catherine.he@rice.edu, pc51@rice.edu, zy47@rice.edu, bergac@uci.edu, vicenteor@rice.edu

Abstract
Vision-and-language models trained to match images
with text can be combined with visual explanation methods to point to the locations of speciﬁc objects in an image. Our work shows that the localization –“grounding”–
abilities of these models can be further improved by ﬁnetuning for self-consistent visual explanations. We propose
a strategy for augmenting existing text-image datasets with
paraphrases using a large language model, and SelfEQ,
a weakly-supervised strategy on visual explanation maps
for paraphrases that encourages self-consistency. Speciﬁcally, for an input textual phrase, we attempt to generate
a paraphrase and ﬁnetune the model so that the phrase
and paraphrase map to the same region in the image. We
posit that this both expands the vocabulary that the model
is able to handle, and improves the quality of the object
locations highlighted by gradient-based visual explanation
methods (e.g. GradCAM). We demonstrate that SelfEQ improves performance on Flickr30k, ReferIt, and RefCOCO+
over a strong baseline method and several prior works. Particularly, comparing to other methods that do not use any
type of box annotations, we obtain 84.07% on Flickr30k
(an absolute improvement of 4.69%), 67.40% on ReferIt (an
absolute improvement of 7.68%), and 75.10%, 55.49% on
RefCOCO+ test sets A and B respectively (an absolute improvement of 3.74% on average).

1. Introduction
Vision-and-language models that are trained to associate
images with text have shown to be effective for many tasks
and benchmarks [21, 27, 31, 41], including object detection [18, 54] and image segmentation [15, 36, 50]. Since
these models are typically trained with in-the-wild data
from the web, they can handle a wide range of vocabulary for objects as long as they are well represented in
the training data. These models are often remarkably accurate [16, 22, 28, 47] even without tuning them to perform well in any particular downstream task [14, 32, 52].
The ALBEF model [27] was particularly capable of visual

   

 

 



 

 



 

    

 

Figure 1. Previous models can localize the word frisbee, but struggle with equivalent but more uncommon referents such as disc. A
model tuned with our proposed SelfEQ objective encourages consistent visual explanations for paraphrased prompts and performs
well on both examples. SelfEQ not only enables a larger working
vocabulary but also improves overall localization performance.

“grounding” – or in other words – the ability to localize
objects in images by simply using it in conjunction with a
visual explanation method such as GradCAM [43]. This capability is particularly remarkable given that this model was
only supervised with images and text but no object location
annotations of any type.
In order to improve the ability of vision-and-language
models to perform localization, many methods have incorporated further ﬁnetuning with either box or segment
annotations, or rely on pretrained object detectors or box
proposal networks [5, 12, 19, 23, 30, 51]. Our work instead aims to improve the localization capabilities of models
trained only on image-text pairs through weak supervision.
But, how can we improve the ability of a model to localize
objects without access to object location annotations? Consider the example in Figure 1 where a model is tasked with
pointing to the location of the object frisbee in this image.
The baseline model succeeds at ﬁnding the object but is unsuccessful at locating the object when prompted with the

13095

