This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class Tokens Infusion for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Sung-Hoon Yoon, Hoyong Kwon, Hyeonseong Kim, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST
{yoon307,kwonhoyong3,brian617,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) relies on Class Activation Maps (CAMs) to extract spatial
information from image-level labels. With the success of
Vision Transformer (ViT), the migration of ViT is actively
conducted in WSSS. This work proposes a novel WSSS
framework with Class Token Infusion (CTI). By infusing
the class tokens from images, we guide class tokens to possess class-specific distinct characteristics and global-local
consistency. For this, we devise two kinds of token infusion: 1) Intra-image Class Token Infusion (I-CTI) and 2)
Cross-image Class Token Infusion (C-CTI). In I-CTI, we
infuse the class tokens from the same but differently augmented images and thus make CAMs consistent among various deformations (i.e. view, color). In C-CTI, by infusing
the class tokens from the other images and imposing the resulting CAMs to be similar, it learns class-specific distinct
characteristics. Besides the CTI, we bring the background
(BG) concept into ViT with the BG token to reduce the false
positive activation of CAMs. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO
2014 datasets, achieving state-of-the-art results in weakly
supervised semantic segmentation. The code is available
at https://github.com/yoon307/CTI.

1. Introduction
Fully supervised semantic segmentation shows great improvement in various fields in exchange for expensive and
labor-intensive labels. To ease the burden of acquiring labels, Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS)
has emerged while utilizing only weak supervision.
With the weak labels that are relatively easy to acquire
with extensive amounts, WSSS researches using imagelevel labels [1, 2, 4, 12, 19, 22, 28, 44, 52, 54], scribbles [29, 42], and bounding boxes [8, 18, 23, 32] are actively
conducted. Among these, our work only utilizes imagelevel classification labels, the most practical and challenging setting.
Since classification labels only convey the presence

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed Class Token Infusion
(CTI). We infuse class tokens in the intermediate layer by I-CTI
and C-CTI. CTI guides class tokens and CAMs to be consistent
in view differences and possess class-specific distinct representations.

or absence of objects with specific classes at an image
level, objects are localized using Class Activation Maps
(CAMs) [56] in WSSS. Numerous studies have aimed to
improve the precision of CAMs to enable the obtained
CAMs to serve as pseudo-labels for semantic segmentation.
Before Vision Transformer (ViT) emerged, most WSSS
research relied on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
to generate CAMs. However, CNNs are trained to localize the objects with limited receptive fields and the classification task itself can not impose spatial constraint, CAMs
from CNN often focus only on discriminative object regions
(i.e. sparseness).
Unlike CNNs that emphasize local features, ViTs capture long-range dependency through self-attention mechanisms; thus, it alleviates the sparseness problem of the
activation map. Also, the ViT model trained in a selfsupervised manner like DINO[3] or MOCO[15] shows that
the localized objects are precise enough to function as a
segmentation mask. However, since the original ViT uses
single-class tokens to perform classification, the resulting
localization map is acquired in a class-agnostic manner.

3595

