This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Breathing Life Into Sketches Using Text-to-Video Priors
Rinon Gal∗,1,2
Yael Vinker∗,1
Yuval Alaluf1
Amit Bermano1
1
3
Daniel Cohen-Or
Ariel Shamir
Gal Chechik2
1

Tel-Aviv University

2

NVIDIA

3

Reichman University

“The penguin
is shuffling,
+ taking cautious
steps.”

+

“The jazz
saxophonist
performs on
stage."

“The gazelle

+ galloping and
jumping.”

Figure 1. Given a still sketch in vector format and a text prompt describing a desired action, our method automatically animates the drawing
with respect to the prompt. Please see the full animations in our project page: https://livesketch.github.io/

Abstract
A sketch is one of the most intuitive and versatile tools
humans use to convey their ideas visually. An animated
sketch opens another dimension to the expression of ideas
and is widely used by designers for a variety of purposes.
Animating sketches is a laborious process, requiring extensive experience and professional design skills. In this
work, we present a method that automatically adds motion
to a single-subject sketch (hence, “breathing life into it”),
merely by providing a text prompt indicating the desired
motion. The output is a short animation provided in vector representation, which can be easily edited. Our method
does not require extensive training, but instead leverages
the motion prior of a large pretrained text-to-video diffusion model using a score-distillation loss to guide the placement of strokes. To promote natural and smooth motion and
to better preserve the sketch’s appearance, we model the
learned motion through two components. The first governs
small local deformations and the second controls global
affine transformations. Surprisingly, we find that even models that struggle to generate sketch videos on their own can
still serve as a useful backbone for animating abstract representations.

1. Introduction
Sketches serve as a fundamental and intuitive tool for visual
expression and communication [3, 20, 25]. Sketches capture the essence of visual entities with a few strokes, allowing humans to communicate abstract visual ideas. In this
paper, we propose a method to “breathe life” into a static
sketch by generating semantically meaningful short videos
from it. Such animations can be useful for storytelling, illustrations, websites, presentations, and just for fun.
Animating sketches using conventional tools (such as
Adobe Animate and Toon Boom) is challenging even for
experienced designers [75], requiring specific artistic expertise. Hence, long-standing research efforts in computer
graphics sought to develop automatic tools to simplify this
process. However, these tools face multiple hurdles, such
as a need to identify the semantic component of the sketch,
or learning to create motion that appears natural. As such,
existing methods commonly rely on user-annotated skeletal
key points [17, 73] or user-provided reference motions that
align with the sketch semantics [9, 75, 87].
In this work, we propose to bring a given static sketch to
life, based on a textual prompt, without the need for any human annotations or explicit reference motions. We do so by

4325

