This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeD: Semantic-Aware Discriminator for Image Super-Resolution
Bingchen Li1 *, Xin Li1 *, Hanxin Zhu1 , Yeying Jin2 , Ruoyu Feng1 , Zhizheng Zhang3 , Zhibo Chen1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Singapore 3 Galbot
{lbc31415926, lixin666, hanxinzhu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jinyeying@u.nus.edu,
ustcfry@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhangzz@galbot.com, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been
widely used to recover vivid textures in image superresolution (SR) tasks. In particular, one discriminator is
utilized to enable the SR network to learn the distribution
of real-world high-quality images in an adversarial training manner. However, the distribution learning is overly
coarse-grained, which is susceptible to virtual textures and
causes counter-intuitive generation results. To mitigate this,
we propose the simple and effective Semantic-aware Discriminator (denoted as SeD), which encourages the SR network to learn the fine-grained distributions by introducing
the semantics of images as a condition. Concretely, we aim
to excavate the semantics of images from a well-trained semantic extractor. Under different semantics, the discriminator is able to distinguish the real-fake images individually and adaptively, which guides the SR network to learn
the more fine-grained semantic-aware textures. To obtain
accurate and abundant semantics, we take full advantage
of recently popular pretrained vision models (PVMs) with
extensive datasets, and then incorporate its semantic features into the discriminator through a well-designed spatial
cross-attention module. In this way, our proposed semanticaware discriminator empowered the SR network to produce
more photo-realistic and pleasing images. Extensive experiments on two typical tasks, i.e., SR and Real SR have
demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed methods.
The code will be available at https://github.com/
lbc12345/SeD.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has accelerated the great development of Single Image Super-resolution (SISR) [12, 34, 36, 50, 59, 60],
which aims to recover the vivid high-resolution (HR) im* Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Comparison between the vanilla discriminator and our
proposed semantic-aware discriminator.

age from its degraded low-resolution (LR) counterpart. In
general, there are two typical optimization objectives for
existing SISR methods, i.e., objective and subjective quality. To pursue the higher objective quality, a series of elaborate frameworks based on convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [9, 31, 36, 72, 73], Transformer [5, 15, 34, 39, 63]
have been proposed to improve the representation ability of
the SR network through the constrain of the pixel-wise loss
function (e.g., L1 loss and MSE loss). However, the pixelwise loss function cannot enable the SR network to have a
promising hallucination capability, which performs poorly
on texture generation and results in an unsatisfied subjective
quality [27, 32].
To improve the subjective quality, it is necessary to generate human-pleasing textures for distorted images. Inspired by the generative adversarial network (GAN) [17],
a series of pioneering works [27, 59, 60, 70, 71] regard the
SR network as the generator, and then introduce the discriminator to enable the SR networks with realistic texture
generation capability. There are three typical discriminators
for SR networks, i.e., image-wise discriminator [24, 54],
patch-wise discriminator [22], and pixel-wise discriminator [52]. In particular, the image-wise discriminator aims
to distinguish the real/fake images from the global distributions, e.g., VGG-like discriminator in [27, 59, 71]. However, the image-wise distribution is so coarse-grained that
causes the network to produce non-ideal local textures. To

25784

