This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inter-X: Towards Versatile Human-Human Interaction Analysis
Liang Xu1,2 Xintao Lv1 Yichao Yan1† Xin Jin2† Shuwen Wu1 Congsheng Xu1 Yifan Liu1
Yizhou Zhou3 Fengyun Rao3 Xingdong Sheng4 Yunhui Liu4 Wenjun Zeng2 Xiaokang Yang1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo
3
WeChat, Tencent Inc. 4 Lenovo
https://liangxuy.github.io/inter-x/

Hands: Hug, Handshake, Wave,
Grab, Hit, Push, Pull, Slap, Pat,
Point at, High-five, Support,
Link arms, Massaging, Hand
wrestling, Thumb up, Touch

One person faces the other person, stretches out his/her arms and walks towards the other one,
embracing the other's waist, while the other person also extends his both arms to embrace the first
person's shoulders, and gently pats them. Then, the two people separate and take a step back.
(Human body / Body parts / Hands / Orientation)

Torso: Knock
over, Bend, Carry
on back, Block

Head: Whisper, Chat, Kiss, Cover mouth,
Look back, Inspect

Hip: Sit on leg
Feet: Walk towards, Step on
foot, Chase, Dance, Kick

Action2Motion

Text2Motion

Actions

Texts

Inter-X

Motion2Text
Reaction Generation

Motion2Action
Stylized Generation

Interaction Order

Relationship & Personality
Personality Assessment

Causal Order Inference

[Actor]: Pushing

[Reactor]:Leaning forward

(a) Familiarity Level

(b) Human-human Relationship

(c) Big Five Personality Distribution

Figure 1. An overview of the data and task taxonomy of our proposed Inter-X dataset, which is a large-scale human-human interaction
MoCap dataset with ∼11K interaction sequences and more than 8.1M frames. The fine-grained textual descriptions, semantic action
categories, interaction order, and relationship and personality annotations allow for 4 categories of downstream tasks.

Abstract
The analysis of the ubiquitous human-human interactions is pivotal for understanding humans as social beings.
Existing human-human interaction datasets typically suffer
from inaccurate body motions, lack of hand gestures and
fine-grained textual descriptions. To better perceive and
generate human-human interactions, we propose Inter-X,
a currently largest human-human interaction dataset with
accurate body movements and diverse interaction patterns,
together with detailed hand gestures. The dataset includes
∼11K interaction sequences and more than 8.1M frames.
We also equip Inter-X with versatile annotations of more
than 34K fine-grained human part-level textual descrip† Corresponding authors

tions, semantic interaction categories, interaction order,
and the relationship and personality of the subjects. Based
on the elaborate annotations, we propose a unified benchmark composed of 4 categories of downstream tasks from
both the perceptual and generative directions. Extensive
experiments and comprehensive analysis show that Inter-X
serves as a testbed for promoting the development of versatile human-human interaction analysis. Our dataset and
benchmark will be publicly available for research purposes.

1. Introduction
The ability to perceive and generate human-human interactions is fundamental in constructing intelligent digital hu-

22260

