This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SEAS: ShapE-Aligned Supervision for Person Re-Identification
Haidong Zhu

Pranav Budhwant
Zhaoheng Zheng
University of Southern California

Ram Nevatia

{haodongz, budhwant, zhaoheng.zheng, nevatia}@usc.edu

Abstract
We introduce SEAS, using ShapE-Aligned Supervision,
to enhance appearance-based person re-identification.
When recognizing an individual’s identity, existing methods
primarily rely on appearance, which can be influenced by
the background environment due to a lack of body shape
awareness. Although some methods attempt to incorporate other modalities, such as gait or body shape, they
encode the additional modality separately, resulting in extra computational costs and lacking an inherent connection
with appearance. In this paper, we explore the use of implicit 3-D body shape representations as pixel-level guidance to augment the extraction of identity features with body
shape knowledge, in addition to appearance. Using body
shape as supervision, rather than as input, provides shapeaware enhancements without any increase in computational
cost and delivers coherent integration with pixel-wise appearance features. Moreover, for video-based person reidentification, we align pixel-level features across frames
with shape awareness to ensure temporal consistency. Our
results demonstrate that incorporating body shape as pixellevel supervision reduces rank-1 errors by 1.4% for framebased and by 2.5% for video-based re-identification tasks,
respectively, and can also be generalized to other existing
appearance-based person re-identification methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification [35, 67], which aims to identify an
individual from a collection of pedestrian images or videos
captured by non-overlapping cameras, is a crucial task for
biometric understanding. Existing methods [20, 33, 65, 89]
primarily focus on a person’s appearance, which can be afThis research is based upon work supported in part by the Office of
the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), via [2022-21102100007]. The views
and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not
be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S.
Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation therein.

Figure 1. Rank-1 accuracy of using SEAS on ResNet-50 backbone on frame-based (MSMT17 [68] and Market1501 [81]). and
PSTA as encoders compared with other state-of-the-art methods
on and video-based (LS-VID [37] and MARS [82]) person reidentification datasets.

fected by environmental variations as the appearance is often intertwined with the background. We explore the use
of 3-D body shape as supervision to enhance the humancentric appearance and demonstrate significant improvement on public datasets compared to other state-of-the-art
methods, as illustrated in Figure 1.
When introducing a second modality, existing reidentification methods [5, 40, 52, 78] often employ a separate branch alongside appearance for person identification. While these methods can enhance the features for
re-identification, they encode each modality independently,
thereby diminishing the integration of the two input modalities and weakening their connection. Additionally, the extra
encoder required introduces new parameters to the network,
leading to increased model size and computational cost.
In this paper, we introduce the use of human body
ShapE-Aligned Supervision, abbreviated as SEAS, to enhance appearance-based re-identification methods. Instead
of using a secondary modality as model input, we utilize
it to guide the generation of identity features with a trainable body shape extractor. This extractor takes identity
feature maps from the identity encoder and converts them
into pixel-level features that represent 3-D body shapes.

164

