This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ID-like Prompt Learning for Few-Shot Out-of-Distribution Detection
Yichen Bai 1 *, Zongbo Han 1 *, Bing Cao 1,2† , Xiaoheng Jiang 3 , Qinghua Hu 1,2 , Changqing Zhang 1,2†
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning
3
School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University
{ycfate, zongbo, caobing, huqinghua, zhangchangqing}@tju.edu.cn, {jiangxiaoheng}@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection methods often exploit auxiliary outliers to train model identifying OOD samples, especially discovering challenging outliers from auxiliary outliers dataset to improve OOD detection. However,
they may still face limitations in effectively distinguishing
between the most challenging OOD samples that are much
like in-distribution (ID) data, i.e., ID-like samples. To
this end, we propose a novel OOD detection framework that
discovers ID-like outliers using CLIP [32] from the vicinity space of the ID samples, thus helping to identify these
most challenging OOD samples. Then a prompt learning
framework is proposed that utilizes the identified ID-like
outliers to further leverage the capabilities of CLIP for OOD
detection. Benefiting from the powerful CLIP, we only need
a small number of ID samples to learn the prompts of the
model without exposing other auxiliary outlier datasets. By
focusing on the most challenging ID-like OOD samples
and elegantly exploiting the capabilities of CLIP, our method
achieves superior few-shot learning performance on various
real-world image datasets (e.g., in 4-shot OOD detection on
the ImageNet-1k dataset, our method reduces the average
FPR95 by 12.16% and improves the average AUROC by
2.76%, compared to state-of-the-art methods). Code is available at https://github.com/ycfate/ID-like

1. Introduction
When deploying machine learning models in practical settings, it is possible to come across OOD samples that were
not encountered during training. The risk of incorrect decisions rises when it comes to these OOD inputs, which
could pose serious safety issues, particularly in applications
like autonomous driving and medical diagnosis. The system
needs to identify OOD samples in addition to performing
* Equal contribution. †Corresponding author.

hard OOD: wolf

ID: husky

easy OOD: cat

Figure 1. Hard OOD samples typically contain more features correlated to ID samples, i.e., they behave more ID-like.

well on ID samples in order to produce trustworthy predictions. OOD detection is therefore quite critical for safely
deploying machine learning models in reality.
Existing methods [9, 18, 21] usually focus on detecting
OOD examples only using ID data in training to predict
lower confidence [8, 27] or higher energy [22] for OOD samples. However, due to the lack of OOD information, these
models struggle to be effective in OOD detection. Therefore, some studies [10, 22] suggest using auxiliary outliers
to regularize the models and identity OOD samples. Chen
et al. [1] and Ming et al. [29] suggested that selecting more
challenging outlier samples can help the model learn a better
decision boundary between ID and OOD. However, these
auxiliary outliers usually contain limited challenging outliers.
Furthermore, most of these methods require additional outlier data, which makes them ineffective when outlier datasets
are unavailable. Recently, Du et al. [4] proposed to synthesize virtual outlier data in the feature space of ID data to
construct outliers during training without additional data.
This method shows strong efficacy in distinguishing between
ID and OOD. However, there are two main limitations: i)
it assumes that ID data in the feature space conforms to a
class conditional Gaussian distribution, which does not always hold in the complex real-world applications [34]; ii) it
requires numerous ID samples to construct a more accurate
distribution of ID data, while obtaining a large number of ID
samples is often costly. Accordingly, in this work, we focus
on flexibly constructing challenging outliers with few-shot

17480

