This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Group Activity Features Through Person Attribute Prediction
Chihiro Nakatani1 Hiroaki Kawashima2 Norimichi Ukita1
1
Toyota Technological Institute, Japan 2 University of Hyogo, Japan

1. Introduction
A group activity is defined as what multiple people jointly
engage in. Group activities are important targets in image
and video understanding, such as team plays in sports [36],
conversations in social scenes [3], and people flows in
surveillance cameras [28].
Group Activity Recognition (GAR), in which a frame or
video is classified into either of the predefined group activity classes, has been widely investigated in recent years
[2, 3, 6, 9, 11, 14, 16, 19, 21, 25, 29, 37–40, 42, 45]. All of
these GAR methods are based on supervised learning that
requires the ground-truth group activities, as shown in Fig. 1
(a). In addition, it is known that person action recognition,
which is also achieved based on a supervised learning manner, supports GAR [2, 3, 6, 9, 11, 14, 19, 21, 25, 29, 37, 38,
40, 45].

Group activity supervision
Recognized
group activity

Difficult annotations due to large variation

B-quick?

A-quick?
C-quick?

Annotator

(a) Supervised group activity recognition

Group
Activity
Feature
(GAF)

Person attribute
predictor

Group activity feature
learner

This paper proposes Group Activity Feature (GAF)
learning in which features of multi-person activity are
learned as a compact latent vector. Unlike prior work
in which the manual annotation of group activities is required for supervised learning, our method learns the GAF
through person attribute prediction without group activity
annotations. By learning the whole network in an end-toend manner so that the GAF is required for predicting the
person attributes of people in a group, the GAF is trained
as the features of multi-person activity. As a person attribute, we propose to use a person’s action class and appearance features because the former is easy to annotate
due to its simpleness, and the latter requires no manual annotation. In addition, we introduce a location-guided attribute prediction to disentangle the complex GAF for extracting the features of each target person properly. Various
experimental results validate that our method outperforms
SOTA methods quantitatively and qualitatively on two public datasets. Visualization of our GAF also demonstrates
that our method learns the GAF representing fined-grained
group activity classes. Code: https://github.com/
chihina/GAFL-CVPR2024.

Group activity
recognizer

Abstract

(b-1) Person action supervision
Easier annotations due to small variation
Annotator
Standing Spiking Moving
Predicted
person attribute

Person appearance feature space
No manual annotations
Annotator
(b-2) Person appearance self-supervision

(b) Ours (group activity feature learning with person attribute)

Figure 1. Difference between annotations for GAR and our group
activity feature learning. (a) Supervised GAR employs group activity annotations that are difficult due to various similar group
activities. (b-1) Our GAF learning employs person action annotations that are easy due to their simplicity. (b-2) We further propose
annotation-free GAF learning with person appearance features.

Such supervised learning requires manually-annotated
training data. For GAR, group activity annotations are required. In addition to labor-intensive and erroneous annotations, a difficulty peculiar to GAR is the complexity of
the group activities. For example, while only four elemental group activity classes are annotated in a widely-used
team-sport dataset [15], they may be insufficient for practical purposes such as tactical analysis (e.g., 200 or more
plays are defined in American Football [8]). That is, more
fine-grained activity classes are required for several applications of group activity analysis. It is, however, difficult
to correctly define and annotate such complex, fine-grained
activity classes, even manually, because of visually minor
but highly contextual differences among those classes.
Such difficulty in manual annotations of group activities motivates us to learn a Group Activity Feature (GAF)
in which features of multi-person activity are learned as a
compact latent vector without group activity annotations.
We note here that GAFs, which represent the complex features of multi-person activity, may have enough information
to predict the attributes of each person in a group.

18233

