This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoDiff : Monocular 3D Object Detection and
Pose Estimation with Diffusion Models
Yasiru Ranasinghe, Deepti Hegde, and Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
{dranasi1, dhegde1, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract
3D object detection and pose estimation from a singleview image is challenging due to the high uncertainty
caused by the absence of 3D perception. As a solution,
recent monocular 3D detection methods leverage additional modalities, such as stereo image pairs and LiDAR
point clouds, to enhance image features at the expense
of additional annotation costs. We propose using diffusion models to learn effective representations for monocular 3D detection without additional modalities or training
data. We present MonoDiff, a novel framework that employs the reverse diffusion process to estimate 3D bounding box and orientation. But, considering the variability
in bounding box sizes along different dimensions, it is ineffective to sample noise from a standard Gaussian distribution. Hence, we adopt a Gaussian mixture model to sample noise during the forward diffusion process and initialize the reverse diffusion process. Furthermore, since the
diffusion model generates the 3D parameters for a given
object image, we leverage 2D detection information to provide additional supervision by maintaining the correspondence between 3D/2D projection. Finally, depending on
the signal-to-noise ratio, we incorporate a dynamic weighting scheme to account for the level of uncertainty in the
supervision by projection at different timesteps. MonoDiff
outperforms current state-of-the-art monocular 3D detection methods on the KITTI and Waymo benchmarks without
additional depth priors. MonoDiff project is available at:
https://dylran.github.io/monodiff.github.io.

1. Introduction
Research on monocular 3D object detection is currently a
focal point in various fields, such as autonomous driving
[8, 36], robotic navigation [29, 44], and beyond [32]. The
objective is to generate 3D bounding box parameters based
on the identification of objects in 2D images [8, 43, 64, 72].
Previous studies have extracted 3D information for ob-

Figure 1. Comparison between existing architectures for effective
representation learners for monocular 3D object detection. CMKD
[28] uses LiDAR data, and MonoNeRD [74] estimates the stereo
and depth image during training. MonoDiff uses monocular images with diffusion models as effective representation learners.

ject poses using 2D/3D constraints and geometric priors.
These constraints typically necessitate additional annotations [8, 24] or the employment of Computer-Aided Design
models [5, 47]. Alternatively, some earlier approaches use
pseudo-LiDAR from depth estimates [50, 65, 71] or integrate image features with depth maps as a precursor for the
3D detection model. Lately, the monocular 3D detection
research has focused on generating corresponding bird’seye-view (BEV) representations [11, 53, 77, 78] from 2D
images to work with pre-trained 3D detectors.
Following the improvement from generating meaningful
representations, recent methods have demonstrated the effectiveness of leveraging additional training data or modalities, as illustrated in Fig. 1, for inferring 3D information
[25, 38, 64]. While these additional modalities help learn

10659

