This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-Time Domain Generalization for Face Anti-Spoofing
Qianyu Zhou1 ,* Ke-Yue Zhang2 ,* Taiping Yao2 , Xuequan Lu3 , Shouhong Ding2†, Lizhuang Ma1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University; 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent; 3 La Trobe University.
1
zhouqianyu@sjtu.edu.cn, 1 ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn,
2
{zkyezhang,taipingyao,ericshding}@tencent.com, 3 b.lu@latrobe.edu.au

Abstract
Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS) is pivotal in safeguarding facial recognition systems against presentation attacks. While
domain generalization (DG) methods have been developed
to enhance FAS performance, they predominantly focus on
learning domain-invariant features during training, which
may not guarantee generalizability to unseen data that differs largely from the source distributions. Our insight is that
testing data can serve as a valuable resource to enhance the
generalizability beyond mere evaluation for DG FAS. In this
paper, we introduce a novel Test-Time Domain Generalization (TTDG) framework for FAS, which leverages the testing data to boost the model’s generalizability. Our method,
consisting of Test-Time Style Projection (TTSP) and Diverse
Style Shifts Simulation (DSSS), effectively projects the unseen data to the seen domain space. In particular, we first
introduce the innovative TTSP to project the styles of the
arbitrarily unseen samples of the testing distribution to the
known source space of the training distributions. We then
design the efficient DSSS to synthesize diverse style shifts
via learnable style bases with two specifically designed
losses in a hyperspherical feature space. Our method eliminates the need for model updates at the test time and can
be seamlessly integrated into not only the CNN but also
ViT backbones. Comprehensive experiments on widely used
cross-domain FAS benchmarks demonstrate our method’s
state-of-the-art performance and effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) is critical in safeguarding face
recognition [11, 35, 46, 88] systems against different types
of presentation attacks, such as printed photos or replaying
videos. To address these presentation attacks, researchers
have developed a range of FAS approaches, including those
based on handcrafted features [5, 17, 18, 39, 67, 98, 102],
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

source domain
Source

target domain
projected data
Source
Target
Target

Model
domain
shifts

Train-Time DG FAS

Model + Projection

projection

Ours (Test-Time DG)

Figure 1. Conventional DG FAS approaches typically learn
domain-invariant features at train time but cannot guarantee generalizability to unseen data that largely differ from source domains.
In contrast, we propose test-time DG for FAS that projects the
unseen testing data to the seen space, thus enhancing the generalizability of FAS model without any model updates at test time.

as well as methods relying on deep learning for feature
extraction [7, 14, 48, 51, 95, 97, 107, 109, 110]. While
these techniques have shown promising results within specific datasets, they often struggle to perform well when confronted with unseen domains due to the distribution shifts.
To improve the performance in unseen environments, recent research has introduced domain generalization (DG)
techniques into FAS tasks. Some adversarial learning [30,
76, 96] techniques tend to align the domain distributions via mini-maxing the domain discriminator, and metalearning [9, 13, 31, 54, 55, 116] methods tend to simulate
the unseen domain from the source domains. Other methods, e.g., instance whitening [121] and contrastive learning [96], align various instances in a self-supervised manner. However, all these methods focus on learning domaininvariant features during training to enhance generalization.
As a result, they may still encounter performance degradation when dealing with unseen domains that have a significantly large discrepancy with the source domains.

175

