This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal learning for geospatial vegetation forecasting
Vitus Benson1,2,3,*
Nuno Carvalhais1,2

Claire Robin1,2
José Cortés1

Christian Requena-Mesa1,2

Zhihan Gao4

Nora Linscheid1

Lazaro Alonso1
Mélanie Weynants1

Markus Reichstein1,2
1
Max-Planck-Institute for Biogeochemistry 2 ELLIS Unit Jena 3 ETH Zürich
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology * vbenson@bgc-jena.mpg.de

Abstract

Precise geospatial vegetation forecasting holds potential
across diverse sectors, including agriculture, forestry, humanitarian aid, and carbon accounting. To leverage the
vast availability of satellite imagery for this task, various
works have applied deep neural networks for predicting
multispectral images in photorealistic quality. However,
the important area of vegetation dynamics has not been
thoroughly explored. Our study introduces GreenEarthNet,
the first dataset specifically designed for high-resolution
vegetation forecasting, and Contextformer, a novel deep
learning approach for predicting vegetation greenness from
Sentinel 2 satellite images with fine resolution across Europe. Our multi-modal transformer model Contextformer
leverages spatial context through a vision backbone and
predicts the temporal dynamics on local context patches
incorporating meteorological time series in a parameterefficient manner. The GreenEarthNet dataset features a
learned cloud mask and an appropriate evaluation scheme
for vegetation modeling. It also maintains compatibility with the existing satellite imagery forecasting dataset
EarthNet2021, enabling cross-dataset model comparisons.
Our extensive qualitative and quantitative analyses reveal
that our methods outperform a broad range of baseline
techniques. This includes surpassing previous state-of-theart models on EarthNet2021, as well as adapted models
from time series forecasting and video prediction. To the
best of our knowledge, this work presents the first models for continental-scale vegetation modeling at fine resolution able to capture anomalies beyond the seasonal cycle,
thereby paving the way for predicting vegetation health and
behaviour in response to climate variability and extremes.
We provide open source code and pre-trained weights to reproduce our experimental results under https://gith
ub.com/vitusbenson/greenearthnet [10].

Inputs

Past Satellite Data

Model

Meteorology

Elevation

Contextformer

Multi-modal deep learning:
global pyramid vision transformer encoder
+ patchwise meteo-guided temporal transformer
+ delta prediction scheme

Outputs

Future Vegetation State
■ Training

■ OOD-t Test

■ OOD-st Test

Figure 1. GreenEarthNet approach (map shows sample locations).

1. Introduction
Optical satellite images have been proven useful for monitoring vegetation status. This is essential for a variety of
applications in agricultural planning, forestry advisory, humanitarian assistance or carbon monitoring. In all these
cases, prognostic information is relevant: Farmers want to
know how their farmland may react to a given weather scenario [83]. Humanitarian organisations need to understand
the localized impact of droughts on pastoral communities
for mitigation of famine with anticipatory action [49]. Afforestation efforts need to consider how their forests react
to future climate [71]. However, providing such prognostic
information through fine resolution vegetation forecasts is
challenging due to ecological memory effects [35], spatial
interactions and the influence of weather variations. Deep
neural networks can model relationships in space, time or
across modalities. Hence, their application to vegetation
forecasting given a sufficiently large dataset seems natural.
1
27788

