This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Monocular Identity-Conditioned Facial Reflectance Reconstruction
Xingyu Ren

Jiankang Deng* Yuhao Cheng Jia Guo Chao Ma*
Yichao Yan Wenhan Zhu Xiaokang Yang

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{rxy sjtu,chengyuhao,chaoma,yanyichao,zhuwenhan823,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
{jiankangdeng,guojia}@gmail.com

Figure 1. We present ID2Reflectance, a high-quality, identity-conditioned reflectance reconstruction method. ID2Reflectance learns multidomain face codebooks by using limited captured data and generates multi-view domain-specific reflectance images guided by facial
identity. Our approach greatly reduces the dependency on captured data and generates high-fidelity reflectance maps for realistic rendering.

Abstract
Recent 3D face reconstruction methods have made remarkable advancements, yet there remain huge challenges
in monocular high-quality facial reflectance reconstruction.
Existing methods rely on a large amount of light-stage captured data to learn facial reflectance models. However, the
lack of subject diversity poses challenges in achieving good
generalization and widespread applicability. In this paper,
we learn the reflectance prior in image space rather than
UV space and present a framework named ID2Reflectance.
Our framework can directly estimate the reflectance maps
of a single image while using limited reflectance data for
training. Our key insight is that reflectance data shares
facial structures with RGB faces, which enables obtaining
expressive facial prior from inexpensive RGB data thus reducing the dependency on reflectance data. We first learn
a high-quality prior for facial reflectance. Specifically, we
pretrain multi-domain facial feature codebooks and design
a codebook fusion method to align the reflectance and RGB
domains. Then, we propose an identity-conditioned swap* Corresponding authors

ping module that injects facial identity from the target image
into the pre-trained autoencoder to modify the identity of
the source reflectance image. Finally, we stitch multi-view
swapped reflectance images to obtain renderable assets.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method exhibits
excellent generalization capability and achieves state-ofthe-art facial reflectance reconstruction results for in-thewild faces. Our project page is https://xingyuren.
github.io/id2reflectance.

1. Introduction
Facial reflectance reconstruction aims at predicting reflectance components (e.g., diffuse and specular albedo) and
high-frequency normals of the input in-the-wild face image.
The recovered 3D faces can be realistically rendered in arbitrary illumination environments. Facial reflectance reconstruction is one of the fundamental problems in computer
vision and graphics, with applications ranging from avatar
creation [70], telecommunication [49], video games, films,
and interactive AR/VR.
To achieve a realistic facial reflectance model, it is

885

