This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Adapter Meets Prompt Tuning:
Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning for Point Cloud Analysis
Xin Zhou∗1 , Dingkang Liang∗1 , Wei Xu1 , Xingkui Zhu1 , Yihan Xu1 , Zhikang Zou2 , Xiang Bai†1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, {xzhou03,dkliang,xbai}@hust.edu.cn
2
Baidu Inc., China
Transformer layer
𝑺𝑺𝒎𝒎
Adapter

𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 … 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇

𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 … 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇

Transformer layer
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 … 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇

: Tunable parameters

(a) Existing Adapter tuning

Transformer layer

Transformer layer

𝑺𝑺𝒅𝒅

𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 … 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇

𝑺𝑺𝒎𝒎 : Manual scale

(b) Existing Prompt tuning

Transformer layer

Adapter

𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 … 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇

: Frozen parameters

90

Transformer layer

𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 … 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇

𝑺𝑺𝒅𝒅 : Dynamic scale

(c) Our Dynamic Adapter with
Internal Prompt tuning

RECON-DAPT
(Ours)

89

Overall Acc. (%)

1

87
86
85
84
83
82

RECON

PointNeXt

88

RECON-IDPT
Point-BERTDAPT (Ours)

PointMLP
Point-MAE

Point-BERTIDPT

0

Point-BERT

15

30

Tunable parameters (M)

45

(d) The comparison of several methods on the
ScanObjectNN (Hardest part) dataset

Figure 1. (a) Adapter tuning utilizes additional residual blocks with manual scale. (b) Prompt tuning usually introduces extra random
initialized prompts into the input space. (c) The proposed Dynamic Adapter generates a dynamic scale for each token and seamlessly
integrates with Prompt tuning. (d) The proposed method achieves an ideal trade-off between tunable parameters and performance.

Abstract
Point cloud analysis has achieved outstanding performance by transferring point cloud pre-trained models.
However, existing methods for model adaptation usually update all model parameters, i.e., full fine-tuning paradigm,
which is inefficient as it relies on high computational costs
(e.g., training GPU memory) and massive storage space.
In this paper, we aim to study parameter-efficient transfer learning for point cloud analysis with an ideal tradeoff between task performance and parameter efficiency. To
achieve this goal, we freeze the parameters of the default
pre-trained models and then propose the Dynamic Adapter,
which generates a dynamic scale for each token, considering the token significance to the downstream task. We
further seamlessly integrate Dynamic Adapter with Prompt
Tuning (DAPT) by constructing Internal Prompts, capturing the instance-specific features for interaction. Extensive
experiments conducted on five challenging datasets demonstrate that the proposed DAPT achieves superior performance compared to the full fine-tuning counterparts while
significantly reducing the trainable parameters and training
GPU memory by 95% and 35%, respectively. Code is available at https://github.com/LMD0311/DAPT.
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud analysis, a crucial computer vision task, has
a broad range of applications, such as autonomous driving [6, 24, 30] and 3D reconstruction [3, 10, 34]. The intrinsic irregularity and sparsity of point clouds pose significant challenges. In the past few years, various deep learning
methods [7, 22, 38] have appeared, yielding substantial advancements in this domain.
To generate robust 3D general representations, using
self-supervised learning with vision transformers [9] to pretrain models is a recent hot topic, such as mask modeling [13, 35] and contrast learning [39, 40]. Further
fine-tuning the entire parameters of the pre-trained models on downstream datasets usually leads to faster convergence and significant performance improvements. However, such a fine-tuning strategy is sub-optimal for point
cloud analysis, as reflected in the following aspects: 1)
Fine-tuning the entire backbone might suffer catastrophic
forgetting and break the rich prior knowledge embedded in
the pre-training. 2) Fine-tuning for each point cloud analysis dataset requires a separate weights copy, and the storage
space overhead may becomes a burden as the number of
datasets increases. 3) The computational cost requirements
escalate dramatically, especially for larger batch sizes, leading to a substantial increase in GPU memory usage, limiting

14707

