This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Novel Class Discovery for Ultra-Fine-Grained Visual Categorization
Yu Liu1 , Yaqi Cai1 , Qi Jia1 ,* Binglin Qiu1 , Weimin Wang1 , Nan Pu2
1
International School of Information Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
2
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento
{liuyu8824,jiaqi,wangweimin}@dlut.edu.cn, {caiyaqi1998,m1andy}@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
nan.pu@unitn.it

Abstract
Ultra-fine-grained visual categorization (Ultra-FGVC)
aims at distinguishing highly similar sub-categories within
fine-grained objects, such as different soybean cultivars.
Compared to traditional fine-grained visual categorization, Ultra-FGVC encounters more hurdles due to the
small inter-class and large intra-class variation. Given
these challenges, relying on human annotation for UltraFGVC is impractical. To this end, our work introduces
a novel task termed Ultra-Fine-Grained Novel Class Discovery (UFG-NCD), which leverages partially annotated
data to identify new categories of unlabeled images for
Ultra-FGVC. To tackle this problem, we devise a RegionAligned Proxy Learning (RAPL) framework, which comprises a Channel-wise Region Alignment (CRA) module and
a Semi-Supervised Proxy Learning (SemiPL) strategy. The
CRA module is designed to extract and utilize discriminative features from local regions, facilitating knowledge
transfer from labeled to unlabeled classes. Furthermore,
SemiPL strengthens representation learning and knowledge
transfer with proxy-guided supervised learning and proxyguided contrastive learning. Such techniques leverage class
distribution information in the embedding space, improving
the mining of subtle differences between labeled and unlabeled ultra-fine-grained classes. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that RAPL significantly outperforms baselines
across various datasets, indicating its effectiveness in handling the challenges of UFG-NCD. Code is available at
https://github.com/SSDUT-Caiyq/UFG-NCD.

1. Introduction
“There are no two identical leaves in the world”, Leibniz
once said. However, it is trivial and troublesome to identify the subtle differences given visually similar leaf images, even for senior botanists. Traditional fine-grained vi* corresponding author

Supervised Learning

𝒟𝒟 𝑙𝑙

Transfer
Semi-supervised Learning

𝒟𝒟 𝑢𝑢

Labeled Images

Unlabeled Images

Pushing

Pulling

Figure 1. Visual conception of UFG-NCD, where Dl , Du are labeled and unlabeled data splits. We propose to exploit novel class
discovery for partially annotated UFG images. The core idea is to
learn prior knowledge from labeled images via supervised learning, subsequently extending the knowledge to unlabeled images
via a semi-supervised framework. It facilitates knowledge transfer
and representation learning across ultra-fine-grained classes.

sual categorization (FGVC) [1] has enabled the differentiation of subordinate categories within a broader class, such
as bird species [26], by focusing on distinct region features
like head and wing. Yet, FGVC methods are still limited
when it comes to dissecting these categories further into
sub-categories. To this end, ultra-fine-grained visual categorization (Ultra-FGVC) [20, 27, 30–34] is researched at
recognizing sub-categories of ultra-fine-grained (UFG) images from a specific fine-grained category, which attracts
the attention of researchers due to its significant potential in
real-world applications like precision agriculture. In Fig. 1,
for example, each row of leaf images corresponds to a distinct soybean cultivar, but the differences between these
UFG classes are hardly able to be defined and perceived

17679

