This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanoOcc: Unified Occupancy Representation for Camera-based
3D Panoptic Segmentation
Yuqi Wang1,2 Yuntao Chen3
Xingyu Liao † Lue Fan2 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
2
CRIPAC, MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (HKISI CAS) 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wangyuqi2020, fanlue2019, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Comprehensive modeling of the surrounding 3D world is
crucial for the success of autonomous driving. However, existing perception tasks like object detection, road structure
segmentation, depth & elevation estimation, and open-set
object localization each only focus on a small facet of the
holistic 3D scene understanding task. This divide-andconquer strategy simplifies the algorithm development
process but comes at the cost of losing an end-to-end
unified solution to the problem. In this work, we address
this limitation by studying camera-based 3D panoptic
segmentation, aiming to achieve a unified occupancy representation for camera-only 3D scene understanding. To
achieve this, we introduce a novel method called PanoOcc,
which utilizes voxel queries to aggregate spatiotemporal
information from multi-frame and multi-view images in
a coarse-to-fine scheme, integrating feature learning and
scene representation into a unified occupancy representation. We have conducted extensive ablation studies to
validate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed
method. Our approach achieves new state-of-the-art results
for camera-based semantic segmentation and panoptic
segmentation on the nuScenes dataset. Furthermore,
our method can be easily extended to dense occupancy
prediction and has demonstrated promising performance
on the Occ3D benchmark. The code will be made available
at https://github.com/Robertwyq/PanoOcc.

1. Introduction
Holistic 3D scene understanding is vital in autonomous
driving. The capability to perceive the environment, identify and categorize objects, and contextualize their positions
in the 3D space of the scene is fundamental for developing
Corresponding author.
† Independent Researcher.

chenyuntao08@gmail.com

a safe and reliable autonomous driving system.
Recent advancements in camera-based Bird’s Eye View
(BEV) methods have shown great potential in enhancing
3D scene understanding. By integrating multi-view observations into a unified BEV space, these methods have
achieved remarkable success in tasks such as 3D object
detection [24, 26, 34, 51, 55], BEV semantic segmentation [16, 42, 67], and vector map construction [28, 35].
However, existing perception tasks have certain limitations
as they primarily focus on specific aspects of the scene. Object detection is primarily concerned with identifying foreground objects, BEV semantic segmentation only predicts
the semantic map on the BEV plane, and vector map construction emphasizes the static road structure of the scene.
To address these limitations, there is a need for a more
comprehensive and integrated paradigm for 3D scene understanding. In this paper, we propose camera-based 3D
panoptic segmentation, which aims to encompass all the elements within the scene in a unified representation for the
3D output space.
However, directly utilizing Bird’s Eye View (BEV) features for camera-based panoptic segmentation leads to poor
performance due to the omission of finer geometry details,
such as shape and height information, which are crucial
for decoding fine-grained 3D structures. This limitation
motivates us to explore a more effective 3D feature representation. Occupancy representation has gained popularity as it effectively describes various elements in the scene,
including open-set objects (e.g., debris), irregular-shaped
objects (e.g., articulated trailers, vehicles with protruding
structures), and special road structures (e.g., construction
zones). Therefore, a burst of recent methods [4, 18, 25,
27, 38, 54, 57, 65] have focused on dense semantic occupancy prediction. However, simply lifting 2D to 3D occupancy representation has been considered inefficient in
terms of memory cost. This limitation has driven methods like TPVFormer [18] to split the 3D representation into

17158

