This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Diffusion Texture Priors for Image Restoration
Tian Ye1 Sixiang Chen1 Wenhao Chai2
Zhaohu Xing1 Jing Qin3 Ge Lin1,4 Lei Zhu1,4*
1
3

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 University of Washington
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Diffusion Models have shown remarkable performance
in image generation tasks, which are capable of generating
diverse and realistic image content. When adopting diffusion models for image restoration, the crucial challenge lies
in how to preserve high-level image fidelity in the randomness diffusion process and generate accurate background
structures and realistic texture details. In this paper, we propose a general framework and develop a Diffusion Texture
Prior Model (DTPM) for image restoration tasks. DTPM
explicitly models high-quality texture details through the
diffusion process, rather than global contextual content. In
phase one of the training stage, we pre-train DTPM on approximately 55K high-quality image samples, after which
we freeze most of its parameters. In phase two, we insert
conditional guidance adapters into DTPM and equip it with
an initial predictor, thereby facilitating its rapid adaptation
to downstream image restoration tasks. Our DTPM could
mitigate the randomness of traditional diffusion models by
utilizing encapsulated rich and diverse texture knowledge
and background structural information provided by the initial predictor during the sampling process.

1. Introduction
Image Restoration tasks [37, 43, 70, 71] usually are illposed problems whose solutions are not unique. While
existing methods [8, 70, 71] have achieved notable breakthroughs, they typically employ direct regression models to
produce deterministic results. A persistent challenge is that
these deterministic models [4, 70, 71] frequently yield unsatisfactory fine-grained details (See Figure 2), as they are
trained to minimize pixel-level error, aligning output with
ground truth by Norm-based losses [30]. The emergence
of Diffusion Models (DMs) [14, 16, 51, 55] has revolutionized image generation, yielding realistic images replete with
fine details. This advancement motivates our investigation
* Lei Zhu (leizhu @ust.hk) is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. We use a coefficient α ranging from 0.1 to 1 to control the intensity of texture removal. As α increases, leading to
richer textures from left to right in the images, we can observe a
corresponding improvement in the scores of no-reference image
quality metrics, specifically NIQE [42] and CLIP-IQA+ [57]. Regarding the NIQE, lower scores indicate better quality, while for
CLIP-IQA+, higher scores represent better visual quality. This
indicates that the quality of the image’s texture details have a
significant impact on the visual perceptual quality of the image.

into diffusion-based methods for image restoration, aiming
to leverage conditional DMs [17, 45, 51] to produce perceptually appealing results that closely mimic natural, clean
images.
However, directly applying diffusion image generation
techniques [44, 51, 55] to image restoration tasks is often
impractical [36, 45]. The high content fidelity required in
image restoration clashes with the stochastic nature of diffusion models [44, 55]. A plausible solution involves integrating physical degradation models [5, 69] with neural
networks or crafting hand-designed priors [20, 47] to mitigate the inherent randomness of the diffusion paradigm.
While several previous studies [17, 68, 69] have adopted
this approach with success, they lack versatility and show
limited generalization capability on real-world scenes, as
physical degradation models do not fully encompass realworld degradation scenarios [4, 66, 67]. Additionally, the
iterative nature and complexity of the denoising process
in diffusion models necessitate extensive data and lengthy
training cycles for effective learning. The challenges and
limitations outlined above necessitate a rethinking of the
use of the diffusion paradigm in image restoration: (i) To
preserve high-level fidelity in restoration, we propose using a diffusion model to recover only texture layers. This

2524

