This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PoseIRM: Enhance 3D Human Pose Estimation on Unseen Camera Settings via
Invariant Risk Minimization
Yanlu Cai1 , Weizhong Zhang1, *, Yuan Wu1 , Cheng Jin1,2,*
1
2
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Haina Lab, Shanghai, China
{ylcai20, weizhongzhang, wuyuan, jc}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Camera-parameter-free multi-view pose estimation is an
emerging technique for 3D human pose estimation (HPE).
They can infer the camera settings implicitly or explicitly
to mitigate the depth uncertainty impact, showcasing significant potential in real applications. However, due to the
limited camera setting diversity in the available datasets,
the inferred camera parameters are always simply hardcoded into the model during training and not adaptable to
the input in inference, making the learned models cannot
generalize well under unseen camera settings. A natural
solution is to artificially synthesize some samples, i.e., 2D3D pose pairs, under massive new camera settings. Unfortunately, to prevent over-fitting the existing camera setting, the number of synthesized samples for each new camera setting should be comparable with that for the existing
one, which multiplies the scale of training and even makes
it computationally prohibitive. In this paper, we propose a
novel HPE approach under the invariant risk minimization
(IRM) paradigm. Precisely, we first synthesize 2D poses
from myriad camera settings. We then train our model under the IRM paradigm, which targets at learning a common
optimal model across all camera settings and thus enforces
the model to automatically learn the camera parameters
based on the input data. This allows the model to accurately
infer 3D poses on unseen data by training on only a handful of samples from each synthesized setting and thus avoid
the unbearable training cost increment. Another appealing
feature of our method is that benefited from the capability
of IRM in identifying the invariant features, its performance
on the seen camera settings is enhanced as well. Comprehensive experiments verify the superiority of our approach.

1. Introduction
3D multi-view Human Pose Estimation (HPE) leverages the
camera relationship between multiple viewpoint to mitigate
* Corresponding authors

the impact of depth uncertainty. Existing methods primarily rely on camera parameters to construct epipolar geometric constraints between camera viewpoints. Unlike cameraparameter-required methods, camera-parameter-free methods can explicitly or implicitly recover camera parameters
during training, thus making them applicable in broader
scenarios where camera parameters are unavailable, such
as HPE in uncontrolled environments or dynamic HPE with
moving cameras. HPCP [21] leverages human pose prior
such as bone length to optimize potential camera parameters. Flex [4] models viewpoint-consistent 3D poses by hierarchical skeletal representation. MTF-Transformer [20]
leverages temporal information to obtain more accurate
camera parameters. Probabilistic Triangulation [11] adopts
Monte Carlo sampling to select the camera parameters.
These methods have achieved commendable results, closely
matching the performance of camera-parameter-free methods under seen camera setting.
However, when generalized to unseen camera settings,
camera-parameter-free methods exhibit a great performance
drop, in contrast the drop in the camera-parameter-required
methods is negligible [20]. We argue that this discrepancy
primarily stems from the reason that the inferred camera
parameters in the camer-parameter-free methods are always
simply hardcoded into the models during training, i.e., they
are not adaptable to the input in inference. To be precise,
the number of camera viewpoints within existing datasets
is rather limited (typically four or eight), whereas previous
mainstream models require at least four camera viewpoints
as input to address the challenges such as self-occlusion
of the human body or inaccuracies in 2D pose estimation,
making the number of available camera settings no larger
than two. With such extremely limited diversity of camera settings, because of the training imbalance, cameraparameter-free methods tend to memorize the specific camera settings rather than to generalize to arbitrary settings,
thus significantly hindering their generalization capabilities
across varied camera settings. Our experiments have substantiated this conjecture. Please refer to Tab. 5 for details.
A natural solution to address the above challenge is to ar-

2124

