This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniLocalRF: Omnidirectional Local Radiance Fields from Dynamic Videos
Dongyoung Choi

Hyeonjoong Jang

Min H. Kim

KAIST
Input 360°
video

Abstract
Omnidirectional cameras are extensively used in various
applications to provide a wide field of vision. However,
they face a challenge in synthesizing novel views due to
the inevitable presence of dynamic objects, including the
photographer, in their wide field of view. In this paper,
we introduce a new approach called Omnidirectional Local Radiance Fields (OmniLocalRF) that can render staticonly scene views, removing and inpainting dynamic objects simultaneously. Our approach combines the principles of local radiance fields with the bidirectional optimization of omnidirectional rays. Our input is an omnidirectional video, and we evaluate the mutual observations of
the entire angle between the previous and current frames.
To reduce ghosting artifacts of dynamic objects and inpaint
occlusions, we devise a multi-resolution motion mask prediction module. Unlike existing methods that primarily separate dynamic components through the temporal domain,
our method uses multi-resolution neural feature planes for
precise segmentation, which is more suitable for long 360◦
videos. Our experiments validate that OmniLocalRF outperforms existing methods in both qualitative and quantitative metrics, especially in scenarios with complex realworld scenes. In particular, our approach eliminates the
need for manual interaction, such as drawing motion masks
by hand and additional pose estimation, making it a highly
effective and efficient solution.

1. Introduction
Omnidirectional cameras such as Ricoh Theta or Insta360
allow capturing panoramic 360◦ views in a single shot.
Various applications with omnidirectional images such as
spherical depth estimation [53, 58, 59], novel view synthesis [2, 3, 5–7, 11, 18, 31, 35] and geometry reconstruction [3, 18] aiming at large-scale static scenes have recently
been explored. In particular, synthesizing 360◦ novel views
can provide continuous views from unobserved camera angles while maintaining its details.
However, recent novel view synthesis methods struggle
to apply to omnidirectional input for the following reasons.

(a) Conventional neural rendering

(b) OmniLocalRF (ours)

Figure 1. We introduce omnidirectional local radiance fields for
photorealistic view synthesis of static scenery from 360◦ videos.
Our method effectively removes dynamic objects (including the
photographer) without manual interaction. Also, it achieves highresolution details in the inpainted regions by means of bidirectional observations of omnidirectional local radiance fields. Refer
to the supplemental video for more results.

When capturing omnidirectional videos to record static environments, dynamic objects are prone to be captured as
an extension of the field of view, and capturing a photographer is inevitable unless employing a dedicated hardware
or remote controller. When synthesizing novel views, these
captured objects are represented as ghosting artifacts onto
the rendered results [37]. Despite these problems, existing
methods have achieved 360◦ view synthesis, relying on constrained capturing conditions, where it minimizes the advent of dynamic objects [3, 11] or requiring dedicated hardware [5–7, 31, 35], which are not suitable for casual 360◦
photography.
Low-rank decomposition through robust principal component analysis [15, 16, 57] and existing optimizationbased methods [13, 14] effectively eliminate dynamic objects on the image domain. However, their applicability is limited to scenarios involving multiple images captured from the same viewpoints. Recent view synthesis

6871

