This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LightIt: Illumination Modeling and Control for Diffusion Models
Peter Kocsis1 *

Julien Philip2
1

Kalyan Sunkavalli2

Technical University of Munich

Matthias Nießner1
2

Adobe Research

Yannick
Hold-Geoffroy2

peter-kocsis.github.io/LightIt/

Figure 1. Teaser. We present LightIt, a method for explicit lighting control of text-guided image generation. Given a normal map of the
desired geometry and light direction with a solid angle, we introduce a method to predict direct shading, which is then used to generate
high-quality images with coherent lighting.

Abstract
We introduce LightIt, a method for explicit illumination
control for image generation. Recent generative methods
lack lighting control, which is crucial to numerous artistic aspects of image generation such as setting the overall
mood or cinematic appearance. To overcome these limitations, we propose to condition the generation on shading and normal maps. We model the lighting with single
bounce shading, which includes cast shadows. We first train
a shading estimation module to generate a dataset of realworld images and shading pairs. Then, we train a control
network using the estimated shading and normals as input.
Our method demonstrates high-quality image generation
and lighting control in numerous scenes. Additionally, we
use our generated dataset to train an identity-preserving relighting model, conditioned on an image and a target shading. Our method is the first that enables the generation of
images with controllable, consistent lighting and performs
on par with specialized relighting state-of-the-art methods.
* Research done during internship at Adobe.

1. Introduction
Generative imaging has significantly evolved over recent
years. Diffusion models have shown outstanding capabilities to learn strong priors on large-scale real-image datasets.
When used in conjunction with joint language-image embeddings, they have been successfully used for high-quality
text-driven image generation. However, as these methods
do not model light transport explicitly, the lighting in the
produced images is uncontrollable and often inconsistent
[3, 9]. However, lighting is an essential component of most
images; without explicit control, artists rely on tedious and
uncertain prompt engineering to try to control it.
Recent methods [13, 24, 50] have introduced control for
various aspects of the generated images, for instance, depth
or normals can be used to guide the geometry. Fine-grained
control over the placement of generated objects can already
be achieved [23, 37] and diffusion inversion enables modification of generated images [38, 43]. However, none of the
methods can provide consistent and explicitly controllable
lighting, which is the essence of photo-realistic images.
Diffusion models achieve incredible performance when
trained on large datasets. However, the lack of real-world

9359

