This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreePoint: Unsupervised Point Cloud Instance Segmentation
Zhikai Zhang1 , Jian Ding1,2† , Li Jiang3 , Dengxin Dai4 , Guisong Xia1†
1
Wuhan University 2 KAUST 3 CUHK-Shenzhen 4 Huawei Zurich Research Center

Abstract
Instance segmentation of point clouds is a crucial task in
3D field with numerous applications that involve localizing
and segmenting objects in a scene. However, achieving satisfactory results requires a large number of manual annotations, which is time-consuming and expensive. To alleviate
dependency on annotations, we propose a novel framework,
FreePoint, for underexplored unsupervised class-agnostic
instance segmentation on point clouds. In detail, we represent the point features by combining coordinates, colors,
and self-supervised deep features. Based on the point features, we perform a bottom-up multicut algorithm to segment point clouds into coarse instance masks as pseudo labels, which are used to train a point cloud instance segmentation model. We propose an id-as-feature strategy at this
stage to alleviate the randomness of the multicut algorithm
and improve the pseudo labels’ quality. During training,
we propose a weakly-supervised two-step training strategy
and corresponding losses to overcome the inaccuracy of
coarse masks. FreePoint has achieved breakthroughs in unsupervised class-agnostic instance segmentation on point
clouds and outperformed previous traditional methods by
over 18.2% and a competitive concurrent work UnScene3D
by 5.5% in AP. Additionally, when used as a pretext task
and fine-tuned on S3DIS, FreePoint performs significantly
better than existing self-supervised pre-training methods
with limited annotations and surpasses CSC by 6.0% in
AP with 10% annotation masks. Code will be released at
https://github.com/zzk273/FreePoint.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation on point clouds aims to segment and
recognize objects in a 3D scene, serving as the foundation
for a wide range of applications such as autonomous driving, virtual reality, and robot navigation. This task has received increasing attention [6, 13–16, 19, 22, 23, 37, 43, 52]
for the availability of large-scale point cloud datasets [4,
† Corresponding author

Pseudo-label
Generation

Instance
Segmentation
Network

Loss

Figure 1. We propose a novel framework for unsupervised point
cloud instance segmentation. In detail, we cluster points based
on coordinates, colors, and self-supervised deep features. Then
we use the clustered pseudo masks to perform a step-training and
improve the unsupervised segmentation quality further.

12, 28, 40]. Most of the previous works focus on fullysupervised point cloud segmentation, which requires a large
number of bounding boxes and per-point annotations to
achieve satisfactory results. However, the annotations of
point clouds are labor-intensive. For example, labeling an
average scene in ScanNet takes about 22.3 minutes [12].
To relieve the annotation requirements, some weaklysupervised 3D segmentation methods [8, 24, 51, 55, 56]
and semi-supervised 3D segmentation methods [7, 20] have
been proposed. Besides, some works explore unsupervised pre-training methods for 3D point clouds [18, 50, 57],
mainly focusing on data-efficient scene understanding and
achieving satisfactory results when fine-tuning on downstream tasks with limited annotations. These works, however, still rely on considerable box, point annotations, or a
certain proportion of mask annotations to achieve competitive results. A concurrent work Unscene3D [34] explores
unsupervised 3D class-agnostic instance segmentation for
indoor scenes. It shows promising results while still having

28254

