This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PixelLM: Pixel Reasoning with Large Multimodal Model
Zhongwei Ren1* , Zhicheng Huang2* , Yunchao Wei1† , Yao Zhao1 ,
Dongmei Fu2 , Jiashi Feng3 , Xiaojie Jin3*†‡
1

Beijing Jiaotong University, 2 University of Science and Technology Beijing, 3 ByteDance Inc.
https://pixellm.github.io/

Figure 1. PixelLM is an effective and efficient LMM for pixel-level reasoning and understanding. We show its visualization results in
following scenarios: 1) Multi-target reasoning segmentation; 2) Instance-level segmentation tied with text description; 3) Multi-referring
segmentation; 4) Conversation

Abstract
While large multimodal models (LMMs) have achieved
remarkable progress, generating pixel-level masks for image reasoning tasks involving multiple open-world targets
remains a challenge. To bridge this gap, we introduce PixelLM, an effective and efficient LMM for pixel-level reasoning and understanding. Central to PixelLM is a novel,
lightweight pixel decoder and a comprehensive segmentation codebook. The decoder efficiently produces masks from
the hidden embeddings of the codebook tokens, which encode detailed target-relevant information. With this design, PixelLM harmonizes with the structure of popular
LMMs and avoids the need for additional costly segmen* Equal contribution.

Work done when Zhongwei and Zhicheng in-

terned at ByteDance Inc. † Correspondence to Xiaojie Jin <jinxiaojie@
bytedance.com> and Yunchao Wei <yunchao.wei@bjtu.edu.cn>.
‡ Project lead.

tation models. Furthermore, we propose a target refinement loss to enhance the model’s ability to differentiate between multiple targets, leading to substantially improved
mask quality. To advance research in this area, we construct MUSE, a high-quality multi-target reasoning segmentation benchmark. PixelLM excels across various pixellevel image reasoning and understanding tasks, outperforming well-established methods in multiple benchmarks,
including MUSE, single- and multi-referring segmentation.
Comprehensive ablations confirm the efficacy of each proposed component. All code, models, and datasets will be
publicly available.

1. Introduction
Built upon the success of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [6, 24, 25, 37], large multimodal models (LMMs)

26374

