This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Interactive Navigation Method with Effect-oriented Affordance
Xiaohan Wang1,2 , Yuehu Liu1 , Xinhang Song2,3 , Yuyi Liu2,3 , Sixian Zhang2,3 , Shuqiang Jiang2,3
1
2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
wuhanwxh2016@stu.xjtu.edu.cn; liuyh@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

{xinhang.song, yuyi.liu, sixian.zhang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn; sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Visual navigation is to let the agent reach the target according to the continuous visual input. In most previous
works, visual navigation is usually assumed to be done in
a static and ideal environment: the target is always reachable with no need to alter the environment. However, the
“messy” environments are more general and practical in
our daily lives, where the agent may get blocked by obstacles. Thus Interactive Navigation (InterNav) is introduced
to navigate to the objects in more realistic ”messy” environments according to the object interaction. Prior work
on InterNav learns short-term interaction through extensive trials with reinforcement learning. However, interaction does not guarantee efficient navigation, that is, planning obstacle interactions that make shorter paths and consume less effort is also crucial. In this paper, we introduce
an effect-oriented affordance map to enable long-term interactive navigation, extending the existing map-based navigation framework to the domain of dynamic environment.
We train a set of affordance functions predicting available
interactions and the time cost of removing obstacles, which
informatively support an interactive modular system to address interaction and long-term planning. Experiments on
the ProcTHOR simulator demonstrate the capability of our
affordance-driven system in long-term navigation in complex dynamic environments.

1. Introduction
Autonomously navigating to a target in complex environments is a core challenge for Embodied AI. Interactive Nav*Project page: https://github.com/polkalian/ADIN
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) under Grant 62350083. This work is in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant JQ22012, and in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62032022, 62125207,
62272443 and U23B2012.

igation (InterNav) [40, 45] aims to navigate more efficiently
to a target point with object interaction in cluttered, dynamic environments, where the agent may get blocked by
multiple obstacles during the long-term navigation. Compared to non-interactive navigation (e.g. ObjectNav, PointNav), the agent is challenged to plan not only long-term
navigation but also interactions that benefit the navigation.
Prior work of InterNav [45] trains an RL-based policy to
output the executable actions based on sensory egocentric
observations and implicit episodic memories (from recurrent neural networks). This approach enables short-term interaction with extensive trials (corresponding to the red arrow in Figure 1(b)). However, effective interaction does not
guarantee an efficient tour. For example (see Figure 1(a)),
clearing the shortest path may cost more effort (or even failure when the obstacle gets stuck) than taking a detour at
some point. Unlike other interactive tasks (e.g. grasp, rearrange), the purpose is not interaction itself but the effect
that facilitates long-term navigation.
Overall, research on visual navigation can be categorized into learning-based methods [8, 27, 38] (prior InterNav works belong to) and map-based methods [4, 5, 25].
The latter builds an explicit map of spatial or semantic information and plans long-term paths on the map, which can
be translated into action sequences. The stable map representation of the environment enables long-term navigation
in unexplored scenes (corresponding to the red arrow in Figure 1(b)). However, the prerequisite for that to work is the
determined reachability of a location that the agent can not
reach it when it’s occupied, otherwise it can. Therefore, the
shortest path can be planned in the reachable area. On the
contrary, the reachability in InterNav is uncertain, since the
location occupied by or behind the obstacle may become
reachable through interaction. To plan long-term paths in
dynamic environments (towards the green node in Figure
1(b)), the agent needs to estimate whether an obstacle area
can be reached, which depends on the interaction outcome.
As illustrated in Figure 1(b), there is a gap in front of

16446

