This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ADFactory: An Effective Framework for Generalizing Optical Flow with NeRF
Han Ling1 Quansen Sun1 * Yinghui Sun2† Xian Xu2 Xingfeng Li1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Southeast University
321106010190@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
A significant challenge facing current optical flow methods is the difficulty in generalizing them well to the real
world. This is mainly due to the lack of large-scale realworld datasets, and existing self-supervised methods are
limited by indirect loss and occlusions, resulting in fuzzy
outcomes. To address this challenge, we introduce a novel
optical flow training framework: automatic data factory
(ADF). ADF only requires RGB images as input to effectively train the optical flow network on the target data domain. Specifically, we use advanced NeRF technology to
reconstruct scenes from photo groups collected by a monocular camera, and then calculate optical flow labels between
camera pose pairs based on the rendering results. To eliminate erroneous labels caused by defects in the scene reconstructed by NeRF, we screened the generated labels from
multiple aspects, such as optical flow matching accuracy,
radiation field confidence, and depth consistency. The filtered labels can be directly used for network supervision.
Experimentally, the generalization ability of ADF on KITTI
surpasses existing self-supervised optical flow and monocular scene flow algorithms. In addition, ADF achieves
impressive results in real-world zero-point generalization
evaluations and surpasses most supervised methods1 .

1. Introduction
Optical flow aims to estimate the motion of each pixel on
the image plane between two consecutive frames. It is one
of the oldest problems in computer vision and has essential applications in autonomous driving[10, 38, 39], video
understanding[11], and human action recognition[1, 18]. In
recent years, deep learning methods[31, 33] have become
the mainstream solution for optical flow and achieved performance far superior to traditional handcrafted methods [6]
in benchmark tests[9, 27].
Compared to traditional methods, deep optical flow
methods can learn robust matching features and contextual
* Corresponding author
† Corresponding author
1 Code: https://github.com/HanLingsgjk/UnifiedGeneralization

features from large-scale data, as well as infer the optical flow of occluded parts[14]. However, acquiring realworld optical flow datasets is challenging. It requires additional sensors such as LiDAR, GPS, IMU, and much manual annotations[27], which has been one of the significant
limitations of applying optical flow methods[44]. Although
recent works in synthetic datasets and self-supervised learning have alleviated this limitation to some extent, they are
still subject to constraints in domain transferability[9, 25,
26], lighting variations, and occlusions[15, 17].
In this era where data is the gold mine, massive training
datasets are a necessary factor for the success of powerful
models such as ChatGPT[8] and SAM[16]. However, how
to quickly and cost-effectively mine high-quality training
data from the ‘gold mines’, and fully tap into the enormous
potential of deep networks remains a challenge to be explored [48]. This paper proposes a novel automated data
factory (ADF) to address this issue. ADF utilizes only photos taken by a single camera as input, and does not require
manual intervention or ground-truth labels. It can quickly
generate massive datasets at a meagre cost, training various
geometric matching tasks. Specifically, ADF mainly consists of two parts: data generation and data filtering.
Data generation: We build a data generator based on
the latest radiation rendering technology (NeRF)[5]. Firstly,
based on NeRF, a high-resolution scene is reconstructed
from photos taken by a monocular camera. Then, by rendering a depth map and randomly generating new camera
pose pairs, we can calculate the corresponding optical flow
results between poses. In addition, to alleviate the problem that NeRF can only reconstruct static scenes with high
quality, we also added randomly shaped foreground floaters
based on the Bezier curve.
Data filtering: In NeRF reconstruction, it is inevitable
to encounter areas of reconstruction failure, resulting in further generation of erroneous training data. Therefore, constructing a comprehensive data filtering mechanism is essential. Before us, the only evaluation metric used was
ambient occlusion (AO) [34, 35]. However, AO can only
be used to check whether floating objects are between the
viewpoint and the target depth, which cannot be widely used

20591

