36

Step2, Loss=0.27

This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Step1,
Loss=0.36
GT it is identical
Step2, Loss=0.27
Step3, Loss=0.22
Except for this watermark,
to the
accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Step3, Loss=0.22

Depth-aware Test-Time Training for Zero-shot Video Object Segmentation
Weihuang Liu1 Xi Shen2 Haolun Li1 Xiuli Bi3 Bo Liu3 Chi-Man Pun1, * Xiaodong Cun4, *
1
2
University of Macau
Intellindust
3
4
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
Zero-shot Video Object Segmentation (ZSVOS) aims at
segmenting the primary moving object without any human
annotations. Mainstream solutions mainly focus on learning
a single model on large-scale video datasets, which struggle
to generalize to unseen videos. In this work, we introduce a
test-time training (TTT) strategy to address the problem. Our
key insight is to enforce the model to predict consistent depth
during the TTT process. In detail, we first train a single
network to perform both segmentation and depth prediction
tasks. This can be effectively learned with our specifically
designed depth modulation layer. Then, for the TTT process,
the model is updated by predicting consistent depth maps for
the same frame under different data augmentations. In addition, we explore different TTT weight updating strategies.
Our empirical results suggest that the momentum-based
weight initialization and looping-based training scheme lead
to more stable improvements. Experiments show that the proposed method achieves clear improvements on ZSVOS. Our
proposed video TTT strategy provides significant superiority
over state-of-the-art TTT methods. Our code is available
at: https://nifangbaage.github.io/DATTT/.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot video object segmentation (ZSVOS) is a fundamental task in computer vision, aiming to accurately segment the primary moving object within a video. The term
“zero-shot” means no human guidance is provided during
the inference, which is different from one-shot video object
segmentation (OSVOS), where the annotation of the first
frame is provided. The problem is of great importance due
to its wide applications in video understanding [24], video
surveillance [15], video editing [34, 58], etc.
However, this task remains challenging, as the model is
required to learn category-agnostic features to detect moving objects. Despite being trained on the most widely used
public dataset (∼3.5K videos), the deployed models often
* Corresponding Author

Frame

Initial Prediction

Target

Step1 (Loss = 0.36)

Step2 (Loss = 0.27)

Step3 (Loss = 0.22)

Figure 1. Key idea of our Depth-aware Test-Time Training.
During the test-time training, the model is required to predict consistent depth maps for the same video frame under different data
augmentation (2nd row). The model is progressively updated and
provides more precise mask prediction (3rd row).

fail when confronted with real-world scenarios. The above
issue might be attributed to the lack of large-scale training
sets. However, collecting and annotating large-scale video
datasets is costly. As an alternative solution, test-time training (TTT) has emerged as a promising approach, which
serves as the main focus of this work. TTT consists of conducting training on each test video. Therefore, the model is
expected to automatically adapt to new scenarios.
Leading studies [11, 22, 39] on TTT are mainly focused on image recognition and have showcased that a
well-designed self-supervised objective function enables the
model to adapt to new distributions, thereby achieving an improved fit for individual test samples. These approaches are
then extended to videos for OSVOS [1] and video semantic
segmentation [47, 49], and demonstrated to be effective on
unusual weather scenarios (snow, fog, rain, etc.). Different
from these works, our key idea in this work (see Figure 1) is
to leverage depth information on video TTT. Our motivation
comes from the fact that the primary object should be close
to the camera and thus has a relatively small depth, i.e. the

19218

