This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Class Face Anti-spoofing via Spoof Cue Map-Guided Feature Learning
Pei-Kai Huang1 , Cheng-Hsuan Chiang1 , Tzu-Hsien Chen1 , Jun-Xiong Chong1 ,
Tyng-Luh Liu2 , Chiou-Ting Hsu1
1
National Tsing Hua University 2 Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{alwayswithme,jimmy890718,gapp111062570,jxchong}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw,
liutyng@iis.sinica.edu.tw, cthsu@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Latent feature space

Abstract
Many face anti-spoofing (FAS) methods have focused on
learning discriminative features from both live and spoof
training data to strengthen the security of face recognition
systems. However, since not every possible attack type is
available in the training stage, these FAS methods usually
fail to detect unseen attacks in the inference stage. In comparison, one-class FAS, where training data comprise only
live faces, aims to detect whether a test face image belongs to the live class or not. In this paper, we propose
a novel One-Class Spoof Cue Map estimation Network (OCSCMNet) to address the one-class FAS detection problem.
Our first goal is to learn to extract latent spoof features
from live images so that their estimated Spoof Cue Maps
(SCMs) should have zero responses. To avoid trapping
to a trivial solution, we devise a novel SCM-guided feature learning by combining many SCMs as pseudo groundtruths to guide a conditional generator to create latent
spoof features for spoof data. Our second goal is to simulate the potential out-of-distribution spoof attacks approximately. To this end, we propose using a memory bank
to dynamically preserve a set of sufficiently “independent”
latent spoof features to encourage the generator to probe
the latent spoof feature space. Extensive experiments conducted on eight FAS benchmark datasets demonstrate that
the proposed OC-SCMNet not only outperforms previous
one-class FAS approaches but also achieves performance
comparable to the state-of-the-art two-class FAS methods.
The code is available at https://github.com/PeiKaiHuang/CVPR24_OC_SCMNet.

1. Introduction
Face recognition has been widely adopted in everyday situations to facilitate biometric authentication for unlocking
devices, making payments, and accessing sensitive data. To
prevent facial spoofing attacks by using photos (i.e., print
attacks), videos (i.e., replay attacks), or masks (i.e., 3D

Training
live image
Zero spoof
cue map

Non-zero pseudo
spoof cue map

Testing
images
Live
image

Print
attack

Replay
attack

3D-mask
attack

Estimated
spoof cue maps
Live

Spoof

Feature extraction Spoof cue estimation SCM-guided feature generation

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed SCM-guided feature learning
for one-class face anti-spoofing (FAS). First, under the assumption
that live images should yield no spoof cues, we focus on learning
to extract latent spoof features so that the estimated Spoof Cue
Maps (SCMs) from live images become 0. Next, to simulate the
absent spoof class, we incorporate nonzero pseudo SCMs in the
SCM-guided generative network to guide the feature learning.

mask attacks) of other authorized persons, many face antispoofing (FAS) methods [2, 9–15, 17, 19, 24, 25, 34, 37]
have been developed to distinguish spoof attacks from live
images. Most FAS methods adopt the two-class classification method to learn discriminative feature characteristics
from both live and spoof images. For example, the authors in
[18] decompose any facial image into a live-like image and
spoof noise, which are then used to differentiate between
live and spoof images. In [8], the authors propose using the
spoof cue map for FAS via estimating an all-zero spoof cue
map for live images and nonzero ones for spoof images.
Compared to two-class methods, one-class FAS methods
[2, 15, 20, 24] aim to train the model only from the live class.

277

