This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Residual Denoising Diffusion Models
Jiawei Liu1,2,3 , Qiang Wang1,4 , Huijie Fan1,2 ,* Yinong Wang5 , Yandong Tang1,2 , Liangqiong Qu5 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Science
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Shenyang University 5 The University of Hong Kong
{liujiawei,wangqiang,fanhuijie,ytang}@sia.cn, liangqqu@hku.hk
Abstract
Target
domain

We propose residual denoising diffusion models
(RDDM), a novel dual diffusion process that decouples
the traditional single denoising diffusion process into
residual diffusion and noise diffusion. This dual diffusion
framework expands the denoising-based diffusion models,
initially uninterpretable for image restoration, into a
unified and interpretable model for both image generation
and restoration by introducing residuals. Specifically, our
residual diffusion represents directional diffusion from the
target image to the degraded input image and explicitly
guides the reverse generation process for image restoration,
while noise diffusion represents random perturbations in
the diffusion process. The residual prioritizes certainty,
while the noise emphasizes diversity, enabling RDDM to
effectively unify tasks with varying certainty or diversity requirements, such as image generation and restoration. We
demonstrate that our sampling process is consistent with
that of DDPM and DDIM through coefficient transformation, and propose a partially path-independent generation
process to better understand the reverse process. Notably,
our RDDM enables a generic UNet, trained with only
an L1 loss and a batch size of 1, to compete with stateof-the-art image restoration methods. We provide code
and pre-trained models to encourage further exploration,
application, and development of our innovative framework
(https://github.com/nachifur/RDDM).

1. Introduction
In real-life scenarios, diffusion often occurs in complex
forms involving multiple, concurrent processes, such as the
dispersion of multiple gases or the propagation of different
types of waves or fields. This leads us to ponder whether
the denoising-based diffusion models [17, 51] have limitations in focusing solely on denoising. Current diffusion* Corresponding author.

Noise domain

Target
domain

Residual
Residual + Noise

Noise
domain

Noise-carrying
input domain
Input domain

(a) DDPM

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Denoising diffusion process - DDPM [17] (a) and our
residual denoising diffusion process (b). For image restoration,
we introduce residual diffusion to represent the diffusion direction
from the target image to the input image.

based image restoration methods [22, 39, 48, 49, 82] extend
the diffusion model to image restoration tasks by using degraded images as a condition input to implicitly guide the
reverse generation process, without modifying the original
denoising diffusion process [17, 51]. However, the reverse
process starting from noise seems to be unnecessary, as the
degraded image is already known. The forward process
is non-interpretability for image restoration, as the diffusion process does not contain any information about the degraded image, as shown in Fig. 1(a).
In this paper, we explore a novel dual diffusion process and propose Residual Denoising Diffusion Models
(RDDM), which can tackle the non-interpretability of a single denoising process for image restoration. In RDDM, we
decouple the previous diffusion process into residual diffusion and noise diffusion. Residual diffusion prioritizes certainty and represents a directional diffusion from the target
image to the conditional input image, and noise diffusion
emphasizes diversity and represents random perturbations
in the diffusion process. Thus, our RDDM can unify different tasks that require different certainty or diversity, e.g.,
image generation and restoration. Compared to denoisingbased diffusion models for image restoration, the residuals
in RDDM clearly indicate the forward diffusion direction
and explicitly guide the reverse generation process for image restoration, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Specifically, we redefine a new forward process that al-

2773

