This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention-Driven Training-Free Efficiency Enhancement of Diffusion Models
Hongjie Wang1 ,* Difan Liu2 , Yan Kang2 , Yijun Li2 , Zhe Lin2 , Niraj K. Jha1 , Yuchen Liu2†
1
Princeton University, 2 Adobe Research

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have exhibited superior performance in generating high-quality and diverse images. However, this exceptional performance comes at the cost of expensive generation process, particularly due to the heavily
used attention module in leading models. Existing works
mainly adopt a retraining process to enhance DM efficiency.
This is computationally expensive and not very scalable. To
this end, we introduce the Attention-driven Training-free
Efficient Diffusion Model (AT-EDM) framework that leverages attention maps to perform run-time pruning of redundant tokens, without the need for any retraining. Specifically, for single-denoising-step pruning, we develop a novel
ranking algorithm, Generalized Weighted Page Rank (GWPR), to identify redundant tokens, and a similarity-based
recovery method to restore tokens for the convolution operation. In addition, we propose a Denoising-Steps-Aware
Pruning (DSAP) approach to adjust the pruning budget
across different denoising timesteps for better generation
quality. Extensive evaluations show that AT-EDM performs favorably against prior art in terms of efficiency
(e.g., 38.8% FLOPs saving and up to 1.53× speed-up over
Stable Diffusion XL) while maintaining nearly the same
FID and CLIP scores as the full model. Project webpage:
https://atedm.github.io.

1. Introduction
Diffusion Models (DMs) [9, 29] have revolutionized computer vision research by achieving state-of-the-art performance in various text-guided content generation tasks, including image generation [28], image editing [12], super
resolution [17], 3D objects generation [27], and video generation [10]. Nonetheless, the superior performance of DMs
comes at the cost of an enormous computation budget. Although Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) [28, 34] make
text-to-image generation much more practical and affordable for normal users, their inference process is still too
slow. For example, on the current flagship mobile phone,
generating a single 512px image requires 90 seconds [19].
* Work was partly done during an internship at Adobe.
† Corresponding author.

To address this issue, numerous approaches geared at efficient DMs have been introduced, which can be roughly
categorized into two regimes: (1) efficient sampling strategy [24, 30] and (2) efficient model architecture [19, 38].
While efficient sampling methods can reduce the number of
denoising steps, they cannot reduce the memory footprint,
making it still challenging to use on devices with limited
memory. On the contrary, an efficient architecture reduces
the cost of each step and can be further combined with sampling strategies to achieve even better efficiency. However,
most prior efficient architecture works require retraining
of the DM backbone, which can take thousands of A100
GPU hours. Moreover, due to different deployment settings on various platforms, different compression ratios of
the backbone model are required, which necessitate multiple retraining runs later. Such retraining costs are a big
concern even for large companies in the industry.
To this end, we propose the Attention-driven Trainingfree Efficient Diffusion Model (AT-EDM) framework,
which accelerates DM inference at run-time without any
retraining. To the best of our knowledge, training-free architectural compression of DMs is a highly uncharted area.
Only one prior work, Token Merging (ToMe) [1], addresses
this problem. While ToMe demonstrates good performance
on Vision Transformer (ViT) acceleration [2], its performance on DMs still has room to improve. To further enrich
research on training-free DMs, we start our study by profiling the floating-point operations per second (FLOPs) of the
state-of-the-art model, Stable Diffusion XL (SD-XL) [26],
through which we find that attention blocks are the dominant workload. In a single denoising step, we thus propose
to dynamically prune redundant tokens to accelerate attention blocks. We pioneer a fast graph-based algorithm, Generalized Weighted Page Rank (G-WPR), inspired by ZeroTPrune [35], and deploy it on attention maps in DMs to
identify superfluous tokens. Since SD-XL contains ResNet
blocks, which require a full number of tokens for the convolution operations, we propose a novel similarity-based token copy approach to recover pruned tokens, again leveraging attention maps. This token recovery method is critical
to maintaining image quality. We find that naive interpolation or padding of pruned tokens adversely impacts gener16080

