This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Draw Step by Step: Reconstructing CAD Construction Sequences from
Point Clouds via Multimodal Diffusion.
Weijian Ma Shuaiqi Chen Yunzhong Lou Xueyang Li Xiangdong Zhou*
School of Computer Science and Technology, Fudan University
{mawj22, chensq22, xueyangli21}@m.fudan.edu.cn

Point2cyl

ExtrudeNet

SECAD

{yzlou20, xdzhou}@fudan.edu.cn

DeepCAD

Lambourne’s

HNC-CAD

Ours

Ground Truth

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1. The reconstruction results. We render the reconstructed CAD construction sequences of our proposed CAD-Diffuser and
comparative methods. Owing to the combination of our proposed multimodal token-based diffusion strategy and the volume-based noise
schedule following the top-down design paradigm, our method has better grasped the information conveyed in the construction sequences
and has a better understanding of the CAD geometry, leading to more detailed reconstruction results.

Abstract
Reconstructing CAD construction sequences from raw
3D geometry serves as an interface between real-world objects and digital designs. In this paper, we propose CADDiffuser, a multimodal diffusion scheme aiming at integrating top-down design paradigm into generative reconstruction. In particular, we unify CAD point clouds and
CAD construction sequences at the token level, guiding our
proposed multimodal diffusion strategy to understand and
link between the geometry and the design intent concentrated in construction sequences. Leveraging the strong decoding abilities of language models, the forward process
is modeled as a random walk between the original token
and the [MASK] token, while the reverse process naturally
fits the masked token modeling scheme. A volume-based
noise schedule is designed to encourage outline-first generation, decomposing the top-down design methodology into
a machine-understandable procedure. For tokenizing CAD
data of multiple modalities, we introduce a tokenizer with
a self-supervised face segmentation task to compress local
and global geometric information for CAD point clouds,
and the CAD construction sequence is transformed into a
primitive token string. Experimental results show that our
CAD-Diffuser can perceive geometric details and the results are more likely to be reused by human designers.
* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Starting from a shape flashed across their eyes and mind,
human designers first quickly depict what they perceive in
a draft outline. Then, they iteratively judge, discuss, and
revise their designs until they become detailed parametric Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models. Finally, the
completed parametric models are further refined for downstream manufacturing processes. Such a top-down design
workflow constitutes most manufactured objects in the real
world, from coffee mugs to airplanes. However, there does
exist situations where parametric design models are not
available, which makes concise and reusable reconstruction
from 3D data like point clouds vital. Hence we set off to
ask: how can we leverage the inherent logic passed down
by human designers to better reconstruct parametric modelling sequences from point clouds?
Top-down design is one of the most profound design
paradigms summarized by human designers. In terms of
parametric CAD model design, it means that shape construction command sequences should be concise, modifiable, and reusable. It reflects the designer’s intents such as
the outlines are drwan first, while the introduction of meaningless entities should be minimized. There have been many
previous works on conditional or unconditional parametric model generation. However, few works have attempted
to take design methodology into account, especially in the
field of reconstructing a parametric sequence from geome-

27154

