This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Kandinsky Conformal Prediction: Efficient Calibration of Image Segmentation
Algorithms
Joren Brunekreef *,1, 2 , Eric Marcus*,1, 2 , Ray Sheombarsing1 , Jan-Jakob Sonke1 , Jonas Teuwen1
1

Netherlands Cancer Institute, 2 University of Amsterdam

{j.brunekreef, e.marcus, r.sheombarsing, j.sonke, j.teuwen}@nki.nl

Abstract
Image segmentation algorithms can be understood as
a collection of pixel classifiers, for which the outcomes of
nearby pixels are correlated. Classifier models can be calibrated using Inductive Conformal Prediction, but this requires holding back a sufficiently large calibration dataset
for computing the distribution of non-conformity scores of
the model’s predictions. If one only requires only marginal
calibration on the image level, this calibration set consists of
all individual pixels in the images available for calibration.
However, if the goal is to attain proper calibration for each
individual pixel classifier, the calibration set consists of individual images. In a scenario where data are scarce (such
as the medical domain), it may not always be possible to set
aside sufficiently many images for this pixel-level calibration.
The method we propose, dubbed “Kandinsky calibration”,
makes use of the spatial structure present in the distribution
of natural images to simultaneously calibrate the classifiers
of “similar” pixels. This can be seen as an intermediate
approach between marginal (imagewise) and conditional
(pixelwise) calibration, where non-conformity scores are aggregated over similar image regions, thereby making more
efficient use of the images available for calibration. We
run experiments on segmentation algorithms trained and
calibrated on subsets of the public MS-COCO and Medical
Decathlon datasets, demonstrating that Kandinsky calibration method can significantly improve the coverage. When
compared to both pixelwise and imagewise calibration on
little data, the Kandinsky method achieves much lower coverage errors, indicating the data efficiency of the Kandinsky
calibration.

1. Introduction
Calibration of predictive models is a critical aspect of machine learning, particularly in applications with significant
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

impact based on model outcomes, such as medical diagnostics. Calibration ensures that predicted probabilities match
the actual empirical likelihood of the predicted events. A
well-calibrated model will output probabilities that correspond closely to real-world frequencies; for instance, if
a model predicts an event with a probability p, this event
should, in reality, occur with frequency p.
In this work, we will focus on image segmentation tasks.
Here, the calibration procedure also plays a vital role. A segmentation model can be interpreted as a collection of classifiers, one for each output pixel. The calibration of each classifier thus affects decision-making at the pixel level, which
subsequently influences global measures of segmentation accuracy (e.g. the Dice score). There are two straightforward
notions of calibration in the context of image segmentation:
marginal calibration, which measures the calibration averaged over all pixels, or calibration conditional on a specific
pixel location.
One standard method for calibrating prediction models is
Conformal Prediction (CP), a framework that has received
increasing amounts of attention in recent years [2–5, 19, 26].
Conformal prediction provides statistically valid measures
of confidence in a model-agnostic manner. Whereas the
original (transductive) CP method [27] is computationally
demanding, the more recently developed inductive CP [23–
25, 30] is better suited for a present-day machine-learning
setting. This lower demand for computational resources
comes at the cost of requiring extra (labeled) data to be set
aside as a calibration set. One then defines a notion of a
non-conformity score, which measures the “strangeness” of
each sample and the associated model prediction in this calibration set. The distribution of non-conformity scores in the
calibration set can then be used as a benchmark to compare
with newly unseen samples, which allows one to obtain a
statistically valid notion of confidence for the model’s predictions.
Now consider the case where one has set aside a calibration set of N images of dimensions m ⇥ n. If we require
only marginal calibration (i.e., aggregated over the whole

4135

