This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HandDiff: 3D Hand Pose Estimation with Diffusion on Image-Point Cloud
Wencan Cheng1 Hao Tang2,3 Luc Van Gool2,4 Jong Hwan Ko5
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
2
CVL, ETH Zurich 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 INSAIT, Sofia Un. St. Kliment Ohridski
5
College of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
{cwc1260, jhko}@skku.edu, {hao.tang, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Extracting keypoint locations from input hand frames,
known as 3D hand pose estimation, is a critical task in various human-computer interaction applications. Essentially,
the 3D hand pose estimation can be regarded as a 3D point
subset generative problem conditioned on input frames.
Thanks to the recent significant progress on diffusion-based
generative models, hand pose estimation can also benefit
from the diffusion model to estimate keypoint locations with
high quality. However, directly deploying the existing diffusion models to solve hand pose estimation is non-trivial,
since they cannot achieve the complex permutation mapping
and precise localization. Based on this motivation, this paper proposes HandDiff, a diffusion-based hand pose estimation model that iteratively denoises accurate hand pose
conditioned on hand-shaped image-point clouds. In order
to recover keypoint permutation and accurate location, we
further introduce joint-wise condition and local detail condition. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
HandDiff significantly outperforms the existing approaches
on four challenging hand pose benchmark datasets. Codes
and pre-trained models are publicly available at https:
//github.com/cwc1260/HandDiff.

1. Introduction
3D hand pose estimation (HPE), which involves estimating the 3D positions of hand keypoints, provides a fundamental conprehension of human hand motion. Therefore,
it is essential to facilitate more natural and intuitive interactions between humans and machines and is applicable to
various human-computer interaction applications including
robotics, gaming, and augmented/virtual reality. In recent
years, significant progress has been made in the field of 3D
hand pose estimation by applying deep learning techniques
and using low-cost depth cameras.
Recent developments in 3D Hand Pose Estimation
(HPE) based on deep learning [5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16,

Depth +
3D noise 𝐉 𝐓
points

3D pose 𝐉 𝐭

diffusion

Joint-wise & local
condition extraction

3D pose 𝐉 𝟎

diffusion

Denoising

Denoising

Figure 1. Illustration of the hand pose diffusion concept. The
model extracts features from input depth images and corresponding point clouds as joint-wise and local conditions to guide the
iterative denoising process that recovers accurate hand poses from
diffused noisy pose distributions.

18, 23, 35, 36, 38] are primarily divided into two core approaches: regression and detection. While these straightforward solutions have shown notable effectiveness and
computational efficiency, these deterministic methods impose limitations on handling ill-posed uncertain cases such
as self-occlusions and hand-object occlusions, which are
prevalent in real-world hand recognition scenarios. Therefore, in order to ensure the reliability of the estimation, it is
imperative to accurately model the uncertainty.
Providentially, a revolutionary approach known as the
Diffusion Model (DM) [19, 27, 43] has demonstrated remarkable performance in processing uncertainty through
modeling of probabilistic distributions. The DM has also
exhibited superiority in 3D generative applications including unseen 3D point cloud generation [27, 50] and uncertain parts completion [28, 54]. Therefore, 3D DM can be
deployed in 3D HPE as in these 3D conditional generation
problems, as both 3D HPE and 3D conditional generation
aim to generate a set of keypoints based on a specific condition. More importantly, 3D DM can resolve the ill-posed
uncertainty of occlusions by learning the probabilistic distribution of the keypoints. Based on this inspiration, we
apply the diffusion model in generating hand keypoint locations conditioned on the hand depth image/point cloud input, as illustrated in Figure 1. To the best of our knowledge,
our work is the first attempt to deploy diffusion models in

2274

