This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Edit Friendly DDPM Noise Space:
Inversion and Manipulations
Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas
Vladimir Kulikov
Tomer Michaeli
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
inbarhub@gmail.com, {vladimir.k@campus, tomer.m@ee}.technion.ac.il
Real image

Our DDPM inversion

Our DDPM inversion

A sketch of a cat → A smiling cat

DDIM inversion

Our DDPM inversion

A sketch of a cat → A sculpture of a cat

Prompt-to-prompt

Prompt-to-prompt +
Our DDPM inversion

A painting of a cat with white flowers→ A painting of a dog with white flowers

Zero Shot

Zero Shot +
Our DDPM inversion

cat→ dog

Figure 1. Edit friendly DDPM inversion. We present a method for extracting a sequence of DDPM noise maps that perfectly reconstruct a
given image. These noise maps are distributed differently from those used in regular sampling, and are more edit-friendly. Our method
allows diverse editing of real images without fine-tuning the model or modifying its attention maps, and it can also be easily integrated into
other algorithms (illustrated here with Prompt-to-Prompt [9] and Zero-Shot I2I [21])

Abstract
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) employ a sequence of white Gaussian noise samples to generate
an image. In analogy with GANs, those noise maps could be
considered as the latent code associated with the generated
image. However, this native noise space does not possess a
convenient structure, and is thus challenging to work with in
editing tasks. Here, we propose an alternative latent noise
space for DDPM that enables a wide range of editing operations via simple means, and present an inversion method for
extracting these edit-friendly noise maps for any given image
(real or synthetically generated). As opposed to the native
DDPM noise space, the edit-friendly noise maps do not have
a standard normal distribution and are not statistically independent across timesteps. However, they allow perfect
reconstruction of any desired image, and simple transformations on them translate into meaningful manipulations of the
output image (e.g. shifting, color edits). Moreover, in text-

conditional models, fixing those noise maps while changing
the text prompt, modifies semantics while retaining structure.
We illustrate how this property enables text-based editing
of real images via the diverse DDPM sampling scheme (in
contrast to the popular non-diverse DDIM inversion). We
also show how it can be used within existing diffusion-based
editing methods to improve their quality and diversity. The
code of the method is attached to this submission.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful generative
framework, achieving state-of-the-art quality on image synthesis [2, 11, 20, 22, 23, 25]. Recent works harness diffusion
models for various image editing and manipulation tasks, including text-guided editing [1, 5, 9, 14, 27], inpainting [16],
and image-to-image translation [17, 24, 30]. A key challenge in these methods is to leverage them for editing of
real content (as opposed to model-generated images). This

12469

