This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

You’ll Never Walk Alone: A Sketch and Text Duet for
Fine-Grained Image Retrieval
Subhadeep Koley1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Aneeshan Sain1 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{s.koley, a.bhunia, a.sain, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
https://subhadeepkoley.github.io/Sketch2Word
(a)

Sketch

(b)

in
shiny
red

is
holding
a shoe

in
blue
velvet

with a
woman
riding

Text

Ours

Sketch

Text

(c)

Sketch

with
floral
print

in red

in
royal
blue

Text-1

Text-2

Text-3

Sketch-1

Sketch-2

Sketch-3

in
yellow
linen
Ours

Baseline

Text

Figure 1. (a) Photos retrieved by our method, depicting precise control over both shape and appearance. (b) Unlike baseline sketch+text
composed retrieval framework, our method seamlessly composes the structural and contextual cues of sketch and text queries respectively. (c) With a fixed sketch query, our method retrieves different images for different textual descriptions and vice-versa, depicting the
complementarity of sketch and text modalities in sketch+text-based composed image retrieval. For a fixed sketch, the visual attributes
from different textual descriptions are visibly reflected in the retrieved images while maintaining shape consistency. Similarly, fixing the
attributes provided via text, shapes of retrieved images change corresponding to different sketch queries.

Abstract
Two primary input modalities prevail in image retrieval:
sketch and text. While text is widely used for inter-category
retrieval tasks, sketches have been established as the sole
preferred modality for fine-grained image retrieval due to
their ability to capture intricate visual details. In this paper, we question the reliance on sketches alone for finegrained image retrieval by simultaneously exploring the
fine-grained representation capabilities of both sketch and
text, orchestrating a duet between the two. The end result enables precise retrievals previously unattainable, allowing users to pose ever-finer queries and incorporate attributes like colour and contextual cues from text. For this
purpose, we introduce a novel compositionality framework,
effectively combining sketches and text using pre-trained
CLIP models, while eliminating the need for extensive finegrained textual descriptions. Last but not least, our system
extends to novel applications in composed image retrieval,
domain attribute transfer, and fine-grained generation, providing solutions for various real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Sketch and text represent the two most common [11, 59] input modalities in the realm of image retrieval. The choice
between these modalities depends on the nature of the retrieval problem, especially when fine-grained distinctions
are required [18, 59, 60, 69]. In inter-category retrieval,
text dominates as the primary modality, exemplified by
widely-used platforms like Google Images. However, when

the challenge transitions to fine-grained image retrieval,
sketches take the spotlight [11, 59, 60]. Sketches promise
to capture fine-grained visual cues that can be cumbersome or even impossible for text to express [11]. Research
in this domain predominantly revolves around harnessing
the unique qualities of sketches, exploring aspects such as
style [54], abstraction [32], and more [4, 18, 59].
In this paper, we question this notion that “sketch is everything” and, for the first time, simultaneously delve into
the fine-grained representation capabilities of both sketch
and text, and in turn orchestrate a duet between these two
modalities for fine-grained image retrieval. The outcome is
a novel retrieval experience where a sketch and text work
in harmony, enabling users to achieve precise retrievals that
were previously unattainable. Now, users can locate “that”
specific shoe, considering not only fine-grained pattern cues
from sketches but also incorporating attributes like colour
and texture from text (Fig. 1a). This synergy extends to scenarios where text offers contextual cues to a given sketch,
such as a cat holding a shoe for that matter (Fig. 1b)!
While sketch and text synergy has been studied before [11, 59], it has predominantly focused on scenelevel/category retrieval, where paired sketch and text descriptions for a given scene/category are readily available
in datasets (e.g., FS-COCO [10], CM-Places [8]). Our contention is that the synergy between sketches and text, while
notable, is not as pronounced in category-level retrieval as
it is for fine-grained retrieval [8, 11]. Indeed, for categorylevel retrieval, one might argue the necessity of sketches,
as the descriptive power of text might already suffice [59].

16509

