This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data Poisoning based Backdoor Attacks to Contrastive Learning
Jinghuai Zhang1 Hongbin Liu2 Jinyuan Jia3 Neil Zhenqiang Gong2
University of California, Los Angeles1
Duke University2
Penn State3
jinghuai1998@g.ucla.edu
{hongbin.liu, neil.gong}@duke.edu
jinyuan@psu.edu

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL) pre-trains general-purpose
encoders using an unlabeled pre-training dataset, which
consists of images or image-text pairs. CL is vulnerable to data poisoning based backdoor attacks (DPBAs),
in which an attacker injects poisoned inputs into the pretraining dataset so the encoder is backdoored. However,
existing DPBAs achieve limited effectiveness. In this work,
we take the first step to analyze the limitations of existing backdoor attacks and propose new DPBAs called
CorruptEncoder to CL. CorruptEncoder introduces a new
attack strategy to create poisoned inputs and uses a theoryguided method to maximize attack effectiveness. Our experiments show that CorruptEncoder substantially outperforms existing DPBAs. In particular, CorruptEncoder is
the first DPBA that achieves more than 90% attack success rates with only a few (3) reference images and a small
poisoning ratio (0.5%). Moreover, we also propose a defense, called localized cropping, to defend against DPBAs.
Our results show that our defense can reduce the effectiveness of DPBAs, but it sacrifices the utility of the encoder,
highlighting the need for new defenses.

1. Introduction
Given an unlabeled pre-training dataset, contrastive learning (CL) [2, 3, 5, 23] aims to pre-train an image encoder
and (optionally) a text encoder via leveraging the supervisory signals in the dataset itself. For instance, given a large
amount of unlabeled images, single-modal CL, which is the
major focus of this paper, 1 can learn an image encoder that
produces similar (or dissimilar) feature vectors for two random augmented views created from the same (or different)
image. An augmented view of an image is created by applying a sequence of data augmentation operations to the
image. Among various data augmentation operations, ran-

dom cropping is the most important one [3].
CL is vulnerable to data poisoning based backdoor attacks (DPBAs) [1, 25]. Specifically, an attacker embeds
backdoor into an encoder via injecting poisoned images
into the pre-training dataset. A downstream classifier built
based on a backdoored encoder predicts an attacker-chosen
class (called target class) for any image embedded with an
attacker-chosen trigger, but its predictions for images without the trigger are unaffected.
However, existing DPBAs achieve limited effectiveness.
In particular, SSL-Backdoor [25] proposes to craft a poisoned image by embedding the trigger directly into an image from the target class. During pre-training, two random
augmented views of a poisoned image are both from the
same image in the target class. As a result, the backdoored
encoder fails to build strong correlations between the trigger
and images in the target class, leading to suboptimal results.
Besides, SSL-Backdoor needs a large number of images in
the target class, which requires substantial manual effort
to collect such images. While PoisonedEncoder [17] uses
fewer such images to achieve an improved attack performance on simple datasets, its effectiveness is limited when
applied to more complex datasets (e.g., ImageNet). The
limitation arises from the absence of a theoretical analysis
that guides the optimization of feature similarity between a
small trigger and objects in the target class. Another line
of work (CTRL [14]) improves stealthiness by embedding
an invisible trigger into the frequency domain. However, its
effectiveness is sensitive to the magnitude of the trigger and
the attack remains ineffective on a large dataset.
Our work: In this work, we propose CorruptEncoder2 ,
a new DPBA to CL. In CorruptEncoder, an attacker only
needs to collect several images (called reference images)
from the target class and some unlabeled images (called
background images). Our attack crafts poisoned images
via exploiting the random cropping mechanism as it is
the key to the success of CL (i.e., the encoder’s utility sacrifices substantially without random cropping as shown in

1 We extend CorruptEncoder to multi-modal CL in Section 6.

2 https://github.com/jzhang538/CorruptEncoder

24357

