This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Separation Graph Neural Networks for Saliency Object Ranking
Zijian Wu1

Jun Lu1 Jing Han1 Lianfa Bai1 Yi Zhang1 Zhuang Zhao1,† Siyang Song2,†
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 University of Leicester
{wuzijian, lujunchenhao, eohj, blf, zhy441}@njust.edu.cn
zhaozhuang3126@gmail.com, ss1535@leicester.ac.uk

Image
(a) SA-SOR vs. MAE on ASSR and IRSR dataset.

GT

ASSR[45]

IRSR[31]

OCOR[49]

Ours

(b) Results on the ASSR dataset of our methods with existing saliency ranking approaches.

Figure 1. Comparison with other state-of-the-art methods. (a) The comparison of SA-SOR and MAE on ASSR and IRSR dataset. The
closer to the upper-left corner, the more accurate the saliency ranking and segmentation results. (b) A visual comparison of our method
with other approaches illustrates that it is challenging for other methods to produce accurate segmentation and ranking results in scenarios
with multiple saliency objects.

Abstract
Saliency object ranking (SOR) has attracted significant
attention recently. Previous methods usually failed to explicitly explore the saliency degree-related relationships between objects. In this paper, we propose a novel Domain
Separation Graph Neural Network (DSGNN), which starts
with separately extracting the shape and texture cues from
each object, and builds an shape graph as well as a texture graph for all objects in the given image. Then, we propose a Shape-Texture Graph Domain Separation (STGDS)
module to separate the task-relevant and irrelevant infor† Corresponding author.

mation of target objects by explicitly modelling the relationship between each pair of objects in terms of their
shapes and textures, respectively. Furthermore, a Cross Image Graph Domain Separation (CIGDS) module is introduced to explore the saliency degree subspace that is robust
to different scenes, aiming to create a unified representation for targets with the same saliency levels in different
images. Importantly, our DSGNN automatically learns a
multi-dimensional feature to represent each graph edge, allowing complex, diverse and ranking-related relationships
to be modelled. Experimental results show that our DSGNN achieved the new state-of-the-art performance on both
ASSR and IRSR datasets, with large improvements of 5.2%

3964

