This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EfficientSAM: Leveraged Masked Image Pretraining for Efficient Segment
Anything
Yunyang Xiong, Bala Varadarajan*, Lemeng Wu∗ , Xiaoyu Xiang, Fanyi Xiao, Chenchen Zhu,
Xiaoliang Dai, Dilin Wang, Fei Sun, Forrest Iandola, Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi, Vikas Chandra
Meta AI Research
https://yformer.github.io/efficient-sam/

Abstract
Segment Anything Model (SAM) has emerged as a powerful tool for numerous vision applications. A key component
that drives the impressive performance for zero-shot transfer and high versatility is a super large Transformer model
trained on the extensive high-quality SA-1B dataset. While
beneficial, the huge computation cost of SAM model has
limited its applications to wider real-world applications.
To address this limitation, we propose EfficientSAMs, lightweight SAM models that exhibits decent performance with
largely reduced complexity. Our idea is based on leveraging
masked image pretraining, SAMI, which learns to reconstruct features from SAM image encoder for effective visual
representation learning. Further, we take SAMI-pretrained
light-weight image encoders and mask decoder to build EfficientSAMs, and finetune the models on SA-1B for segment
anything task. We perform evaluations on multiple vision
tasks including image classification, object detection, instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation, and find
that our proposed pretraining method, SAMI, consistently
outperforms other masked image pretraining methods. On
segment anything task such as zero-shot instance segmentation, our EfficientSAMs with SAMI-pretrained lightweight
image encoders perform favorably with a significant gain
(e.g., ∼4 AP on COCO/LVIS) over other fast SAM models.
Our EfficientSAM code and models are available at here.

1. Introduction
Segment Anything Model (SAM) [31] has been very successful in the vision field, achieving state-of-the-art performance in a variety of image segmentation tasks such as
zero-shot edge detection[1, 31], zero-shot object proposal
generation[31, 54], and zero-shot instance segmentation[31],
and many other real-world applications[24, 37, 41, 50–52].
The key feature of SAM is a prompt-based Vision Trans* Joint second author.

Figure 1. The comparative analysis result. (Top) The overview
of EfficientSAM model by taking a well-pretrained light-weight
image encoder for instance segmentation with largely reduced complexity. (Bottom) Throughput/Parameter/Performance comparison
of EfficientSAM, MobileSAM, FastSAM, and SAM for zero-shot
instance segmentation on COCO. We benchmark throughput (image per second) of all models on a single NVIDIA A100 with one
box prompt. The input image resolution is 1024 × 1024. Our
EfficientSAMs outperform MobileSAM and FastSAM by a large
margin, ∼4 AP, with comparable complexity. Our EfficientSAM-S
reduces the inference time of SAM by ∼20x and the parameter size
by ∼20x with a small performance drop, 44.4 AP vs 46.5 AP.

former (ViT)[19]model trained on a large-scale visual dataset
with more than 1B masks from 11M images, SA-1B[31],
which allows segmenting any object on a given image. This
ability of Segment Anything makes SAM a foundation model
in vision and enables its applications even beyond vision.
Despite the forgoing advantages, the model of SAM turns
out to be a major efficiency bottleneck for practical deployment since the architecture of SAM, especially, the image
encoder (e.g., ViT-H) is very expensive. Note that ViTH image encoder in SAM has 632M parameters while the

16111

