This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bidirectional Autoregressive Diffusion Model for Dance Generation
Canyu Zhang1 , Youbao Tang2B , Ning Zhang2 , Ruei-Sung Lin2 ,
Mei Han2 , Jing Xiao3 , Song Wang1B
1
University of South Carolina, USA, 2 PAII Inc., USA, 3 Ping An Technology, China

Abstract
Dance serves as a powerful medium for expressing human emotions, but the lifelike generation of dance is still
a considerable challenge. Recently, diffusion models have
showcased remarkable generative abilities across various
domains. They hold promise for human motion generation due to their adaptable many-to-many nature. Nonetheless, current diffusion-based motion generation models often create entire motion sequences directly and unidirectionally, lacking focus on the motion with local and bidirectional enhancement. When choreographing high-quality
dance movements, people need to take into account not
only the musical context but also the nearby music-aligned
dance motions. To authentically capture human behavior,
we propose a Bidirectional Autoregressive Diffusion Model
(BADM) for music-to-dance generation, where a bidirectional encoder is built to enforce that the generated dance
is harmonious in both the forward and backward directions. To make the generated dance motion smoother, a
local information decoder is built for local motion enhancement. The proposed framework is able to generate new
motions based on the input conditions and nearby motions,
which foresees individual motion slices iteratively and consolidates all predictions. To further refine the synchronicity between the generated dance and the beat, the beat
information is incorporated as an input to generate better music-aligned dance movements. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed model achieves state-of-theart performance compared to existing unidirectional approaches on the prominent benchmark for music-to-dance
generation. The code and models are available: https:
//github.com/czzhang179/BADM .

1. Introduction
Dance is a highly effective medium for expressing emotions, facilitating communication, and fostering social interaction. Nevertheless, the creation of new dances reThis work was done during Canyu’s intership in PAII Inc..
B Corresponding author.

mains a formidable challenge, given the inherently expressive and freeform nature of dance movements. In order to generate new dance sequences that seamlessly integrate with both preceding motions and the musical context, various deep learning-based methods have been proposed [9, 21, 22, 29, 31, 37]. However, they typically
treat dance generation as a matching problem. For example, some works [44, 53] rely on constructing a codebook
for music-to-motion matching, which hinders their potential
for creative dance generation. And they exclusively rely on
past movements as the sole guide, neglecting the insights offered by future distributions. These methods also encounter
limitations when attempting to generate dances from music
based on user-defined constraints.
Currently, diffusion models have shown remarkable
promise in image processing tasks. Notable initiatives [48,
49] have explored the potential of diffusion models in the
context of human motion generation. However, a significant drawback is the insufficient attention given to interframe transitions, resulting in sequences that lack coherence. When designing new motions, people always need
to consider the music condition and nearby motions within
a range. But these models primarily emphasize conditioning input and global relationships, often neglecting the intricate details crucial for crafting fluid and harmonious motion. Consequently, the generated dance movements for
each frame may not align smoothly with the motions in
nearby frames, leading to inconsistencies in the overall sequence.
In response to the limitations inherent in current methodologies, we present the innovative bidirectional Autoregressive diffusion model (BADM). Our model introduces a
novel strategy by breaking down the entire noise sequence
into smaller, manageable slices. During the generation of
each slice, our model considers the preceding dance sequences and forwarding noise distributions using a crossattention layer in a bidirectional way. Then refined noise
slices are sent into the decoder along with conditions iteratively. The output dance slices are then concatenated and
refined by a local information decoder to ensure a cohesive
and harmonious overall sequence from a local perspective.

687

