This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Low-Resource Vision Challenges for Foundation Models
Yunhua Zhang1
1

Hazel Doughty2

University of Amsterdam

2

Cees G. M. Snoek1

Leiden University

Abstract
Low-resource settings are well-established in natural language processing, where many languages lack sufficient data
for deep learning at scale. However, low-resource problems
are under-explored in computer vision. In this paper, we
address this gap and explore the challenges of low-resource
image tasks with vision foundation models. We first collect a
benchmark of genuinely low-resource image data, covering
historic maps, circuit diagrams, and mechanical drawings.
These low-resource settings all share three challenges: data
scarcity, fine-grained differences, and the distribution shift
from natural images to the specialized domain of interest.
While existing foundation models have shown impressive
generalizability, we find they cannot transfer well to our
low-resource tasks. To begin to tackle the challenges of
low-resource vision, we introduce one simple baseline per
challenge. Specifically, we i) enlarge the data space by
generative models, ii) adopt the best sub-kernels to encode
local regions for fine-grained difference discovery and iii)
learn attention for specialized domains. Experiments on our
three low-resource tasks demonstrate our proposals already
provide a better baseline than transfer learning, data augmentation, and fine-grained methods. This highlights the
unique characteristics and challenges of low-resource vision
for foundation models that warrant further investigation.
Project page: https://xiaobai1217.github.io/
Low-Resource-Vision/.

1. Introduction
Many have studied low-resource natural language processing [8, 23, 32, 57, 89], in which the target languages are less
common and data is scarce. In computer vision, numerous
works have explored effective learning methods for limited labeled data scenarios, e.g., by meta-learning [35, 37],
few-shot learning [53, 67], or generative modeling [24, 85].
Albeit successful, they focus on high-resource image domains, where thousands of images from the same domain
are available, even though each class may only have a few
samples for model learning. Different from existing works
handling data scarcity, we investigate low-resource settings
for computer vision where data is truly scarce (see Figure 1).
By collecting a benchmark of low-resource vision tasks

High-Resource

Low-Resource

Big Data

Limited Data

Coarse-Grained

Fine-Grained

General Domain

Specialized Domain

Figure 1. High-Resource vs Low-Resource Vision. High-resource
vision focuses on images that can be collected at scale, have coarsegrained classes, and come from a general domain. We instead focus
on low-resource vision tasks where data is scarce, has fine-grained
differences, and comes from highly specialized domains.

we are able to study the combination of challenges unique
to this area. First, data is severely limited with only a few
hundred examples available for model learning. Second,
vision tasks that are low-resource also tend to be highly specialized, meaning differences between different images are
extremely subtle and fine-grained. Finally, the limited examples and specialized nature of the task means the domain
is incredibly different from more common natural images
available in bulk. While these challenges are often studied
in isolation [34, 68] or even pairs [12, 46], the combination
of all three is unique to low-resource vision and demands
solutions outside of the scope of current models.
An intuitive way to handle low-resource vision is leveraging the strong image representations from foundation models,
which have progressed at a tremendous pace in recent years
[27, 39, 44, 49, 58]. They show promising zero-shot performance on various downstream vision tasks and provide representations with generalization and transfer capabilities. Thus,
they are a natural solution to low-resource vision. However,
we find that current foundation models [27, 49, 50, 58] struggle to generalize to the specialized domains of low-resource
vision tasks. We also find that existing transfer learning techniques struggle to adapt with the very limited amount of data
available. Thus, we propose several adaptation baselines to
begin to tackle the challenges of low-resource vision, with
the ambition to inspire future work in this area.

21956

