This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistent Prompting for Rehearsal-Free Continual Learning
Zhanxin Gao1 , Jun Cen2 , Xiaobin Chang1,3 *
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Cheng Kar-Shun Robotics Institute, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
gaozhx27@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, jcenaa@connect.ust.hk, changxb3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Training Phase
Prompt

1. Introduction
Continual learning [2, 6, 26, 37, 39] aims to equip deep
models with the capacity to continuously acquire new
knowledge, e.g., learn to recognize new object categories,
while handling catastrophic forgetting [18, 27, 28, 32] of
the old knowledge. Rehearsal-based methods [3, 34, 49]
alleviate the forgetting problem with a small number of exemplars of previous tasks stored in the memory buffer and
* indicates corresponding author.

Pt
Pre-Trained
Network

Dt

Classifier
Inconsistency

Prompt
Inconsistency
Pi, i∈ {1:t}

Ct

Ct
Pre-Trained
Network

Ct-1

…

Continual learning empowers models to adapt autonomously to the ever-changing environment or data
streams without forgetting old knowledge. Prompt-based
approaches are built on frozen pre-trained models to learn
the task-specific prompts and classifiers efficiently. Existing prompt-based methods are inconsistent between training and testing, limiting their effectiveness. Two types of
inconsistency are revealed. Test predictions are made from
all classifiers while training only focuses on the current
task classifier without holistic alignment, leading to Classifier inconsistency. Prompt inconsistency indicates that
the prompt selected during testing may not correspond to
the one associated with this task during training. In this
paper, we propose a novel prompt-based method, Consistent Prompting (CPrompt), for more aligned training and
testing. Specifically, all existing classifiers are exposed to
prompt training, resulting in classifier consistency learning.
In addition, prompt consistency learning is proposed to enhance prediction robustness and boost prompt selection accuracy. Our Consistent Prompting surpasses its promptbased counterparts and achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple continual learning benchmarks. Detailed analysis shows that improvements come from more
consistent training and testing. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Zhanxin-Gao/CPrompt.

Trainable
Frozen
Classifier

C1
D1:t

Testing Phase

Figure 1. Existing prompt-based methods are inconsistent between
training and testing, and prompt inconsistency and classifier inconsistency are illustrated. Pt and Ct represent the prompt and
the classifier of the current task t, respectively.

replayed with the new task data during training. However, exemplars of previous tasks may not be available
due to constraints such as data privacy or memory limitations. Therefore, rehearsal-free continual learning methods [9, 23, 25, 35, 43, 51] have attracted much attention.
Prompt-based models [30, 36, 38, 45, 46] have shown
exceptional results in rehearsal-free continual learning.
Based on the frozen backbone network pre-trained on a
large-scale dataset, such models can efficiently adapt to the
new task by only training a tiny set of parameters, i.e., the
prompts and fully connected (FC) classifiers. However, the
training and testing of existing approaches lack consistency,
as the prompt and the classifier are optimized solely within
the current task. As shown in Figure 1, two types of such inconsistencies are discussed. Firstly, classifier inconsistency
indicates that test predictions are made from all classifiers
rather than only from the training one. Secondly, prompt

28463

