This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TFMQ-DM: Temporal Feature Maintenance Quantization for Diffusion Models
Yushi Huang1,2 *†, Ruihao Gong1,2 ,* Jing Liu2,3 , Tianlong Chen4 , Xianglong Liu1‡
1

Beihang University

2

SenseTime Research

3

Monash University

4

UT Austin

{huangyushi,gongruihao,liujing5}@sensetime.com,tianlong.chen@utexas.edu,xlliu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The Diffusion model, a prevalent framework for image
generation, encounters significant challenges in terms of
broad applicability due to its extended inference times and
substantial memory requirements. Efficient Post-training
Quantization (PTQ) is pivotal for addressing these issues in
traditional models. Different from traditional models, diffusion models heavily depend on the time-step t to achieve
satisfactory multi-round denoising. Usually, t from the finite set {1, . . . , T } is encoded to a temporal feature by a
few modules totally irrespective of the sampling data. However, existing PTQ methods do not optimize these modules
separately. They adopt inappropriate reconstruction targets
and complex calibration methods, resulting in a severe disturbance of the temporal feature and denoising trajectory,
as well as a low compression efficiency. To solve these,
we propose a Temporal Feature Maintenance Quantization
(TFMQ) framework building upon a Temporal Information
Block which is just related to the time-step t and unrelated
to the sampling data. Powered by the pioneering block design, we devise temporal information aware reconstruction
(TIAR) and finite set calibration (FSC) to align the fullprecision temporal features in a limited time. Equipped with
the framework, we can maintain the most temporal information and ensure the end-to-end generation quality. Extensive experiments on various datasets and diffusion models
prove our state-of-the-art results. Remarkably, our quantization approach, for the first time, achieves model performance nearly on par with the full-precision model under
4-bit weight quantization. Additionally, our method incurs
almost no extra computational cost and accelerates quantization time by 2.0× on LSUN-Bedrooms 256 × 256 compared to previous works. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/ModelTC/TFMQ-DM.

* Equal Contribution.
† Work done during an internship at SenseTime Research.
‡ Corresponding Author.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling plays a crucial role in machine learning, particularly in applications like image [13, 14, 17, 38,
44], voice [37, 42], and text synthesis [2, 51]. Diffusion
models have showcased impressive capabilities in producing high-quality samples across diverse domains. In comparison to generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8] and
variational autoencoders (VAEs) [20], diffusion models successfully sidestep issues such as model collapse and posterior collapse, resulting in a more stable training process.
However, the substantial computational cost poses a critical bottleneck hampering the widespread adoption of diffusion models. Furthermore, the computational cost for diffusion models can be attributed to two primary factors. First,
these models typically require hundreds of denoising steps
to generate images, rendering the procedure considerably
slower than that of GANs. Prior efforts [21, 27, 29, 44]
have addressed this challenge by seeking shorter and more
efficient sampling trajectories, thereby reducing the number of denoising steps. Second, the substantial network architecture of diffusion models demands considerable time
and memory resources, particularly for foundational models pre-trained on large-scale datasets, e.g., LDM [38] and
Stable Diffusion. Our work aims to tackle the latter challenge, focusing on the compression of diffusion models.
Quantization is currently the most widely used
method [1, 5, 7, 31, 32] for compressing models by mapping high-precision floating-point numbers to low-precision
numbers. Among different quantization methods, Posttraining quantization (PTQ) [15, 31, 47] incurs lower overhead and is more user-friendly without the need for retraining or fine-tuning. While PTQ on conventional models has undergone extensive study [7, 24, 31, 47], its application to diffusion models has shown huge performance
degradation, especially under low-bit settings. For instance,
Q-Diffusion [23] exhibits severe accuracy drop on some
datasets [48] under 4-bit quantization. We believe the reason they fail to achieve better results is that they all overlook
the sampling data independence and uniqueness of temporal features, which are generated from time-step t through a
few modules, used to control the denoising trajectory in dif-

7362

