This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Situational Awareness Matters in 3D Vision Language Reasoning
Yunze Man
Liang-Yan Gui
Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{yunzem2,lgui,yxw}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Being able to carry out complicated vision language
reasoning tasks in 3D space represents a significant milestone in developing household robots and human-centered
embodied AI. In this work, we demonstrate that a critical and distinct challenge in 3D vision language reasoning is the situational awareness, which incorporates two
key components: (1) The autonomous agent grounds its
self-location based on a language prompt. (2) The agent
answers open-ended questions from the perspective of its
calculated position. To address this challenge, we introduce SIG3D, an end-to-end Situation-Grounded model for
3D vision language reasoning. We tokenize the 3D scene
into sparse voxel representation, and propose a languagegrounded situation estimator, followed by a situated question answering module. Experiments on the SQA3D and
ScanQA datasets show that SIG3D outperforms state-ofthe-art models in situational estimation and question answering by a large margin (e.g., an enhancement of over
30% on situation accuracy). Subsequent analysis corroborates our architectural design choices, explores the distinct
functions of visual and textual tokens, and highlights the
importance of situational awareness in the domain of 3D
question-answering. Project page is available at https:
//yunzeman.github.io/situation3d.

1. Introduction
Humans learn knowledge efficiently through the interactions with the 3D world and the integration of multi-modal
information, such as verbal guidance or instructions. Similarly, introducing language guidance into the visual comprehension task can greatly enhance models’ learning efficiency [3, 42]. Nonetheless, despite considerable advancements in linguistic understanding [7, 11, 31, 58] and visionlanguage integration [3, 37, 54, 61], current methodologies
remain deficient in accurately perceiving and rationalizing
within real-world 3D environments, which is largely attributed to the lack of 3D situational reasoning capabilities.
Compared with machine learning models, humans put

<3D Scene>

<Situation> “I am sitting on an armchair facing the center of the
room, and there is a brown sofa on my right.”
<Question> “Describe to me: what I will see if I stand up from the
armchair and turn right?”

Ours

Previous Model

Tokenization

Tokenization

Q

Multi-modal + Task
Transformer
Heads

Response <text> Situation <vector>

Self-attention
Cross-attention
Head

Situation
Estimation

K, V

Large
Multi-modal
Transformer
Response <text>

Figure 1. Previous methods perform direct 3D vision language
reasoning without modeling the situation of an embodied agent in
the 3D environment. Our method, SIG3D, grounds the situational
description in the 3D space, and then re-encodes the visual tokens
from the agent’s intended perspective before vision-language fusion, resulting in a more comprehensive and generalized 3D vision
language (3DVL) representation and reasoning pipeline. Q, K, V
stands for query, key, and value, respectively.

themselves inside the 3D world and then perceive and interact with the surrounding environment from their egoperspective (Figure 1). Such situational awareness is a
crucial difference between 2D and 3D visual understanding, and a key to achieve seamless understanding of spatial
concepts in more complex real-world environments. Several existing methods recognize the lack of positional understanding in 3D and propose new benchmarks and joint
optimization functions [44], or positional embedding methods [26] to enhance the overall reasoning performance.
However, the lack of an explicit situation modeling
and situation-grounded 3D reasoning method restricts them
from obtaining a generalizable and consistent 3D visionlanguage (VL) representation. As shown in Figure 2, the
situation prediction of the state-of-the-art method [44] (in
blue) diverges significantly from the ground truth vectors
(in red) in almost all scenes in the dataset [13]. Moreover,
our pilot study in Section 3 also reveals that situational understanding, despite being very crucial in comprehending
the context of questions, only plays a minor role in the final

13678

