This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AVFF: Audio-Visual Feature Fusion for Video Deepfake Detection
Trevine Oorloff1,2*
Surya Koppisetti2
2
Ben Colman
Yaser Yacoob1
1

Nicolò Bonettini2
Ali Shahriyari2
2

University of Maryland - College Park

Divyaraj Solanki2
Gaurav Bharaj2

Reality Defender Inc.

Abstract
With the rapid growth in deepfake video content, we require improved and generalizable methods to detect them.
Most existing detection methods either use uni-modal cues
or rely on supervised training to capture the dissonance between the audio and visual modalities. While the former
disregards the audio-visual correspondences entirely, the latter predominantly focuses on discerning audio-visual cues
within the training corpus, thereby potentially overlooking
correspondences that can help detect unseen deepfakes. We
present Audio-Visual Feature Fusion (AVFF), a two-stage
cross-modal learning method that explicitly captures the
correspondence between the audio and visual modalities
for improved deepfake detection. The first stage pursues
representation learning via self-supervision on real videos
to capture the intrinsic audio-visual correspondences. To
extract rich cross-modal representations, we use contrastive
learning and autoencoding objectives, and introduce a novel
audio-visual complementary masking and feature fusion
strategy. The learned representations are tuned in the second
stage, where deepfake classification is pursued via supervised learning on both real and fake videos. Extensive experiments and analysis suggest that our novel representation
learning paradigm is highly discriminative in nature. We
report 98.6% accuracy and 99.1% AUC on the FakeAVCeleb
dataset, outperforming the current audio-visual state-of-theart by 14.9% and 9.9%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Deepfake generative AI technology enables new opportunities to create rich and quality content in multimedia applications such as virtual reality [52], movie production [41],
and telepresence [35, 48]. However, its malicious use has
become a major societal threat posing a number of problems
including frauds1 , defamation2 and disinformation3 . As the
* This work was completed during an internship at Reality Defender Inc.
1 Fraudsters Used AI to Mimic CEO’s Voice in Cybercrime Case
2 Deepfake porn documentary explores its ‘life-shattering’ impact, AI
Fake Nudes are booming
3 Martin Lewis felt ‘sick’ seeing deepfake scam ad on Facebook, Deepfake scams have arrived

Audio to
Visual
(A2V)

Audio
Encoder

Masked
Tokens

Visual to
Audio
(V2A)

Visual
Encoder

Input
Audio/Visuals

Feature
Encoding

Feature
Tokens

Complementary

Masking

Cross-Modal
Decoding

Token
Prediction

Feature
Fusion

Figure 1. We use audio-visual correspondences for deepfake detection. Transformer-based encoders are used to extract audio and
visual feature tokens, which are then masked complementarily. The
visible audio tokens are sent through a learnable A2V network to
predict the masked visual tokens. These predicted visual tokens
are fused with the visible visual tokens to obtain the full visual
embeddings. Full audio embeddings are obtained in a similar way
using the V2A network. The audio/visual embeddings are then
used for video reconstruction in the MAE sense, and subsequently
for deepfake classification.

generative AI landscape continues to evolve, there is a growing need for robust deepfake detection that helps preserve
content integrity. In this paper, we study video deepfake
detection where either or both the visual and audio content
are AI-generated.
We pursue multi-modal learning and draw inspiration
from previous works, such as SyncNet [9], CLIP [42], and
AudioCLIP [18], where the correspondence between different modalities (audio, text, visual) was leveraged to significantly enhance performance on various downstream tasks.
We note that in real video face context, the audio-visual
correspondence is deeply intuitive since there is an intrinsic
correlation between the mouth articulations (visemes) and
the speech units (phonemes) [2, 9, 41, 58], as well as an
alignment of emotional nuances embedded in the facial and
speech expressions [4, 36, 37]. Such inherent audio-visual
correspondence, for example, in audio-driven emotion, is
challenging to faithfully replicate in deepfake videos. Based
on these observations, we propose a video deepfake detection
method that learns efficient representations for audio and vi-

27102

