This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Generalized Zero-Shot Learning by Exploring the Diverse Semantics
from External Class Names

1

Yapeng Li1 , Yong Luo1,2 , Zengmao Wang1 *, Bo Du1,2∗
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China.
https://github.com/li-yapeng/DSECN

Abstract
Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) methods often
assume that the unseen classes are similar to seen classes,
and thus perform poor when unseen classes are dissimilar
to seen classes. Although some existing GZSL approaches
can alleviate this issue by leveraging additional semantic
information from test unseen classes, their generalization
ability to dissimilar unseen classes is still unsatisfactory.
This motivates us to study GZSL in the more practical setting, where unseen classes can be either similar or dissimilar to seen classes. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective GZSL framework by exploring diverse semantics from external class names (DSECN), which is simultaneously robust on the similar and dissimilar unseen
classes. This is achieved by introducing diverse semantics from external class names and aligning the introduced
semantics to visual space using the classification head of
pre-trained network. Furthermore, we show that the design
idea of DSECN can easily be integrate into other advanced
GZSL approaches, such as the generative-based ones, and
enhance their robustness for dissimilar unseen classes. Extensive experiments in the practical setting including both
similar and dissimilar unseen classes show that our method
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches on
all datasets and can be trained very efficiently.

1. Introduction
Due to the high cost of annotation and the complexity of
real-world test scenarios, the presence of unseen classes
is often inevitable [34, 43]. Unfortunately, traditional machine learning models are unable to handle samples from
classes that have not been covered by the training data [8].
* Corresponding authors: Zengmao Wang, Bo Du

Our setting
seen classes unseen classes
(similar)

unseen classes
(dissimilar)

Existing setting

Dissimilar unseen classes

(a) Our Setting

Mode
Similar
Dissmilar

CN [38] TransZero [9] ZLA [4] DGZ [5]
42.50
5.09

47.99
2.47

42.65
8.52

Ours (∆)

43.16 48.45 (+0.46)
12.30 47.44 (+35.14)

(b) Results

Figure 1. Setting illustration and results: (a) Comparison with the
existing setting, our setting takes into account the scenario where
the unseen classes are dissimilar to seen classes; (b) Performance
of existing GZSL methods on similar and dissimilar unseen classes
on the CUB dataset. The similar unseen classes were obtained
from the same CUB dataset, while the dissimilar unseen classes
come from AWA2 and SUN dataset.

To tackle this challenge, zero-shot learning (ZSL) has been
proposed to recognize new classes via transferring knowledge obtained from seen classes with the help of semantic
information [14, 15, 23, 52]. In contrast, Generalized ZSL
(GZSL) is a more challenging task which handle test samples from both seen and unseen classes [3, 25, 29, 34].
The core idea of GZSL is to introduce auxiliary semantic
information and establish the connection between semantic
and visual space for the recognition of unseen classes [34].
Since unseen samples are not available during training, existing GZSL models often misclassify unseen class samples into seen classes during test (known as the bias issue) [21, 22]. To alleviate this issue, several strategies have
been introduced. A common strategy is to utilize a backbone pre-trained on the ImageNet-1K dataset [13] to extract
visual features [7, 24, 26, 36, 50], which is beneficial to improve the generalization ability of visual features. However,

23344

