This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D3T: Distinctive Dual-Domain Teacher Zigzagging Across RGB-Thermal Gap
for Domain-Adaptive Object Detection
Dinh Phat Do1 , Taehoon Kim1 , Jaemin Na1,2 , Jiwon Kim3 , Keonho Lee3 , Kyunghwan Cho3 ,
and Wonjun Hwang1
1
Ajou University, Korea, 2 Tech. Innovation Group, KT, 3 Robotics Lab, Hyundai Motor Company
{phatai,th951113,wjhwang}@ajou.ac.kr jaemin.na@kt.com
{jiwon1115,keonho.lee,kyunghwan.cho}@hyundai.com

Abstract
Domain adaptation for object detection typically entails
transferring knowledge from one visible domain to another
visible domain. However, there are limited studies on adapting from the visible to the thermal domain, because the
domain gap between the visible and thermal domains is
much larger than expected, and traditional domain adaptation can not successfully facilitate learning in this situation. To overcome this challenge, we propose a Distinctive Dual-Domain Teacher (D3T) framework that employs distinct training paradigms for each domain. Specifically, we segregate the source and target training sets for
building dual-teachers and successively deploy exponential
moving average to the student model to individual teachers of each domain. The framework further incorporates
a zigzag learning method between dual teachers, facilitating a gradual transition from the visible to thermal domains
during training. We validate the superiority of our method
through newly designed experimental protocols with wellknown thermal datasets, i.e., FLIR and KAIST. Source code
is available at https://github.com/EdwardDo69/D3T.

1. Introduction
Beyond the significant success of the Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) [17, 24], it has naturally led to recent advancements in CNN-based object detection [28, 33, 34, 38].
These advances hold promise for wide real-world applications such as autonomous driving, surveillance, and human activity recognition. Reflecting on the key contributors to this success, two crucial factors emerge: the development of efficient network architectures [33, 34] and
the availability of a sufficient number of trainable RGB
images [8, 11, 27] with corresponding supervision signals
for supervised learning. It is noteworthy that RGB cameras struggle to provide reliable imaging in scenarios where

Figure 1. (a) Sample images showing the difference between unsupervised domain adaptation from RGB to RGB domains and
unsupervised domain adaptation from RGB to thermal domains.
(b) Conceptual illustration of the proposed unsupervised domain
adaptation using distinctive dual-domain teachers, demonstrating
the zigzag approach across the large RGB-thermal gap.

visible light sensors prove inadequate, particularly during
nighttime. In sharp contrast, thermal cameras [12] hold
a significant advantage, detecting the heat emitted by objects and facilitating effective operation in complete darkness, through smoke, and in visually obstructive environments. This capability makes them indispensable for various applications, including nighttime surveillance, search
and rescue operations, wildlife monitoring, and all-weather
autonomous driving systems [1, 16, 21, 22, 32].

23313

