This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-conditioned adaptation of visual features in multi-task policy learning
Pierre Marza 1

Laetitia Matignon2
1

INSA Lyon

2

Olivier Simonin1

UCBL

3

Christian Wolf3

Naver Labs Europe

{pierre.marza, olivier.simonin}@insa-lyon.fr
laetitia.matignon@univ-lyon1.fr, christian.wolf@naverlabs.com

Project Page: https://pierremarza.github.io/projects/task conditioned adaptation/

Abstract
Successfully addressing a wide variety of tasks is a core
ability of autonomous agents, requiring flexibly adapting
the underlying decision-making strategies and, as we argue in this work, also adapting the perception modules.
An analogical argument would be the human visual system,
which uses top-down signals to focus attention determined
by the current task. Similarly, we adapt pre-trained large
vision models conditioned on specific downstream tasks in
the context of multi-task policy learning. We introduce taskconditioned adapters that do not require finetuning any pretrained weights, combined with a single policy trained with
behavior cloning and capable of addressing multiple tasks.
We condition the visual adapters on task embeddings, which
can be selected at inference if the task is known, or alternatively inferred from a set of example demonstrations. To
this end, we propose a new optimization-based estimator.
We evaluate the method on a wide variety of tasks from the
CortexBench benchmark and show that, compared to existing work, it can be addressed with a single policy. In
particular, we demonstrate that adapting visual features is
a key design choice and that the method generalizes to unseen tasks given a few demonstrations.

1. Introduction
Vision is one of the most important modalities for agents
interacting with the world and is almost indispensable for
dexterous manipulation or locomotion, as no other sensor
can provide information as rich and versatile. The inherent flexibility of the sensor comes with a high price, the
high dimensionality of the information, and the complexity of the processes necessary to extract useful information.
Humans and other biological agents are capable of adapting their perception systems to the task at hand. There is
indeed evidence for bottom-up and top-down processes in
human vision, with the latter guiding attention to regions
determined by the requirements of the task [3, 6].

Known tasks

New task demonstra on
Visual features

Task embedding search
Visual Adapters

Task embedding
Adapted visual
features
Task embedding space
Mul -task policy

ti

ti

Figure 1. Task-conditioned adaptation: A single policy can be
trained to address multiple heterogenous tasks including manipulation, legged motion etc., and few-shot learning is possible to address tasks given as demonstrations but unseen during training. A
key element is the task-conditioned adaptation of visual features.

There is a growing need for a similar versatility in artificial systems, and general neural networks have been trained
from large-scale data in different domains such as natural language processing (NLP), computer vision (CV), and,
more recently, robotics. A single general vision model coupled with a neural policy would be an appealing choice if
it could allow an easy generalization to new domains or
tasks. The wide adoption of attention mechanisms in several domains has made it easier for trained models to adapt
their behavior to the requirements of different tasks without
changing parameters, and it has been shown that attention
plays a crucial role in specialization on a specific instance
in language models [34] and vision and language models
[15]. However, even powerful generally pre-trained models
can benefit from parameter adaptations to specific tasks, ei-

17847

