This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AutoAD III: The Prequel – Back to the Pixels
Tengda Han1
1

Max Bain1

Arsha Nagrani1†

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

2

Gül Varol1,2

Weidi Xie1,3

LIGM, École des Ponts ParisTech

3

Andrew Zisserman1

CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Generating Audio Description (AD) for movies is a challenging task that requires fine-grained visual understanding and
an awareness of the characters and their names. Currently,
visual language models for AD generation are limited by a
lack of suitable training data, and also their evaluation is hampered by using performance measures not specialized to the
AD domain. In this paper, we make three contributions: (i)
We propose two approaches for constructing AD datasets with
aligned video data, and build training and evaluation datasets
using these. These datasets will be publicly released; (ii) We
develop a Q-former-based architecture which ingests raw video
and generates AD, using frozen pre-trained visual encoders and
large language models; and (iii) We provide new evaluation metrics to benchmark AD quality that are well matched to human
performance. Taken together, we improve the state of the art on
AD generation.

1. Introduction
Cinema is a matter of what’s in the frame and what’s out.
Martin Scorsese

Audio description (AD) is an accessibility tool for the blind
and visually impaired that describes visual content which
is essential for following video programs1. Automatically
generating AD text is a challenging task as the information must
be accurate, character-aware, story-aware, complementary to
the soundtrack, and distilled into the gaps between speech. For
TV broadcasters in the US and UK, providing AD for a certain
percentage of video content has become a legal requirement.
With the current power of visual-to-text generative models,
generating AD automatically is now becoming possible [66],
and there has been a recent flurry of interest in this goal [20, 21],
kick-started by the availability of films and AD provided in
the MAD dataset [54]. Key innovations have included partial
training of AD generative models using available large-scale
datasets [20], and the introduction of a character bank to
provide hints (as prompts) for the language model for the
1 https://www.3playmedia.com/learn/populartopics/audio-description/

Number of descriptions

Abstract

HowTo-AD
(Ours)
106

MAD
105

LSMDC CMD-AD
(Ours)
DiDeMo
102

103

104

Number of movies / videos

105

Figure 1. We propose two new movie Audio Description (AD) datasets
with pixels – CMD-AD and HowTo-AD by temporally aligning or
textually transforming existing pixel video datasets. The marker size
is proportional to the total video durations and grey color indicates
datasets with features instead of raw pixels.

crucial objective of naming the characters in the generated text
descriptions [21]. However, MAD only provides frame-level
CLIP features (and only at 5 Hz) and this has limited the ability
of generative models to provide fine-grained spatial details. Recent Visual Language Models (VLMs) [1, 31–33, 71, 74] have
accessed the spatial feature map of the image (or video) in order
to obtain fuller descriptions or answer more detailed questions.
We make the following contributions: First, we provide two
new datasets that can be used to train an AD generation model
end-to-end. The datasets go beyond MAD [54] in that they
provide video as input, rather than only a CLIP frame feature,
i.e., they go back to the pixels. The first dataset, CMD-AD,
is constructed from two publicly available sources – the AD
descriptions for films available from AudioVault2 and the movie
clips available from CMD [4]. The challenge in this case is
how to determine the temporal alignment of these two sources
given that one has only audio with AD, and the other (CMD)
is non-contiguous with timings unknown with respect to the
original movies. The second dataset, HowTo-AD, is constructed
from the large-scale HowTo100M video dataset [40] that
originally consists of YouTube videos with narrated instructions.
Inspired by the use of Language Models (LMs) to rephrase the
instructions as video captions in HowtoCaption [53], we use
LMs to repurpose HowTo100M as an AD dataset containing
2 https://audiovault.net

18164

