This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SynFog: A Photo-realistic Synthetic Fog Dataset based on End-to-end Imaging
Simulation for Advancing Real-World Defogging in Autonomous Driving
Yiming Xie1* , Henglu Wei1* , Zhenyi Liu2 , Xiaoyu Wang1 , Xiangyang Ji1
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Stanford University

{xieym22@mails., weihenglu@mail., xiaoyu-w17@mails., xyji@}tsinghua.edu.cn,
{zhenyiliu@}stanford.edu

Figure 1. The SynFog dataset comprises images under different lighting, with the first row captured in natural sky light and the second with
extra light sources like street lamps and automotive lighting. This dataset covers three levels of fog density across each scene, corresponding
visibility of 600 m, 300 m, 150 m. Additionally, pixel-accurate depth data and segmentation labels for each scene are also provided.

Abstract
To advance research in learning-based defogging algorithms, various synthetic fog datasets have been developed.
However, existing datasets created using the Atmospheric
Scattering Model (ASM) or real-time rendering engines often struggle to produce photo-realistic foggy images that
accurately mimic the actual imaging process. This limitation hinders the effective generalization of models from
synthetic to real data. In this paper, we introduce an
end-to-end simulation pipeline designed to generate photorealistic foggy images. This pipeline comprehensively considers the entire physically-based foggy scene imaging process, closely aligning with real-world image capture methods. Based on this pipeline, we present a new synthetic fog
dataset named SynFog, which features both sky light and
active lighting conditions, as well as three levels of fog density. Experimental results demonstrate that models trained
on SynFog exhibit superior performance in visual perception and detection accuracy compared to others when applied to real-world foggy images.

1. Introduction
Fog, due to its light scattering and attenuation properties,
poses a significant challenge for outdoor vision-based sys-

tems such as remote sensing, surveillance, autonomous
driving, and fire rescue [6, 10, 52]. It causes severe degradation in object appearance and contrast, resulting in a notable
impact on people’s daily lives. Consequently, there has been
a growing research interest in image defogging task to develop robust outdoor vision systems.
Recent learning-based defogging algorithms depend on
sets of foggy images and corresponding clear images for
model training. While several datasets have been collected
from real-world scenarios [5, 40], they are typically limited
to foggy images only, as it is almost impossible to obtain
pixel-accurate clear images with consistent scene contents
and environmental illumination. Studies in [2–4, 35] attempt to capture real-world foggy and clear image pairs using smoke machines. However, the scale of these datasets is
inadequate for training of a high-performing model. Given
the challenge of obtaining paired foggy and clear images
in real world, various synthetic fog datasets have been proposed as an alternative [25, 40, 55]. The most widely used
method is based on the theory proposed by McCartney [33],
also known as the Atmospheric Scattering Model (ASM).
However, this model fails to consider accurate global illumination and the actual imaging process that occurs in realworld captures as detailed in Sec. 3.1. These limitations
significantly impact the model’s overall applicability, par-

21763

