This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlashAvatar: High-fidelity Head Avatar with Efficient Gaussian Embedding
Jun Xiang
Xuan Gao
Yudong Guo
Juyong Zhang*
University of Science and Technology of China
{junxiang@mail., gx2017@mail., yudong@, juyong@}ustc.edu.cn

…

1s
2

1
Monocular Video Input

300

High-Fidelity Reconstruction and Rendering at 300FPS

Figure 1. Given a monocular video sequence, our proposed FlashAvatar can reconstruct a high-fidelity digital avatar in minutes which can
be animated and rendered over 300FPS at the resolution of 512 × 512 with an Nvidia RTX 3090.

Abstract
We propose FlashAvatar, a novel and lightweight 3D
animatable avatar representation that could reconstruct
a digital avatar from a short monocular video sequence
in minutes and render high-fidelity photo-realistic images
at 300FPS on a consumer-grade GPU. To achieve this,
we maintain a uniform 3D Gaussian field embedded in
the surface of a parametric face model and learn extra
spatial offset to model non-surface regions and subtle facial details. While full use of geometric priors can capture high-frequency facial details and preserve exaggerated expressions, proper initialization can help reduce the
number of Gaussians, thus enabling super-fast rendering
speed. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
FlashAvatar outperforms existing works regarding visual
quality and personalized details and is almost an order
of magnitude faster in rendering speed. Project page:
https://ustc3dv.github.io/FlashAvatar/

1. Introduction
Achieving low-cost, high-fidelity digital humans with
real-time multi-modal interaction, natural expressions and
movements, etc., is a key underlying technology for many
AR and VR applications, such as immersive remote confer* Corresponding Author

encing. With this target in mind, this work aims to present
a high-fidelity animatable head avatar that enables efficient
reconstruction and lightning-fast rendering, such that the remaining computing resources can support other interactive
tasks of multi-modal digital humans.
Previous works have made notable progress, while there
still exist some shortcomings. 3D morphable models
(3DMMs) [25, 36] based methods [13, 21, 22] are compatible with the standard graphics pipeline and can extrapolate
to unseen deformations. However, the limitations of relying
on coarse geometry and fixed topology prevent them from
modeling complex hairstyles or accessories like eyeglasses.
Works [1, 3, 10, 15, 17, 19, 59] building on neural implicit
representations [30, 31, 34] could well capture fine features
with great rendering quality and 3D consistency but commonly suffer from slow training and inference computation
speed. Motivated by works [6, 9, 27, 32, 41] for accelerating
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [31] rendering, [11, 49, 62]
apply voxel representations like voxel grids and multi-level
hash tables to speed up head avatar reconstruction. Nevertheless, the volume rendering mechanism of excessive sampling and alpha composition still limits the inference speed.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [20] revolutionized radiance field rendering by introducing non-neural
3D Gaussians as geometric primitives and developing a
fast rendering algorithm that supports anisotropic splatting.
Follow-up works [48, 51] of 3D-GS have already extended
it to dynamic scenes by maintaining a canonical Gaussian

1802

