This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoCutLER: Surprisingly Simple Unsupervised Video Instance Segmentation
Xudong Wang

Ishan Misra
Ziyun Zeng
Rohit Girdhar
UC Berkeley
FAIR, Meta AI

Trevor Darrell

Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/CutLER
Quantitative
Results

Learning Unsupervised Video Instance Segmentation
MaskCut

Unlabeled Images

Video Seg.
Model
Pseudo Masks

Pseudo-Masking

Ours

Loss

OCLR

50.7

Synthetic Videos

ImageCut2Video

Unsup. Model Learning
4.8

Qualitative Results

YouTubeVIS-19

a)

b)

c)

d)

38.9

4.4

YouTubeVIS-21

Figure 1. VideoCutLER is a simple unsupervised video instance segmentation method (UnVIS). We show the first competitive unsupervised results on the challenging YouTubeVIS benchmark. Moreover, unlike most prior approaches, we demonstrate that UnVIS models can
be learned without relying on natural videos and optical flow estimates. Row 1: We propose VideoCutLER, a simple cut-synthesis-andlearn pipeline that involves three main steps. Firstly, we generate pseudo-masks for multiple objects in an image using MaskCut [35]. Then,
we convert a random pair of images in the minibatch into a video with corresponding pseudo mask trajectories using ImageCut2Video.
Finally, we train an unsupervised video instance segmentation model using these mask trajectories. Row 2: Despite being trained only on
unlabeled images, at inference time VideoCutLER can be directly applied to unseen videos and can segment and track multiple instances
across time (Fig. 1a), even for small objects (Fig. 1b), objects that are absent in specific frames (Fig. 1c), and instances with high overlap
(Fig. 1d). Column 2: Our method surpasses the previous SOTA method OCLR [37] by a factor of 10 in terms of class-agnostic APvideo
50 .

Abstract
Existing approaches to unsupervised video instance segmentation typically rely on motion estimates and experience difficulties tracking small or divergent motions. We
present VideoCutLER, a simple method for unsupervised
multi-instance video segmentation without using motionbased learning signals like optical flow or training on natural videos. Our key insight is that using high-quality pseudo
masks and a simple video synthesis method for model training is surprisingly sufficient to enable the resulting video
model to effectively segment and track multiple instances
across video frames. We show the first competitive unsupervised learning results on the challenging YouTubeVIS-2019
benchmark, achieving 50.7% APvideo
50 , surpassing the previous state-of-the-art by a large margin. VideoCutLER can
also serve as a strong pretrained model for supervised video
instance segmentation tasks, exceeding DINO by 15.9% on
YouTubeVIS-2019 in terms of APvideo .

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation is vital for various computer
vision applications, e.g. video surveillance, autonomous
driving, and video editing, yet labeled videos are costly to
obtain. Hence, there is a pressing need to devise an unsupervised video instance segmentation approach that can
comprehend video content comprehensively and operate in
general domains without labels.
Prior work in this area typically relies on an optical flow
network as an off-the-shelf motion estimator [30, 37, 38].
Although optical flow can be informative in detecting pixel
motion between frames, it is not always a reliable technique, particularly in the presence of occlusions, motion
blur, complex motion patterns, changes in illuminations,
etc. As a result, models that heavily rely on optical flow
estimations may fail in several common scenarios. For example, stationary or slowly moving objects may have flow
estimates similar to the background, causing them to be
omitted in the segmentation process (e.g., the parrot with
negligible motion is missed in Fig. 2a). Similarly, non-

22755

