This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CORES: Convolutional Response-based Score for Out-of-distribution Detection
Keke Tang1∗ , Chao Hou1∗ , Weilong Peng1† , Runnan Chen2 ,
Peican Zhu3 , Wenping Wang4 , Zhihong Tian1
1

Guangzhou University 2 University of Hong Kong
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University 4 Texas A&M University
tangbohutbh@gmail.com, houchaohk@gmail.com, wlpeng@gzhu.edu.cn, crnsmile@connect.hku.hk,
ericcan@nwpu.edu.cn, wenping@tamu.edu, tianzhihong@gzhu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) often display overconfidence when encountering out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, posing significant challenges in real-world applications. Capitalizing on the observation that responses
on convolutional kernels are generally more pronounced
for in-distribution (ID) samples than for OOD ones, this
paper proposes the COnvolutional REsponse-based Score
(CORES) to exploit these discrepancies for OOD detection.
Initially, CORES delves into the extremities of convolutional
responses by considering both their magnitude and the frequency of significant values. Moreover, through backtracking from the most prominent predictions, CORES effectively
pinpoints sample-relevant kernels across different layers.
These kernels, which exhibit a strong correlation to input
samples, are integral to CORES’s OOD detection capability. Comprehensive experiments across various ID and
OOD settings demonstrate CORES’s effectiveness in OOD
detection and its superiority to the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) [17, 36, 37] have achieved
significant success in various tasks. Nevertheless, DNNs
often suffer performance drop when exposed to novel, unforeseen categories of data, termed as out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples, owing to their initial design for static,
closed-world scenarios [1]. Indeed, many recent studies
have demonstrated that DNN classifiers suffer from the
issue of making overconfident predictions on OOD samples [6, 26, 35]. Hence, OOD detection is crucial for ensuring the safety and reliability of DNN deployments [10, 39].
∗ Joint first authors. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Response visualization of convolutional kernels in the
penultimate layer of ResNet-18. Responses to in-distribution (ID)
CIFAR-10 data are contrasted with OOD data from: (a) LSUN;
and (b) SVHN. The x-axis enumerates the convolutional channel
indices, and the y-axis shows the maximum positive and minimum
negative values of the responses. It is evident that ID displays
higher positive and lower negative responses than OOD.

A prevalent direction for OOD detection involves enhancing classifiers through exposure to auxiliary OOD samples [11, 18]. However, these approaches may lead to increased training costs and potentially compromise model
performance. As a result, post-hoc methods that examine
the inference process offer advantages in real-world applications. Existing post-hoc methods typically fall into two
main categories: 1) those utilizing in-distribution (ID) samples, such as training data, and 2) those that do not rely on
ID samples. Specifically, the first category aims to measure the difference between a test image and training samples [19, 27, 30, 34, 41]. In many real-world scenarios, access to training data is limited, and even when available,
it may not comprehensively represent the entire ID domain,
potentially causing inaccuracies in calculated discrepancies.

10916

