This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenStreetView-5M: The Many Roads to Global Visual Geolocation
Guillaume Astruc* 1,2,5
Nacim Bouia 1
Charles Raude 1
1

Nicolas Dufour* 1,6
Stephanie Fu 1,4

Elliot Vincent 1,3

LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, CNRS, UGE
5

Ioannis Siglidis* 1
Romain Loiseau 1,2

Lintao XU 1
2

Van Nguyen Nguyen 1

Hongyu Zhou 1

UGE, IGN, ENSG, LASTIG
6

CESBIO, Univ de Toulouse, CNES/CNRS/IRD/INRAE/UPS

Constantin Aronssohn 1

3

Inria Paris

Loic Landrieu1
4

UC Berkeley

LIX, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris

Abstract
Determining the location of an image anywhere on Earth
is a complex visual task, which makes it particularly relevant for evaluating computer vision algorithms. Yet, the
absence of standard, large-scale, open-access datasets with
reliably localizable images has limited its potential. To address this issue, we introduce OpenStreetView-5M, a largescale, open-access dataset comprising over 5.1 million georeferenced street view images, covering 225 countries and
territories. In contrast to existing benchmarks, we enforce
a strict train/test separation, allowing us to evaluate the
relevance of learned geographical features beyond mere
memorization. To demonstrate the utility of our dataset,
we conduct an extensive benchmark of various state-of-theart image encoders, spatial representations, and training
strategies. All associated codes and models can be found at
github.com/gastruc/osv5m.

While natural image classification is the standard for evaluating computer vision methods [11, 49, 59], global geolocation
offers a compelling alternative task. In contrast to classification, where the focus is often a single object, geolocation
involves detecting and combining various visual clues, like
road signage, architectural patterns, climate, and vegetation. Predicting a single GPS coordinate or location label
from these observations necessitates a rich representation
of both the Earth’s culture and geography; see Figure 1 for
some examples. Furthermore, the abundance of geo-tagged
street-view images depicting complex scenes with a clear
and consistent point of view makes this task appropriate for
training and evaluating modern vision models.
Despite this potential, few supervised approaches are

drivephotograph, and eng, gclem, bootprint, Mapillary, licensed under CC-BY-SA.

climate/vegetation

traffic markers

architecture

culture/script

Figure 1. Global Visual Geolocation. Predicting the location of
an image taken anywhere in the world from just pixels requires
detecting a combination of clues of various abstraction levels [36].
Can you guess where these images were taken?1

trained and evaluated for the task of geolocation. We attribute this to the limitations of existing geolocation datasets:
(i) Large and open geolocation datasets contain a significant
portion of noisy and non-localizable images [19, 25, 60]; (ii)
Street view datasets are better suited for the task but are both
proprietary and expensive to download [7, 10, 16, 18, 33, 53].
To address these issues, we introduce OpenStreetView-5M
(OSV-5M), an open-access dataset of 5.1 million high1

* Denotes equal contributions.

21967

From top left to bottom right: Nagoya, Japan; Ontario, Canada; Mato
Grosso, Brazil; Lofoten, Norway.

1. Introduction

