This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TACO: Benchmarking Generalizable Bimanual
Tool-ACtion-Object Understanding
Yun Liu1,2,3 , Haolin Yang4 , Xu Si1 , Ling Liu5 , Zipeng Li1 , Yuxiang Zhang1 , Yebin Liu1 , Li Yi†,1,2,3
1
Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 5 Beijing Institute of Technology

Figure 1. TACO is a large-scale bimanual hand-object manipulation dataset covering extensive tool-action-object combinations in realworld scenarios. It involves videos from both 12 third-person views and one egocentric view, together with precise hand-object meshes,
2D segmentation, realistic hand-object appearances, and behavior triplet annotations. With rich diversities of object shapes and interaction
behaviors, TACO supports test-time generalization to unseen object geometries and novel behavior triplets and benchmarks various generalizable research topics, e.g., action recognition, motion forecasting, and cooperative grasp synthesis.

Abstract
Humans commonly work with multiple objects in daily
life and can intuitively transfer manipulation skills to novel
objects by understanding object functional regularities.
However, existing technical approaches for analyzing and
synthesizing hand-object manipulation are mostly limited
to handling a single hand and object due to the lack of
data support. To address this, we construct TACO, an
extensive bimanual hand-object-interaction dataset spanning a large variety of tool-action-object compositions for
daily human activities. TACO contains 2.5K motion sequences paired with third-person and egocentric views, precise hand-object 3D meshes, and action labels. To rapidly

expand the data scale, we present a fully automatic data
acquisition pipeline combining multi-view sensing with an
optical motion capture system. With the vast research
fields provided by TACO, we benchmark three generalizable hand-object-interaction tasks: compositional action
recognition, generalizable hand-object motion forecasting,
and cooperative grasp synthesis. Extensive experiments reveal new insights, challenges, and opportunities for advancing the studies of generalizable hand-object motion analysis and synthesis. Our data and code are available at
https://taco2024.github.io.

† Corresponding author.

21740

