This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint-Task Regularization for Partially Labeled Multi-Task Learning
Kento Nishi*

Junsik Kim*
Wanhua Li
Harvard University

Hanspeter Pfister

kentonishi@college.harvard.edu, {jskim, wanhua, pfister}@seas.harvard.edu

! ) Labels (𝒀)
Predictions (𝒀

Abstract
Multi-task learning has become increasingly popular in the
machine learning field, but its practicality is hindered by
the need for large, labeled datasets. Most multi-task learning methods depend on fully labeled datasets wherein each
input example is accompanied by ground-truth labels for
all target tasks. Unfortunately, curating such datasets can
be prohibitively expensive and impractical, especially for
dense prediction tasks which require per-pixel labels for
each image. With this in mind, we propose Joint-Task Regularization (JTR), an intuitive technique which leverages
cross-task relations to simultaneously regularize all tasks
in a single joint-task latent space to improve learning when
data is not fully labeled for all tasks. JTR stands out from
existing approaches in that it regularizes all tasks jointly
rather than separately in pairs—therefore, it achieves linear complexity relative to the number of tasks while previous methods scale quadratically. To demonstrate the validity of our approach, we extensively benchmark our method
across a wide variety of partially labeled scenarios based
on NYU-v2, Cityscapes, and Taskonomy.

1. Introduction
In recent years, multi-task learning (MTL) has gained popularity in the field of machine learning. This approach involves training a model to perform multiple related tasks
simultaneously, as opposed to traditional machine learning methods which train multiple independent models for
each task. By leveraging commonalities across tasks, multitask learning has the potential to improve overall performance while reducing inefficiencies and redundancies in
the learning process. In particular, dense prediction tasks
such as semantic segmentation and depth estimation have
been particularly promising areas for multi-task learning,
as these tasks typically require large models and significant computational resources. Extensive research has been
conducted in various directions to achieve effective multitask learning [9, 32, 51, 61], including architecture de*Equal contribution.
Code is available at github.com/KentoNishi/JTR-CVPR-2024.

MTL

Joint-Task
Regularization

JTR
[#
𝑦1; #
𝑦2; #
𝑦3]
Joint-Task Space

[#
𝑦1; y2; y3]

Task Stacks

Figure 1. An overview of Joint-Task Regularization (JTR) for
multi-task learning with partially labeled samples. JTR “stacks”
predictions and labels, encodes them into a single joint-task latent
space, and minimizes the latent embedding distance. JTR regularizes unlabeled task predictions using the labels of other tasks
jointly in the latent space.

sign [6, 7, 27, 41, 44, 52, 59] and optimization strategies [12, 22, 30, 46, 66, 71]. While these studies have
demonstrated the effectiveness of multi-task learning, their
applicability is limited by data availability. Training multitask models requires high quality data, which is often expensive and time-consuming to acquire.
Collecting data for multi-task learning presents two primary challenges. The first challenge is the cost of annotating dense labels. For instance, annotating a segmentation mask for a single image in the Cityscapes dataset took
over 1.5 hours on average [17]. Single task semi-supervised
learning presents a potential solution to this problem—
however, despite extensive research on semi-supervised
learning [4, 25, 43, 47], its application to multi-task learning remains underexplored. Second, for tasks which involve predicting other modalities from images (such as
depth or surface normal estimation), obtaining data introduces the challenge of sensor alignment and synchronization, requiring an expensive sensor fusion system. Build-

16152

