This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LEMON: Learning 3D Human-Object Interaction Relation from 2D Images
Yuhang Yang1 , Wei Zhai1,† , Hongchen Luo1 , Yang Cao1,2 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

LEMON

{yyuhang@mail., wzhai056@, lhc12@mail., forrest@, zhazj@}ustc.edu.cn

Human
Contact

Object
Affordance

Spatial
Relation

Elements of 3D Human-Object Interaction Relation

Figure 1. For an interaction image with paired geometries of the human and object, LEMON learns 3D human-object interaction relation
by jointly anticipating the interaction elements, including human contact, object affordance, and human-object spatial relation. Vertices in
yellow denote those in contact with the object, regions in red are object affordance regions, and the translucent sphere is the object proxy.

Abstract
Learning 3D human-object interaction relation is pivotal to embodied AI and interaction modeling. Most existing methods approach the goal by learning to predict
isolated interaction elements, e.g., human contact, object
affordance, and human-object spatial relation, primarily
from the perspective of either the human or the object.
Which underexploit certain correlations between the interaction counterparts (human and object), and struggle
to address the uncertainty in interactions. Actually, objects’ functionalities potentially affect humans’ interaction
intentions, which reveals what the interaction is. Meanwhile, the interacting humans and objects exhibit matching geometric structures, which presents how to interact.
In light of this, we propose harnessing these inherent correlations between interaction counterparts to mitigate the
uncertainty and jointly anticipate the above interaction elements in 3D space. To achieve this, we present LEMON
(LEarning 3D huMan-Object iNteraction relation), a unified model that mines interaction intentions of the counterparts and employs curvatures to guide the extraction of geometric correlations, combining them to anticipate the interaction elements. Besides, the 3D Interaction Relation
dataset (3DIR) is collected to serve as the test bed for training and evaluation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
†Corresponding Author.

superiority of LEMON over methods estimating each element in isolation. The code and dataset are available at
https://yyvhang.github.io/LEMON.

1. Introduction
Learning 3D human-object interaction (HOI) relation seeks
to capture semantic co-occurrence and geometric compatibility between humans and objects in 3D space [5, 68, 80].
How can machines learn the interaction relation? One possible solution involves perceiving certain elements capable
of revealing the interaction. Contact [6, 21, 64, 70], affordance [10, 13, 46, 92], and spatial relation [19, 31, 52]
that elucidate “where” the interaction manifests between
the human and object garner great attention. Capturing
representations of such elements is pivotal for applications
like AR/VR [7], imitation learning [1, 24], embodied AI
[17, 58, 60], and interaction modeling [20, 81].
Humans predominantly manipulate and interact with objects in 3D space. Thus, many methods devise task-specific
models to anticipate certain interaction elements, thereby
perceiving 3D HOI relation. Methods [21, 62, 64] estimate dense human contact based on the interaction semantics depicted in images. Some studies anticipate the
object affordance according to objects’ structures or 2D
visuals [10, 44, 67, 78]. Several works delve into predicting
the human-object spatial relation through synthetic images
[19] or posed human geometries [52]. A prevailing trend in

16284

