This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporally Consistent Unbalanced Optimal Transport
for Unsupervised Action Segmentation
Ming Xu
Australian National University

Stephen Gould
Australian National University

mingda.xu@anu.edu.au

stephen.gould@anu.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to the action segmentation
task for long, untrimmed videos, based on solving an optimal transport problem. By encoding a temporal consistency
prior into a Gromov-Wasserstein problem, we are able to
decode a temporally consistent segmentation from a noisy
affinity/matching cost matrix between video frames and action classes. Unlike previous approaches, our method does
not require knowing the action order for a video to attain
temporal consistency. Furthermore, our resulting (fused)
Gromov-Wasserstein problem can be efficiently solved on
GPUs using a few iterations of projected mirror descent.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in an unsupervised learning setting, where our method is used to generate pseudo-labels for self-training. We evaluate our segmentation approach and unsupervised learning pipeline on
the Breakfast, 50-Salads, YouTube Instructions and Desktop Assembly datasets, yielding state-of-the-art results for
the unsupervised video action segmentation task.

1. Introduction
While action recognition is a well-studied topic in the
area of video understanding, datasets are typically comprised of short videos arising from distinctive action categories with tightly cropped temporal boundaries [16,17]. In
this paper, we study the less-explored setting of segmenting long, untrimmed videos of multi-stage activities, where
each video contains multiple actions. A fine grained temporal understanding of videos is required for this task, which
can be attained in a supervised learning setting given dense,
per-frame annotations. Developing techniques to address
this task in an unsupervised manner will allow large video
collections to be utilized for learning without requiring expensive frame-level annotations.
The action segmentation task can be formulated as a
dense classification problem, where each frame within a
video is assigned to an action class. Specific to this task,

Figure 1. High-level overview of our action segmentation method,
ASOT. Given a (noisy) cost/affinity matrix between video frames
and actions, ASOT solves an optimal transport (OT) problem to
yield temporally consistent segmentations.

however, is that individual actions occupy temporal blocks
of frames. We call this phenomena the temporal consistency
property. Current approaches in the unsupervised setting do
not provide temporally consistent predictions “out-of-thebox”, necessitating post-processing methods based on hidden Markov models (HMMs) [11, 22, 23, 26, 36, 40, 42] to
decode a segmentation from the learned representations. A
critical assumption for these HMM methods is that the action order present within a video is known.
Furthermore, successful approaches to unsupervised
learning for image data based on joint representation learning and clustering [6, 45] have been adapted to the action
segmentation task [23, 40], yielding state-of-the-art results.
These methods use (regularized) optimal transport (OT) [9]
to generate pseudo-labels for self-training, and jointly learn
a video encoder and a set of action class embeddings. However, the OT formulation used in [23, 40] does not account
for temporal consistency, which is inherent to the action
segmentation task. In addition, the balanced assignment
assumption is imposed, which yields pseudo-labels that
are uniformly distributed among action classes. We argue
this is unreasonable for action segmentation since datasets
used [2, 21, 35] exhibit long-tailed class distributions [11].
Motivated by these observations, we propose Action
Segmentation Optimal Transport (ASOT), a novel method

14618

