This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Super-Resolution Transformer with Masked Inter&Intra-Frame Attention
Xingyu Zhou1 Leheng Zhang1 Xiaorui Zhao1 Keze Wang2 Leida Li3 Shuhang Gu1 *
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Sun Yat-sen University 3 Xidian University
{xy.chous526, lehengzhang12, zzzhaoxiaorui, kezewang, shuhanggu}@gmail.com, ldli@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

28.4

Recently, Vision Transformer has achieved great success
in recovering missing details in low-resolution sequences,
i.e., the video super-resolution (VSR) task. Despite its superiority in VSR accuracy, the heavy computational burden as well as the large memory footprint hinder the deployment of Transformer-based VSR models on constrained
devices. In this paper, we address the above issue by
proposing a novel feature-level masked processing framework: VSR with Masked Intra and inter-frame Attention
(MIA-VSR). The core of MIA-VSR is leveraging featurelevel temporal continuity between adjacent frames to reduce redundant computations and make more rational use
of previously enhanced SR features. Concretely, we propose
an intra-frame and inter-frame attention block which takes
the respective roles of past features and input features into
consideration and only exploits previously enhanced features to provide supplementary information. In addition, an
adaptive block-wise mask prediction module is developed
to skip unimportant computations according to feature similarity between adjacent frames. We conduct detailed ablation studies to validate our contributions and compare
the proposed method with recent state-of-the-art VSR approaches. The experimental results demonstrate that MIAVSR improves the memory and computation efficiency over
state-of-the-art methods, without trading off PSNR accuracy. The code is available at https://github.com/
LabShuHangGU/MIA-VSR.

28.2

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) refers to the process of recovering sharp details in high resolution (HR) images from
low resolution (LR) observations. Due to its great value in
practical usages, e.g., surveillance and high definition display, SR has been a thriving research topic over the past
twenty years. Generally, compared with single image superresolution which only exploits intra-frame information to
* Corresponding author.

MIA-VSR
(ours)

PSRT
(NeurIPS 22)

PSNR (dB)

28

RVRT
(NeurIPS 22)

27.8

BasicVSR++
(CVPR 22)

VRT
(Arxiv 22)

#params

27.6

27.4

10M 20M 30M

EDVR
(CVPRW 19)

40M

27.2
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

FLOPs (G)

Figure 1. PSNR(dB) and FLOPs(G) comparison on the Vid4
[24] dataset. We compare our MIA-VSR model with the state-ofthe-art temporal sliding-window and recurrent based VSR models,
including EDVR [36], BasicVSR++ [5], VRT [21], RVRT [22] and
PSRT [32]. Our MIA-VSR model outperforms these methods and
strikes a balance between performance and compute efficiency.

estimate the missing details, video super-resolution (VSR)
additionally leverages the temporal information to recover
the HR frames and therefore often leads to better SR results.
The key of VSR lies in making rational use of temporal information. Researchers in the early stages utilized
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to extract features
and have investigated advanced information propagation
strategies [4, 5, 8, 13, 32], sophisticated alignment modules [4, 22, 32, 35, 36, 39], effective training strategies
[23, 38] as well as elaborately designed network architectures [15, 19] for the pursuit of highly accurate VSR results. Recently, with the rapid development of Transformers
in computer vision, several attempts have been made to exploit Transformers for better recovering missing details in
LR sequences [21, 22, 25, 30, 32]. Due to the powerful representation learning capabilities of self-attention structure,
these Transformer-based approaches have raised the stateof-the-art in VSR to a new level.

25399

