This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

mPLUG-Owl2: Revolutionizing Multi-modal Large Language Model
with Modality Collaboration
Qinghao Ye∗ Haiyang Xu∗ Jiabo Ye∗ Ming Yan† Anwen Hu
Haowei Liu
Qi Qian
Ji Zhang
Fei Huang
Alibaba Group
{yeqinghao.yqh, shuofeng.xhy, yejiabo.yjb, ym119608}@alibaba-inc.com
Code & Demo & Models: https://github.com/X-PLUG/mPLUG-Owl/tree/main/mPLUG-Owl2

Abstract

BLIP-2, MiniGPT-4, LLaVA, etc.
(Vanilla Language Decoder)

Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
demonstrated impressive instruction abilities across various
open-ended tasks. However, previous methods primarily focus on enhancing multi-modal capabilities. In this work,
we introduce a versatile multi-modal large language model,
mPLUG-Owl2, which effectively leverages modality collaboration to improve performance in both text and multi-modal
tasks. mPLUG-Owl2 utilizes a modularized network design,
with the language decoder acting as a universal interface for
managing different modalities. Specifically, mPLUG-Owl2
incorporates shared functional modules to facilitate modality collaboration and introduces a modality-adaptive module
that preserves modality-specific features. Extensive experiments reveal that mPLUG-Owl2 is capable of generalizing
both text tasks and multi-modal tasks and achieving state-ofthe-art performances with a single generic model. Notably,
mPLUG-Owl2 is the first MLLM model that demonstrates
the modality collaboration phenomenon in both pure-text
and multi-modal scenarios, setting a pioneering path in the
development of future multi-modal foundation models.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 [5], LLaMA
[52, 53], and GPT-4 [43] have garnered significant attention due to their exceptional generalization abilities in
text understanding and generation. To facilitate the visionlanguage applications, GPT-4V1 [42] has recently demonstrated impressive multi-modal capabilities in diverse tasks,
e.g., description , question answering, etc., sparking interest among researchers in the potential convergence of the
vision-language field. This has led to the emergence of a
group of Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
∗ Equal contribution

† Corresponding author

1https://openai.com/research/gpt-4v-system-card

mPLUG-Owl2

(Modality-Adaptive Language Decoder)

1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Feed Forward Network

Feed Forward Network

Attention Module

Modality-Adaptive Module

Modality Interference

Modality Collaboration

(a) • Text Instruction Understanding

(b) • Text Instruction Understanding

• Visual Concept Understanding

• Visual Concept Understanding

Figure 1. Comparison between existing MLLMs and our proposed model. (a) Previous approaches utilize a standard language
decoder (i.e., LLM) to manage different types of instructions, leading to modality interference and performance degradation. (b)
We introduce mPLUG-Owl2, which uses a modality-adaptive language decoder to handle different modalities within distinct modules while sharing some parameters for modality collaboration.
This approach mitigates the issue of modality interference.

[4, 14, 28, 35, 61, 62, 64, 71], which aim to enhance LLMs
with the ability to understand and handle visual problems.
Previous studies [25, 58] in multi-modal learning suggest
that different modalities can effectively collaborate, thereby
enhancing the performance of both text and multi-modal
tasks simultaneously. However, MLLMs is a unified model
that supports different modalities and tasks without finetuning for specific tasks. Recent works utilize cross-modal
alignment modules (e.g., Q-former [14, 28, 71] and linear
layer [9, 35]) to map visual features from the vision encoder
into the frozen LLMs to carry out multi-modal tasks by leveraging preserved language capabilities. This strategy, unfortunately, restricts the potential of modality collaboration. As
a result, some researchers [35, 64] opt to fine-tune LLMs
during multi-modal instruction tuning. While fine-tuning
significantly improves multi-modal tasks, it risks weakening text task performance [15]. As illustrated in Figure 1,

13040

