This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLiC: Concept Learning in Context
Mehdi Safaee1

Aryan Mikaeili1
1

Or Patashnik2

Ac a w
A ta /c a w

A be /de w

[v*] s

[v*] s

2

Simon Fraser University
Generation

Daniel Cohen-Or2

Ali Mahdavi-Amiri1

Tel Aviv University

Editing
[v*] s

le

le

le

Ac a w

[v*] s

le

A ta

[v*] s

le

w

Figure 1. Given an object in an image (e.g., the red chair in the middle), we learn an in-context token for a concept embedded in this object
(e.g., an ornament of a chair). This token can then be used to generate images with new objects embodying the same concept (left) or to
transfer the concept to given target objects, while maintaining their structure (right). Project page: https://mehdi0xc.github.io/clic

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of learning a local
visual pattern of an object from one image, and generating images depicting objects with that pattern. Learning a
localized concept and placing it on an object in a target image is a nontrivial task, as the objects may have different
orientations and shapes. Our approach builds upon recent
advancements in visual concept learning. It involves acquiring a visual concept (e.g., an ornament) from a source
image and subsequently applying it to an object (e.g., a
chair) in a target image. Our key idea is to perform incontext concept learning, acquiring the local visual concept
within the broader context of the objects they belong to. To
localize the concept learning, we employ soft masks that
contain both the concept within the mask and the surrounding image area. We demonstrate our approach through object generation within an image, showcasing plausible embedding of in-context learned concepts. We also introduce
methods for directing acquired concepts to specific locations within target images, employing cross-attention mechanisms, and establishing correspondences between source
and target objects. The effectiveness of our method is
demonstrated through quantitative and qualitative experiments, along with comparisons against baseline techniques.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of transferring an ornament from one
image of a chair onto another image of a different chair,
even if the chairs are in different orientations (see Fig. 1).
It is evident that a straightforward image-space cut-andpaste operation is insufficient here. Moreover, attempting
to model the ornament from a single perspective and accurately pasting it onto the other image is a complex task, one
that currently stands as a daunting challenge.
An alternative approach involves harnessing the recently
developed domain of visual concept learning [2, 10, 11, 22,
30] that allows learning the visual concept from a source image and subsequently applying it to a target image. While it
does not provide an exact, one-to-one transfer of the ornament, it does offer a way to transfer the overall concept. Yet,
plausibly learning a local concept from a single image and
applying it in a specific location of an object in the target
image is challenging due to the lack of context (see Fig. 1).
Avrahami et al. [4] have recently presented a technique
called “Break-A-Scene” wherein they learn local concepts
from a single image and then apply them within a generated image through text-to-image machinery. This technique can be seemingly applied to our local concept learning problem as well. However, as we shall show in the fol-

6924

