This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Skeleton-in-Context: Unified Skeleton Sequence Modeling with
In-Context Learning
Xinshun Wang1,2,∗ , Zhongbin Fang1,∗ , Xia Li3 , Xiangtai Li4 , Chen Chen5 , Mengyuan Liu2,
1 Sun Yat-sen University
2 National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School
3 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 4 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
5 Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida

{wangxsh36, fangzhb5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xia.li@inf.ethz.ch, xiangtai94@gmail.com
chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu, liumengyuan@pku.edu.cn
https://github.com/fanglaosi/Skeleton-in-Context
Prompt

Abstract

1. Introduction
The idea of multi-task models has attracted much research interest over the years in a wide range of areas [6, 16, 17, 58],
such as computer vision and natural language processing
* Equal contribution.

Corresponding author is Mengyuan Liu.

Painter

Depth Estimation

a) Image Modeling
Prompt

Prediction

Query Input

PIC

Denoising

Reconstruction

b) Point Cloud Modeling
Task-Guided Prompt

Query Input

Prediction

Joint Completion

Motion Prediction

Skeleton-in-Context

In-context learning provides a new perspective for multitask modeling for vision and NLP. Under this setting, the
model can perceive tasks from prompts and accomplish them
without any extra task-specific head predictions or model
fine-tuning. However, skeleton sequence modeling via incontext learning remains unexplored. Directly applying existing in-context models from other areas onto skeleton sequences fails due to the similarity between inter-frame and
cross-task poses, which makes it exceptionally hard to perceive the task correctly from a subtle context. To address this
challenge, we propose Skeleton-in-Context (SiC), an effective framework for in-context skeleton sequence modeling.
Our SiC is able to handle multiple skeleton-based tasks simultaneously after a single training process and accomplish
each task from context according to the given prompt. It
can further generalize to new, unseen tasks according to
customized prompts. To facilitate context perception, we
additionally propose a task-unified prompt, which adaptively
learns tasks of different natures, such as partial joint-level
generation, sequence-level prediction, or 2D-to-3D motion
prediction. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate
the effectiveness of our SiC on multiple tasks, including motion prediction, pose estimation, joint completion, and future
pose estimation. We also evaluate its generalization capability on unseen tasks such as motion-in-between. These
experiments show that our model achieves state-of-the-art
multi-task performance and even outperforms single-task
methods on certain tasks.

Prediction

Query Input

Segmentation

Pose Estimation

Future Pose Estimation

New, unseen task prompt

...

...

c) Skeleton Sequence Modeling (ours)

Figure 1. In-context learning in a) image modeling [58], b) point
cloud modeling [16], and c) skeleton sequence modeling (ours).

(NLP). To build such models, most previous works focus
on deploying task-specific heads on a shared backbone and
learning them through pretraining and fine-tuning. Models
with such task-specific architectures are not learned in an
end-to-end manner and are hard to generalize to new, unseen
tasks and data. Most existing methods for skeleton-based
human-centric tasks rely on task-specific designs and/or
non-end-to-end frameworks to accomplish multiple tasks.
Several works [9, 36] learn unified human motion representations. In particular, MotionBERT [77] adopts two-stage
training, including pre-training on the 2D-3D lifting task

2436

