This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GOV-NeSF: Generalizable Open-Vocabulary Neural Semantic Fields
Yunsong Wang
Hanlin Chen
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{yunsong, hanlin.chen, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg
https://github.com/wangys16/GOV-NeSF

3D Queries

Inference

Semantic Novel View Synthesis

yellow chair
water
cooking
food

color

wooden floor

semantic

kitchen wall

Volume Rendering

Open-Vocabulary Text Queries

Unseen scene images

3D Semantic Segmentation
Generalizable Open-Vocabulary
Neural Semantic Fields

Figure 1. Overall pipeline of GOV-NeSF. Given the posed images from any unseen 3D scene, and arbitrary open-vocabulary text queries,
our model is capable of both open-vocabulary 3D semantic segmentation and novel view synthesis with 2D semantic segmentation.

Abstract
Recent advancements in vision-language foundation
models have significantly enhanced open-vocabulary 3D
scene understanding. However, the generalizability of existing methods is constrained due to their framework designs
and their reliance on 3D data. We address this limitation
by introducing Generalizable Open-Vocabulary Neural
Semantic Fields (GOV-NeSF), a novel approach offering
a generalizable implicit representation of 3D scenes with
open-vocabulary semantics. We aggregate the geometryaware features using a cost volume, and propose a Multiview Joint Fusion module to aggregate multi-view features
through a cross-view attention mechanism, which effectively
predicts view-specific blending weights for both colors and
open-vocabulary features. Remarkably, our GOV-NeSF exhibits state-of-the-art performance in both 2D and 3D openvocabulary semantic segmentation, eliminating the need for
ground truth semantic labels or depth priors, and effectively
generalize across scenes and datasets without fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation for 2D [13, 25, 34, 45] and 3D
[4, 29–31] is a fundamental problem in computer vision
with broad applications in fields such as autonomous driving [20, 39], robotic navigation [54], medical imaging analysis [15], etc. Given the input 2D images or 3D data such
as point cloud, the model is trained to predict dense semantic labels that are assigned to each pixel or point, respectively. Conventional approaches for semantic segmentation
are limited by a predefined set of classes that can potentially
be assigned to a pixel/point, which hinders the generalizability of the models across datasets and label sets, resulting
in dataset-specific models that heavily rely on labels.
Recently, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [32, 33, 49,
51] propose to learn vision-language correlations from webscale image-text pairs, showing impressive generalizability in zero-shot vision recognition tasks across different
datasets. Attempts like MaskCLIP [56] and PointCLIP [57]
have explored transferring knowledge from 2D VLMs to 3D
encoders, benefiting from the robustness and generalizabil-

20443

