This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structured Model Probing:
Empowering Efficient Transfer Learning by Structured Regularization
Zhi-Fan Wu

Chaojie Mao

Xue Wang

Jianwen Jiang

Yiliang Lv

Rong Jin

100

Abstract

1. Introduction
The parameters of models have grown drastically with the
rapid development of deep learning [5, 37], posing challenges for adapting pre-trained models to downstream tasks.
The widely used transfer strategy, fully fine-tuning, becomes
infeasible due to excessive computation and storage overhead. Recently, parameter efficient tuning [19, 23] has
gained attention for reducing storage costs and improving
tuning performance with few trainable parameters when lim-

Fine-tuning

VPT

Ours

80
Accuracy (%)

Despite encouraging results from recent developments in
transfer learning for adapting pre-trained model to downstream tasks, the performance of model probing is still lagging behind the state-of-the-art parameter efficient tuning
methods. Our investigation reveals that existing model probing methods perform well for the easy case when the source
domain (where models are pre-trained) and the adapted
domain are similar, but fail for the difficult case when the
two domains are significantly different. Simply incorporating features extracted from multiple layers and increasing
complexity of the probing model can mitigate the gap in the
difficult case, but degrades the performance in the easy case.
To address this challenge, we propose structured model probing (SMP) that is able to deliver good performance for both
cases through structured regularization. The regularization performs feature selection leveraging model structure
as a prior, and controls the complexity of the probing model
through the weights of selected structures. This enables us
to construct a simple adaptation model, with a small number
of selected features and a linear prediction model, for the
easy case; and to automatically increase the complexity of
adaptation model, with a large number of selected features
and a non-linear model, for the difficult case. Our extensive
empirical studies show that SMP significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods for parameter efficient tuning,
and at the same time, still maintains the advantage of computational efficiency for probing-based methods.

Linear Probing

60
40
20
0

Nat. (Easy)

Spec. (Easy) Struc. (Difficult)

Mean

Relative Adaptation Time (Mean)

Alibaba Group

1.0

0.5

0.0 LP FT VPT Ours

Figure 1. Performance comparison on different dataset groups (left)
and mean relative adaptation time (right) on VTAB-1k benchmark.

ited data are available for downstream tasks. Despite the
progress, parameter efficient tuning methods still face significant computational overhead in training due to the need
to perform forward and backward passes through the pretrained model at each training step.
Model probing, which leverages features extracted from
the pre-trained model to perform adaptation, is promising
due to its efficiency and simplicity: The training procedure
is efficient since the pre-trained model is fixed and only performs one forward propagation to extract features, and probing model is decoupled from pre-trained model that makes it
convenient to deploy small sized task-specific downstream
models. However, it is a nuisance that probing methods are
usually outperformed by state-of-the-art parameter efficient
tuning methods. This is true even after several recent improvements made for the probing methods [16, 45]. In this
paper, we aim to improve the performance of model probing
significantly without sacrificing its simplicity and efficiency.
We first investigate when model probing methods perform worse than the tuning-based methods on widely used
visual task adaptation benchmark VTAB-1k [44] as shown
in Figure 1. Target domains are categorized as easy and
difficult cases based on their similarity to the source domain
where the pre-trained model is trained on (see Section 3.1
for details). We find simple linear probing yields comparable performance as the two tuning-based approaches (finetuning and VPT [23]) for easy cases, whereas a significant

16849

