This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-fidelity Person-centric Subject-to-Image Synthesis
Yibin Wang1, 3 ,* Weizhong Zhang2 ,* Jianwei Zheng3†, Cheng Jin1, 4†
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University 2 School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology 4 Haina Lab
yibinwang1121@163.com, weizhongzhang@fudan.edu.cn, zjw@zjut.edu.cn, jc@fudan.edu.cn

Reference

a magazine cover of a man and a man
standing next to each other

Ours

a man in spider-man costume and a woman
in spider-man costume posing for a painting

Reference

a movie poster of a man and a woman

Ours

a man sitting in front of a picture of a man

Figure 1. Displayed are the results generated using our Face-diffuser, showcasing its prowess across varied inputs. Each instance comprises
two distinct inputs: a textual description, and reference images.

Abstract
Current subject-driven image generation methods encounter significant challenges in person-centric image generation. The reason is that they learn the semantic scene and
person generation by fine-tuning a common pre-trained diffusion, which involves an irreconcilable training imbalance.
Precisely, to generate realistic persons, they need to sufficiently tune the pre-trained model, which inevitably causes
the model to forget the rich semantic scene prior and makes
scene generation over-fit to the training data. Moreover, even
with sufficient fine-tuning, these methods can still not generate high-fidelity persons since joint learning of the scene and
person generation also lead to quality compromise. In this
paper, we propose Face-diffuser, an effective collaborative
generation pipeline to eliminate the above training imbalance and quality compromise. Specifically, we first develop
two specialized pre-trained diffusion models, i.e., Text-driven
Diffusion Model (TDM) and Subject-augmented Diffusion

Model (SDM), for scene and person generation, respectively.
The sampling process is divided into three sequential stages,
i.e., semantic scene construction, subject-scene fusion, and
subject enhancement. The first and last stages are performed
by TDM and SDM respectively. The subject-scene fusion
stage, that is the collaboration achieved through a novel and
highly effective mechanism, Saliency-adaptive Noise Fusion
(SNF). Specifically, it is based on our key observation that
there exists a robust link between classifier-free guidance
responses and the saliency of generated images. In each
time step, SNF leverages the unique strengths of each model
and allows for the spatial blending of predicted noises from
both models automatically in a saliency-aware manner, all
of which can be seamlessly integrated into the DDIM sampling process. Extensive experiments confirm the impressive
effectiveness and robustness of the Face-diffuser in generating high-fidelity person images depicting multiple unseen
persons with varying contexts. Code is available at https:
//github.com/CodeGoat24/Face-diffuser.

∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

7675

