This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Summarize the Past to Predict the Future: Natural Language Descriptions of
Context Boost Multimodal Object Interaction Anticipation
Razvan-George Pasca1* Alexey Gavryushin1*
Yen-Ling Kuo3 Kaichun Mo4 Luc Van Gool1, 5, 6
1

2

ETH Zurich

3

Univ. of Virginia

Frame buffer

Activation frame

Univ. of Zurich

Past

Present

4

Muhammad Hamza2
Otmar Hilliges1 Xi Wang1

NVIDIA

5

KU Leuven

6

INSAIT, Sofia

Future

TransFusion
Estimated position
of next active object
Past observable frames

Multimodal fusion
model

Prediction frame

verb noun TTC
stir
pan 0.52s

Input egocentric video

Object detector,

spoon;
hold pan

Image captioner, ...

Models for context extraction

Estimated next action
+ time to contact

Language context

Figure 1. TransFusion: Multimodal fusion transformer for short-term object interaction anticipation. Given a video sequence of
past observations, the task aims to predict a set of objects visible in the current frame that will be interacted with in the future, i.e. in the
activation frame that is ∆ frames away from the current prediction frame. Additionally, the task requires estimating the bounding box, the
associated action described by a verb-noun pair, and the time to contact for each predicted object. We propose TransFusion, a multimodal
fusion architecture that uses language summaries of past actions and salient objects to effectively predict future object interactions.

Abstract
We study object interaction anticipation in egocentric
videos. This task requires an understanding of the spatiotemporal context formed by past actions on objects, coined
action context. We propose TransFusion, a multimodal
transformer-based architecture for short-term object interaction anticipation. Our method exploits the representational power of language by summarizing the action context textually, after leveraging pre-trained vision-language
foundation models to extract the action context from past
video frames. The summarized action context and the last
observed video frame are processed by the multimodal fusion module to forecast the next object interaction. Experiments on the Ego4D next active object interaction dataset
show the effectiveness of our multimodal fusion model and
highlight the benefits of using the power of foundation models and language-based context summaries in a task where
* Authors contributed equally.

vision may appear to suffice. Our novel approach outperforms all state-of-the-art methods on both versions of the
Ego4D dataset. A project video and code are available at
https://eth-ait.github.io/transfusion-proj/.

1. Introduction
The ability to predict plausible future human-object interactions is important for many assistive technologies. The
task of short-term object interaction anticipation [18, 22] is
defined as predicting which object a user will interact with
next, what action will be performed and when in the future,
given an egocentric video input. Providing an effective solution would help artificial agents, such as care robots, assist humans in their daily activities, as well as enable safety
applications such as child and elderly monitoring.
This task is challenging because it requires reasoning
about user intent [6, 35, 43], which is not directly observable. For example, if the video shows the user holding

18286

