This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AirPlanes: Accurate Plane Estimation via 3D-Consistent Embeddings
Jamie Watson1,3
Filippo Aleotti1
Mohamed Sayed1
Zawar Qureshi1
Oisin Mac Aodha2
Gabriel Brostow1,3
Michael Firman1
Sara Vicente1
1
2
3
Niantic
University of Edinburgh
UCL
https://nianticlabs.github.io/airplanes/
Our 3D Embeddings

Abstract
Extracting planes from a 3D scene is useful for downstream tasks in robotics and augmented reality. In this
paper we tackle the problem of estimating the planar surfaces in a scene from posed images. Our first finding is
that a surprisingly competitive baseline results from combining popular clustering algorithms with recent improvements in 3D geometry estimation. However, such purely
geometric methods are understandably oblivious to plane
semantics, which are crucial to discerning distinct planes.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a method that predicts multi-view consistent plane embeddings that complement geometry when clustering points into planes. We show
through extensive evaluation on the ScanNetV2 dataset that
our new method outperforms existing approaches and our
strong geometric baseline for the task of plane estimation.

Input:
RGB images
+ poses
Extracted Planes
Ours
Ground
truth
Planar
Recon

1. Introduction
While only parts of the real world are perfectly planar, a
3D reconstruction made out of planes is a useful parameterization for many downstream tasks. A planar scene reconstruction is a common representation for applications in
robotics [20, 51], path planning [25], and augmented reality
(AR) [75]. For example, both ARKit [2] and ARCore [21],
two of the most used AR platforms, provide 3D plane estimation from scenes as part of their frameworks.
Broadly, there are two families of approaches for 3D
plane extraction from images: geometric versus learningbased methods. Geometry-based pipelines assume access
to a point cloud or mesh of the scene, e.g., as estimated
from multi-view stereo or LIDAR. This geometry is then
partitioned into planes using geometric cues, e.g., using
RANSAC [17]. The disadvantages of these approaches are
that they can be sensitive to noisy data and they do not typically encode learned priors to facilitate robust plane estimation. In contrast, learning-based methods make use of
supervised data to develop models that can predict plane
parameters from raw images. Many prior works have fo-

?

Figure 1. We create planar scene representations using only
posed RGB images as input. Existing systems can predict perpixel planar embeddings for each image, but these are not 3D consistent. We learn a per-scene function which maps points on the
same plane to nearby positions in an embedding space. Clustering
these embeddings, using strong geometrical priors, gives accurate
planar reconstructions.

cused on the task of extracting planes from single input images [37, 38, 63, 71, 80, 82]. In practice though, it is more
common to have a sequence of input images of the scene of
interest, e.g., in AR applications where the user is interacting with new parts of the scene in real-time. There is however, only limited work that extends these learning-based
single image methods to the multi-image setting [79].
Inspired by recent work in interactive labeling [87], we
propose an alternative approach to discovering planes in
3D. We train a small MLP network for each scene, which
maps any 3D location in that scene to an embedding vec-

5270

