This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Industrial Anomaly Detection by Crossmodal Feature Mapping
Alex Costanzino∗

Pierluigi Zama Ramirez∗

Giuseppe Lisanti

Luigi Di Stefano

CVLAB, Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI) – University of Bologna, Italy

https://cvlab-unibo.github.io/CrossmodalFeatureMapping/

Abstract
Recent advancements have shown the potential of leveraging both point clouds and images to localize anomalies.
Nevertheless, their applicability in industrial manufacturing is often constrained by significant drawbacks, such as
the use of memory banks, which leads to a substantial increase in terms of memory footprint and inference times.
We propose a novel light and fast framework that learns
to map features from one modality to the other on nominal
samples and detect anomalies by pinpointing inconsistencies between observed and mapped features. Extensive experiments show that our approach achieves state-of-the-art
detection and segmentation performance in both the standard and few-shot settings on the MVTec 3D-AD dataset
while achieving faster inference and occupying less memory
than previous multimodal AD methods. Furthermore, we
propose a layer pruning technique to improve memory and
time efficiency with a marginal sacrifice in performance.

1. Introduction
Industrial Anomaly Detection (AD) aims to identify unusual characteristics or defects in products, serving as a vital
component within quality inspection processes. Collecting
data to exemplify anomalies is challenging due to their rarity and unpredictability. Therefore, most works focus on
unsupervised approaches, i.e., algorithms trained only on
samples without defects, also referred to as nominal samples. Currently, most existing AD methods are geared toward analyzing RGB images. However, in many industrial
settings, anomalies are hard to recognize effectively based
solely on colour images, e.g., due to varying light conditions
conducive to false detection and surface deviations that may
not appear as unlikely colours. Deploying colour images
and surface information acquired by 3D sensors can tackle
the above issues and substantially improve AD.
Recently, researchers have started to explore novel avenues thanks to the introduction of benchmark datasets for
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Performance, speed and memory occupancy of Multimodal Anomaly Detection methods. The chart reports defect
segmentation performance (AUPRO@30%) vs inference speed
(Frame Rate on an NVIDIA 4090 GPU).

3D anomaly detection, such as MVTec 3D-AD [5] and
Eyecandies [6]. Indeed, both provide RGB images alongside pixel-registered 3D information for all data samples,
thereby fostering the development of new, multimodal AD
approaches [17, 34, 39]. Unsupervised multimodal AD
methods like BTF [17] and M3DM [39] rely on large memory banks of multimodal features. They achieve excellent performance (AUPRO@30% metric in Fig. 1) at the
cost of extensive memory requirements and slow inference
(Fig. 1). In particular, M3DM outperforms BTF by leveraging frozen feature extractors trained by self-supervision on
large datasets, i.e., ImageNet and Shapenet, for 2D and 3D
features, respectively. Another recent multimodal method,
AST [34], follows a teacher-student paradigm conducive to
a faster architecture (Fig. 1). Yet, AST does not exploit
the spatial structure of the 3D data but employs this information just as an additional input channel in a 2D network
architecture. This results in inferior performance compared
to M3DM and BTF (Fig. 1).
In this paper, we propose a novel paradigm to exploit
the relationship between features extracted from different
modalities and improve multimodal AD. The core idea be-

17234

