This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRFCodec: Neural Feature Compression Meets Neural Radiance Fields for
Memory-Efficient Scene Representation
Sicheng Li

Hao Li

Yiyi Liao∗

Lu Yu∗∗

Zhejiang University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [28] have emerged as a popular scene representation for novel view synthesis. As a
promising representation for immersive media, how to compress NeRF with a better storage-quality trade-off is a significant problem for efficient communication and storage.
While the deep MLPs used in NeRF [28] are parameterefficient, the hybrid representation [36, 43], which combines feature grids and small MLPs, has become the mainstream due to its high reconstruction quality, fast training
∗ Corresponding author. ∗∗ Co-corresponding author.

33.5

33.0
PSNR (dB)

The emergence of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has
greatly impacted 3D scene modeling and novel-view synthesis. As a kind of visual media for 3D scene representation, compression with high rate-distortion performance is
an eternal target. Motivated by advances in neural compression and neural field representation, we propose NeRFCodec, an end-to-end NeRF compression framework that
integrates non-linear transform, quantization, and entropy
coding for memory-efficient scene representation. Since
training a non-linear transform directly on a large scale of
NeRF feature planes is impractical, we discover that pretrained neural 2D image codec can be utilized for compressing the features when adding content-specific parameters. Specifically, we reuse neural 2D image codec but modify its encoder and decoder heads, while keeping the other
parts of the pre-trained decoder frozen. This allows us to
train the full pipeline via supervision of rendering loss and
entropy loss, yielding the rate-distortion balance by updating the content-specific parameters. At test time, the bitstreams containing latent code, feature decoder head, and
other side information are transmitted for communication.
Experimental results demonstrate our method outperforms
existing NeRF compression methods, enabling high-quality
novel view synthesis with a memory budget of 0.5 MB.

36.21 dB / 0.46 MB

NeRF-Synthetic Dataset

32.5

36.60 dB / 0.91 MB

32.0

Masked Wavelet NeRF
Binary Radiance Fields
VQ-TensoRF
NeRFCodec (Ours)

31.5
1

2

3
4
Size (MB)

5

(a) Rate-distortion performance

(b) Rendered images

Figure 1. Compression performance.

speed, and efficient rendering. However, its drawback lies
in the significant storage requirements. Consequently, subsequent research efforts have emerged to reduce the storage
footprint of the hybrid representation without compromising reconstruction quality.
One line of work focuses on efficient data structure design of feature grids, which involves using more parameterefficient data structures, e.g., tensor factorization-based representations [8, 9] and multi-resolution hash grids [30], to
replace dense voxel grids. These methods allow for reducing the number of parameters, e.g., from 1GB to 50MB,
without sacrificing the quality. However, this size still requires further reduction.
Another line of work focuses on compressing parameters
using compression techniques like quantization [24, 33, 37]
and entropy coding [24]. However, most works in this field
overlook another effective compression method, transform
coding [18], that transforms the original data to another
space based on linear [23, 40] or non-linear mapping [2].
The image compression community demonstrates that the
combination of transform coding, quantization, and entropy
coding leads to the most competitive compression performance [6, 34, 35]. Recently, there is a work named Masked
Wavelet NeRF [32], which is the first to consider trans-

21274

