This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Infrared Small Target Detection with Scale and Location Sensitivity
Qiankun Liu1 Rui Liu1,2 Bolun Zheng3 Hongkui Wang3 Ying Fu1,2 *
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Hangzhou Dianzi University
{liuqk3, liurui20}@bit.edu.cn, {blzheng, wanghk}@hdu.edu.cn, fuying@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
70

1. Introduction
Infrared small target detection (IRSTD) is an important
computer vision task, which has a wide range of applications, such as maritime surveillance [20, 34], traffic management [26, 27, 30] and so on. However, due to the longdistance camera capture, and the noise and clutter interference, infrared targets are often small and dim, making it
difficult to detect infrared small targets effectively.
To enhance the detection performance of infrared small
* Corresponding author

ALCNet

60
IoU (%)

Recently, infrared small target detection (IRSTD) has
been dominated by deep-learning-based methods. However, these methods mainly focus on the design of complex
model structures to extract discriminative features, leaving the loss functions for IRSTD under-explored. For example, the widely used Intersection over Union (IoU) and
Dice losses lack sensitivity to the scales and locations of
targets, limiting the detection performance of detectors. In
this paper, we focus on boosting detection performance with
a more effective loss but a simpler model structure. Specifically, we first propose a novel Scale and Location Sensitive (SLS) loss to handle the limitations of existing losses:
1) for scale sensitivity, we compute a weight for the IoU
loss based on target scales to help the detector distinguish
targets with different scales: 2) for location sensitivity, we
introduce a penalty term based on the center points of targets to help the detector localize targets more precisely.
Then, we design a simple Multi-Scale Head to the plain UNet (MSHNet). By applying SLS loss to each scale of the
predictions, our MSHNet outperforms existing state-of-theart methods by a large margin. In addition, the detection
performance of existing detectors can be further improved
when trained with our SLS loss, demonstrating the effectiveness and generalization of our SLS loss. The code is available at https://github.com/ying-fu/MSHNet.

DNANet

50
40

ISNet

MSHNet
(Ours)

MDvsFA

30
200

20

40
60
Images/second

80

100

Figure 1. Visualization of the detection performance (IoU), inference time consumption (Images/second) as well as the number of floating point of operations (area of circles) of some deeplearning-based methods. It can be seen that our MSHNet achieves
a better balance between these three metrics than other methods.
Results are evaluated on IRSTD-1k [30].

targets, numerous methods have been proposed. Early traditional methods can be divided into filtering-based methods
[5, 17], local-contrast-based methods [9, 10], and low-rankbased methods [2, 28, 29, 31]. However, these traditional
methods rely on manually designed features, and thus can
not generalize well to environment changes. Recently, with
the development of Deep Learning (DL), IRSTD has been
dominated by DL-based methods [1, 15, 21, 24]. Different
from traditional methods, DL-based methods can automatically learn useful features through a gradient descent algorithm with the constraints of loss functions, making them
more robust to various scenarios.
However, existing DL-based methods primarily focus on
designing complex model structures for feature extraction,
leaving the loss functions for IRSTD under-explored. For
instance, Li et.al. [14] customize a dense nested interactive
module to achieve multi-layer feature fusion, and Wu et.al.
[25] nest the U-Net structure to achieve feature aggregation. Although discriminative features can be extracted by
the complex model structures, the detection performance is
still limited by the under-explored loss functions. For ex-

17490

