This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayoutFormer: Hierarchical Text Detection Towards Scene Text Understanding
Min Liang, Jia-Wei Ma, Xiaobin Zhu*, Jingyan Qin, Xu-Cheng Yin
University of Science and Technology Beijing
{lm20200126, mjw20151001}@hotmail.com, {zhuxiaobin, xuchengyin}@ustb.edu.cn,
qinjingyanking@foxmail.com

Abstract
Existing scene text detectors generally focus on accurately detecting single-level (i.e., word-level, line-level, or
paragraph-level) text entities without exploring the relationships among different levels of text entities. To comprehensively understand scene texts, detecting multi-level
texts while exploring their contextual information is critical. To this end, we propose a unified framework (dubbed
LayoutFormer) for hierarchical text detection, which simultaneously conducts multi-level text detection and predicts
the geometric layouts for promoting scene text understanding. In LayoutFormer, WordDecoder, LineDecoder, and ParaDecoder are proposed to be responsible for word-level
text prediction, line-level text prediction, and paragraphlevel text prediction, respectively. Meanwhile, WordDecoder and ParaDecoder adaptively learn word-line and
line-paragraph relationships, respectively. In addition, we
propose a Prior Location Sampler to be used on multi-scale
features to adaptively select a few representative foreground
features for updating text queries. It can improve hierarchical detection performance while significantly reducing
the computational cost. Comprehensive experiments verify
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
single-level and hierarchical text detection.

1. Introduction
Reading and understanding texts in scene images and digital
documents is important in various real-world applications,
including visual recognition [40], scene understanding [4],
and text-based VQA [1, 30]. Compared to words, phrases
and sentences express more semantic messages, and paragraphs convey richer contextual semantic messages. For
better reading and understanding texts in scenes, it is necessary to simultaneously detect multi-level texts (i.e., word* Corresponding Author. This work was supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (2020AAA0109701), National
Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (62125601), and National
Natural Science Foundation of China (62076024, 62172035).

Figure 1. Top: LayoutFormer is introduced for hierarchical text
detection, which simultaneously detects multi-level texts (i.e.,
word-level, line-level, and paragraph-level) and predicts their geometric layouts. Bottom: Pipeline comparisons of (a) single-level
detector, (b) two-level detector, and (c) hierarchical text detector.

level for words, line-level for phrases and sentences, and
paragraph-level for paragraphs) and predict their geometric
layouts [16, 44], i.e., hierarchical text detection [25]. Hierarchical texts can deliver complete and meaningful text
messages, which is beneficial for various downstream tasks.
Although existing scene text detectors have achieved
promising performance, they [32, 47] often concentrate on
detecting single-level text, which decodes the encoded features of an input image into their representation of independent text entities, e.g., words, lines, or paragraphs. As
shown in Fig. 1 (a), single-level detectors only predict one
level of text results and do not explore the contextual relationship among different levels of texts. This makes them
unable to deliver more informative messages for facilitating scene text understanding. Recently, some methods have
investigated two-level text detection. A schematic of the
framework is shown in Fig. 1 (b). CUTE [43] proposes a

15665

