This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Retrieval-Augmented Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Jooyeon Kim1, * Eulrang Cho2, *,† Sehyung Kim1 Hyunwoo J. Kim1,‡
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University 2 Samsung Research
{parang, shkim129, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

eulrang.cho@samsung.com

Abstract
Open-vocabulary object detection (OVD) has been studied with Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to detect novel
objects beyond the pre-trained categories. Previous approaches improve the generalization ability to expand the
knowledge of the detector, using ‘positive’ pseudo-labels
with additional ‘class’ names, e.g., sock, iPod, and alligator. To extend the previous methods in two aspects, we
propose Retrieval-Augmented Losses and visual Features
(RALF). Our method retrieves related ‘negative’ classes
and augments loss functions. Also, visual features are augmented with ‘verbalized concepts’ of classes, e.g., worn on
the feet, handheld music player, and sharp teeth. Specifically, RALF consists of two modules: Retrieval Augmented Losses (RAL) and Retrieval-Augmented visual Features (RAF). RAL constitutes two losses reflecting the semantic similarity with negative vocabularies. In addition,
RAF augments visual features with the verbalized concepts from a large language model (LLM). Our experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of RALF on COCO and LVIS
benchmark datasets. We achieve improvement up to 3.4
box APN50 on novel categories of the COCO dataset and 3.6
mask APr gains on the LVIS dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/RALF.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary object detection (OVD) aims to detect
objects belonging to open-set categories. It is a challenging
task because novel categories do not appear during training. Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) enable the
detector to recognize base categories as well as novel categories via their zero-shot visual recognition ability learned
from large-scale image-text pairs from the Internet. For instance, CLIP [19] and ALIGN [12] are widely used in OVD
to classify unseen objects [8, 16, 28].
Knowledge distillation is one approach to transfer the
* Equal contribution.
† This work was done when she was working at Korea University.
‡ Corresponding author.

Similar:

‘jaguar’
Vocabulary Set

cat

Disimilar: bottle

(a) Retrieving hard (similar) and easy negative (dissimilar) classes.

sock
iPod
Vocabulary Set

alligator

worn on the feet
LLM

handheld music player
sharp teeth

strong tail

Concepts

(b) Verbalized concepts to augment visual features

Figure 1. Negative vocabularies and verbalized concepts from
a large vocabulary set. (a) Example of negative vocabularies that
can be derived from a large vocabulary set. From the vocabulary set, ‘cat’ and ‘bottle’ can be retrieved as hard negative (similar) and easy negative (dissimilar) vocabulary, given the category
‘jaguar’. (b) Example of verbalized concepts that are generated
from LLMs. The concepts of the objects provide more detailed
information about the object, such as the attributes.

knowledge of VLMs to the detector. It has been extensively
explored in the literature [5, 8, 23, 28, 36]. For the more effective knowledge distillation, some works have endeavored
to match words at the region level rather than at the image
level to ensure better alignment [23, 28, 36]. To improve
generalization to novel categories, several studies employ
pseudo-labeling to expand detector knowledge [4,6,35,36].
Pseudo-labels (positive classes) are generated for region
proposals by matching their visual features with words from
additional vocabulary sets or captions. So, the additional
vocabulary sets are constructed only focusing on ‘positive’
classes. We believe that more diverse vocabulary sets such
as ‘negative’ classes and verbalized (visual) concepts with
new techniques will open the door to further improve OVD
frameworks.
To study the underexplored directions, in this paper we
propose methods utilizing ‘negative’ classes and ‘verbalized concepts’ to more effectively use vocabulary sets to
enhance the generalization ability to novel categories. One

17427

