This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Strong Transferable Adversarial Attacks via Ensembled Asymptotically Normal
Distribution Learning

1

Zhengwei Fang1,2 , Rui Wang1,2,3 *, Tao Huang1,2 , Liping Jing1,2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
3
Collaborative Innovation Center of Railway Traffic Safety, Beijing, China
jankinfmail@gmail.com, {rui.wang,thuang,lpjing}@bjtu.edu.cn

𝒙𝒂𝒅𝒗
(VMI-FGSM)

Abstract
Strong adversarial examples are crucial for evaluating
and enhancing the robustness of deep neural networks.
However, the performance of popular attacks is usually sensitive, for instance, to minor image transformations, stemming from limited information — typically only one input
example, a handful of white-box source models, and undefined defense strategies. Hence, the crafted adversarial
examples are prone to overfit the source model, which hampers their transferability to unknown architectures. In this
paper, we propose an approach named Multiple Asymptotically Normal Distribution Attacks (MultiANDA) which
explicitly characterize adversarial perturbations from a
learned distribution. Specifically, we approximate the posterior distribution over the perturbations by taking advantage of the asymptotic normality property of stochastic gradient ascent (SGA), then employ the deep ensemble strategy
as an effective proxy for Bayesian marginalization in this
process, aiming to estimate a mixture of Gaussians that facilitates a more thorough exploration of the potential optimization space. The approximated posterior essentially describes the stationary distribution of SGA iterations, which
captures the geometric information around the local optimum. Thus, MultiANDA allows drawing an unlimited number of adversarial perturbations for each input and reliably maintains the transferability. Our proposed method
outperforms ten state-of-the-art black-box attacks on deep
learning models with or without defenses through extensive
experiments on seven normally trained and seven defense
models.

1. Introduction
Albeit the excellent performance of deep neural networks
(DNNs) across a broad spectrum of tasks in machine vi* Corresponding author.

𝜹
(VMI-FGSM)

𝒙𝒂𝒅𝒗
(ANDA)

𝜹
(ANDA)

𝒙𝒂𝒅𝒗
(MultiANDA)

𝜹
(MultiANDA)

Figure 1. Perturbation visualization of the adversarial examples
generated by ANDA/MultiANDA that fool all selected normally
trained (first row) and defense (second row) models.

sion and natural language processing, a rich stream of work
[8, 14, 39, 50, 51] shows the non-negligible vulnerability
of DNNs to adversarial attacks, which craft imperceptible
perturbations to synthesize malicious inputs for triggering
unexpected model predictions. Such severe degradation
of model robustness and stability greatly hinders the application of DNNs in security- or safety-critical domains
[1, 2, 11]. Fortunately, studying how to create potent adversarial examples aids in evaluating DNN-based systems and
enhancing their robustness by devising defensive strategies,
such as adversarial training [14, 29].
This paper focuses on the black-box and transfer-based
threat model. The corresponding adversarial attack algorithms intend to synthesize the adversarial examples that
can successfully fool the unknown DNNs without accessing
any information on model architectures and outputs. Researchers implement such attacks by maximizing the nonconcave loss function of a substitute model trained for the
same task with, for example, one step [14], or iterative steps
[20] of gradient ascent optimization. However, prior work
has shown the generated adversarial examples trend to overfit the substitute model, which hardly attacks other models
[21]. Meanwhile, they are often sensitive to minor transformations [4, 26, 27].
Hence, researchers have been exploring various data

24841

