This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PFStorer: Personalized Face Restoration and Super-Resolution
Tuomas Varanka∗1

Tapani Toivonen2 Soumya Tripathy2 Guoying Zhao1
1
2
University of Oulu
Huawei Finland

Erman Acar2

tuomas.varanka@oulu.fi

Figure 1. Imagine wanting to restore a photo of yourself, only for the resulting image to not be you, but someone else! By utilizing a few
high-quality reference images, we can faithfully restore images with fine-grained details. Best viewed by zooming in.

Abstract
Recent developments in face restoration have achieved
remarkable results in producing high-quality and lifelike
outputs. The stunning results however often fail to be faithful with respect to the identity of the person as the models
lack necessary context. In this paper, we explore the potential of personalized face restoration with diffusion models.
In our approach a restoration model is personalized using
a few images of the identity, leading to tailored restoration
with respect to the identity while retaining fine-grained details. By using independent trainable blocks for personalization, the rich prior of a base restoration model can be exploited to its fullest. To avoid the model relying on parts of
identity left in the conditioning low-quality images, a generative regularizer is employed. With a learnable parameter,
the model learns to balance between the details generated
∗ This research was performed during an internship at Huawei Finland.

based on the input image and the degree of personalization. Moreover, we improve the training pipeline of face
restoration models to enable an alignment-free approach.
We showcase the robust capabilities of our approach in several real-world scenarios with multiple identities, demonstrating our method’s ability to generate fine-grained details with faithful restoration. In the user study we evaluate the perceptual quality and faithfulness of the generated
details, with our method being voted best 61% of the time
compared to the second best with 25% of the votes.

1. Introduction
Face restoration aims to recover HQ (high-quality) face
images from degraded observations, such as blur, lowresolution, noise and compression artifacts. In real-world
scenarios, the task is even more challenging, due to more
complex degradations and variations in illumination and

2372

