This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evidential Active Recognition: Intelligent and Prudent
Open-World Embodied Perception
Lei Fan1 , Mingfu Liang1 , Yunxuan Li1 , Gang Hua2 and Ying Wu1
1
Northwestern University 2 Wormpex AI Research
{leifan,mingfuliang2020,yunxuanli2019}@u.northwestern.edu,ganghua@gmail.com,yingwu@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
Passive visual recognition, encompassing a broad range
of approaches such as image-based and video-based techniques [17, 27, 37, 56], has experienced tremendous success
in recent decades. Nonetheless, a contrasting approach, the
active recognition system [1, 2, 4], offers unique advantages.
Namely, it benefits from the ability to move within and perceive its environment, allowing it to dynamically determine
visual inputs, as opposed to relying on pre-captured images.
A number of approaches [5–7, 32] in active recognition
have been proposed over the years with information gain
quantification [15], auxiliary task modeling [13, 41], and
discriminative feature discovery [29]. Given its sequential
nature, prevalent approaches [16, 20, 29, 55] involve combin-

desk sofa door

*

Recognition

*

Both rewards
are correct for
policy learning.

desk sofa door unknown

Standard

*

Move

Ours

Move

What is
that?

Target is missing

Target in the frame

Standard

Active recognition enables robots to intelligently explore
novel observations, thereby acquiring more information
while circumventing undesired viewing conditions. Recent
approaches favor learning policies from simulated or collected data, wherein appropriate actions are more frequently
selected when the recognition is accurate. However, most
recognition modules are developed under the closed-world
assumption, which makes them ill-equipped to handle unexpected inputs, such as the absence of the target object in the
current observation. To address this issue, we propose treating active recognition as a sequential evidence-gathering
process, providing by-step uncertainty quantification and
reliable prediction under the evidence combination theory.
Additionally, the reward function developed in this paper
effectively characterizes the merit of actions when operating
in open-world environments. To evaluate the performance,
we collect a dataset from an indoor simulator, encompassing
various recognition challenges such as distance, occlusion
levels, and visibility. Through a series of experiments on
recognition and robustness analysis, we demonstrate the necessity of introducing uncertainties to active recognition and
the superior performance of the proposed method.

Initial frame

Ours

Abstract

*
desk sofa door

Recognition
Standard
reward could
be misleading.

*

*

desk sofa door unknown

Figure 1. An overview of active recognition agents operating in an
open-world environment with different recognition models. The
agent is initially queried to perform recognition. In standard practice, the recognition model is unable to identify its own failures,
especially when confronted with unexpected inputs, which may
lead to incorrect rewards for the policy. In contrast, our approach
estimates uncertainty at each step and fuses the collected evidence
to provide a final prediction.

ing recognition models, such as object detectors or classifiers,
with reinforcement learning techniques. The rewards, which
can take the form of recognition accuracy, serve as incentives
for the policy and are directly associated with the outputs
of the recognition model. Nevertheless, the reward could
be misleading when deploying the agent in open environments [25]. Consider an agent being queried with a target in
the initial observation. The target may be out of view during subsequent movements, i.e., an unexpected input for the
recognition system. As a consequence, the recognition might
fail to provide rewards that accurately represent the worth of
actions being taken, impeding effective policy learning.
Regarding this challenge, our insight is derived from an
instinctive understanding of how humans learn from experience. We consciously weigh our learning based on the level
of trust we have in our observations. When faced with a high
degree of uncertainty, we exercise caution in drawing conclusions from our experiences. Likewise, the agent should
evaluate the uncertainty in its observations to avoid being
negatively influenced by unexpected inputs, such as when
the target object exhibits high ambiguity or is simply not
present in the input.

16351

