This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Versatile Navigation under Partial Observability via Value-guided Diffusion Policy
Gengyu Zhang1 Hao Tang2 Yan Yan1,†
1
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
gzhang32@hawk.iit.edu, bjdxtanghao@gmail.com, yyan34@iit.edu

obstacles
observed
unobserved
agent

Abstract
Route planning for navigation under partial observability
plays a crucial role in modern robotics and autonomous
driving. Existing route planning approaches can be categorized into two main classes: traditional autoregressive and
diffusion-based methods. The former often fails due to its myopic nature, while the latter either assumes full observability
or struggles to adapt to unfamiliar scenarios, due to strong
couplings with behavior cloning from experts. To address
these deficiencies, we propose a versatile diffusion-based
approach for both 2D and 3D route planning under partial
observability. Specifically, our value-guided diffusion policy first generates plans to predict actions across various
timesteps, providing ample foresight to the planning. It then
employs a differentiable planner with state estimations to
derive a value function, directing the agent’s exploration and
goal-seeking behaviors without seeking experts while explicitly addressing partial observability. During inference, our
policy is further enhanced by a best-plan-selection strategy,
substantially boosting the planning success rate. Moreover,
we propose projecting point clouds, derived from RGB-D
inputs, onto 2D grid-based bird-eye-view maps via semantic
segmentation, generalizing to 3D environments. This simple
yet effective adaption enables zero-shot transfer from 2Dtrained policy to 3D, cutting across the laborious training for
3D policy, and thus certifying our versatility. Experimental
results demonstrate our superior performance, particularly
in navigating situations beyond expert demonstrations, surpassing state-of-the-art autoregressive and diffusion-based
baselines for both 2D and 3D scenarios.

1. Introduction
Navigation is a critical component in mobile robotics and
autonomous driving dependent on sequential planning, a
process of evaluating and selecting an action sequence that
most effectively achieves a specific goal. However, traditional autoregressive planning methods for navigation, as
† Corresponding author

input sequence

...
value-guided diffusion policy
output sequence

Figure 1. Our value-guided diffusion policy under partial observability. It processes local partial observations to generate action
sequences adaptable for both 2D and 3D scenarios.

mentioned in [11, 14, 31], face two significant limitations.
First, they select actions sequentially, where each decision
is based on the previous one and the consequent state transitions. This step-by-step approach is not well-suited for tasks
with longer horizons, as it lacks foresight. The problem
worsens in partially observable settings, where increased uncertainty introduces greater computational demands to solve
complex mathematical frameworks [13, 28]. Additionally,
the necessity for instantaneous decision-making in real-time
navigation can be at odds with the once-per-step inference
rate of traditional planning methods. Second, these methods
often require a substantial volume of data to learn effective
policies for 3D navigation. In practice, however, gathering large datasets can be impractical due to environmental,
logistical, or equipment constraints, resulting in a limited
set of offline data. When faced with such data deficiency,
traditional methods tend to yield suboptimal performance.
To overcome the limitations carried by autoregressive
planning, we explore trajectory-level behavior synthesis.
This novel approach capitalizes on the capabilities of generative models, particularly diffusion models [1, 4, 12, 17,
19, 24]. Unlike autoregressive methods that generate actions sequentially, diffusion-based approaches synthesize
entire action trajectories simultaneously, enhancing multistep planning efficiency during inference. However, to our
best knowledge, no existing work of this class has actively
explored their effectiveness under partial observability. Thus,
through a significant modification, we adapt this concept for

17943

