This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborating Foundation Models for Domain Generalized
Semantic Segmentation
Yasser Benigmim1,2

Subhankar Roy3 Slim Essid1 Vicky Kalogeiton2 Stéphane Lathuilière1
LTCI, Télécom-Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
2
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 3 University of Aberdeen
1

yasser.benigmim@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS)
deals with training a model on a labeled source domain
with the aim of generalizing to unseen domains during inference. Existing DGSS methods typically effectuate robust
features by means of Domain Randomization (DR). Such an
approach is often limited as it can only account for style
diversification and not content. In this work, we take an
orthogonal approach to DGSS and propose to use an assembly of CoLlaborative FOUndation models for Domain
Generalized Semantic Segmentation (CLOUDS). In detail,
CLOUDS is a framework that integrates Foundation Models of various kinds: (i) CLIP backbone for its robust feature
representation, (ii) Diffusion Model to diversify the content, thereby covering various modes of the possible target distribution, and (iii) Segment Anything Model (SAM)
for iteratively refining the predictions of the segmentation
model. Extensive experiments show that our CLOUDS excels in adapting from synthetic to real DGSS benchmarks
and under varying weather conditions, notably outperforming prior methods by 5.6% and 6.7% on averaged mIoU, respectively. Our code is available at https://github.
com/yasserben/CLOUDS

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have showcased remarkable ability in scene understanding tasks like Semantic Segmentation (SS) [7, 70, 72], when the training and test distribution are the same. This dependency reveals a significant
vulnerability: their performance substantially diminishes
when encountering domain shifts [66], highlighting a fundamental challenge in generalizing these networks to unseen domains [43, 46, 61]. To address this, Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS) has gained prominence [28, 31, 33, 82]. DGSS aims to develop models that
leverage a source-annotated dataset while remaining effec-

mIoU
60

Ours
Traditional DGSS
Open-vocabulary (zero-shot)

55

FC-CLIP

DGSS with foundation models

50

ODISE
MoDify

FSDR SHADE

45

HRDA

CATSeg
TLDR

GTR
DRPC

40
2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

Year

Figure 1. Performance over time by various methods on the
GTA → {Cityscapes, BDD, Mapillary} benchmark. Recent openvocabulary approaches, like FC-CLIP, are shown to excel in zeroshot learning and surpass traditional domain generalization methods trained in closed-set scenarios, challenging the relevance of
the DGSS setting. CLOUDS, by harnessing multiple foundation
models, demonstrates its ability to effectively utilize the source
dataset, thereby outperforming both conventional DGSS and openvocabulary methods.

tive across unseen domains, thus overcoming the limitations
of traditional DNNs in handling unseen environments.
Recently, the advent of large-scale pretrained models,
often referred to as Foundation Models (FMs) [2, 35, 56,
59, 67], have brought a paradigm shift in computer vision tasks. The FMs comprise of contrastively trained image classification models (e.g., CLIP [56], ALIGN [30]),
text-conditioned generative models (e.g., Stable Diffusion
[59], DALL-E [57]), vision transformer-based segmentation model trained on mammoth dataset (e.g., Segment
Anything Model (SAM) [35]), to name a few. Of particular interest to SS, SAM is a promptable segmentation model that accepts as input an image and geometric
prompts (points, scribbles, boxes, masks) and outputs classagnostic masks. Owing to its pre-training on billion-scale
dataset [35], SAM has demonstrated excellent performance
on varied out-of-distribution tasks namely, medical imaging

3108

