This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Physics-informed Low-rank Deep Neural Network for
Blind and Universal Lens Aberration Correction
Jin Gong1

Runzhao Yang1

Weihang Zhang1

Jinli Suo1,2,3

Qionghai Dai1,2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
1

Abstract
High-end lenses, although offering high-quality images,
suffer from both insufficient affordability and bulky design,
which hamper their applications in low-budget scenarios or
on low-payload platforms. A flexible scheme is to tackle the
optical aberration of low-end lenses computationally. However, it is highly demanded but quite challenging to build
a general model capable of handling non-stationary aberrations and covering diverse lenses, especially in a blind
manner. To address this issue, we propose a universal solution by extensively utilizing the physical properties of camera
lenses: (i) reducing the complexity of lens aberrations, i.e.,
lens-specific non-stationary blur, by warping annual-ringshaped sub-images into rectangular stripes to transform
non-uniform degenerations into a uniform one, (ii) building
a low-dimensional non-negative orthogonal representation
of lens blur kernels to cover diverse lenses; (iii) designing
a decoupling network to decompose the input low-quality
image into several components degenerated by above kernel
bases, and applying corresponding pre-trained deconvolution networks to reverse the degeneration. Benefiting from
the proper incorporation of lenses’ physical properties and
unique network design, the proposed method achieves superb imaging quality, wide applicability for various lenses,
high running efficiency, and is totally free of kernel calibration. These advantages bring great potential for scenarios
requiring lightweight high-quality photography.

1. Introduction
High-quality photography is of crucial importance for both
high-fidelity visual recording (e.g., filmmaking, sports video
capturing) and sophisticated computer vision tasks (e.g.,
surveillance, auto-piloting). High-end camera systems often
employ compound lenses comprising approximately ten or
more components constructed from diverse materials to com-

pensate for geometric and photometric aberrations. Such
complicated designs are proven to be effective in achieving nice image quality, but come with inherent drawbacks,
including high costs, bulkiness, and fragility, making them
unsuitable for scenarios with low payload capacity or limited
budgets. Consequently, the demand for high-quality photography using lightweight lenses has significantly intensified.
Considering the optical aberration in image formation
and the afterward processing jointly, the workload in optical design can be shifted to the later stage [23, 28], where
advanced reconstruction algorithms play a crucial role. One
can also utilize the physical properties in the imaging setup
to facilitate reconstruction, and researchers have made some
primary efforts in this direction [32, 45].
However, grand challenges lie in the variability of optical
aberrations across the field of view and diverse lenses. On
the one hand, the quality degeneration of a simple lens is
intrinsically a convolution with non-uniform blur kernels,
and the typical compensation algorithms [43] approximate
the globally non-uniform deconvolution with patch-wise
uniform deconvolutions, leading to a trade-off between precision and computational efficiency. This trade-off comes up
with high inflexibility when adopting data-driven approaches
[14, 41], which require learning a large number of models
to achieve high-performance results. On the other hand, the
degradation of different lenses varies significantly, so lensspecific algorithm development or parameter optimizations
are required for high reconstruction performance. Furthermore, the calibration of the PSF kernels of camera lenses
is quite expertise-demanding[27, 46], and blind compensation is more favorable for users. Overall, computational
compensation for lens aberrations holds great promise for
achieving lightweight high-quality imaging. However, there
is a pressing demand for a general approach to handle spatially varying aberrations of diverse lenses in a blind manner.
In this paper, we propose a physics-informed end-to-end
solution that (i) capitalizes the characteristics of lens aber-

24861

