This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From-Ground-To-Objects: Coarse-to-Fine Self-supervised Monocular Depth
Estimation of Dynamic Objects with Ground Contact Prior
Jaeho Moon

Juan Luis Gonzalez Bello

Byeongjun Kwon

Munchurl Kim

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{jaeho.moon, juanluisgb, kbj2738, mkimee}@kaist.ac.kr
https://kaist-viclab.github.io/From_Ground_To_Objects_site/

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation (DE) is an
approach to learning depth without costly depth ground
truths. However, it often struggles with moving objects that
violate the static scene assumption during training. To address this issue, we introduce a coarse-to-fine training strategy leveraging the ground contacting prior based on the observation that most moving objects in outdoor scenes contact the ground. In the coarse training stage, we exclude
the objects in dynamic classes from the reprojection loss
calculation to avoid inaccurate depth learning. To provide
precise supervision on the depth of the objects, we present a
novel Ground-contacting-prior Disparity Smoothness Loss
(GDS-Loss) that encourages a DE network to align the
depth of the objects with their ground-contacting points.
Subsequently, in the fine training stage, we refine the DE
network to learn the detailed depth of the objects from the
reprojection loss, while ensuring accurate DE on the moving object regions by employing our regularization loss with
a cost-volume-based weighting factor. Our overall coarseto-fine training strategy can easily be integrated with existing DE methods without any modifications, significantly
enhancing DE performance on challenging Cityscapes and
KITTI datasets, especially in the moving object regions.

1. Introduction
Recent neural-network-based methods for depth estimation
(DE) from 2D images have shown promising performance
as the demand for 3D information grows with navigation,
robotics, and AR/VR applications. While supervised methods [2, 10, 29, 33, 45] utilize expensive and sparse ground
truth (GT) depth for training, self-supervised methods learn
depth by minimizing photometric errors (or reprojection
loss) between the target frame and the warped frames from
stereo images [11, 12, 14, 15, 48, 50] or consecutive frames
in monocular videos [13, 17, 51, 54].

Ground Truth

Image
ܽଵ : 0.661

ܾܽ‫݈݁ݎ_ݏ‬: 0.422

Error Map

Depth Map

1.0

0.0

Point Cloud Reconstruction

MonoViT [54]
ܽଵ : 0.913

Depth Map

ܾܽ‫݈݁ݎ_ݏ‬: 0.095

Error Map

1.0

0.0

Point Cloud Reconstruction

Ours-MonoViT

Figure 1. The effect of our coarse-to-fine self-supervised DE training strategy applied to MonoViT [54]. In the error maps, blue indicates small errors, and red indicates large errors.

In the pipeline of self-supervised depth learning for
monocular videos, a DE network often learns inaccurate
depth of moving objects that break the static scene assumption but still minimize the reprojection loss for selfsupervision [13, 17, 18, 27]. To handle the moving object
problem, the ‘automasking’ [13] is proposed to exclude the
static pixels in sequential frames from the reprojection loss
calculation. More recent work suggested to estimate 3D object motions [22, 30–32] or to disentangle object motion for
cost volume construction [9]. However, these methods confront inherent ambiguities in learning the depth and motion
of the objects without precise supervision.

10519

