This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Prior Information Generation with CLIP for Few-Shot Segmentation
Jin Wang1

Bingfeng Zhang1 * Jian Pang1 Honglong Chen1
1
China University of Petroleum (East China)

Weifeng Liu1 *

{wangjin, jianpang}@s.upc.edu.cn, {bingfeng.zhang, wfliu, chenhl}@upc.edu.cn

PASCAL-5i

1. Introduction
With the development of deep learning [3, 4], semantic segmentation [16, 29, 34, 51, 63] has made a great progress.
Traditional semantic segmentation relies on intensive annotations which is time-consuming and labour-intensive,
once the segmentation model encounters samples with limited labeled data, it cannot output accurate prediction, making it difficult to apply in practice. Few-shot segmentation [19, 50, 57] is proposed to address the above problem, which aims to segment novel classes with a few annotated samples during inference. To achieve this, it divides
data into a support set and a query set, the images in the
query set are segmented using the provided information in
* Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/vangjin/PI-CLIP

(b)
(c)
(d)

Few-shot segmentation remains challenging due to the
limitations of its labeling information for unseen classes.
Most previous approaches rely on extracting high-level feature maps from the frozen visual encoder to compute the
pixel-wise similarity as a key prior guidance for the decoder. However, such a prior representation suffers from
coarse granularity and poor generalization to new classes
since these high-level feature maps have obvious category
bias. In this work, we propose to replace the visual prior
representation with the visual-text alignment capacity to
capture more reliable guidance and enhance the model generalization. Specifically, we design two kinds of trainingfree prior information generation strategy that attempts to
utilize the semantic alignment capability of the Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training model (CLIP) to locate the
target class. Besides, to acquire more accurate prior guidance, we build a high-order relationship of attention maps
and utilize it to refine the initial prior information. Experiments on both the PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i datasets show
that our method obtains a clearly substantial improvement
and reaches the new state-of-the-art performance. The code
is available on the project website 1 .

COCO-20i

(a)

Abstract

Figure 1. Comparison of prior information. (a) Support images with ground-truth masks; (b) Query images with ground-truth
masks; (c) Prior information from previous approaches generated
based on the frozen ImageNet [5] weights, which are biased towards some classes, such as the ‘Person’ class; (d) Our prior information, which is generated utilizing the text and visual alignment
ability of the frozen CLIP model. Our prior information is finergrained and mitigates the bias of the class.

the support set as a reference. Existing few-shot segmentation methods can be roughly categorized into two types:
pixel-level matching [12, 43, 54, 54, 58] and prototype-level
matching [8, 19, 39, 50, 53, 57]. Pixel-level matching uses
the pixel-to-pixel matching mechanism [41, 43, 60] to enforce the few-shot model mine pixel-wise relationship [1,
49, 60]. Prototype-level matching methods extract prototypes [14, 26, 37, 52] from the support set to perform similarity [11, 21, 38, 39] or dense comparisons [2, 6, 20, 22, 47]
with the query image features to make predictions. No matter pixel-level matching or prototype-level matching, most
recent approaches [8, 19, 22, 39, 45] introduce the prior
masks [19, 25, 62] as a coarse localization map to guide
the matching or segmentation process to concentrate on the
located regions. However, such prior masks are mainly generated through interacting fixed high-dimensional features
from the visual pre-trained models, i.e., CNN with ImageNet [5] pre-train initialization, causing several insolvable
problems as shown in Fig. 1: 1) incorrect target location

3941

