This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vector Graphics Generation via Mutually Impulsed Dual-domain Diffusion
Zhongyin Zhao1 Ye Chen1 Zhangli Hu1 Xuanhong Chen1,2 Bingbing Ni1,2∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
USC-SJTU Institute of Cultural and Creative Industry
{zhao zhongyin, chenye123, tension-2019, chen19910528, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Intelligent generation of vector graphics has very
promising applications in the fields of advertising and logo
design, artistic painting, animation production, etc. However, current mainstream vector image generation methods
lack the encoding of image appearance information that
is associated with the original vector representation and
therefore lose valid supervision signal from the strong correlation between the discrete vector parameter (drawing instruction) sequence and the target shape/structure of the
corresponding pixel image. On the one hand, the generation process based on pure vector domain completely ignores the similarity measurement between shape parameter (and their combination) and the paired pixel image appearance pattern; on the other hand, two-stage methods
(i.e., generation-and-vectorization) based on pixel diffusion
followed by differentiable image-to-vector translation suffer from wrong error-correction signal caused by approximate gradients. To address the above issues, we propose a
novel generation framework based on dual-domain (vectorpixel) diffusion with cross-modality impulse signals from
each other. First, in each diffusion step, the current representation extracted from the other domain is used as a condition variable to constrain the subsequent sampling operation, yielding shape-aware new parameterizations; second,
independent supervision signals from both domains avoid
the gradient error accumulation problem caused by crossdomain representation conversion. Extensive experimental results on popular benchmarks including font and icon
datasets demonstrate the great advantages of our proposed
framework in terms of generated shape quality.

1. Introduction
Vector graphics are a representation of images using a sequence of drawing instructions. Unlike traditional raster
graphics, vector graphics preserve their geometric proper∗ Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni

Noise

Generated Vector

Vector
Generator

Vector Labels and Primitive

Vector Supervision

Pure vector generation
No Pixel Similarity

Vector Primitive

No Pixel Labels

Pure Vector Generation: No Pixel Supervision
Noise

Pixel Results

Frozen Vectorizer

Pixel Labels

Vector Primitives

Vector Results

Image
Generator

No Gradient

Only Pixel Supervision

Generation and Vectorization: No Vector Supervision
Noise

Generated Vector

Rasterized Pixel

Pixel Labels

Differentiable Rasterize
Gradient
Error

Vector
Generator

Gradient

Vector Primitive

Gradient

Weak Correspondence
between Vector and Pixel

Cross-domain Supervision: Inaccurate Gradient

Figure 1. Current mainstream approaches each come with distinct challenges: 1. Pure Vector Generation: No pixel supervision. The similarity measurement between shape parameters (and
their combination) and the paired pixel image appearance pattern
is ignored. 2. Generation and Vectorization: No Vector Supervision. The quality of generated vector graphics relies heavily on
the vectorizer. 3. Cross-domain Supervision: Inaccurate Gradient.
Gradients estimated by differentiable rasterization are inaccurate,
causing wrong error-correction signal.

ties and visual quality regardless of the resolution. Moreover, well-designed vector graphics, with their planar elements organized in a way that closely aligns with human
cognitive logic for shapes, make editing more intuitive and
convenient. As a result, vector graphics have gained significant popularity in the realms of creativity, art, design
and the development of technologies capable of generating
high-quality vector images has become a primary objective
for designers.
However, current mainstream methods for generating
vector graphics lack the encoding of image appearance associated with the original vector image, i.e., offering no effective linkage between pixel pattern and the corresponding drawing primitives during learning. As a result, they

4420

