This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Differentiable Micro-Mesh Construction
Yishun Dou2 Zhong Zheng2 Qiaoqiao Jin1 Rui Shi1 Yuhan Li1 Bingbing Ni1,2 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China 2 Huawei
yishun.dou@gmail.com

nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn

Base Mesh

Displaced

Abstract
Micro-mesh (µ-mesh) is a new graphics primitive for
compact representation of extreme geometry, consisting of
a low-polygon base mesh enriched by per micro-vertex displacement. A new generation of GPUs supports this structure with hardware evolution on µ-mesh ray tracing, achieving real-time rendering in pixel level geometric details.
In this article, we present a differentiable framework to
convert standard meshes into this efficient format, offering
a holistic scheme in contrast to the previous stage-based
methods. In our construction context, a µ-mesh is defined
where each base triangle is a parametric primitive, which is
then reparameterized with Laplacian operators for efficient
geometry optimization. Our framework offers numerous advantages for high-quality µ-mesh production: (i) end-toend geometry optimization and displacement baking; (ii)
enabling the differentiation of renderings with respect to µmesh for faithful reprojectability; (iii) high scalability for
integrating useful features for µ-mesh production and rendering, such as minimizing shell volume, maintaining the
isotropy of the base mesh, and visual-guided adaptive level
of detail. Extensive experiments on µ-mesh construction for
a large set of high-resolution meshes demonstrate the superior quality achieved by the proposed scheme.

1. Introduction
Micro-Mesh (µ-mesh) [38] is a promising graphics primitive for compact storage and efficient ray tracing rendering,
supported by a new generation of GPUs. A µ-mesh can be
seen as a special displacement-mapped mesh, consisting of
a low-polygon base mesh and per-µ-vertex scalar displacement (see Fig. 1 (a)), where the µ-vertex is produced by
subdivision at rendering time. The µ-mesh construction,
i.e. converting a standard mesh to this format, is critical to
µ-mesh accuracy and rendering efficiency.
A straightforward choice is to combine existing polygon mesh processing methods [5], including mesh decimation [12], remeshing [24], displacement baking [10, 11] and
* Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

(a)

Input

Subdivided

- mesh

Parameters

(b)

Diﬀerentiable Operations

Base Mesh

Isotropy
Reprojectability

Displaced

Diﬀerentiation w.r.t.

- mesh

Minimizing
Shell Volume

Figure 1. (a) A µ-mesh produced by our method in 1 : 64 decimation. (b) Overview of our differentiable µ-mesh construction.

so on, which is adopted in [29, 38]. This forms a stagebased pipeline, where each stage independently minimizes
some local objective, such as the quadric error metric for
decimation, or the centroidal voronoi tessellation energy for
remeshing. However, both of these objective functions are
designed for specific mesh processing tasks, while the ultimate goals of building a µ-mesh, i.e. faithful reproduction
and minimal bounding shell volume, are not directly considered. The most recent state-of-the-art method proposed
by [28] significantly improves the µ-mesh quality, but they
still continue with the staged pipeline and pose risks in error
accumulation and suboptimal construction.
We propose to alleviate these limitations through the
end-to-end optimization, taking the ultimate goals of µmesh as the objective for both the base mesh optimization
and displacement baking. This is made possible by (i) a
holistic µ-mesh construction system that is full of differentiable operations for end-to-end backpropagation, (ii) a curriculum optimization strategy exploiting the level of detail
nature of µ-mesh, and (iii) several novel objectives that well
instantiate the goals of producing a high quality µ-mesh.
See Fig. 1 (b) for an illustration. Our system is designed
according to the following principles:
• Reprojectability. The primary requirement for building
a µ-mesh is to reproduce the original mesh. Since the µ-

4294

