This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-conditioned Detection Transformer
Jang Hyun Cho
UT Austin

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin

janghyuncho7@utexas.edu

philkr@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We present a new open-vocabulary detection framework.
Our framework uses both image-level labels and detailed
detection annotations when available. Our framework proceeds in three steps. We first train a language-conditioned
object detector on fully-supervised detection data. This detector gets to see the presence or absence of ground truth
classes during training, and conditions prediction on the
set of present classes. We use this detector to pseudolabel images with image-level labels. Our detector provides much more accurate pseudo-labels than prior approaches with its conditioning mechanism. Finally, we
train an unconditioned open-vocabulary detector on the
pseudo-annotated images. The resulting detector, named
DECOLA , shows strong zero-shot performance in openvocabulary LVIS benchmark as well as direct zero-shot transfer benchmarks on LVIS, COCO, Object365, and OpenImages. DECOLA outperforms the prior arts by 17.1 APrare
and 9.4 mAP on zero-shot LVIS benchmark. DECOLA
achieves state-of-the-art results in various model sizes, architectures, and datasets by only training on open-sourced
data and academic-scale computing. Code is available at
https://github.com/janghyuncho/DECOLA.

1. Introduction
Object detection has seen immense progress over the past
decade. Classical object detectors reason over datasets of
fixed predefined classes. This simplifies the design, training, and evaluation of new methods, and allows for rapid
prototyping [2–5, 17, 18, 25, 37, 42, 60, 70, 72, 75]. However, it complicates deployment to downstream applications too. A classical detector requires a new dataset to
further finetune for every new concept it encounters. Collecting sufficient data for every new concept is not scalable [20]. Open-vocabulary detection offers an alternative [19, 43, 61, 65, 66, 73]. Open-vocabulary detectors
reason about any arbitrary concept with free-form text,
using the generalization ability of vision-language models. Yet, common open-vocabulary detectors reuse classical detectors and either replace the last classification layer

image-text dataset of size N

image-text dataset of size N

xN

xN

Standard
OV Detector

text encoder

DECOLA

conditioned
Language-conditioned Detections

Image-level tags:
“cat”, “cola”, “mentos”
filtering & argmax

select scores

argmax

xN

training data with pseudo-labels

(a) Standard self-training

xN

training data with pseudo-labels

(b) DECOLA self-training

Figure 1. An illustration of how standard open-vocabulary detectors and DECOLA generate pseudo-labels using image-level data.
Standard detectors use image-level information later in the pipeline
after initial box proposals, which may result in low coverage of
unseen classes (e.g., “mentos” and “cola”). DECOLA adjusts the
prediction to the information and ensures sufficient coverage.

with [19, 43, 66, 73], or fuse box feature with [31, 65] text
representation from pretrained vision-language model. The
inner workings of the detector remain unchanged.
In this paper, we introduce a transformer-based object
detector that adjusts its inner workings to any arbitrary set
of concepts represented in language. The detector considers
only the queried set of concepts as foreground and disregards any other objects as background. It learns to adapt
detection to the language embedding of queried concepts at
run-time. Specifically, the detector conditions proposal generation with respect to the text embedding of each queried
concept and refines the conditioned proposals into predictions. Our detection transformer conditioned on language
(DECOLA) offers a powerful alternative to classical architectures in open-vocabulary detection. Adapting the detector to

16593

