This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Backdoor Attack by Naturalistic Data Poisoning on Trajectory
Prediction in Autonomous Driving

1

Mozhgan Pourkeshavarz1 Mohammad Sabokrou2 Amir Rasouli1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Canada 2 Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology (OIST)
firstname.lastname@huawei.com
mohammad.sabokrou@oist.jp

Poisoned data

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction is one of the essential components
of autonomous driving (AD) systems necessary for safe
motion planning. Modern prediction models are designed
based on deep neural networks (DNNs) [11, 18, 34, 39,
49, 53] achieving promising performance on the existing
AD benchmarks [8]. Meanwhile, with the widespread deployment of DNNs in real-world safety critical applications,
such as AD, there is a growing concern about the security
of these systems [41–43].
There is a large body of literature on adversarial attacks

Disguised poison

AV

Inference

In autonomous driving, behavior prediction is fundamental for safe motion planning, hence the security and robustness of prediction models against adversarial attacks
are of paramount importance. We propose a novel adversarial backdoor attack against trajectory prediction models
as a means of studying their potential vulnerabilities. Our
attack affects the victim at training time via naturalistic,
hence stealthy, poisoned samples crafted using a novel twostep approach. First, the triggers are crafted by perturbing the trajectory of attacking vehicle and then disguised by
transforming the scene using a bi-level optimization technique. The proposed attack does not depend on a particular model architecture and operates in a black-box manner,
thus can be effective without any knowledge of the victim
model. We conduct extensive empirical studies using stateof-the-art prediction models on two benchmark datasets using metrics customized for trajectory prediction. We show
that the proposed attack is highly effective, as it can significantly hinder the performance of prediction models, unnoticeable by the victims, and efficient as it forces the victim to generate malicious behavior even under constrained
conditions. Via ablative studies, we analyze the impact of
different attack design choices followed by an evaluation of
existing defence mechanisms against the proposed attack.

Poisoning
Training Data

Abstract

AV

Attack triggered

Misprediction

AV

AV

AV

Observation

Poisoned
observation

Ground
truth

Prediction

AV’s correct
plan

AV’s altered
plan

AV

AtV

Social
vehicle

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed adversarial backdoor attack.
Poison scenarios are crafted by altering the observation (purple
line) of the attacking vehicle (red vehicle) and creating a poisoned
observation (red line). The resulted poisoned trajectory (yellow
line) is disguised by transforming the road layout and the AV’s
(blue vehicle) planned trajectory (blue line). The samples are then
injected in the training data of the victim. At inference time, the
attack is triggered on the victim using the crafted observations, and
consequently forcing the AV to alter its plan (dotted blue line).

and their impact on deep networks [10]. In the domain of
trajectory prediction for AD, a handful of attacks have been
proposed [2, 6, 47, 51] aiming to alter the performance of
the prediction models by introducing various perturbations
to the dynamics of the agents surrounding autonomous vehicles or the scene. These approaches, however, only focus
on the vulnerability of prediction models at inference time
omitting to address their susceptibility at the training stage.
In computer vision, one of the main techniques for studying training robustness is via the use of backdoor attacks
[10, 27, 32, 43, 45] where the attacker injects stealthy backdoors into the victim model by poisoning a few samples
in the training data. The attacker achieves this by attaching a trigger (i.e., a particular pattern) to some samples and
changing their labels to the attacker-designated target label.
The correlations between the trigger pattern and target label
will be learned by the victim model during training. Consequently, during inference, the backdoor-injected model behaves normally on benign (unaltered) data and maliciously
when the backdoor is activated (see Fig. 1). The risk of
such attacks has been recognized as one of the major areas

14885

