This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transfer CLIP for Generalizable Image Denoising
Jun Cheng, Dong Liang, Shan Tan*
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{jcheng24, liangdong, shantan}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Image denoising is a fundamental task in computer vision. While prevailing deep learning-based supervised and
self-supervised methods have excelled in eliminating indistribution noise, their susceptibility to out-of-distribution
(OOD) noise remains a significant challenge. The recent emergence of contrastive language-image pre-training
(CLIP) model has showcased exceptional capabilities in
open-world image recognition and segmentation. Yet, the
potential for leveraging CLIP to enhance the robustness of
low-level tasks remains largely unexplored. This paper uncovers that certain dense features extracted from the frozen
ResNet image encoder of CLIP exhibit distortion-invariant
and content-related properties, which are highly desirable
for generalizable denoising. Leveraging these properties,
we devise an asymmetrical encoder-decoder denoising network, which incorporates dense features including the noisy
image and its multi-scale features from the frozen ResNet
encoder of CLIP into a learnable image decoder to achieve
generalizable denoising. The progressive feature augmentation strategy is further proposed to mitigate feature overfitting and improve the robustness of the learnable decoder.
Extensive experiments and comparisons conducted across
diverse OOD noises, including synthetic noise, real-world
sRGB noise, and low-dose CT image noise, demonstrate the
superior generalization ability of our method.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a significant task in computer vision
and image processing. Current supervised denoising methods leveraging powerful deep neural networks and largescale datasets have achieved exceptional performance in
both synthetic and real-world noise removal [33, 60]. However, these supervised denoisers tend to overfit the noise
present in the training datasets, resulting in poor generalization to out-of-distribution (OOD) noise [6]. On the other
hand, unsupervised and self-supervised denoising methods
* Corresponding author.

[12, 18, 26, 28, 44, 54] directly focus on the target domain
in which the target noisy images reside and hence bypass
OOD generalization. Nevertheless, these methods are inherently vulnerable to unseen noise [7] and the collection
of target noisy datasets is not always available. Therefore,
it is critical to enhance the generalization of deep denoisers.
OOD generalization has been popular research in highlevel vision tasks like image recognition and segmentation
[51, 70]. In contrast, attention to OOD generalization within
image denoising is limited. Existing research in this area
primarily consists of two aspects: generalization across
degradation levels and generalization across degradation
types. Regarding the former, some works trained blind denoisers [18, 60, 62] or bias-free networks [41, 63] to handle
noise with varying levels. However, these methods are confined to specific noise and cannot generalize to unseen noise
types. For the latter, several works aimed to fortify models against general OOD noise. Particularly, MaskDenoising [6] incorporated dropout units into the model training
to enforce the denoiser to learn the reconstruction of image
contents. DIL [32] built upon causality and meta-learning
and encouraged the model to learn distortion-invariant representations. HAT [58] designed an adversarial attack for
deep denoisers and then conducted adversarial training.
Recently, through solving the image-text alignment
problem based on hyper-scale datasets, the contrastive
language-image pre-training (CLIP) model [48] has demonstrated remarkable generalization capacity in downstream
open-world image recognition tasks. A series of extensions
on CLIP through frozen models [65, 69], model fine-tuning
[49], visual prompts [71], distillations [19, 31], and so on
[34] have been proposed to transfer the generalization ability of CLIP from classification to dense prediction tasks,
including open-vocabulary segmentation [34] and zero-shot
depth estimation [65]. However, the feasibility of CLIP for
robust restoration in low-level tasks remains unexplored.
We therefore ask, is CLIP robust to image noise and can
we transfer it for generalizable image denoising?
In this paper, we find that the dense feature maps from
the frozen ResNet image encoder of CLIP within specific
scales exhibit remarkable resilience to noise, a property that

25974

