This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Program Distillation:
Distilling Tools and Programmatic Reasoning into Vision-Language Models
Yushi Hu1,2⇤ Otilia Stretcu1 Chun-Ta Lu1 Krishnamurthy Viswanathan1
Kenji Hata1 Enming Luo1 Ranjay Krishna2 Ariel Fuxman1
1
Google Research 2 University of Washington
https://visual-program-distillation.github.io/
TOOLS

Abstract
Solving complex visual tasks such as “Who invented the
musical instrument on the right?” involves a composition of
skills: understanding space, recognizing instruments, and
also retrieving prior knowledge. Recent work shows promise
by decomposing such tasks using a large language model
(LLM) into an executable program that invokes specialized vision models. However, generated programs are error-prone:
they omit necessary steps, include spurious ones, and are
unable to recover when the specialized models give incorrect outputs. Moreover, they require loading multiple models,
incurring high latency and computation costs. We propose
Visual Program Distillation (VPD), an instruction tuning
framework that produces a vision-language model (VLM) capable of solving complex visual tasks with a single forward
pass. VPD distills the reasoning ability of LLMs by using
them to sample multiple candidate programs, which are then
executed and verified to identify a correct one. It translates
each correct program into a language description of the
reasoning steps, which are then distilled into a VLM. Extensive experiments show that VPD improves the VLM’s ability
to count, understand spatial relations, and reason compositionally. Our VPD-trained PaLI-X outperforms all prior
VLMs, achieving state-of-the-art performance across complex vision tasks, including MMBench, OK-VQA, A-OKVQA,
TallyQA, POPE, and Hateful Memes. An evaluation with
human annotators also confirms that VPD improves model
response factuality and consistency. Finally, experiments on
content moderation demonstrate that VPD is also helpful for
adaptation to real-world applications with limited data.

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) have become the pretrained backbone for many computer vision tasks [2, 4, 7, 9–
11, 34, 39, 41, 60, 63, 74, 79]. Yet, all these models still fall
short of solving numerous visual reasoning tasks expected
⇤ Work done while interning at Google Research.

Object Detection

Depth Estimation

Captioning

Knowledge

OCR

ABC

ABC

?

VQA

LLM-generated Programs
distillation

Vision-Language Model
Figure 1. We introduce Visual Program Distillation (VPD), a training framework which leverages LLM-generated programs that
make calls to specialist models and tools to distill cross-modal
reasoning abilities and specialist skills into multimodal models.

of competent vision models. Even state-of-the-art (SOTA)
proprietary vision-language models such as GPT-4V [49] do
not perform well on tasks that involve counting and spatial
reasoning [71]. They find it difficult to count (TallyQA [1]),
to compositionally reason (GQA [26]), and to reason with external knowledge (OK-VQA [44], A-OKVQA [53]). Many
of these tasks require VLMs to conduct compositional reasoning, which still remains an unsolved challenge. For instance, answering the question “Who invented the musical
instrument on the right?” involves a composition of skills:
identifying objects, applying spatial reasoning to locate the
one on the right, recognizing the musical instrument, and
accessing prior knowledge to retrieve the inventor.
In contrast, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance at generating code that
solves complex and compositional tasks [3, 8, 43, 49, 69].
Several recent papers [16, 20, 25, 57] capitalize on this by
prompting LLMs to generate programs where each step corresponds to a reasoning step. The programs invoke specialized “tools” (or specialized vision models) to explicitly

9590

