This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Brain Decodes Deep Nets
Huzheng Yang James Gee* Jianbo Shi*
University of Pennsylvania
https://huzeyann.github.io/brain-decodes-deep-nets

l Brain encoding model

i-th brain
voxel (scalar)

Selected
feature

layer

channel

flatten

k

j Feature extraction

space

scale

: Factorized (layer/space/scale) and topology-smooth feature selection

space

layer

scale

m

: Channel clustering

channel

Figure 1. Visualize Deep Networks in the Brain. The training objective of the brain encoding model is to predict the brain’s fMRI signal
1 Image features are extracted from
in response to an image stimulus. 3D visual brain surface is flattened into 2D for better visualization. ⃝
2 Feature selection for each voxel is randomly initialized and learned using the brain encoding training objective.
a pre-trained network. ⃝
3
The selection is factorized in the layer/space/scale axis; the topological constraint improves selection smoothness and confidence. ⃝
4 After training, linear weights are used to cluster channels. We use the resulting brain-to-network
Linearized brain encoding model. ⃝
mapping together with the known knowledge of the brain to answer the question “how do deep networks work?”.

Abstract
We developed a tool for visualizing and analyzing large
pre-trained vision models by mapping them onto the brain,
thus exposing their hidden inside. Our innovation arises
from a surprising usage of brain encoding: predicting brain
fMRI measurements in response to images. We report two
findings. First, explicit mapping between the brain and
deep-network features across dimensions of space, layers,
scales, and channels is crucial. This mapping method, FactorTopy, is plug-and-play for any deep-network; with it, one
can paint a picture of the network onto the brain (literally!). Second, our visualization shows how different training methods matter: they lead to remarkable differences
in hierarchical organization and scaling behavior, growing
with more data or network capacity. It also provides insight into fine-tuning: how pre-trained models change when
adapting to small datasets. We found brain-like hierarchically organized network suffer less from catastrophic forgetting after fine-tuned.

1. Introduction
The brain is massive, and its enormous size hides within
it a mystery: how it efficiently organizes many specialized
modules with distributed representation and control. One
clue it offers is its feed-forward hierarchical organization
(Figure 2). This hierarchical structure facilitates efficient
computation, continuous learning, and adaptation to dynamic tasks.
Deep networks are enormous, containing billions of parameters. Performances keep improving with more training
data and larger size. It doesn’t seem to matter if the network
is trained under the supervision of labels, weakly supervised with image captions, or even self-supervised without
human-provided guidance. Its sheer size also hides another
mystery: as its size increases, it can be fine-tuned successfully to many unseen tasks.
*: Equal advising.

23030

