This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Human Pose Perception from Egocentric Stereo Videos
Hiroyasu Akada

Jian Wang
Vladislav Golyanik
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC

Christian Theobalt

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 1. 3D human pose estimation results of our proposed method from egocentric stereo fisheye videos. Left: results on synthetic
images; (a) reference RGB view of the scene; (b) 3D-to-2D pose re-projections, and (c) a 3D pose in a scene mesh reconstructed by our
framework. Right: results on real-world images; (d) reference view; (e) 3D-to-2D pose re-projections; (f) a 3D pose in the reconstructed
scene, and (g) 3D virtual character animation (possible future application of our method).

Abstract
While head-mounted devices are becoming more compact, they provide egocentric views with significant selfocclusions of the device user. Hence, existing methods often
fail to accurately estimate complex 3D poses from egocentric views. In this work, we propose a new transformerbased framework to improve egocentric stereo 3D human
pose estimation, which leverages the scene information and
temporal context of egocentric stereo videos. Specifically,
we utilize 1) depth features from our 3D scene reconstruction module with uniformly sampled windows of egocentric
stereo frames, and 2) human joint queries enhanced by temporal features of the video inputs. Our method is able to
accurately estimate human poses even in challenging scenarios, such as crouching and sitting. Furthermore, we introduce two new benchmark datasets, i.e., UnrealEgo2 and
UnrealEgo-RW (RealWorld). The proposed datasets offer a
much larger number of egocentric stereo views with a wider
variety of human motions than the existing datasets, allowing comprehensive evaluation of existing and upcoming
methods. Our extensive experiments show that the proposed
approach significantly outperforms previous methods. UnrealEgo2, UnrealEgo-RW, and trained models are available
on our project page1 and Benchmark Challenge2 .
1 https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/UnrealEgo2/
2 https://unrealego.mpi-inf.mpg.de/

1. Introduction
Egocentric 3D human motion capture using wearable devices has received increased attention recently [1, 11, 22,
31, 37, 38, 40–42, 45, 48, 52, 53]. Different from traditional vision-based motion capture setups that require a
fixed recording space, egocentric systems allow flexible
motion capture in less constrained situations. Therefore, the
egocentric setups offer various applications, such as motion
analysis and XR technologies (Fig. 1-(g)).
Previous works proposed various egocentric methods to
capture device users. On the one hand, the vast majority of
existing methods—which use a monocular camera—would
fail for complex human poses due to depth ambiguity and
self-occlusion. On the other hand, the methods designed
for stereo devices do not yet realize the full potential of
their stereo settings, especially with the most recent compact eyeglasses-based setups [1, 53]. Specifically, they do
not deliver high 3D reconstruction accuracy across different scenarios. Moreover, these approaches do not consider
scene information, which further limits their accuracy.
To address the challenges outlined above, we propose a
new transformer-based framework for egocentric 3D human
motion capture from compact eyeglasses-based devices; see
Fig. 1. The first step of our framework is to estimate 2D
joint heatmaps from egocentric stereo fisheye RGB videos
(Sec. 4.1). These 2D joint heatmaps are then processed
with human joint queries in our transformer-based 3D mod-

767

