This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultiPly: Reconstruction of Multiple People from Monocular Video in the Wild
Zeren Jiang∗1 Chen Guo∗1 Manuel Kaufmann1 Tianjian Jiang1
Julien Valentin2 Otmar Hilliges1 Jie Song1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Microsoft

Figure 1. We propose MultiPly, a novel framework to reconstruct multiple people in 3D from in-the-wild monocular videos. Our method
can recover the complete 3D human with high-fidelity shape and appearance, even in scenarios involving occlusions and close interactions.

Abstract
We present MultiPly, a novel framework to reconstruct
multiple people in 3D from monocular in-the-wild videos.
Reconstructing multiple individuals moving and interacting
naturally from monocular in-the-wild videos poses a challenging task. Addressing it necessitates precise pixel-level
disentanglement of individuals without any prior knowledge
about the subjects. Moreover, it requires recovering intricate and complete 3D human shapes from short video sequences, intensifying the level of difficulty. To tackle these
challenges, we first define a layered neural representation
for the entire scene, composited by individual human and
background models. We learn the layered neural representation from videos via our layer-wise differentiable volume
rendering. This learning process is further enhanced by
our hybrid instance segmentation approach which combines
the self-supervised 3D segmentation and the promptable 2D
segmentation module, yielding reliable instance segmentation supervision even under close human interaction. A
confidence-guided optimization formulation is introduced
to optimize the human poses and shape/appearance alternately. We incorporate effective objectives to refine human
poses via photometric information and impose physically
plausible constraints on human dynamics, leading to temporally consistent 3D reconstructions with high fidelity. The
evaluation of our method shows the superiority over prior
art on publicly available datasets and in-the-wild videos.
* These authors contributed equally to this work

1. Introduction
Despite rapid progress in estimating the 3D shape from
monocular videos of a single performer [11, 18, 35, 42],
the analysis and reconstruction of several closely interacting people is still limited. This imbalance is unsatisfying, as group activities make up a significant portion of
our lives. Although systems for multi-person reconstruction have been previously investigated, most require multiview setups that constrain the capture area to a fixed volume
and demand specialized equipment and expertise to operate [36, 47, 48]. Being able to reconstruct multiple people
in detailed 3D geometry and appearance from monocular
videos – which is also amenable to novice users – would
facilitate many downstream tasks in AR/VR, such as the
telepresence of groups of people, or the “replay” of social activities in 4D. Accomplishing this is fundamentally
a challenging task since it requires accurate pixel-level disentanglement of individuals without a priori known geometries of the subjects. To make matters worse, the task is further complicated by depth ambiguities, complex human dynamics, and severe human-human occlusions – all of which
have to be resolved from a single, short video clip.
In this paper, we introduce a novel method, called MultiPly, that provides a solution to this task: It takes a single video as input and outputs complete, high-quality, and
separated 3D human geometry and appearance for individuals appearing in the scene (see Fig. 1). By embracing the promising paradigm of neural implicit functions for
3D representations, remarkable progress has recently been
achieved in modelling detailed human geometry and ap-

109

