This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minimal Perspective Autocalibration
Andrea Porfiri Dal Cin1
1
Politecnico di Milano

Timothy Duff2
2
University of Washington

Abstract
We introduce a new family of minimal problems for reconstruction from multiple views. Our primary focus is a
novel approach to autocalibration, a long-standing problem in computer vision. Traditional approaches to this
problem, such as those based on Kruppa’s equations or
the modulus constraint, rely explicitly on the knowledge of
multiple fundamental matrices or a projective reconstruction. In contrast, we consider a novel formulation involving constraints on image points, the unknown depths of
3D points, and a partially specified calibration matrix K.
For 2 and 3 views, we present a comprehensive taxonomy
of minimal autocalibration problems obtained by relaxing
some of these constraints. These problems are organized
into classes according to the number of views and any assumed prior knowledge of K. Within each class, we determine problems with the fewest—or a relatively small number of—solutions. From this zoo of problems, we devise
three practical solvers. Experiments with synthetic and real
data and interfacing our solvers with COLMAP demonstrate that we achieve superior accuracy compared to stateof-the-art calibration methods. The code is available at
github.com/andreadalcin/MinimalPerspectiveAutocalibration.

1. Introduction
Autocalibration is the fundamental process of determining intrinsic camera parameters using only point correspondences, without external calibration objects or known scene
geometry [11–14, 23, 28, 33, 34, 36, 38, 47, 51].

Luca Magri1

Tomas Pajdla3
3
CIIRC CTU Prague

depths, and seamlessly integrates any partial knowledge
of the camera intrinsics. This gives rise to a variety of
two- and three-view minimal autocalibration problems, for
which we provide a complete taxonomy in Tab. 1. We develop a general theory of minimal relaxations to address
cases where our formulation leads to an over-constrained
problem. These minimal relaxations of our depth formulation can be completely enumerated, and each instance of
a specific autocalibration problem can be solved offline by
applying numerical homotopy continuation (HC) methods
to one such relaxation. Crucially, the offline analysis with
HC methods also enables us to identify the most efficiently
solvable minimal relaxations.
Our practical contributions include implementing a numerical solver for full camera calibration, i.e., calibration of
all 5 unknown parameters of a perspective camera. We also
consider common assumptions—namely, zero-skew and
square pixels—and design fast solvers for specialized problems with a partially calibrated camera. These solvers can
be fast enough for many online calibration applications, and
can also bootstrap solutions using R AN S AC-based frameworks with high accuracy in offline calibration settings.
Among the strengths of our approach, we avoid well-known
degeneracies of Kruppa’s equations [48] and recover K directly instead of relying on estimates of the dual image
of the absolute conic (DIAC), which may not be positivesemidefinite. Experiments show that our solvers outperform
existing autocalibration methods in terms of accuracy in
both synthetic and real image sequences despite increased
runtime. Interfacing our solvers with COLMAP [44] further
highlights the applicability of our approach.

1.1. Contribution
Xq

This paper presents a comprehensive characterization of
two- and three-view minimal autocalibration problems in
the case of a perspective camera with constant intrinsics.
We introduce practical and efficient solvers for minimal autocalibration by introducing a novel formulation that extends the minimal Euclidean reconstruction problem of four
points in three calibrated views [24, 40] to the uncalibrated
case. Our approach jointly estimates camera intrinsics, encoded in the calibration matrix K, and unknown 3D point

xiq
C1

Xp
xip
K 1 xip

CM

Ci
Figure 1. Illustrating the setup of equations (1) and (4).

5064

