This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Putting the Object Back into Video Object Segmentation
Ho Kei Cheng1

Seoung Wug Oh2
Brian Price2
Joon-Young Lee2
Alexander Schwing1
1
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Adobe Research

{hokeikc2,aschwing}@illinois.edu, {seoh,bprice,jolee}@adobe.com

Abstract
We present Cutie, a video object segmentation (VOS) network with object-level memory reading, which puts the object
representation from memory back into the video object segmentation result. Recent works on VOS employ bottom-up
pixel-level memory reading which struggles due to matching
noise, especially in the presence of distractors, resulting
in lower performance in more challenging data. In contrast, Cutie performs top-down object-level memory reading
by adapting a small set of object queries. Via those, it interacts with the bottom-up pixel features iteratively with a
query-based object transformer (qt, hence Cutie). The object queries act as a high-level summary of the target object,
while high-resolution feature maps are retained for accurate segmentation. Together with foreground-background
masked attention, Cutie cleanly separates the semantics of
the foreground object from the background. On the challenging MOSE dataset, Cutie improves by 8.7 J &F over XMem
with a similar running time and improves by 4.2 J &F over
DeAOT while being three times faster. Code is available at:
hkchengrex.github.io/Cutie.

1. Introduction
Video Object Segmentation (VOS), specifically the “semisupervised” setting, requires tracking and segmenting objects
from an open vocabulary specified in a first-frame annotation. VOS methods are broadly applicable in robotics [1],
video editing [2], reducing costs in data annotation [3],
and can also be combined with Segment Anything Models
(SAMs) [4] for universal video segmentation (e.g., Tracking
Anything [5–7]).
Recent VOS approaches employ a memory-based
paradigm [8–11]. A memory representation is computed
from past segmented frames (either given as input or segmented by the model), and any new query frame “reads”
from this memory to retrieve features for segmentation. Importantly, these approaches mainly use pixel-level matching
for memory reading, either with one [8] or multiple matching
layers [10], and generate the segmentation bottom-up from

Figure 1. Comparison of pixel-level memory reading v.s. objectlevel memory reading. In each box, the left is the reference frame,
and the right is the query frame to be segmented. Red arrows indicate wrong matches. Low-level pixel matching (e.g., XMem [9])
can be noisy in the presence of distractors. We propose object-level
memory reading for more robust video object segmentation.

the pixel memory readout. Pixel-level matching maps every
query pixel independently to a linear combination of memory
pixels (e.g., with an attention layer). Consequently, pixellevel matching lacks high-level consistency and is prone
to matching noise, especially in the presence of distractors.
This leads to lower performance in challenging scenarios
with occlusions and frequent distractors. Concretely, the
performance of recent approaches [9, 10] is more than 20
points in J &F lower when evaluating on the recently proposed challenging MOSE [12] dataset rather than the simpler
DAVIS-2017 [13] dataset.
We think this unsatisfactory result in challenging scenarios is caused by the lack of object-level reasoning. To
address this, we propose object-level memory reading, which
effectively puts the object from a memory back into the query
frame (Figure 1). Inspired by recent query-based object detection/segmentation [14–18] that represent objects as “object queries,” we implement our object-level memory reading
with an object transformer. This object transformer uses a
small set of end-to-end trained object queries to 1) iteratively
probe and calibrate a feature map (initialized by a pixel-level

3151

