This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PairDETR : Joint Detection and Association of Human Bodies and Faces
Ammar Ali
MTS AI, ITMO
ammarali32@itmo.ru

Georgii Gaikov
MTS AI
Ivan Laptev
MBZUAI

Denis Rybalchenko
VisionLabs

Alexander Chigorin
VisionLabs

Sergey Zagoruyko
MTS AI, Skoltech

Figure 1. Results of our method for crowded scenes. Bounding boxes of the same color correspond to associated bodies and faces.

Abstract
Image and video analysis requires not only accurate object detection but also the understanding of relationships
among detected objects. Common solutions to relation modeling typically resort to stand-alone object detectors followed by non-differentiable post-processing techniques. Recently introduced detection transformers (DETR) perform
end-to-end object detection based on a bipartite matching
loss. Such methods, however, lack the ability to jointly detect
objects and resolve object associations. In this paper, we
build on the DETR approach and extend it to the joint detection of objects and their relationships by introducing an
approximated bipartite matching. While our method can generalize to an arbitrary number of objects, we here focus on
the modeling of object pairs and their relations. In particular,
we apply our method PairDETR to the problem of detecting human bodies and faces, and associating them for the
same person. Our approach not only eliminates the need for
hand-designed post-processing but also achieves excellent
results for body-face associations. We evaluate PairDETR
on the challenging CrowdHuman and CityPersons datasets
and demonstrate a large improvement over the state of the
art. Our training code and pre-trained models are available
at https://github.com/mts-ai/pairdetr

1. Introduction
The detection of objects and their relationships is one of the
key challenges in computer vision. It involves the prediction
of bounding boxes for given object categories and assigning
pairs of detected objects to particular relations.
For example, the detection of human faces and bodies, as
well as the association of them for the same person, is essential for applications including human-computer interaction
(gestures detection), gaming (in virtual reality), fitness and
sport (from virtual coaching to automated match tracking),
mass market (virtual try-on), and many others.
Person detection is a well-studied problem in computer
vision. However, common approaches often focus on detecting human bodies, faces, and heads in isolation, without
considering relationships among them. Given face and body
detections, typical systems resolve object relations based
on ad-hoc post-processing techniques, such as non-maxima
suppression followed by the matching of overlapping object
bounding boxes.
In this work, we formulate the detection and association
of object pairs as a graph prediction problem. While apply-

423

