This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Subject-Driven Image Synthesis with Subject-Agnostic Guidance
Kelvin C.K. Chan

Yang Zhao

Xuhui Jia

Ming-Hsuan Yang

Huisheng Wang

Google

w/o SAG

Reference

w/ SAG

S*, Monet style

S*, swimming in front
of Eiﬀel Tower, Van
Gogh starry night style

S* in a basket,
at a beach

S* with a cloudy night
sky and a moon

S*, Pixar movie

Figure 1. Addressing Content Ignorance. Given user-provided subject images, a part of the content specified in the text prompt (highlighted in blue) are overlooked. Our Subject-Agnostic Guidance (SAG) aligns the output more closely with both the target subject and text
prompt. Here S∗ denotes a pseudo-word, with its text embedding replaced by a learnable subject embedding.

Abstract
In subject-driven text-to-image synthesis, the synthesis
process tends to be heavily influenced by the reference images provided by users, often overlooking crucial attributes
detailed in the text prompt. In this work, we propose
Subject-Agnostic Guidance (SAG), a simple yet effective
solution to remedy the problem. We show that through
constructing a subject-agnostic condition and applying our
proposed dual classifier-free guidance, one could obtain
outputs consistent with both the given subject and input text
prompts. We validate the efficacy of our approach through
both optimization-based and encoder-based methods. Additionally, we demonstrate its applicability in second-order
customization methods, where an encoder-based model is
fine-tuned with DreamBooth. Our approach is conceptually
simple and requires only minimal code modifications, but
leads to substantial quality improvements, as evidenced by
our evaluations and user studies.

1. Introduction
Subject-driven text-to-image synthesis focuses on generating diverse image samples, conditioned on user-given text
descriptions and subject images. This domain has witnessed
a surge of interest and significant advancements in recent
years. Optimization-based methods [16, 37, 41] tackle the
problem by overfitting pre-trained text-to-image synthesis
models [36, 38] and text tokens to the given subject. Recently, encoder-based approaches [10, 24, 49] propose to
train auxiliary encoders to generate subject embeddings, bypassing the necessity of per-subject optimization.
In the aforementioned approaches, both the embeddings
and networks are intentionally tailored to closely fit the target subject. As a consequence, these learnable conditions
tend to dominate the synthesis process, often obscuring the
attributes specified in the text prompt. For instance, as
shown in Fig. 1, when employing S∗1 alongside the style
1 S∗ denotes a pseudo-word, where its embedding is substituted by a
learnable subject embedding.

6733

