This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JRDB-Social: A Multifaceted Robotic Dataset for Understanding of Context and
Dynamics of Human Interactions Within Social Groups
Simindokht Jahangard, Zhixi Cai, Shiki Wen, Hamid Rezatofighi
Monash University
{simindokht.jahangard,zhixi.cai,hamid.rezatofighi}@monash.edu,swen0021@student.monash.edu

https://jrdb.erc.monash.edu/dataset/social

•

Female •

•
•

Male

Race Category

Age Category

Gender Category
Childhood
•
Adolescence •

Young Adulthood
Middle adulthood •

Late Adulthood

•
•

Caucasian (or White)
Negroid(or Black)

•
•

Present Interactions:
Standing together:

Conversation:

Two individuals, one middle-aged
Caucasian male and one young Mongoloid
male, are sitting on chairs, at the table and
near the pillar in an indoor cafeteria with
the aim of working and socializing.

MYM

MMC

Sitting together:

One individual, a young Caucasian
female, is standing on the floor and
near the wall in an indoor cafeteria
with the aim of waiting and ordering
or eating food.

FYC

MYM

MYC

MYM

Eating together:

Five individuals, comprising two young
Caucasian males, one young Mongoloid
female and two young Mongoloid males, are
standing on the floor and near the counter in
an indoor cafeteria with the aim of ordering
or eating.

Individual
Level

Mongoloid (or Asian)
Others

Intra_group
Level

Other 16 Interactions

Two individuals, both young
Mongoloid females, are sitting on
chairs and at the table in an indoor
cafeteria with the aim of ordering or
eating and socializing.

Group
Level

FYM

MYC

FYM

FYM

Figure 1. Some highlighted instances from the JRDB-Social dataset featuring detailed annotations across three levels: Individual Level)
Representing specific attributes like age, gender, and race are shown through color-coded abbreviations. For example, ‘MMC’ represents
Male, Middle Adulthood, Caucasian. Intra-group Level) This level focuses on group dynamics and interactions between each pair at
the frame level, represented by dashed lines. Group Level) Each social group [1] is represented by the same colour and accompanied
by textual descriptions that detail the number of members, their specific attributes, their body position’s connection with the content, the
presence of salient scene content near the group, the venue, and the group’s aim or purpose.

Abstract
Understanding human social behaviour is crucial in computer vision and robotics. Micro-level observations like individual actions fall short, necessitating a comprehensive
approach that considers individual behaviour, intra-group
dynamics, and social group levels for a thorough understanding. To address dataset limitations, this paper introduces JRDB-Social, an extension of JRDB [2]. Designed
to fill gaps in human understanding across diverse indoor
and outdoor social contexts, JRDB-Social provides annotations at three levels: individual attributes, intra-group interactions, and social group context. This dataset aims to
enhance our grasp of human social dynamics for robotic
applications. Utilizing the recent cutting-edge multi-modal
large language models, we evaluated our benchmark to explore their capacity to decipher social human behaviour.

1. Introduction
Human social behaviour understanding finds numerous applications in computer vision and robotics. Simply observing the micro-level information like the actions of an individual is inadequate for a comprehensive understanding of
human behaviour because humans are inherently social beings and require analysis within a broader social context.
Therefore, a comprehensive and multi-layered approach is
required to perceive human social behaviour thoroughly.
For example, in security and surveillance systems, integrating individual-level data, identifying social groups, and taking context into account significantly enhance the overall
capacity to better understand crowd behaviors [3]. Additionally, this integration fosters more natural and intuitive
experiences in human-robot interaction like telerobots [4],

22087

