This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistent3D: Towards Consistent High-Fidelity Text-to-3D Generation with
Deterministic Sampling Prior
Zike Wu1,4

Pan Zhou⇤2,4
1

Nanyang Technological University
3

zike001@e.ntu.edu.sg,

Xuanyu Yi1,4

Johns Hopkins University

panzhou@smu.edu.sg,

Xiaoding Yuan3

Hanwang Zhang1,5

2

Singapore Management University

4

Sea AI Lab 5 Skywork AI

xuanyu001@e.ntu.edu.sg,

xyuan19@jhu.edu,

hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

A ceramic lion

An astronaut is riding a horse

A panda rowing a boat

A skiing penguin
wearing a puffy jacket

A tiger wearing a tuxedo

A baby dragon
hatching out of a stone egg

The Himeji Castle

The Great Wall

Figure 1. Examples generated by Consistent3D. Our methods can generate detailed, diverse 3D objects and large-scale scenes from a wide
range of textual prompts.

Abstract
Score distillation sampling (SDS) and its variants have
greatly boosted the development of text-to-3D generation,
but are vulnerable to geometry collapse and poor textures
yet. To solve this issue, we first deeply analyze the SDS
and find that its distillation sampling process indeed corresponds to the trajectory sampling of a stochastic differential equation (SDE): SDS samples along an SDE trajectory
to yield a less noisy sample which then serves as a guidance to optimize a 3D model. However, the randomness in
SDE sampling often leads to a diverse and unpredictable
⇤ Corresponding author.

sample which is not always less noisy, and thus is not a
consistently correct guidance, explaining the vulnerability
of SDS. Since for any SDE, there always exists an ordinary
differential equation (ODE) whose trajectory sampling can
deterministically and consistently converge to the desired
target point as the SDE, we propose a novel and effective
“Consistent3D” method that explores the ODE deterministic sampling prior for text-to-3D generation. Specifically,
at each training iteration, given a rendered image by a 3D
model, we first estimate its desired 3D score function by a
pre-trained 2D diffusion model, and build an ODE for trajectory sampling. Next, we design a consistency distillation sampling loss which samples along the ODE trajectory
to generate two adjacent samples and uses the less noisy

9892

