This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-Conditioned Generative Model of 3D Strand-based Human Hairstyles
Vanessa Sklyarova1,2

Egor Zakharov2

Otmar Hilliges2

Michael J. Black1

Justus Thies1,3

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
ETH Zürich, Switzerland 3 Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany
1

2

...afro hairstyle...

...voluminous straight hair...

...man haircut...

...wavy short hairstyle...

...bob haircut...

...long wavy hairstyle...

...long straight hair...

...short curly hairstyle...

Figure 1. Given a text description, our method produces realistic human hairstyles. The usage of a 3D strand-based geometry representation
allows it to be easily incorporated into existing computer graphics pipelines for simulation and rendering [3, 7, 8].

Abstract
We present HAAR, a new strand-based generative model
for 3D human hairstyles. Specifically, based on textual inputs, HAAR produces 3D hairstyles that could be used as
production-level assets in modern computer graphics engines. Current AI-based generative models take advantage
of powerful 2D priors to reconstruct 3D content in the form
of point clouds, meshes, or volumetric functions. However, by using the 2D priors, they are intrinsically limited
to only recovering the visual parts. Highly occluded hair
structures can not be reconstructed with those methods, and
they only model the “outer shell”, which is not ready to be
used in physics-based rendering or simulation pipelines. In
contrast, we propose a first text-guided generative method
that uses 3D hair strands as an underlying representation.
Leveraging 2D visual question-answering (VQA) systems,
we automatically annotate synthetic hair models that are
generated from a small set of artist-created hairstyles. This

allows us to train a latent diffusion model that operates in
a common hairstyle UV space. In qualitative and quantitative studies, we demonstrate the capabilities of the proposed
model and compare it to existing hairstyle generation approaches. For results, please refer to our project page† .

1. Introduction
There has been rapid progress in creating realistic, animatable 3D face and head avatars from images, video, and text.
What is still missing is hair. Existing methods typically
represent hair with a coarse mesh geometry, implicit surfaces, or neural radiance fields. None of these representations are compatible with the strand-based models used by
existing rendering systems and do not enable animation of
the resulting avatars with natural hair dynamics. Modeling
and generating realistic 3D hair remains a key bottleneck
to creating realistic, personalized avatars. We address this
† https://haar.is.tue.mpg.de/

4703

