This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiagent Multitraversal Multimodal Self-Driving:
Open MARS Dataset
Yiming Li Zhiheng Li Nuo Chen Moonjun Gong
Zonglin Lyu Zehong Wang Peili Jiang Chen Feng✉
New York University
yimingli@nyu.edu, cfeng@nyu.edu
Traversal 1

Traversal 2

Traversal 3

Traversal 4
Surround-view RGB images

Traversal 5

Traversal 6

LiDAR Point Cloud

(a)

GPS trajectories

(b)

Multiagent

(c)

Multitraversal

(d)

Multimodal

Figure 1. Overview of MARS. (a) Within a geographical area, we operate four autonomous vehicles, displaying their GPS trajectories from
a single day using different colors. (b) Vehicles occasionally come close together (visualized via distinct-colored point clouds), supporting
research in multiagent systems. (c) We collect sensory data from repeated traversals of the same location under varying conditions, for
learning and perception research with retrospective memory. (d) The dataset includes surround-view RGB images and LiDAR point clouds
: https://maymobility.com/
for cross-modal perception and learning. Note that our data is obtained from May Mobility

.

Abstract
Large-scale datasets have fueled recent advancements
in AI-based autonomous vehicle research. However, these
datasets are usually collected from a single vehicle’s onetime pass of a certain location, lacking multiagent interactions or repeated traversals of the same place. Such
information could lead to transformative enhancements in
autonomous vehicles’ perception, prediction, and planning
capabilities. To bridge this gap, in collaboration with
the self-driving company May Mobility, we present MARS
dataset which unifies scenarios that enable MultiAgent,
multitraveRSal, and multimodal autonomous vehicle research. More specifically, MARS is collected with a fleet of
autonomous vehicles driving within a certain geographical
area. Each vehicle has its own route and different vehicles
may appear at nearby locations. Each vehicle is equipped
with a LiDAR and surround-view RGB cameras. We curate
two subsets in MARS: one facilitates collaborative driving with multiple vehicles simultaneously present at the
same location, and the other enables memory retrospection
through asynchronous traversals of the same location by
multiple vehicles. We conduct experiments in place recognition and neural reconstruction. More importantly, MARS
introduces new research opportunities and challenges such

as multitraversal 3D reconstruction, multiagent perception,
and unsupervised object discovery. Our data and codes can
be found at https://ai4ce.github.io/MARS/.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving, which has the potential to fundamentally enhance road safety and traffic efficiency, has witnessed significant advancements through AI technologies
in recent years. Large-scale, high-quality, real-world data
is crucial for AI-powered autonomous vehicles (AVs) to
enhance their perception and planning capabilities [1, 14]:
AVs can not only learn to detect objects from annotated
datasets [15] but also create safety-critical scenarios by generating digital twins based on past driving recordings [16].
The pioneering KITTI dataset [1] established the initial
benchmark for tasks such as detection and tracking. Since
its introduction, a number of datasets have been proposed
to promote the development of self-driving; see Tab. 1.
Two representative datasets are nuScenes [7] and Waymo
Dataset [8] which introduce multimodal data collected from
cameras and range sensors, covering a 360-degree field of
view for panoramic scene understanding. These datasets
have shifted the focus from KITTI’s monocular cameras,
receiving wide attention in the fields of vision and robotics.

22041

