This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PICTURE: PhotorealistIC virtual Try-on from UnconstRained dEsigns
Shuliang Ning1,2,3
Duomin Wang3
Yipeng Qin4
Zirong Jin2
*
Baoyuan Wang3
Xiaoguang Han2,1,
1
2
3
4
FNii, CUHKSZ
SSE, CUHKSZ
Xiaobing.AI
Cardiff University

Figure 1. Examples of virtual try-on manipulations using ucVTON on in-the-wild real images. Orange box: style control; Green box:
texture control; Blue box: design elements control.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel virtual try-on from unconstrained designs (ucVTON) task to enable photorealistic
synthesis of personalized composite clothing on input human images. Unlike prior arts constrained by specific input types, our method allows flexible specification of style
(text or image) and texture (full garment, cropped sections,
or texture patches) conditions. To address the entanglement challenge when using full garment images as conditions, we develop a two-stage pipeline with explicit disentanglement of style and texture. In the first stage, we generate a human parsing map reflecting the desired style conditioned on the input. In the second stage, we composite
textures onto the parsing map areas based on the texture input. To represent complex and non-stationary textures that
have never been achieved in previous fashion editing works,
we first propose extracting hierarchical and balanced CLIP
features and applying position encoding in VTON. Experiments demonstrate superior synthesis quality and personalization enabled by our method. The flexible control over
style and texture mixing brings virtual try-on to a new level
of user experience for online shopping and fashion design.

*

Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn.

1. Introduction
Virtual try-on (VTON) systems have become indispensible
in the era of online clothing shopping and are an active area
of research in computer vision. As online shopping grows
increasingly ubiquitous in modern digital lifestyles, VTON
addresses a key limitation: the inability to physically try on
clothes prior to purchase. By enabling users to visualize
garments on their photos or avatars, VTON systems aim to
provide crucial visual information about fit and appearance.
Traditional VTON [2, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 18, 21, 22, 38, 39]
focuses on in-shop scenarios which create photorealistic visualization by generating images of individuals wearing existing retail garments. This is constrained by input person
and clothing images so that the person’s identity and appearance are retained and the generated clothing matches
the input. However, this constrained generation is also limited, as real-world online shopping behaviors often involve
a bit of design, with a desire to mix-and-match elements
from different garments. That is, users may wish to visualize personalized composite clothing items, combining preferred style and texture aspects from separate pieces. Enabling such controllable synthesis of new clothing on virtual try-on remains an open challenge. FashionTex [19] pioneered this strand by using a disentangled (style, texture)
representation to control the VTON synthesis. However,
despite its success, FashionTex is still constrained by the

6976

