This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeiT-LT: Distillation Strikes Back for Vision Transformer Training on
Long-Tailed Datasets
Harsh Rangwani*1 Pradipto Mondal*1,2 Mayank Mishra*1
Ashish Ramayee Asokan1 R. Venkatesh Babu1
1

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Abstract

Vision Transformer (ViT) has emerged as a prominent
architecture for various computer vision tasks. In ViT, we
divide the input image into patch tokens and process them
through a stack of self-attention blocks. However, unlike Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), ViT’s simple architecture
has no informative inductive bias (e.g., locality, etc.). Due
to this, ViT requires a large amount of data for pre-training.
Various data-efficient approaches (DeiT) have been proposed
to train ViT on balanced datasets effectively. However, limited literature discusses the use of ViT for datasets with
long-tailed imbalances. In this work, we introduce DeiT-LT
to tackle the problem of training ViTs from scratch on longtailed datasets. In DeiT-LT, we introduce an efficient and
effective way of distillation from CNN via distillation DIST
token by using out-of-distribution images and re-weighting
the distillation loss to enhance focus on tail classes. This
leads to the learning of local CNN-like features in early
ViT blocks, improving generalization for tail classes. Further, to mitigate overfitting, we propose distilling from a flat
CNN teacher, which leads to learning low-rank generalizable
features for DIST tokens across all ViT blocks. With the proposed DeiT-LT scheme, the distillation DIST token becomes
an expert on the tail classes, and the classifier CLS token
becomes an expert on the head classes. The experts help to
effectively learn features corresponding to both the majority
and minority classes using a distinct set of tokens within the
same ViT architecture. We show the effectiveness of DeiT-LT
for training ViT from scratch on datasets ranging from smallscale CIFAR-10 LT to large-scale iNaturalist-2018. Project
Page: https://rangwani-harsh.github.io/DeiT-LT.

1. Introduction
Visual Recognition has seen unprecedented success with the
advent of deep neural networks trained on large datasets [10].
Consequently, efforts are being made to collect large datasets

2

Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
through crowd-sourcing to train deep neural networks for
various applications across domains. As a result of crowdsourcing, these datasets often exhibit long-tailed data distributions due to inherent natural statistics [14, 52], i.e., a large
number of images belong to a small portion of (majority)
classes, whereas other (minority) classes contain few image
samples each. A lot of recent works [5, 9, 25, 32, 67] focus
on training deep neural networks for recognition on such
long-tailed datasets, such that networks perform reasonably
well across all classes, including the minority classes. Loss
manipulation-based techniques [5, 9, 23] enhance the network’s focus toward learning tail classes by enforcing a large
margin or increasing the weight for loss for these classes.
As these techniques enhance the focus on the tail classes,
they often lead to some performance degradation in the head
(majority) classes. To mitigate this, State-of-the-Art (SotA)
techniques currently train multiple expert networks [25, 56]
that specialize in different portions of the data distribution.
The predictions from these experts are then aggregated to
produce the final output, which improves the performance
over individual experts. However, all these efforts have been
restricted to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), particularly ResNets [15], with little attention to architectures
such as Transformers [11, 53], MLP-Mixers [47] etc.
Recently, the transformer architecture adapted for computer vision, named as Vision Transformer (ViT) [12], has
gained popularity due to its scalability and impressive performance on various computer vision tasks [6, 44]. One
caveat behind its impressive performance is the requirement
for pre-training on large datasets [11]. The data-efficient
transformers (DeiT) [48] aimed to reduce this requirement
for pre-training by distilling information from a pre-trained
CNN. Subsequent efforts have further improved the data and
compute efficiency [50, 51] of ViTs. However, all these
improvements have been primarily based on increasing performance on the balanced ImageNet dataset. We find that
these improvements are still insufficient for robust perfor* denotes equal contribution. Correspondence to harshr@iisc.ac.in.

23396

