This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Non-rigid Structure-from-Motion: Temporally-smooth Procrustean Alignment
and Spatially-variant Deformation Modeling
Jiawei Shi, Hui Deng, Yuchao Dai *
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Information Acquisition and Processing
{sjw2018, denghui986}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Even though Non-rigid Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM)
has been extensively studied and great progress has been
made, there are still key challenges that hinder their broad
real-world applications: 1) the inherent motion/rotation
ambiguity requires either explicit camera motion recovery
with extra constraint or complex Procrustean Alignment; 2)
existing low-rank modeling of the global shape can overpenalize drastic deformations in the 3D shape sequence.
This paper proposes to resolve the above issues from a
spatial-temporal modeling perspective. First, we propose
a novel Temporally-smooth Procrustean Alignment module
that estimates 3D deforming shapes and adjusts the camera motion by aligning the 3D shape sequence consecutively. Our new alignment module remedies the requirement
of complex reference 3D shape during alignment, which
is more conductive to non-isotropic deformation modeling.
Second, we propose a spatial-weighted approach to enforce
the low-rank constraint adaptively at different locations to
accommodate drastic spatially-variant deformation reconstruction better. Our modeling outperform existing lowrank based methods, and extensive experiments across different datasets validate the effectiveness of our method1 .

1. Introduction
Non-rigid structure-from-motion (NRSfM) targets at jointly
estimating the deforming 3D shapes and the camera motion from the 2D observation sequence, which is a classical and long-lasting geometric vision problem [8]. In contrast to the recently booming deep learning based solutions
[14, 24, 25, 34, 42, 48], the optimization based solutions do
not rely on training data and can be directly applied to arbitrary classes such as human, animal, and deforming surface.
Even though considerable progress has been made [11] and
* Yuchao Dai is the corresponding author.
1 Project page: https://npucvr.github.io/TSM-NRSfM.

Camera Motion

S i
World
Coordinate

(a)

Camera Pose

Ri

ˆ
rank  G k G Tk   3, k  1, , K

2i 1:2i G k  cik Ri , i  1,, F , k  1,, K &&
Camera Motion

(b)

Ri
World
Coordinate

TPA:

R i1
2
min  Q i 1S i 1  Q i S i

Temporally-smooth
Alignment

F

Qi

Qi

Procrustean Alignment
Procrustean
Alignment

Mean Shape

Xi

Ri

Camera
Coordinate

GPA:

(c)

X
min  si R i X i  t i 1T  X

2

si , R i , t i , X

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed TPA Module. (a) Camera motion can be recovered by orthographic and rank-3 constraints within the matrix factorization framework[11]. (c) The
Procrustean alignment framework uses GPA to resolve the rotation ambiguity. (b) We propose the TPA module, which aligns the
3D shapes of consecutive frames and corrects the camera motion
by the temporal smoothing property.

a series of milestones have been achieved [1, 27, 30, 49], the
performance of NRSfM is still far from satisfactory. The
challenges mainly lie in 1) the inherent motion/rotation ambiguity requires either explicit camera motion recovery with
extra constraint or complex Procrustean Alignment; 2) existing global modeling (i.e., low-rank [11, 26, 27], union-ofsubspace [28, 49]) of the deforming 3D shape cannot handle
drastic spatially-variant 3D deformations.
Existing NRSfM statistical prior frameworks can be
roughly classified into two categories: 1) explicit motion
estimation-based approaches [2, 8, 11, 15, 26, 27] and 2)
motion estimation-free approaches [30, 31, 41]. The former usually employs the matrix factorization framework

21446

