This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deformable One-shot Face Stylization via DINO Semantic Guidance

One-shot
example

source
domain

transfer

Source

Yang Zhou
Zichong Chen
Hui Huang*
Visual Computing Research Center, Shenzhen University

Reference

target
domain
Figure 1. We propose a deformation-aware face stylization framework trained on a single real-style image pair (left). Our framework
can generate diverse, high-quality, stylized faces with desired deformations, while maintaining the input identity well (right).

Abstract
This paper addresses the complex issue of one-shot face
stylization, focusing on the simultaneous consideration of
appearance and structure, where previous methods have
fallen short. We explore deformation-aware face stylization
that diverges from traditional single-image style reference,
opting for a real-style image pair instead. The cornerstone
of our method is the utilization of a self-supervised vision
transformer, specifically DINO-ViT, to establish a robust
and consistent facial structure representation across both
real and style domains. Our stylization process begins by
adapting the StyleGAN generator to be deformation-aware
through the integration of spatial transformers (STN). We
then introduce two innovative constraints for generator
fine-tuning under the guidance of DINO semantics: i) a
directional deformation loss that regulates directional vectors in DINO space, and ii) a relative structural consistency
constraint based on DINO token self-similarities, ensuring
diverse generation. Additionally, style-mixing is employed
to align the color generation with the reference, minimiz* Corresponding author.

ing inconsistent correspondences. This framework delivers
enhanced deformability for general one-shot face stylization, achieving notable efficiency with a fine-tuning duration of approximately 10 minutes. Extensive qualitative and
quantitative comparisons demonstrate our superiority over
state-of-the-art one-shot face stylization methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/zichongc/DoesFS.

1. Introduction
Face stylization is a stylish and eye-catching application favored by users in social media and the virtual world.
Recent advances [22, 31, 36–38] mainly benefit from the
capacity of generative models, e.g., StyleGAN [16–18].
When coping with artistic styles of extremely limited examples (e.g., one), it is necessary to prevent the training
from over-fitting and mode collapse. Many one-shot methods [6, 21, 40, 45] have addressed this issue with different strategies. However, these approaches mainly focus on
color and texture transfer, seldom exploring the geometric deformation potential. As exaggeration is an important characteristic of artistic style, structural deformations
should also be emphasized in the stylization.

7787

