This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NTO3D: Neural Target Object 3D Reconstruction with Segment Anything
Xiaobao Wei1,2,3 Renrui Zhang4 Jiarui Wu1,3 Jiaming Liu1
Ming Lu5 Yandong Guo6 Shanghang Zhang1†
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Peking University 2 Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
5
Intel Labs China 6 AI2 Robotics

Abstract
Neural 3D reconstruction from multi-view images has
recently attracted increasing attention from the community.
Existing methods normally learn a neural field for the whole
scene, while it is still under-explored how to reconstruct a
target object indicated by users. Considering the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) has shown effectiveness in segmenting any 2D images, in this paper, we propose NTO3D, a
novel high-quality Neural Target Object 3D (NTO3D) reconstruction method, which leverages the benefits of both
neural field and SAM. We first propose a novel strategy to
lift the multi-view 2D segmentation masks of SAM into a
unified 3D occupancy field. The 3D occupancy field is then
projected into 2D space and generates the new prompts for
SAM. This process is iterative until convergence to separate the target object from the scene. After this, we then
lift the 2D features of the SAM encoder into a 3D feature
field in order to improve the reconstruction quality of the
target object. NTO3D lifts the 2D masks and features of
SAM into the 3D neural field for high-quality neural target object 3D reconstruction. We conduct detailed experiments on several benchmark datasets to demonstrate the
advantages of our method. The code will be available at:
https://github.com/ucwxb/NTO3D.

Train NTO3D

Select A Target

Sup.

SAM

SAM

Iterative

SDF Field
Color Field

Sup.
3D Occupancy Field

3D SAM Feature Field

Get Your 3D Model of Target Object

Figure 1. Overview of NTO3D. First, a user selects a reconstruction target in the scene. Then, our NTO3D utilizes a 3D occupancy field iteratively to merge the multi-view 2D segmentation
masks into 3D space. NTO3D further lifts the features of the SAM
encoder into a 3D SAM features field and optimizes the feature
field together with other fields. Finally, the user can obtain a highquality 3D reconstruction model of the target object with NTO3D.

1. Introduction
The neural field has made significant progress over the past
few years and become one of the most popular 3D representations. The pioneering Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [28]
and its variants [2, 8, 30, 43, 59] learn coordinate-based neural networks to predict the density and color from multiview images and use volume rendering to conduct novel
view synthesis. NeuS [47] improves the 3D reconstruction
quality of NeRF by representing a surface with a Signed
† Corresponding Author E-mail: shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Distance Function (SDF). They also developed a new volume rendering method to train the neural SDF representation. Many studies are proposed to improve the reconstruction quality and reduce the training cost [44, 52]. However,
existing methods usually learn a neural field for the whole
scene, ignoring the reconstruction of a target object in the
scene, which can be indicated by end users on the fly.
Although traditional techniques such as in-hand scanning [51] have been proposed for target 3D object reconstruction, it is still non-trivial for neural 3D reconstruction

20352

