This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InternVL: Scaling up Vision Foundation Models and Aligning
for Generic Visual-Linguistic Tasks
Zhe Chen2,1† , Jiannan Wu3,1† , Wenhai Wang4,1 , Weijie Su6,1† , Guo Chen2,1† , Sen Xing5 , Muyan Zhong5 ,
Qinglong Zhang1 , Xizhou Zhu5,7,1 , Lewei Lu7,1 , Bin Li6 , Ping Luo3 , Tong Lu2 , Yu Qiao1 , Jifeng Dai5,1B
1
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Nanjing University
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 Tsinghua University
6
University of Science and Technology of China 7 SenseTime Research
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/InternVL
classes

contras(ve

vision
encoder

vision
encoder

text
encoder

scaling up
vision
encoder
to 6B #params

image

image

text

image

(a) Supervised pre-training

generative

contras(ve

(b) Contrastive pre-training

large
language
model

text

shared
weights

large
language
model

prompt

(c) InternVL: Scaling up vision encoder and aligning with LLM (ours)

Figure 1. Comparisons of different vision and vision-language foundation models. (a) indicates the traditional vision foundation model,
e.g. ResNet [43] pre-trained on classification tasks. (b) represents the vision-language foundation models, e.g. CLIP [89] pre-trained on
image-text pairs. (c) is our InternVL, which presents a workable way to align the large-scale vision foundation model (i.e., InternViT-6B)
with the large language model and is versatile for both contrastive and generative tasks.

Abstract
The exponential growth of large language models
(LLMs) has opened up numerous possibilities for multimodal AGI systems. However, the progress in vision and
vision-language foundation models, which are also critical
elements of multi-modal AGI, has not kept pace with LLMs.
In this work, we design a large-scale vision-language foundation model (InternVL), which scales up the vision foundation model to 6 billion parameters and progressively
aligns it with the LLM, using web-scale image-text data
from various sources. This model can be broadly applied
to and achieve state-of-the-art performance on 32 generic
visual-linguistic benchmarks including visual perception
tasks such as image-level or pixel-level recognition, visionlanguage tasks such as zero-shot image/video classification,
zero-shot image/video-text retrieval, and link with LLMs to
create multi-modal dialogue systems. It has powerful visual
capabilities and can be a good alternative to the ViT-22B.
We hope that our research could contribute to the development of multi-modal large models.
† This work is done when they are interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory;
B corresponding author (daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn)

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) largely promote the development of artificial general intelligence (AGI) systems
with their impressive capabilities in open-world language
tasks, and their model scale and performance are still increasing at a fast pace. Vision large language models
(VLLMs) [3, 5, 19, 21, 28, 69, 87, 113, 147], which leverage
LLMs, have also achieved significant breakthroughs, enabling sophisticated vision-language dialogues and interactions. However, the progress of vision and vision-language
foundation models, which are also crucial for VLLMs, has
lagged behind the rapid growth of LLMs.
To bridge vision models with LLMs, existing VLLMs
[5, 61, 100, 138, 147] commonly employ lightweight “glue”
layers, such as QFormer [61] or linear projection [69], to
align features of vision and language models. Such alignment contains several limitations: (1) Disparity in parameter scales. The large LLMs [38] now boosts up to 1000
billion parameters, while the widely-used vision encoders
of VLLMs are still around one billion. This gap may lead
to the under-use of LLM’s capacity. (2) Inconsistent representation. Vision models, trained on pure-vision data or

24185

