This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Paint3D: Paint Anything 3D with Lighting-Less Texture Diffusion Models
Wen Liu1
Zibo Zhao1,3
Zhongqi Qi1 *
Xin Chen1 *
Xianfang Zeng1 *
Zhibin Wang1
BIN FU1
Yong Liu2
Gang Yu1†
1
2
3
Tencent PCG
Zhejiang University
ShanghaiTech University
https://github.com/OpenTexture/Paint3D

Figure 1. A gallery of generated texture results by Paint3D. Our method is capable of generating lighting-less, high-quality, and highfidelity textures across diverse objects from numerous categories.

Abstract
This paper presents Paint3D, a novel coarse-to-fine
generative framework that is capable of producing highresolution, lighting-less, and diverse 2K UV texture maps
for untextured 3D meshes conditioned on text or image
inputs. The key challenge addressed is generating highquality textures without embedded illumination information, which allows the textures to be re-lighted or re-edited
within modern graphics pipelines. To achieve this, our
method first leverages a pre-trained depth-aware 2D diffusion model to generate view-conditional images and perform multi-view texture fusion, producing an initial coarse
texture map. However, as 2D models cannot fully represent 3D shapes and disable lighting effects, the coarse texture map exhibits incomplete areas and illumination arti* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author (email: skicyyu@tencent.com).

facts. To resolve this, we train separate UV Inpainting and
UVHD diffusion models specialized for the shape-aware refinement of incomplete areas and the removal of illumination artifacts. Through this coarse-to-fine process, Paint3D
can produce high-quality 2K UV textures that maintain semantic consistency while being lighting-less, significantly
advancing the state-of-the-art in texturing 3D objects.

1. Introduction
The rise of deep generative models has ushered the era
of Artificial Intelligence Generated Content, catalyzing advancements in natural language generation [46, 58, 70],
image synthesis [42, 48, 50, 51], and 3D generation [31,
43, 61]. These 3D generative technologies have significantly impacted various applications, revolutionizing the
landscape of current 3D productions. However, the generated meshes, characterized by chaotic lighting textures and

4252

