This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global Latent Neural Rendering
Thomas Tanay
Matteo Maggioni
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Project page: thomas-tanay.github.io/convglr

SparseNeRF [18]

GPNR [63]

GeoNeRF [28]

Challenge winner [26]

Sparse DTU
3 views

Sparse RFF
3 views

Generalizable DTU
unknown scene

Generalizable RFF
unknown scene

ILSH
ICCV 23 challenge

ours

baselines

RegNeRF [44]

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of our method with various baselines under 5 different experimental setups. Our method renders target
views in a low-resolution latent space and operates over all camera rays jointly. It produces significantly better geometries and textures
than previous sparse and generalizable methods, which render light rays independently and typically suffer from grainy artifacts.

Abstract
A recent trend among generalizable novel view synthesis
methods is to learn a rendering operator acting over single camera rays. This approach is promising because it
removes the need for explicit volumetric rendering, but it
effectively treats target images as collections of independent pixels. Here, we propose to learn a global rendering operator acting over all camera rays jointly. We show
that the right representation to enable such rendering is a
5-dimensional plane sweep volume consisting of the projection of the input images on a set of planes facing the target camera. Based on this understanding, we introduce our
Convolutional Global Latent Renderer (ConvGLR), an efficient convolutional architecture that performs the rendering
operation globally in a low-resolution latent space. Experiments on various datasets under sparse and generalizable
setups show that our approach consistently outperforms existing methods by significant margins.

1. Introduction
Significant progress has been made on novel view synthesis
in recent years, both in terms of image quality and rendering speed [2, 3, 6, 15, 30, 42, 43]. However, a lot of this
progress has focused on the scene-specific formulation of
the problem, where models are trained to fit one scene. We
are interested here in the generalizable formulation, where
novel views of unknown scenes can be rendered directly
from a set of posed input views [5, 41, 63, 71, 77].
This generalizable formulation is challenging because
it requires to reason about the geometry of the scene for
each target image, instead of solving the geometry problem as a preliminary step. It also typically relies on a
much sparser number of input views (3 to 16 here) while
the scene-specific formulation routinely uses 100s of input
views. However, we believe that it is ultimately more powerful because 1) sparse setups are common in real world
applications [11, 18, 44] and 2) it provides the ability to

19723

