This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniSeg3D: Omniversal 3D Segmentation via
Hierarchical Contrastive Learning
Haiyang Ying1 , Yixuan Yin1 , Jinzhi Zhang1 , Fan Wang2 , Tao Yu1 , Ruqi Huang1 , Lu Fang1†
1

Tsinghua University,

2

Alibaba Group

Figure 1. We propose OmniSeg3D, a 3D segmentation framework that (a) takes multi-view inconsistent 2D segmentations as input, and
outputs a consistent 3D feature field via a hierarchical contrastive learning method. This method supports (b) hierarchical segmentation,
(c) multi-object selection, and (d) holistic discretization in an interactive manner. See our project at oceanying.github.io/OmniSeg3D.

Abstract
Towards holistic understanding of 3D scenes, a general
3D segmentation method is needed that can segment diverse
objects without restrictions on object quantity or categories,
while also reflecting the inherent hierarchical structure. To
achieve this, we propose OmniSeg3D, an omniversal segmentation method aims for segmenting anything in 3D all
at once. The key insight is to lift multi-view inconsistent 2D
segmentations into a consistent 3D feature field through a
hierarchical contrastive learning framework, which is accomplished by two steps. Firstly, we design a novel hierarchical representation based on category-agnostic 2D seg-

mentations to model the multi-level relationship among pixels. Secondly, image features rendered from the 3D feature field are clustered at different levels, which can be further drawn closer or pushed apart according to the hierarchical relationship between different levels. In tackling
the challenges posed by inconsistent 2D segmentations, this
framework yields a global consistent 3D feature field, which
further enables hierarchical segmentation, multi-object selection, and global discretization. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on high-quality
3D segmentation and accurate hierarchical structure understanding. A graphical user interface further facilitates
flexible interaction for omniversal 3D segmentation.

† Corresponding author (fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn, luvision.net).

20612

