This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relaxed Contrastive Learning for Federated Learning
Seonguk Seo* 1

Jinkyu Kim* 1
Geeho Kim* 1
Bohyung Han1,2
1
ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University

{seonguk, jinkyu, snow1234, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel contrastive learning framework to effectively address the challenges of data heterogeneity in federated learning. We first analyze the inconsistency of gradient updates across clients during local training and establish its dependence on the distribution of feature representations, leading to the derivation of the supervised contrastive
learning (SCL) objective to mitigate local deviations. In
addition, we show that a naı̈ve integration of SCL into federated learning incurs representation collapse, resulting in
slow convergence and limited performance gains. To address this issue, we introduce a relaxed contrastive learning loss that imposes a divergence penalty on excessively
similar sample pairs within each class. This strategy prevents collapsed representations and enhances feature transferability, facilitating collaborative training and leading to
significant performance improvements. Our framework outperforms all existing federated learning approaches by significant margins on the standard benchmarks, as demonstrated by extensive experimental results. The source code
is available at our project page1 .

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) trains a shared model through the
collaboration of distributed clients while safeguarding the
privacy of local data by restricting their sharing and transfer. The primary challenge in this learning framework arises
from the data heterogeneity across clients and the class imbalance in local data. These problems eventually lead to severe misalignments of the local optima of the client models,
hindering the search for better global optima of the aggregated model and slowing down convergence.
To tackle these challenges, most existing approaches focus on minimizing the discrepancy between the global and
local models by incorporating regularization techniques on
either model parameters [1, 2, 12, 21, 44] or feature representations [15, 18, 19, 23, 40]. However, aligning the
* indicates equal contribution.
1 https://github.com/skynbe/FedRCL

(a) Tiny-ImageNet

(b) CIFAR-100

Figure 1. Performance curves of our framework, dubbed as FedRCL, in comparison to other baselines on the Tiny-ImageNet and
CIFAR-100 with non-i.i.d. setting (↵ = 0.1). FedSCL incorporates the supervised contrastive learning objective into FedAvg,
but it suffers from slow convergence and restrains performance
enhancement. Our framework significantly improves both convergence speed and accuracy.

local models with the global model entails a trade-off as
the global model is not necessarily optimal. Recently, there
have been several attempts to analyze the inconsistent local training in a principled way [33, 42]. For example,
Zhang et al. [42] investigate the label distribution skewness from a statistical perspective, and introduce a deviation
bound for analyzing the inconsistency of gradient updates in
local training.
We reformulate the deviation bound proposed in [42] and
establish its dependence on the distribution of feature representations. Subsequently, we derive that incorporating the
supervised contrastive learning (SCL) objective enhances
this bound, resulting in consistent local updates across heterogeneous clients. In other words, we show that employing
SCL improves the convergence of federated learning by alleviating the variations of local models.
Although SCL is helpful for the optimization in federated learning, the empirical results show that a naı̈ve integration of SCL suffers from slow convergence and limited
performance gains as illustrated in Figure 1. Due to the
limited and imbalanced training data in a local client, the
intra-class attraction force in SCL hampers feature diversity and consequently weakens the transferability of neural

12279

