This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CFAT: Unleashing Triangular Windows for Image Super-resolution
Abhisek Ray1 Gaurav Kumar1 Maheshkumar H. Kolekar1
1
Indian Institute of Technology Patna, India
{rayabhisek0610, gaurav19.iitp}@gmail.com, mahesh@iitp.ac.in

Abstract
Transformer-based models have revolutionized the field
of image super-resolution (SR) by harnessing their inherent ability to capture complex contextual features. The
overlapping rectangular shifted window technique used in
transformer architecture nowadays is a common practice
in super-resolution models to improve the quality and robustness of image upscaling. However, it suffers from distortion at the boundaries and has limited unique shifting modes. To overcome these weaknesses, we propose
a non-overlapping triangular window technique that synchronously works with the rectangular one to mitigate
boundary-level distortion and allows the model to access
more unique sifting modes. In this paper, we propose a
Composite Fusion Attention Transformer (CFAT) that incorporates triangular-rectangular window-based local attention with a channel-based global attention technique in
image super-resolution. As a result, CFAT enables attention
mechanisms to be activated on more image pixels and captures long-range, multi-scale features to improve SR performance. The extensive experimental results and ablation
study demonstrate the effectiveness of CFAT in the SR domain. Our proposed model shows a significant 0.7 dB performance improvement over other state-of-the-art SR architectures. Find the code Here.

1. Introduction
Efficient transmission or storage of images in band- or
memory-limited systems heavily relies on diverse image
compression techniques. However, in the real world, these
image compression phenomenons are lossy. It is challenging to retrieve the original visual quality from its compressed correspondent. Image super-resolution (SR) [10],
a reverse engineering approach in contrast to compression,
aims to recover high-resolution (HR) images from their
low-resolution (LR) counterparts. Despite extensive and
consistent research efforts, SR models still struggle to eliminate the visual artifacts in recovered images entirely. In
early 2014, the evolution of deep neural networks enhanced
SR capabilities with CNN as a mainframe skeleton [10].

Figure 1. Proposed CFAT vs other SOTA models. RW/TW:
Rectangular/Triangular Window, MSA: Multi-Head Attention,
(D): Dense, (SD): Shifted Dense, (S): Sparse, (O): Overlapping

These approaches [9, 19, 44, 45] frequently come with substantial computational and memory requirements regardless
of their effectiveness. The transformer-based techniques
have stood out as the most successful SR approaches among
many emerging models, showcasing state-of-the-art performances in the recent era.
The surge in popularity of transformer-based architectures is attributed to their natural proficiency in leveraging
long-range dependencies among image features. Leading
approaches such as SwinIR[25], Swin2SR[8], ESRT[28],
HST[21], HAT[6] and ART[43] advocate the above benefit.
They predominantly rely on a hierarchical attention mechanism, ensuring the reconstruction of HR outputs from their
LR counterparts with enhanced precision. SwinIR [27] pioneered the application of the shifted window technique in
the domain of image restoration [25], focusing mainly on
image super-resolution. Swin2SR [8] redefined the SwinIR
to enhance the performance after effectively tackling data
and training-related challenges. However, both [25] and
[8] consistently concentrate exclusively on specific image
patches for self-attention. The dilated window approach introduced in ART [43] aims not only to resolve the fixed
window problem as mentioned earlier but also to alleviate computational load while concurrently boosting superresolution performance. Nevertheless, the quick internal

26120

