This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Communication-Efficient Federated Learning with Accelerated Client Gradient
Geeho Kim* 1
Jinkyu Kim* 1
Bohyung Han1,2
1
ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University
{snow1234, jinkyu, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Federated learning often suffers from slow and unstable convergence due to the heterogeneous characteristics of
participating client datasets. Such a tendency is aggravated
when the client participation ratio is low since the information collected from the clients has large variations. To address this challenge, we propose a simple but effective federated learning framework, which improves the consistency
across clients and facilitates the convergence of the server
model. This is achieved by making the server broadcast a
global model with a lookahead gradient. This strategy enables the proposed approach to convey the projected global
update information to participants effectively without additional client memory and extra communication costs. We
also regularize local updates by aligning each client with
the overshot global model to reduce bias and improve the
stability of our algorithm. We provide the theoretical convergence rate of our algorithm and demonstrate remarkable
performance gains in terms of accuracy and communication
efficiency compared to the state-of-the-art methods, especially with low client participation rates. The source code
is available at our project page1 .

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [27] is a large-scale machine learning framework that learns a shared model in a central server
through collaboration with a large number of remote clients
with separate datasets. Such a decentralized learning framework achieves a basic level of data privacy because the data
stored in local clients are unobservable by the server and
other clients. On the other hand, federated learning algorithms are particularly sensitive to communication and computational costs due to limited resources on many clients,
such as mobile or IoT devices.
A baseline algorithm of federated learning, FedAvg [27],
updates a subset of client models using a gradient descent
method based on their local data. The resulting models are
* indicates equal contribution.
1 https://github.com/geehokim/FedACG

then uploaded to the server for estimating the global model
parameters via model averaging. As extensively discussed
in the convergence of FedAvg [3, 37–39, 46], multiple local
updates conducted before server-side aggregation provide
theoretical support and practical benefits of federated learning by reducing communication costs significantly.
Despite its initial success, federated learning faces two
key challenges: high heterogeneity in training data distributed over clients and limited client participation rates.
Several studies [15, 49] have shown that multiple local updates in the clients with non-i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed) data lead to client model drift, in other
words, diverging updates in individual clients. Such a phenomenon introduces a high variance issue in FedAvg steps
for global model updates, which hampers convergence to
the optimal average loss over all clients [13, 17, 25, 26, 41,
42]. The challenge related to client model drift is exacerbated when the client participation rate per communication
round is low.
To properly address the issue of client heterogeneity, we
propose a novel federated learning algorithm, Federated averaging with Accelerated Client Gradient (FedACG), which
conveys the momentum of the global gradient to clients and
enables the momentum to be incorporated into the local updates in the individual clients. Specifically, FedACG transmits the global model integrated with the global momentum
in the form of a single message, which allows each client to
perform its local gradient update step along the landscape
of the global loss function. This approach is effective in reducing the gap between global and local losses. In addition,
FedACG adds a regularization term in the objective function of clients to make the local gradients more consistent
across clients. We show that subtle differences in federated
learning algorithms can have a significant impact on the final results and discuss the behavior of FedACG together
with related methods.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows.
• We propose a simple yet effective federated optimization
algorithm, called FedACG, that proactively adjusts the
initial local model using a lookahead gradient and aligns

12385

