This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeU: Free Lunch in Diffusion U-Net
Chenyang Si Ziqi Huang Yuming Jiang Ziwei LiuB
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{chenyang.si, ziqi002, yuming002, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

https://github.com/ChenyangSi/FreeU

SD1.4

FreeU

SD1.4

FreeU

SDXL

FreeU

Figure 1. FreeU substantially improves diffusion model sample quality at no costs: no training, no additional learnable parameter
introduced, and no increase in memory or sampling time.

Abstract
In this paper, we uncover the untapped potential of diffusion U-Net, which serves as a “free lunch” that substantially improves the generation quality on the fly. We initially
investigate the key contributions of the U-Net architecture
to the denoising process and identify that its main backbone
primarily contributes to denoising, whereas its skip connections mainly introduce high-frequency features into the decoder module, causing the potential neglect of crucial functions intrinsic to the backbone network. Capitalizing on this
discovery, we propose a simple yet effective method, termed
“FreeU”, which enhances generation quality without additional training or finetuning. Our key insight is to strategically re-weight the contributions sourced from the U-Net’s
skip connections and backbone feature maps, to leverage
the strengths of both components of the U-Net architecture. Promising results on image and video generation tasks
demonstrate that our FreeU can be readily integrated to existing diffusion models, e.g., Stable Diffusion, DreamBooth
and ControlNet, to improve the generation quality with only
a few lines of code. All you need is to adjust two scaling
factors during inference.

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models, a cutting-edge category of
generative models, have garnered significant attention, particularly for tasks related to computer vision [7, 8, 11, 18,
33, 41, 45, 46, 49]. These diffusion models are composed
of two key processes: diffusion process and the denoising
process. In the diffusion process, Gaussian noise is gradually added to the input data and eventually corrupts it into
approximately pure Gaussian noise. During the denoising
process, the original input data is recovered from its noise
state through a learned sequence of inverse diffusion operations. Usually, a U-Net is employed to iteratively predict the noise to be removed at each denoising step. Existing works [3, 47, 58, 65] primarily focus on utilizing
pre-trained diffusion U-Nets for downstream applications,
while the internal properties of the diffusion U-Net, remain
largely under-explored.
In this paper, we delve into the denoising process of the
diffusion U-Net. For a comprehensive analysis, our first objective is to explore the mechanics behind how images are
generated from noise during the denoising process. To
understand what’s going on, we conduct an investigation

4733

