This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Total-Decom: Decomposed 3D Scene Reconstruction with Minimal Interaction
Xiaoyang Lyu* Chirui Chang∗ Peng Dai Yang-Tian Sun Xiaojuan Qi†
The University of Hong Kong
{shawlyu, chiruichang, sunyt98}@connect.hku.hk, {daipeng, xjqi}@eee.hku.hk

……
(b) Decomposed Object Meshes

Click the desired objects
on the rendering view
(a) Reconstructed Mesh With Posed Images and Pseudo Geometry Prior

(c) Re-textured Objects

Reconfiguration View
(d) Room Reconfiguration with Decomposed Meshes

Figure 1. Indoor scenes consist of complex compositions of objects and backgrounds. Our proposed method, Total-Decom, (a) performs
3D reconstruction from posed multiview images, (b) decomposes the reconstructed mesh to generate high-quality meshes for individual
objects and backgrounds with minimal human annotations. This approach facilitates such applications as (c) object re-texturing and (d)
scene reconfiguration. For additional demonstrations, please refer to our supplementary materials and videos.

Abstract
Scene reconstruction from multi-view images is a fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics. Recent neural implicit surface reconstruction methods have
achieved high-quality results; however, editing and manipulating the 3D geometry of reconstructed scenes remains challenging due to the absence of naturally decomposed object entities and complex object/background compositions. In this paper, we present Total-Decom, a novel
method for decomposed 3D reconstruction with minimal
human interaction. Our approach seamlessly integrates
the Segment Anything Model (SAM) with hybrid implicitexplicit neural surface representations and a mesh-based
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

region-growing technique for accurate 3D object decomposition. Total-Decom requires minimal human annotations while providing users with real-time control over the
granularity and quality of decomposition. We extensively
evaluate our method on benchmark datasets and demonstrate its potential for downstream applications, such as
animation and scene editing. The code is available at
https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/Total-Decom.git.

1. Introduction
Scene reconstruction from multi-view images is a fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics [11, 12, 22,
24, 26, 28, 29]. Recently, neural implicit surface reconstruction methods such as VolSDF [39] and NeuS [35] have been
proposed to address this problem and have achieved high-

20860

