This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On Train-Test Class Overlap and Detection for Image Retrieval
Chull Hwan Song1
1

Dealicious Inc.

2

Jooyoung Yoon1 Taebaek Hwang1
Yeong Hyeon Gu2 * Yannis Avrithis3

Sejong University

3

Shunghyun Choi1

Institute of Advanced Research on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IARAI)
6WDJH,QVWDQFH'HWHFWLRQ
'%

Abstract
How important is it for training and evaluation sets to
not have class overlap in image retrieval? We revisit Google
Landmarks v2 clean [56], the most popular training set, by
identifying and removing class overlap with Revisited Oxford
and Paris [34], the most popular evaluation set. By comparing the original and the new RGLDv2-clean on a benchmark
of reproduced state-of-the-art methods, our ﬁndings are striking. Not only is there a dramatic drop in performance, but it
is inconsistent across methods, changing the ranking.
What does it take to focus on objects or interest and ignore background clutter when indexing? Do we need to train
an object detector and the representation separately? Do we
need location supervision? We introduce Single-stage Detectto-Retrieve (CiDeR), an end-to-end, single-stage pipeline to
detect objects of interest and extract a global image representation. We outperform previous state-of-the-art on both existing training sets and the new RGLDv2-clean. Our dataset
is available at https://github.com/dealiciousinc/RGLDv2-clean.

1. Introduction
Instance-level image retrieval is a signiﬁcant computer
vision problem, attracting substantial investigation before
and after deep learning. High-quality datasets are crucial for
advancing research. Image retrieval has beneﬁted from the
availability of landmark datasets [2, 8, 36, 28, 56]. Apart
from depicting particular landmarks, an important property
of training sets [8, 36] is that they do not contain landmarks
overlapping with the evaluation sets [31, 32, 34]. Google
landmarks [56] has gained widespread adoption in state of
the art benchmarks, but falls short in this property [55].
At the same time, a fundamental challenge in image retrieval is to ﬁnd a particular object among other objects or
background clutter. In this direction, it is common to use
attention [15, 27, 46] but it is more effective use object detection [41, 40] in order to represent only objects of interest for
retrieval. These detect-to-retrieve (D2R) [48] methods how* Corresponding author

&11

/RFDOL]DWLRQ1HWZRUN
'%

6WDJH(PEHGGLQJIRU5HWULHYDO

&11

&11
0DVNEDVHG
SRROLQJ
)HDWXUH

'HWHFWHG'%

(a) Two-stage

(b) One-stage

Figure 1. It is beneﬁcial for image retrieval to detect objects of interest in
database images and only represent those. (a) Two-stage pipeline. Previous
works involve two-stage embedding extraction at indexing, or a two-stage
training process, and they may use location supervision or not. (b) Onestage pipeline. We use a single-stage embedding extraction at training and
indexing; training is end-to-end and uses no location supervision.

ever, necessitate complex two-stage training and indexing
pipelines, as shown in Figure 1(a), often requiring a separate
training set with location supervision.
Motivated by the above challenges, we investigate two
directions in this work. First, in the direction of data, we
revisit GLDv2-clean dataset [56]. We analyze and remove
overlaps of landmark categories with evaluation sets [34],
introducing a new version, RGLDv2-clean. We then reproduce and benchmark state-of-the-art methods on the new
dataset and compare with the original. Remarkably, we ﬁnd
that, although the images removed are only a tiny fraction,
there is a dramatic drop in performance.
Second, in the direction of the method, we introduce
CiDeR, a simple attention-based approach to detect objects
of interest at different levels and obtain a global image representation that effectively ignores background clutter. Importantly, as shown in Figure 1(b), this is a streamlined
end-to-end approach that only needs single-stage training,
single-stage indexing and is free of any location supervision.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
1. We introduce RGLDv2-clean, a new version of an established dataset for image retrieval.

17375

