This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCE-MAE: Selective Correspondence Enhancement with Masked Autoencoder
for Self-Supervised Landmark Estimation
Kejia Yin1,2†*

Varshanth Rao2*

Ruowei Jiang2 Xudong Liu1,2† Parham Aarabi1
University of Toronto 2 ModiFace

David B. Lindell1

1

† This work was done during the internship at ModiFace.

Similarity
Loss

Full
Correspondence

CARB

MAE
ViT

* Equal contribution.

Contrastive
Learning

Discarded after Pretraining

Example
Similarity Map

Previous
Work

Decoder

Facial landmark detection is a computer vision task involving the identification and localization of specific keypoints
corresponding to particular positions on a human face. Facial landmarks form the crux for many classical downstream
tasks such as 3D face reconstruction [1, 48], face recognition [18, 41], face emotion/expression recognition [32, 33],
and more contemporary applications such as facial beauty
prediction [4, 16] and face make-up try on [20, 24, 31].
Albeit extremely useful, training facial landmark de-

Unannotated
Dataset

Stage 2
Protocol

Multi-view SSL

Net’

1. Introduction

Example
Query

Net

Self-supervised landmark estimation is a challenging
task that demands the formation of locally distinct feature representations to identify sparse facial landmarks in
the absence of annotated data. To tackle this task, existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods (1) extract coarse features from backbones that are trained with instance-level
self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigms, which neglect
the dense prediction nature of the task, (2) aggregate them
into memory-intensive hypercolumn formations, and (3) supervise lightweight projector networks to naı̈vely establish
full local correspondences among all pairs of spatial features. In this paper, we introduce SCE-MAE, a framework
that (1) leverages the MAE [14], a region-level SSL method
that naturally better suits the landmark prediction task, (2)
operates on the vanilla feature map instead of on expensive hypercolumns, and (3) employs a Correspondence Approximation and Refinement Block (CARB) that utilizes a
simple density peak clustering algorithm and our proposed
Locality-Constrained Repellence Loss to directly hone only
select local correspondences. We demonstrate through extensive experiments that SCE-MAE is highly effective and
robust, outperforming existing SOTA methods by large margins of ∼20%-44% on the landmark matching and ∼9%15% on the landmark detection tasks.

Dataset
t-SNE Plot

Stage 1
Protocol

Abstract

SCE-MAE
(Ours)

Selective
Correspondence
Left Eye

Right Eye

Nose

Left Lip Corner

Right Lip Corner

Figure 1. SCE-MAE vs prior self-supervised facial landmark detection methods. Stage 1: Prior works (top) use instance-level
multi-view SSL paradigms that output less distinct initial local
features. Our framework (bottom) leverages MAE to naturally
form better initial features that result in well-defined boundaries
between facial landmarks (see t-SNE plots). Stage 2: Prior works
operate on memory-intensive hypercolumns and supervise each
feature pair to achieve correspondence. Our framework employs
a Correspondence Approximation and Refinement Block (CARB)
that operates on the original MAE output and directly hones only
the selected correspondence pairs. For the example query, SCEMAE outputs a more-focused and sharper similarity map, demonstrating the superiority of the final features.

tectors requires numerous precise annotations per sample,
making it a laborious and expensive ordeal. Furthermore,
landmarks are not always semantically well-defined, making their annotations prone to inconsistencies and biases
[15, 23, 58], which can severely limit the development of
accurate landmark models. Motivated to avoid these demerits, recent works [9, 19, 46] have incorporated the unsupervised [46] and self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigms
[12, 13, 47] into their methods. SSL-pretrained models have
shown to yield highly effective feature representations without the use of labeled data and, at many times, outperform
their supervised counterparts on the target tasks [2, 5, 14].
Facial landmark detection and matching tasks rely on
the formation of locally distinct features to differentiate between (1) the facial regions (e.g., eye vs. lip), (2) the components of face parts (e.g., left vs. right corners of the lip),

1313

