This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grounded Question-Answering in Long Egocentric Videos
Shangzhe Di1
1

Weidi Xie1,2

CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

2

Shanghai AI Lab, China

Abstract
Existing approaches to video understanding, mainly designed for short videos from a third-person perspective,
are limited in their applicability in certain fields, such as
robotics. In this paper, we delve into open-ended questionanswering (QA) in long, egocentric videos, which allows individuals or robots to inquire about their own past visual experiences. This task presents unique challenges, including
the complexity of temporally grounding queries within extensive video content, the high resource demands for precise
data annotation, and the inherent difficulty of evaluating
open-ended answers due to their ambiguous nature. Our
proposed approach tackles these challenges by (i) integrating query grounding and answering within a unified model
to reduce error propagation; (ii) employing large language
models for efficient and scalable data synthesis; and (iii)
introducing a close-ended QA task for evaluation, to manage answer ambiguity. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method, which also achieves stateof-the-art performance on the QAEgo4D and Ego4D-NLQ
benchmarks. Code, data, and models are open-sourced 1 .

1. Introduction
In the literature, existing video perception tasks have primarily focused on videos in third-person view, for example, action recognition [4, 11, 14], video-language grounding [9, 16, 30], and video question-answering [17, 37, 40],
these videos are short, e.g., typically ranging from 10 seconds to one minute. Until recently, the proposal of Ego4D
dataset [12] re-ignites the interest of video understanding
from egocentric views, where the inputs are normally long,
continuous video streams from the first-person point of
view, i.e., seeing the world through the eyes of an agent
actively engaged with its environment, which resembles an
important step towards deploying vision models into realworld scenarios, such as robotics and augmented reality.
In this paper, we consider question answering (QA) in
long, egocentric videos, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Given ques1 https://github.com/Becomebright/GroundVQA

t=0

t=T

Question:
where did I put lettuce?

Temporal window:
20-50s

Choices:
(A) pantry (B) refrigerator (C) cupboard (D) draw

Answer:
in the fridge / (B) refrigerator

Figure 1. We propose a unified model for addressing grounded
question answering in long egocentric videos, i.e., simultaneously
identifying the temporal window to a question, generating answers
in natural language (OpenQA task), or picking answers from candidate choices (CloseQA task).

tions about an egocentric video, e.g., “where did I put lettuce”, we aim to build a visual system that can answer the
raised question in free-form language. This task serves two
purposes: enhancing episodic memory [35], i.e., allowing a
person or robot to ask questions on the fly about their own
past visual experience; or probing the multi-modal reasoning abilities of deep models.
Question-answering (QA) in long egocentric videos is
challenging, primarily due to the complexity of temporally
grounding and generating answers to the queries within extensive video content. A pioneer work, overlooking the importance of query grounding, achieves unsatisfactory QA
performance that merely outperforms “blind guessing” [3].
On the other hand, research about temporal grounding in
long egocentric videos, while achieving good progress, is
limited in practical uses without the QA ability. A potential fix would be chaining models from the two areas, i.e.,
starting by localizing the temporal window to which the
question relates, and followed by answering based on the
corresponding video context. However, such a method is
often ineffective due to error propagation. To address these
challenges, we propose to train a unified model for simultaneous query grounding and answering, as shown in Fig. 1.
The unified training has three advantages: First, by training the grounding task, the model can better grasp queryrelevant information from the long videos, which is helpful
for effective QA; Second, simultaneously training these two

12934

