This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Partial-to-Partial Shape Matching with Geometric Consistency
Viktoria Ehm1,2

Maolin Gao1,2
Paul Roetzer3
Marvin Eisenberger1,2
Daniel Cremers1,2
Florian Bernard3
1
2
Technical University of Munich Munich Center for Machine Learning 3 University of Bonn

Overlapping Region Prediction

Intra-Class Matching

Inter-Class Matching

Figure 1. We present the first geometrically consistent partial-to-partial shape matching solution. Our approach can find correspondences between partial shapes and thus determine the overlapping region between these shapes (left). We can find correspondences within
shape classes (middle), and across shape classes (right). For the latter, we introduce a new inter-class partial-to-partial matching dataset.

Abstract
Finding correspondences between 3D shapes is an important and long-standing problem in computer vision,
graphics and beyond. A prominent challenge are partialto-partial shape matching settings, which occur when the
shapes to match are only observed incompletely (e.g. from
3D scanning). Although partial-to-partial matching is a
highly relevant setting in practice, it is rarely explored. Our
work bridges the gap between existing (rather artificial) 3D
full shape matching and partial-to-partial real-world settings by exploiting geometric consistency as a strong constraint. We demonstrate that it is indeed possible to solve
this challenging problem in a variety of settings. For the
first time, we achieve geometric consistency for partialto-partial matching, which is realized by a novel integer
non-linear program formalism building on triangle product spaces, along with a new pruning algorithm based on
linear integer programming. Further, we generate a new
inter-class dataset for partial-to-partial shape-matching.
We show that our method outperforms current SOTA methods on both an established intra-class dataset and our novel
inter-class dataset. The code of this work is publicly available1 .

1 https://github.com/vikiehm/gc-ppsm

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences between 3D shapes is an important topic in computer vision to solve tasks such as
shape interpolation or texture transfer. While there is a
lot of research on 3D shape matching, these works predominantly focus on full-to-full shape matching [11, 19,
25, 33, 39, 43, 44], or on partial-to-full shape matching
[3, 11, 18, 29, 36, 37]. Therefore, they are not applicable to
the complex problem of matching two partial shapes. The
problem of partial-to-partial matching is difficult because
not every part of one shape will necessarily be matched to
the other shape and vice versa. At the same time, we must
encourage specific parts to be matched to avoid the trivial
solution of not matching anything. There is only little research on the topic of partial-to-partial shape matching.
The current SOTA method [3] requires annotated data for
training, which is often unavailable rendering many applications infeasible. While the method [37] is learning-free and
thus does not rely on annotations, it requires closing holes
in the partial shapes to generate a full-to-full shape matching, resulting in poor results for shapes with low overlaps.
It uses the property of geometric consistency to generate its
results. While many methods also make use of the connectivity of meshes to generate geometrically consistent results
for full-to-full [39, 43, 44] or partial-to-full [18] matching,
to date, it has not been applied to partial-to-partial matching. In this work, we incorporate geometric consistency into

27488

