This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Plug and Play Active Learning for Object Detection
Lichao Huang2
Elliot J. Crowley1
Chenhongyi Yang1 *
1
School of Engineering, University of Edinburgh
2
Horizon Robotics

Abstract
Annotating datasets for object detection is an expensive and time-consuming endeavor. To minimize this burden, active learning (AL) techniques are employed to select the most informative samples for annotation within a
constrained “annotation budget”. Traditional AL strategies typically rely on model uncertainty or sample diversity
for query sampling, while more advanced methods have focused on developing AL-specific object detector architectures to enhance performance. However, these specialized
approaches are not readily adaptable to different object detectors due to the significant engineering effort required
for integration. To overcome this challenge, we introduce
Plug and Play Active Learning (PPAL), a simple and effective AL strategy for object detection. PPAL is a twostage method comprising uncertainty-based and diversitybased sampling phases. In the first stage, our Difficulty
Calibrated Uncertainty Sampling leverage a category-wise
difficulty coefficient that combines both classification and
localisation difficulties to re-weight instance uncertainties,
from which we sample a candidate pool for the subsequent diversity-based sampling. In the second stage, we
propose Category Conditioned Matching Similarity to better compute the similarities of multi-instance images as
ensembles of their instance similarities, which is used by
the k-Means++ algorithm to sample the final AL queries.
PPAL makes no change to model architectures or detector
training pipelines; hence it can be easily generalized to different object detectors. We benchmark PPAL on the MSCOCO and Pascal VOC datasets using different detector
architectures and show that our method outperforms prior
work by a large margin. Code is available at https:
//github.com/ChenhongyiYang/PPAL

1. Introduction
Object detectors typically need a huge amount of training
data [21, 26] annotated with both object category labels and
* Corresponding Author. Email: chenhongyi.yang@ed.ac.uk

Uncertainty-based Sampling

Reweight

Collect

Diversity-based Sampling

Sort
CCMS

Di culty
Coe cient

Candidate pool

Inference

Add

Training
Next Round

Object Detector
ffi ffi

Unlabelled Set

Training Set

Oracle Annotation

Figure 1. An overview of our two-stage PPAL. In the first Difficulty Calibrated Uncertainty Sampling stage, the objects’ uncertainties are re-weighted with the difficulty coefficients that take
both classification and localisation into account, and a candidate
pool of images, which the model is mostly uncertain on, are sampled. In the second diversity-based stage, we run a modified
kmeans++ algorithm using the proposed Category Conditioned
Matching Similarity (CCMS) to select a set of representative images as active learning queries for the next round of annotation.

bounding box locations. This annotation is expensive and
tedious. If we are required to do some annotation, it would
make sense to annotate the images that will be of the greatest benefit when used for training. But how do we know
which ones to choose? The goal of active learning is to
tell us. Given a large unlabelled data pool, active learning
(AL) aims to sample data that would maximally improve
a model’s performance if that data was annotated and used
for training. There are typically two main streams of active
learning: (1) Uncertainty-based AL methods [20, 22, 23,
36, 40] select samples that maximise a measure of model
uncertainty e.g. those with the least mutual information with
the current set of labelled data; (2) Diversity-based AL approaches [1, 3, 13, 16, 29, 31, 39, 42, 47] instead select
samples that are representative of the whole distribution of
unlabelled data; this can be achieved by minimising the similarities between the features [39] or posterior probabilities
vectors [1] inside this subset.
With a neural network, uncertainty-based and diversitybased AL can be straightforwardly applied to the image
classification task. For example, uncertainty-based sampling can be implemented by selecting the unlabelled sam-

17784

