This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DifFlow3D: Toward Robust Uncertainty-Aware Scene Flow Estimation with
Iterative Diffusion-Based Refinement
Jiuming Liu1 , Guangming Wang2 , Weicai Ye3 , Chaokang Jiang4 , Jinru Han1 ,
Zhe Liu5 , Guofeng Zhang3 , Dalong Du4 , Hesheng Wang1 *
1
2
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
University of Cambridge
3
4
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
PhiGent Robotics
5
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{liujiuming,wangguangming,liuzhesjtu,wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn
ts20060079a31@cumt.edu.cn

maikeyeweicai@gmail.com

Figure 1. Comparison on challenging cases. DifFlow3D predicts uncertainty-aware scene flow with diffusion model, which has stronger
robustness for: (a) dynamics, (b) noisy inputs, (c) small objects, and (d) repetitive patterns. Blue, green, red points respectively indicate
the first frame P C1 , accurately estimated P C2 (P C1 warped by estimated flow), and inaccurately estimated P C2 .

Abstract
Scene flow estimation, which aims to predict per-point
3D displacements of dynamic scenes, is a fundamental task in the computer vision field. However, previous works commonly suffer from unreliable correlation
caused by locally constrained searching ranges, and struggle with accumulated inaccuracy arising from the coarseto-fine structure. To alleviate these problems, we propose
a novel uncertainty-aware scene flow estimation network
1 *Corresponding Author.

(DifFlow3D) with the diffusion probabilistic model. Iterative diffusion-based refinement is designed to enhance the
correlation robustness and resilience to challenging cases,
e.g. dynamics, noisy inputs, repetitive patterns, etc. To restrain the generation diversity, three key flow-related features are leveraged as conditions in our diffusion model.
Furthermore, we also develop an uncertainty estimation
module within diffusion to evaluate the reliability of estimated scene flow. Our DifFlow3D achieves state-of-theart performance, with 24.0% and 29.1% EPE3D reduction
respectively on FlyingThings3D and KITTI 2015 datasets.

15109

