This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Separating the “Chirp” from the “Chat”:
Self-supervised Visual Grounding of Sound and Language
Mark Hamilton
MIT, Microsoft

Andrew Zisserman
Oxford, Google

John R. Hershey
Google

William T. Freeman
MIT, Google

markth@mit.edu

Figure 1. Visual overview of the DenseAV algorithm. Two modality-specific backbones featurize audio and visual signals. We introduce
a novel generalization of multi-head attention to extract attention maps that discover and separate the “meaning” of spoken words and the
sounds an object makes. DenseAV performs this localization and decomposition solely through observing paired stimuli such as videos.

Abstract
We present DenseAV, a novel dual encoder grounding architecture that learns high-resolution, semantically meaningful, and audio-visual aligned features solely through
watching videos. We show that DenseAV can discover the
“meaning” of words and the “location” of sounds without
explicit localization supervision. Furthermore, it automatically discovers and distinguishes between these two types of
associations without supervision. We show that DenseAV’s
localization abilities arise from a new multi-head feature
aggregation operator that directly compares dense image
and audio representations for contrastive learning. In contrast, many other systems that learn “global” audio and
video representations cannot localize words and sound. Finally, we contribute two new datasets to improve the evaluation of AV representations through speech and sound
prompted semantic segmentation. On these and other
datasets we show DenseAV dramatically outperforms the
prior art on speech and sound prompted semantic segmentation. DenseAV outperforms the current state-of-the-art,
ImageBind, on cross-modal retrieval using fewer than half
of the parameters. Project Page: https://aka.ms/denseav

1. Introduction
Associating audio and video is a fundamental aspect of
human perception. As infants develop, the synchronization and correspondence of sounds enables multi-modal
association – a voice with a face, and a ‘moo’ with a
cow [50]. Later, as they acquire language, they associate
spoken words with objects they represent [10, 45]. Amazingly, these association abilities, constituting speech recognition, sound event recognition, and visual object recognition, develop without much direct supervision. This
work aims to create a model with this capability by learning high-resolution, semantically meaningful, audio-visual
(AV) aligned representations. Features with these properties
can be used to discover fine-grained correspondences between modalities without localization supervision or knowledge of the textual representation of language.
As an example, consider the spoken caption and accompanying sounds of the image shown in Figure 1. We wish
to “ground” both the speech and the sounds with high resolution. For instance, both the spoken word “dog” and the
sound of a bark in the audio signal should be associated
with the pixels of the dog in the visual signal if present. We
seek high quality local representations where simple inner

13117

