This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Embodied Multi-Modal Agent trained by an LLM from a Parallel TextWorld
Yijun Yang1,5,4 Tianyi Zhou2 Kanxue Li3 Dapeng Tao3 Lusong Li4
Li Shen4,⇤ Xiaodong He4 Jing Jiang5 Yuhui Shi1, *
1
Southern University of Science and Technology 2 University of Maryland, College Park
3
Yunnan University 4 JD Explore Academy 5 University of Technology Sydney
https://github.com/stevenyangyj/Emma-Alfworld
(d) Bird's Eye View

5 safe 1

Instruction: put the gold vase into safe.
Agent's action

Target object

Action succeeded
Action failed due to hallucination
Action failed due to invalid grammar

(a) GPT-4V
(b) InstructBLIP

4 sidetable 1

(c) Our EMMA

dresser 1
drawer 2
3
cabinet 1
2
1
Robot

t = 0

look around

t = 1

pick up laptop

t = 0

t = 1

t = 2

move laptop to
the side
t = 2

t = 3

open drawer
under laptop
t = 3

No vase here

go to sidetable 1

go to dresser 1

take vase 1 from
dresser 1

t = 0

t = 1

t = 2

t = 4

examine papers
t = 4

No vase here

go to drawer 2

t = 3

take vase 1 from
drawer 2
t = 4

Success
go to cabinet 1

take vase 1 from
cabinet 1

go to safe 1

put vase 1 in/on
safe 1

Figure 1: Comparison of three VLM-based agents in the visual environment from ALFWorld. Given the task instruction and the
current-step observation as inputs, a VLM agent is expected to predict an action, e.g., “go to cabinet 1”, towards completing the task. (a)
GPT-4V(ision). (b) InstructBLIP finetuned by behavior cloning on a static dataset of demonstrations by a rule-based expert in the visual
simulator. (c) Our Embodied Multi-Modal Agent (EMMA) trained via cross-modality interactive imitation learning from an LLM expert.

Abstract
While large language models (LLMs) excel in a simulated
world of texts, they struggle to interact with the more realistic
world without perceptions of other modalities such as visual
or audio signals. Although vision-language models (VLMs)
integrate LLM modules (1) aligned with static image features,
and (2) may possess prior knowledge of world dynamics (as
demonstrated in the text world), they have not been trained
in an embodied visual world and thus cannot align with its
dynamics. On the other hand, training an embodied agent in
a noisy visual world without expert guidance is often challenging and inefficient. In this paper, we train a VLM agent
living in a visual world using an LLM agent excelling in
a parallel text world. Specifically, we distill LLM’s reflection outcomes (improved actions by analyzing mistakes) in
* Corresponding author

a text world’s tasks to finetune the VLM on the same tasks
of the visual world, resulting in an Embodied Multi-Modal
Agent (EMMA) quickly adapting to the visual world dynamics. Such cross-modality imitation learning between the
two parallel worlds is achieved by a novel DAgger-DPO
algorithm, enabling EMMA to generalize to a broad scope
of new tasks without any further guidance from the LLM
expert. Extensive evaluations on the ALFWorld benchmark’s
diverse tasks highlight EMMA’s superior performance to
SOTA VLM-based agents, e.g., 20%-70% improvement in
the success rate.

1. Introduction
Embodied multi-modal agents have been acknowledged as
a pivotal stride towards achieving Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), as they encompass the potential for a broad
scope of intelligent activities [27, 63]. The rising of founda-

26275

