This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Domain Adaptation with False Negative Prediction
for Object Detection
Yuzuru Nakamura1 Yasunori Ishii1
1
Panasonic Holdings Corporation

Takayoshi Yamashita2
Chubu University

2

{nakamura.yuzuru,ishii.yasunori}@jp.panasonic.com

Abstract
Domain adaptation adapts models to various scenes with
different appearances. In this field, active domain adaptation is crucial in effectively sampling a limited number of
data in the target domain. We propose an active domain
adaptation method for object detection, focusing on quantifying the undetectability of objects. Existing methods for
active sampling encounter challenges in considering undetected objects while estimating the uncertainty of model predictions. Our proposed active sampling strategy addresses
this issue using an active learning approach that simultaneously accounts for uncertainty and undetectability. Our
newly proposed False Negative Prediction Module evaluates the undetectability of images containing undetected objects, enabling more informed active sampling. This approach considers previously overlooked undetected objects,
thereby reducing false negative errors. Moreover, using
unlabeled data, our proposed method utilizes uncertaintyguided pseudo-labeling to enhance domain adaptation further. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the performance of our proposed method closely rivals that of fully
supervised learning while requiring only a fraction of the
labeling efforts needed for the latter.

1. Introduction
Significant differences in appearance due to factors such as
lighting conditions and sensors, as observed in in-vehicle
cameras, demand substantial annotation for each dataset,
resulting in prolonged model deployment. Domain adaptation (DA) is an effective technique in such situations, allowing models to adapt to various scenes with different appearances. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) that deals
with unlabeled target domain data has been widely studied [2–4, 9, 14, 23, 35, 55, 60, 61]. UDA is an optimal
approach for reducing annotation costs. However, a considerable performance gap persists between UDA and fully
supervised learning, wherein all data are labeled.

takayoshi@isc.chubu.ac.jp

Uncertainty
Undetectability
(Ours)
Predicted
Proposals
False Negative
Errors

Figure 1. Conceptual diagram of the conventional uncertainty
and our proposed undetectability metrics used for the acquisition function. Uncertainty is only estimated from predicted
bounding boxes (represented by blue rectangles). In contrast, undetectability is estimated from false negative (FN) errors that the
detection model cannot predict (represented by red dotted rectangles). Our proposed method performs active sampling by utilizing
both uncertainty and undetectability.

Active learning (AL) [5, 10, 16, 22, 24, 26, 30, 42, 45,
46, 53, 56, 58] is a method to select a few effective samples
for training, achieving high accuracy with a limited number
of labeled data. However, most AL methods select samples from a single pool, assuming an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) dataset. Consequently, under domain shift, AL fails to select samples capable of enhancing
performance.
Active domain adaptation (ADA) is a solution for effective sample selection under domain shift. This method
has been actively studied [1, 7, 11, 18, 19, 21, 25, 29, 31,
33, 38, 40, 44, 47–51, 57, 59] and, with a limited labeling
budget, achieves accuracy comparable to fully supervised
learning [38]. Most ADA studies focus on image classification and semantic segmentation tasks, whereas relatively
less research has been conducted on applying this method
to an object detection task. Classification and segmentation
tasks have a common feature: they can be regarded as classifying tasks for an image or pixel. In contrast, an object detection task predicts the location and category of an object
bounding box. In ADA, classification uncertainty is taken
as a criterion for sample selection. Therefore, even if ADA,

28782

