This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grid Diffusion Models for Text-to-Video Generation
Taegyeong Lee*
Soyeong Kwon∗
Taehwan Kim
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST
{taegyeonglee, soyoung17, taehwankim}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advances in the diffusion models have significantly improved text-to-image generation. However, generating videos from text is a more challenging task than generating images from text, due to the much larger dataset and
higher computational cost required. Most existing video
generation methods use either a 3D U-Net architecture that
considers the temporal dimension or autoregressive generation. These methods require large datasets and are limited
in terms of computational costs compared to text-to-image
generation. To tackle these challenges, we propose a simple
but effective novel grid diffusion for text-to-video generation without temporal dimension in architecture and a large
text-video paired dataset. We can generate a high-quality
video using a fixed amount of GPU memory regardless of
the number of frames by representing the video as a grid
image. Additionally, since our method reduces the dimensions of the video to the dimensions of the image, various
image-based methods can be applied to videos, such as textguided video manipulation from image manipulation. Our
proposed method outperforms the existing methods in both
quantitative and qualitative evaluations, demonstrating the
suitability of our model for real-world video generation.

1. Introduction
The advancement of diffusion models has resulted in significant improvements in the performance of text-to-image
models [9, 18, 23, 24, 26]. Unlike GAN-based models, the
diffusion model is easier to train, offering desirable properties such as distribution coverage, a stationary training objective, and easy scalability [8]. Based on these strengths,
various studies [5, 16, 45, 47] are being conducted to manipulate or generate images from text using diffusion, and
research on generating videos [4, 6, 12, 15, 17, 29] from text
is also actively being pursued. However, video generation
is more challenging than image generation because videos
have higher dimensions [17], there is a scarcity of text-video
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

datasets [11, 15], and it incurs higher costs [15, 17, 34] than
generating an image from text. Previous studies [4, 15, 17,
29] generate a video by using additional temporal dimensions and super-resolution models to maintain the temporal
consistency and resolution of videos. This characteristic of
videos makes efficiency an important issue in video generation, which is one reason why many video generation
studies [12, 17, 46] focus on efficiency. Unlike the existing video generation paradigm, we propose novel grid diffusion models that reduce the high dimensionality of videos
to that of images, allowing for high-quality video generation
without substantial GPU memory costs and a large paired
dataset. We leverage the strengths of diffusion actively to
generate videos from text.
Our model consists of two stages: 1) key grid image generation and 2) autoregressive grid image interpolation. To
reduce video generation to image generation, we select four
frames from the video in chronological order and generate
an image as in Figure 2, called a key grid image. The image
consists of four inside frames that represent the video generated from the text. We fine-tune a pre-trained text-to-image
model [26] using the prompt as the condition to generate
the key grid image. According to Stable Diffusion [26], due
to VAE latent in representing global spatial image structure,
we can prevent the naive generation of the four similar inside frames and generate individual inside frames in the key
grid image with temporal consistency.
However, unlike prior text-to-video generation models [13–15, 17, 29, 34] that generate only 16 frames, our
key grid image consists of four inside frames. Therefore, we
need to interpolate inside frames of the key grid image while
maintaining temporal consistency and order. Since we reduce the video to an image dimension, we can use an image
manipulation method [5]. Inspired by [5], we propose an
autoregressive grid image interpolation method. Our interpolation model takes the masked grid image as the input and
the previously generated key grid image as the condition.
Our model concatenates the embedding spaces of the two
images in the latent dimension. This enables us to generate
coherent video frames that are consistent within the current
grid image and with the previously generated grid image.

8734

