This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVD-Fusion: Single-view 3D via Depth-consistent Multi-view Generation
Hanzhe Hu1 *
1

Zhizhuo Zhou2 *

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Varun Jampani3

Shubham Tulsiani 1

Stanford University

3

Stability AI

https://mvd-fusion.github.io/

Input View

Synthesized Novel Views

Input View

Synthesized Novel Views

Figure 1. Single-view 3D Inference. Given an input RGB image, MVD-Fusion allows synthesizing multi-view RGB-D images using a
depth-guided attention mechanism for enforcing multi-view consistency. We visualize the input RGB image (left) and three synthesized
novel views (with generated depth in inset).

Abstract
We present MVD-Fusion: a method for single-view 3D
inference via generative modeling of multi-view-consistent
RGB-D images. While recent methods pursuing 3D inference advocate learning novel-view generative models, these
generations are not 3D-consistent and require a distillation
process to generate a 3D output. We instead cast the task
of 3D inference as directly generating mutually-consistent
multiple views and build on the insight that additionally inferring depth can provide a mechanism for enforcing this
consistency. Specifically, we train a denoising diffusion
model to generate multi-view RGB-D images given a sin-

gle RGB input image and leverage the (intermediate noisy)
depth estimates to obtain reprojection-based conditioning
to maintain multi-view consistency. We train our model
using large-scale synthetic dataset Obajverse as well as
the real-world CO3D dataset comprising of generic camera viewpoints. We demonstrate that our approach can
yield more accurate synthesis compared to recent state-ofthe-art, including distillation-based 3D inference and prior
multi-view generation methods. We also evaluate the geometry induced by our multi-view depth prediction and find
that it yields a more accurate representation than other direct 3D inference approaches.

* Equal contribution.

9698

