This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Modes: Self-supervised Learning of Nonlinear Modal Subspaces
Jiahong Wang, Yinwei Du, Stelian Coros, Bernhard Thomaszewski
ETH Zürich
{wangjiah, duyin, scoros, bthomasz}@ethz.ch

animations. However, while our ability to create ever more
realistic simulations is steadily increasing, physics-based
simulations are notoriously time-consuming, and translating techniques to the real-time regime remains a major challenge. One particular strategy to reduce computational burden without sacrificing visual quality is model reduction
[13, 20, 35]. These techniques construct low-dimensional
subspaces that aim to capture the variability and expressiveness of full-space simulations. However, designing subspaces that strike a balance between visual fidelity and computational complexity is no easy task. While linear vibration modes are ideal for small deformations, they fail to
capture motions involving large deformations and rotations.

Figure 1. Visualization of our nonlinear subspace on a giraffe
model discretized with tetrahedron finite elements. Overlays correspond to different frames from a selected neural mode.

Abstract
We propose a self-supervised approach for learning
physics-based subspaces for real-time simulation. Existing learning-based methods construct subspaces by approximating pre-defined simulation data in a purely geometric way. However, this approach tends to produce highenergy configurations, leads to entangled latent space dimensions, and generalizes poorly beyond the training set.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a self-supervised
approach that directly minimizes the system’s mechanical
energy during training. We show that our method leads
to learned subspaces that reflect physical equilibrium constraints, resolve overfitting issues of previous methods, and
offer interpretable latent space parameters.

1. Introduction
Physics-based simulation is an indispensable tool in science and engineering. Computer graphics has since long
relied on simulation to create stunning visual effects and

Instead of approximating nonlinear simulations with a
linear subspace, recent work has started to explore machine
learning techniques to build nonlinear subspaces from simulation data [8]. While this learning-based approach to subspace simulation has shown its promise, existing methods
rely on supervised training, which leads to a number of
challenges and limitations. First, supervised learning requires significant amounts of pre-defined and curated training data. Second, this data is typically approximated in
a purely geometric way, e.g., by minimizing the reconstruction loss of a deep autoencoder (AE) [18]. This geometric approach, however, ignores the fact that simulation data live on a nonlinear manifold defined through mechanical equilibrium conditions. Consequently, configurations from geometrically-learned subspaces generally exhibit much higher internal energy than the input data, which
manifests as stress concentrations and spurious forces that
affect the quality and performance of simulations. Another
problem is the empirical observation that supervised learning often leads to overfitting and generalizes poorly to configurations outside the training set. We confirm this observation for the case of nonlinear subspace simulation through
a series of experiments. Finally, the learned representation
of the subspace typically lacks structure and is often strewn
with singularities and discontinuities. In particular, latent
space dimensions are rarely meaningful (neither from energetic, visual, nor semantic points of view), and smooth
trajectories in latent space typically lead to incoherent ge-

23158

