This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Object State Changes in Videos: An Open-World Perspective
Zihui Xue1,2
Kumar Ashutosh1,2
1
The University of Texas at Austin

Kristen Grauman1,2
2
FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Object State Changes (OSCs) are pivotal for video understanding. While humans can effortlessly generalize OSC
understanding from familiar to unknown objects, current
approaches are confined to a closed vocabulary. Addressing this gap, we introduce a novel open-world formulation
for the video OSC problem. The goal is to temporally localize the three stages of an OSC—the object’s initial state,
its transitioning state, and its end state—whether or not
the object has been observed during training. Towards this
end, we develop VIDOSC, a holistic learning approach that:
(1) leverages text and vision-language models for supervisory signals to obviate manually labeling OSC training
data, and (2) abstracts fine-grained shared state representations from objects to enhance generalization. Furthermore,
we present HowToChange, the first open-world benchmark
for video OSC localization, which offers an order of magnitude increase in the label space and annotation volume
compared to the best existing benchmark. Experimental results demonstrate the efficacy of our approach, in both traditional closed-world and open-world scenarios.1

1. Introduction
In video understanding, the study of objects primarily revolves around tasks like recognition [16], detection [24],
and tracking [8, 62], with the assumption that objects maintain a consistent visual appearance throughout the video.
Yet, objects in video are often dynamic. They can undergo
transformations that change their appearance, shape, and
even topology. For example, a pineapple goes from whole
to peeled to sliced, or wood is carved into a new shape.
Object State Changes (OSCs) [2, 15, 17, 22, 47, 50–
52, 60, 64] add a critical dimension to video understanding. On the one hand, they provide insights into human
actions—observing a piece of metal being shaped into a
hook, for instance, implies the action of bending; observing an egg shell go from whole to broken implies the action of cracking. On the other hand, OSCs are essential
1 Project webpage:
https : / / vision . cs . utexas . edu /
projects/VidOSC/.

Figure 1. Top: The video OSC objective is to temporally localize
an object’s three states (i.e., initial, transitioning, end). Bottom:
OSCs naturally exhibit a long tail. Certain OSCs, such as melting
butter or marshmallow, are frequently showcased in instructional
videos while others like melting jaggery might be rarely seen. We
introduce an innovative open-world formulation that requires extrapolating to novel objects never encountered during training.

for assessing goal completion, in a way that is invariant to
the specific procedure used. For instance, the readiness of
cake batter signifies the completion of a mixing task, regardless of whether it was stirred by hand or a mechanical
mixer. These core functionalities are instrumental for various real-world applications [5, 6, 12, 13, 20, 21, 66], ranging from AR/VR assistants [42] that guide users through
complex tasks by monitoring object states, to robotic manipulation [9, 55] where understanding the state of objects
is critical for task planning and failure recovery.
However, the development of video OSC is still at a
primitive stage. Existing approaches [1, 2, 15, 46, 50, 51,
58] assume a closed vocabulary, where each state transformation is associated with a limited set of objects—often just
1 or 2. For example, the concept of “melting” might be limited to familiar items like butter and marshmallow. Consequently, the learned models are only capable of identifying
state changes for objects observed during training and stumble when presented with novel objects. In contrast, in realworld situations a single state transition like “melting” can
be linked with a plethora of objects—some ubiquitous and

18493

