This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Osprey: Pixel Understanding with Visual Instruction Tuning
Yuqian Yuan1∗ , Wentong Li1 ,* Jian Liu2 , Dongqi Tang2 , Xinjie Luo1 , Chi Qin3 ,
Lei Zhang4 , Jianke Zhu1†
1

Zhejiang University

2

Ant Group

3

Microsoft

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have
recently achieved impressive general-purpose visionlanguage capabilities through visual instruction tuning.
However, current MLLMs primarily focus on image-level
or box-level understanding, falling short in achieving finegrained vision-language alignment at pixel level. Besides,
the lack of mask-based instruction data limits their advancements. In this paper, we propose Osprey, a mask-text
instruction tuning approach, to extend MLLMs by incorporating fine-grained mask regions into language instruction, aiming at achieving pixel-wise visual understanding.
To achieve this goal, we first meticulously curate a maskbased region-text dataset with 724K samples, and then design a vision-language model by injecting pixel-level representation into LLM. Specifically, Osprey adopts a convolutional CLIP backbone as the vision encoder and employs a mask-aware visual extractor to extract precise visual mask features from high resolution input. Experimental results demonstrate Osprey’s superiority in various region understanding tasks, showcasing its new capability for
pixel-level instruction tuning. In particular, Osprey can be
integrated with Segment Anything Model (SAM) seamlessly
to obtain multi-granularity semantics. The source code,
dataset and demo can be found at https://github.
com/CircleRadon/Osprey.

1. Introduction
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [24] are
key building blocks towards general-purpose visual assistants [23], and they have become increasingly popular in
the research community. Though many recent MLLMs
such as LLaVA [33], MiniGPT-4 [55], Otter [22], InstructBLIP [12], Qwen-VL [2] and LLaVA-1.5 [32] have demonstrated impressive results on instruction-following and visual reasoning capabilities, they mostly perform vision* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

4

The HongKong Polytechnical University

language alignment on image-level using image-text pairs.
The lack of region-level alignment hinders them from finegrained image understanding tasks, such as region classification, captioning and reasoning.
To enable region-level understanding in vision-language
models, some recent works, e.g., Kosmos-2 [37], Shikra [5],
PVIT [4] and GPT4RoI [53], have attempted to process
bounding box-specified regions and leverage visual instruction tuning with object-level spatial features. However, directly employing the sparse bounding box as the referring
input region could involve irrelevant background features
and may lead to inexact region-text pair alignment for visual instruction tuning on LLM. During inference, the boxlevel referring input may not be able to precisely indicate
the object, resulting in semantic deviation, as illustrated in
Fig. 1-(a). Besides, these models employ a relatively low
input image resolution (e.g., 224×224), and struggle with
understanding the details of dense object regions where a
much higher resolution is required for optimal performance.
Compared with coarse bounding box, using fine-grained
mask as the referring input can represent objects precisely.
By training with billions of high-quality masks, the recently developed SAM [19] supports using simple bounding boxes or points as prompts while demonstrating exceptional segmentation quality on zero-shot object, part or subpart. Several studies, like HQ-SAM [18], further enhance
SAM’s capability on fine-grained segmentation and generalization, making the segmentation more practical for realworld applications. However, these models cannot provide
the primary semantic labels, let alone detailed semantic attributes and captions. As a result, the existing methods are
limited in understanding the real-world scenes with inherent
fine-grained multimodal information.
In this paper, we propose Osprey, a novel approach designed to extend the capability of MLLMs for fine-grained
pixel-wise understanding. To this end, we present a maskaware visual extractor to capture precise visual mask features with various granularity. These visual features are
then interleaved with language instructions to form the input sequence to LLM. To facilitate the use of high resolution
input, we leverage the convolutional CLIP backbone [40]

28202

