This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Instance-Aware Correspondences for Robust Multi-Instance Point
Cloud Registration in Cluttered Scenes
Zhiyuan Yu1 Zheng Qin2 Lintao Zheng1 Kai Xu1 *
1
National University of Defense Technology
2
Defense Innovation Institute, Academy of Military Sciences

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration aims at estimating a rigid transformation that aligns two point clouds. In real-world application scenarios such as robotic bin picking, there is often the requirement of multi-instance registration where the
point cloud of a model needs to be registered against multiple instances of the model in the target scene. Multiinstance point cloud registration is challenging due to the
unknown number of instances and inter-instance occlusions
* Corresponding author: Kai Xu (kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com).

ZigZag

Multi-instance point cloud registration estimates the
poses of multiple instances of a model point cloud in a
scene point cloud. Extracting accurate point correspondences is to the center of the problem. Existing approaches
usually treat the scene point cloud as a whole, overlooking the separation of instances. Therefore, point features
could be easily polluted by other points from the background or different instances, leading to inaccurate correspondences oblivious to separate instances, especially
in cluttered scenes. In this work, we propose MIRETR,
Multi-Instance REgistration TRansformer, a coarse-to-fine
approach to the extraction of instance-aware correspondences. At the coarse level, it jointly learns instance-aware
superpoint features and predicts per-instance masks. With
instance masks, the influence from outside of the instance
being concerned is minimized, such that highly reliable superpoint correspondences can be extracted. The superpoint
correspondences are then extended to instance candidates
at the fine level according to the instance masks. At last,
an efficient candidate selection and refinement algorithm is
devised to obtain the final registrations. Extensive experiments on three public benchmarks demonstrate the efficacy
of our approach. In particular, MIRETR outperforms the
state of the arts by 16.6 points on F1 score on the challenging ROBI benchmark. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/zhiyuanYU134/MIRETR.

Gear

Abstract

GeoTransformer

MIRETR

Figure 1. MIRETR significantly improves the multi-instance registration results in cluttered scenes compared to the state-of-the-art
GeoTransformer [38]. Benefiting from the instance-aware correspondences, our method can generate more accurate registrations
(see the yellow boxes) and register the heavily-occluded instances
with severe geometric deficiency (see the red boxes).

especially in a cluttered scene.
Existing approaches to multi-instance registration are
mostly two-stage: They first extract point correspondences
between the model and the scene point clouds and then
recover per-instance transformations with multi-model fitting [28, 44, 55]. Clearly, the performance of such approach
highly depends on the quality of the correspondences. Unlike pair-wise registration that can be pinned down by a
small number of correspondences, multi-instance registration poses unique challenges. First, the correspondences
should widely spread over the scene point cloud to cover
as many instances as possible so that more instances can be
found and registered. Second, the correspondences should

19605

