This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Vision Transformers for 3D Human Motion-Language Models
with Motion Patches
Qing Yu

Mikihiro Tanaka Kent Fujiwara
LY Corporation

{yu.qing, mikihiro.tanaka, kent.fujiwara}@lycorp.co.jp

Existing Methods

Abstract

#Joints

The cross-modal analysis of 3D human motion and natural language has opened up new avenues for tasks such as
motion recognition [10, 38, 46, 49, 50, 52, 54, 60] and textto-motion synthesis [3, 36, 37], which can benefit the applications like animating avatars or humans [18, 53]. The key
to these tasks is constructing a cross-modal latent space that
captures the intricate relationship between human motions
and language semantics, allowing systems to interpret and
generate human-like motions based on textual descriptions.
Despite the promising advancements in this area, one of

#Frames

m
ra
#F

es

…

Transformer

…

Skeleton Sequence
(Differed by skeleton)

Proposed Method

Motion
Features

Pre-trained weights
for 2D images available

#Body Parts
N Points

#Frames

N Frames

m
ra
#F

es

Vision
Transformer

Motion
Features

…

1. Introduction

…

…

To build a cross-modal latent space between 3D human motion and language, acquiring large-scale and highquality human motion data is crucial. However, unlike the
abundance of image data, the scarcity of motion data has
limited the performance of existing motion-language models. To counter this, we introduce “motion patches”, a new
representation of motion sequences, and propose using Vision Transformers (ViT) as motion encoders via transfer
learning, aiming to extract useful knowledge from the image domain and apply it to the motion domain. These motion patches, created by dividing and sorting skeleton joints
based on body parts in motion sequences, are robust to
varying skeleton structures, and can be regarded as color
image patches in ViT. We find that transfer learning with
pre-trained weights of ViT obtained through training with
2D image data can boost the performance of motion analysis, presenting a promising direction for addressing the issue of limited motion data. Our extensive experiments show
that the proposed motion patches, used jointly with ViT,
achieve state-of-the-art performance in the benchmarks of
text-to-motion retrieval, and other novel challenging tasks,
such as cross-skeleton recognition, zero-shot motion classification, and human interaction recognition, which are currently impeded by the lack of data.

Motion Patches
(Shared by skeleton)

Figure 1. Overview of the existing methods and the proposed
method. The existing methods train an original Transformer with
the joint information from the motion sequences directly, while
the proposed method converts them into motion patches and then
trains the ViT, which can be initialized with pre-trained weights.

the most challenging aspects is the scarcity of data, because
the process of collecting and annotating 3D human motion
data is labor-intensive and time-consuming. While recent
years have seen an increase of motion capture datasets [31],
some of which are categorized by classes [28] or even labeled with free text [39, 40], these resources are still not
sufficient for deep learning algorithms to fully understand
human motions. Moreover, because various motion capture systems and skeleton structures are used in different
datasets, it has been difficult to build a large-scale dataset
with a unified representation.
To build a motion-language model, existing methods [38,
50] attempt to incorporate text embeddings into motion autoencoders. Due to the lack of large-scale data, they train
the motion encoder from scratch on each dataset and try to
use motion synthesis in autoencoders to improve the motion features. Tevet et al. [50] attempt to apply pre-trained
image-language models [41] to motion data, but they only
render a single frame as the input image. Consequently,
these methods are not yet robust enough to handle the vari-

937

