This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Content-Adaptive Non-Local Convolution for Remote Sensing Pansharpening
Yule Duan†, Xiao Wu†, Haoyu Deng, Liang-Jian Deng∗
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
yule.duan@outlook.com; wxwsx1997@gmail.com;
haoyu deng@std.uestc.edu.cn; liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Currently, machine learning-based methods for remote
sensing pansharpening have progressed rapidly. However,
existing pansharpening methods often do not fully exploit
differentiating regional information in non-local spaces,
thereby limiting the effectiveness of the methods and resulting in redundant learning parameters. In this paper, we introduce a so-called content-adaptive non-local
convolution (CANConv), a novel method tailored for remote sensing image pansharpening. Specifically, CANConv
employs adaptive convolution, ensuring spatial adaptability, and incorporates non-local self-similarity through the
similarity relationship partition (SRP) and the partitionwise adaptive convolution (PWAC) sub-modules. Furthermore, we also propose a corresponding network architecture, called CANNet, which mainly utilizes the multi-scale
self-similarity. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of CANConv, compared with recent
promising fusion methods. Besides, we substantiate the
method’s effectiveness through visualization, ablation experiments, and comparison with existing methods on multiple test sets. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/duanyll/CANConv.

1. Introduction
Due to technological constraints, existing remote sensing satellites can only capture low-resolution multispectral
images (LRMS) and high-resolution panchromatic images
(PAN). Wherein, LRMS images consist of four, eight, or
more channels in different bands, but have low spatial resolution. PAN images usually have 4× higher spatial resolution, but they are monochromatic and grayscale. Especially,
pansharpening in this work involves merging an LRMS image and a PAN image to produce a high-resolution multispectral (HRMS) image, see Fig. 1. Also shown in Fig. 1,
† Contributed Equally.

PAN

LRMS

HRMS

(a)

Generate

Kernel 1

Generate

Kernel 2

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Pansharpening involves fusing the PAN and LRMS
images into an HRMS image. (b) A toy example of partitioned
regions and (c) their corresponding content-adaptive convolution
kernels, which is the motivation of this paper: 1) different content (regions) should be filtered by distinct kernels; 2) non-local
information with the same content (regions) is extracted and represented only by the same convolution kernel.

remote sensing images possess unique characteristics compared to common natural images. Just as facial images are
composed of fixed parts such as eyes, nose, and mouth, remote sensing images also consist of relatively stable elements, such as oceans, forests, buildings and streets, etc.
These components exhibit distinct and easily distinguishable features in terms of color and texture. Within regions
with similar semantics, there are numerous repetitive tiled
textures, and even in distant locations, similar textures can
be found. Given these characteristics of remote sensing images, an ideal pansharpening method should be able to adapt
to different regions with varying features and should leverage information from non-local similar regions.

∗ Corresponding author.

To obtain HRMS images, various prior arts have been

27738

