This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RepAn: Enhanced Annealing through Re-parameterization
Xiang Fei1,2†, Xiawu Zheng1,2,3†, Yan Wang4 , Fei Chao1,2 , Chenglin Wu5 , Liujuan Cao1,2 ,*
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efﬁcient Computing.
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University. 361005, PR. China.
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China. 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
4
Samsara, 1 De Haro Street, San Francisco, California, USA. 5 DeepWisdom Inc.
{xiangf, zhengxiawu}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yan.wang@samsara.com
fchao@xmu.edu.cn, alexanderwu@deepwisdom.ai, caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
 

The simulated annealing algorithm aims to improve
model convergence through multiple restarts of training.
However, existing annealing algorithms overlook the correlation between different cycles, neglecting the potential
for incremental learning. We contend that a ﬁxed network
structure prevents the model from recognizing distinct features at different training stages. To this end, we propose
RepAn, redesigning the irreversible re-parameterization
(Rep) method and integrating it with annealing to enhance
training. Speciﬁcally, the network goes through Rep, expansion, restoration, and backpropagation operations during training, and iterating through these processes in each
annealing round. Such a method exhibits good generalization and is easy to apply, and we provide theoretical explanations for its effectiveness. Experiments demonstrate that
our method improves baseline performance by 6.38% on
the CIFAR-100 dataset and 2.80% on ImageNet, achieving
state-of-the-art performance in the Rep ﬁeld. The code is
available at https://github.com/xfey/RepAn.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [39] have achieved
remarkable results in the ﬁeld of computer vision [27, 30,
36, 43, 52]. Among them, some classical network architectures such as VGG [56], ResNet [26], DenseNet [34] and
MobileNet [31] have achieved great success by stacking
convolutional modules. Practically, one needs to consider
the trade-off of the model’s overall performance, including
accuracy, inference speed, and memory footprint.
The Re-parameterization technique (Rep) [17, 65] is inspired by the characteristics of neural architecture and aims
* Corresponding author.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.



    






  

 
  

    

  
 

   
 


 

Figure 1. (a) The Rep approach is irreversible. (b) Annealing
simply restarts training cyclically. (c) Our approach investigates
the efﬁcacy of Rep in enhancing model accuracy with annealing.

to achieve cost-free efﬁciency improvements. Rep involves
a series of branch fusion operations that merge multiple parallel branches into a single layer. During training, the network utilizes a multi-branch structure to aid in optimization.
After convergence, for convolutional and batch normalization (BN) [37] layers, lossless merging operations can be
performed to achieve accelerated inference.
Despite the effectiveness of Rep, its application to model
training is not only counter-intuitive but also technically
challenging. The branch merging operation, designed for
model deployment, is practically a one-way procedure with
an ill-posed inverse operator. As a result, research on Rep
is primarily focused on the diversity of its compatible structures [14, 16, 58]. In this paper, we explore the overlooked
potential of Rep to beneﬁt the training accuracy of networks. Figure 1 illustrates the difference between the traditional application of Rep and our proposed method.

5798

