This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing Large Language Models for Training-free Video Anomaly Detection
Luca Zanella1

Willi Menapace1

Massimiliano Mancini1

University of Trento1

Yiming Wang2

Elisa Ricci1,2

Fondazione Bruno Kessler2

https://lucazanella.github.io/lavad/

Abstract
Video anomaly detection (VAD) aims to temporally locate
abnormal events in a video. Existing works mostly rely on
training deep models to learn the distribution of normality
with either video-level supervision, one-class supervision,
or in an unsupervised setting. Training-based methods are
prone to be domain-specific, thus being costly for practical deployment as any domain change will involve data
collection and model training. In this paper, we radically
depart from previous efforts and propose LAnguage-based
VAD (LAVAD), a method tackling VAD in a novel, trainingfree paradigm, exploiting the capabilities of pre-trained
large language models (LLMs) and existing vision-language
models (VLMs). We leverage VLM-based captioning models
to generate textual descriptions for each frame of any test
video. With the textual scene description, we then devise a
prompting mechanism to unlock the capability of LLMs in
terms of temporal aggregation and anomaly score estimation,
turning LLMs into an effective video anomaly detector. We
further leverage modality-aligned VLMs and propose effective techniques based on cross-modal similarity for cleaning
noisy captions and refining the LLM-based anomaly scores.
We evaluate LAVAD on two large datasets featuring realworld surveillance scenarios (UCF-Crime and XD-Violence),
showing that it outperforms both unsupervised and one-class
methods without requiring any training or data collection.

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) aims to temporally localize
events that deviate significantly from the normal pattern
in a given video, i.e. the anomalies. VAD is challenging
as anomalies are often undefined and context-dependent,
and they rarely occur in the real world. The literature [10]
often casts VAD as an out-of-distribution detection problem
and learns the normal distribution using training data with
different levels of supervision (see Fig. 1), including fullysupervised (i.e. frame-level supervision of both normal and
abnormal videos) [1, 32], weakly-supervised (i.e. video-level

Our proposal

State-of-the-art methods
...

...

(a) Fully-supervised

Inference

(b) One-class
...

VLM

(c) Weakly-supervised (d) Unsupervised

LLM

Training-free method

Training

Inference

Training-based
method
Normal frame

Anomalous frame

Anomalous video

Unlabeled video

Figure 1. We introduce the first training-free method for video
anomaly detection (VAD), diverging from state-of-the-art methods
that are ALL training-based with different degrees of supervision.
Our proposal, LAVAD, leverages modality-aligned vision-language
models (VLMs) to query and enhance the anomaly scores generated
by large language models (LLMs).

supervision of both normal and abnormal videos) [11, 13,
15, 24, 28, 35], one-class (i.e. only normal videos) [18, 20,
21, 25, 37, 38], and unsupervised (i.e. unlabeled videos) [30,
31, 40]. While more supervision leads to better results, the
cost of manual annotation is prohibitive. On the other hand,
unsupervised methods assume abnormal videos to constitute
a certain portion of the training data, a fragile assumption in
practice without human intervention.
Crucially, every existing method necessitates a training
procedure to establish an accurate VAD system, and this
entails some limitations. One primary concern is generalization: a VAD model trained on a specific dataset tends to
underperform in videos recorded in different settings (e.g.,
daylight versus night scenes). Another aspect, particularly
relevant to VAD, is the challenge of data collection, especially in certain application domains (e.g. video surveillance)
where privacy issues can hinder data acquisition. These considerations led us to explore a novel research question: Can
we develop a training-free VAD method?

18527

