This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Action-slot: Visual Action-centric Representations for Multi-label Atomic
Activity Recognition in Traffic Scenes
Chi-Hsi Kung1

Shu-Wei Lu1

Yi-Hsuan Tsai2

Yi-Ting Chen1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University1

Google2

{chkung,tomy45651.sc06,ychen}@nycu.edu.tw

yhtsai@google.com

Figure 1. Illustration of the concept of multi-label atomic activity recognition and our proposed Action-slot. In the scene, three atomic
activities are presented and depicted by colored arrows. For example, the red arrow represents the Z1-Z4: C+ atomic activity, indicating a
group of vehicles turning left. Atomic activities are defined based on road user’s type and their motion patterns grounded in the underlying
road structure. We introduce Action-slot to learn visual action-centric representations that enable decomposing multiple atomic activities
in videos. We demonstrate that our framework can effectively recognize multiple atomic activities via learned representations.

Abstract
In this paper, we study multi-label atomic activity recognition. Despite the notable progress in action recognition, it is still challenging to recognize atomic activities due
to a deficiency in holistic understanding of both multiple
road users’ motions and their contextual information. In
this paper, we introduce Action-slot, a slot attention-based
approach that learns visual action-centric representations,
capturing both motion and contextual information. Our key
idea is to design action slots that are capable of paying attention to regions where atomic activities occur, without the
need for explicit perception guidance. To further enhance
slot attention, we introduce a background slot that competes
with action slots, aiding the training process in avoiding unnecessary focus on background regions devoid of activities.
Yet, the imbalanced class distribution in the existing dataset
hampers the assessment of rare activities. To address the
limitation, we collect a synthetic dataset called TACO,
which is four times larger than OATS and features a balanced distribution of atomic activities. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we conduct comprehensive experi-

ments and ablation studies against various action recognition baselines. We also show that the performance of multilabel atomic activity recognition on real-world datasets can
be improved by pretraining representations on TACO. Our
source code, dataset, and visualization videos are available
at https://hcis-lab.github.io/Action-slot/

1. Introduction
There has been a noteworthy rise of community interest
in activity recognition within traffic scenes [3, 13, 40, 43,
46, 47, 53]. Recognizing activities of road users is essential for advancing the development of intelligent driving
systems, as it enables various applications, such as intent
prediction [30, 40, 61], scenario retrieval [39, 45, 51, 55],
scenario-based assessment [1, 62], and safety-critical scenario generation [10, 48, 49, 62].
In this paper, we focus on multi-label atomic activity
recognition, a new task proposed by the OATS dataset for
interactive traffic scenario understanding [3]. An atomic activity is a higher-level semantic motion pattern rooted in the

18451

