This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Monkey: Image Resolution and Text Label Are Important Things for Large
Multi-modal Models
Zhang Li1† , Biao Yang1† , Qiang Liu2 , Zhiyin Ma1 , Shuo Zhang1 , Jingxu Yang2 , Yabo Sun2 ,
Yuliang Liu1∗ , Xiang Bai1 *
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Kingsoft Office
ylliu@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have shown promise in
vision-language tasks but struggle with high-resolution input and detailed scene understanding. Addressing these
challenges, we introduce Monkey to enhance LMM capabilities. Firstly, Monkey processes input images by dividing them into uniform patches, each matching the size
(e.g., 448×448) used in the original training of the welltrained vision encoder. Equipped with individual adapter
for each patch, Monkey can handle higher resolutions up
to 1344×896 pixels, enabling the detailed capture of complex visual information. Secondly, it employs a multi-level
description generation method, enriching the context for
scene-object associations. This two-part strategy ensures
more effective learning from generated data: the higher
resolution allows for a more detailed capture of visuals,
which in turn enhances the effectiveness of comprehensive
descriptions. Extensive ablative results validate the effectiveness of our designs. Additionally, experiments on 18
datasets further demonstrate that Monkey surpasses existing LMMs in many tasks like Image Captioning and various Visual Question Answering formats. Specially, in
qualitative tests focused on dense text question answering,
Monkey has exhibited encouraging results compared with
GPT4V. Code is available at https://github.com/
Yuliang-Liu/Monkey.

1. Introduction
The field of large multimodal models (LMMs) is advancing
quickly because of their skill in handling different types of
data, like images and text. Their success in various tasks,
including image captioning and visual question answering,
is attracting attention in the academic community.
Training LMMs benefits greatly from high-resolution
images [3], because higher resolution allows these mod* † equal contribution; ∗ corresponding authors

Figure 1. The performance of Monkey on a broad range of multimodal tasks compared with existing models.

els to detect more nuanced visual details, leading to accurate recognition of objects, their interrelationships, and
the broader context within the image. Additionally, the
improved visual clarity of high-resolution images aids in
effectively capturing and representing complex details essential for detailed captioning. Despite advancements, handling the wide range of image resolutions and training data
quality is still challenging, especially in complex situations.
Solutions include using pre-trained visual modules with
larger input resolution (like LLaVA1.5 [28] ) and gradually increasing the resolution of the training process through

26763

