This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIEM: Decomposition-Integration Enhancing Multimodal Insights
Xinyi Jiang1 Guoming Wang1, * Junhao Guo1
Juncheng Li1 Wenqiao Zhang1 Rongxing Lu2 Siliang Tang1
1
1

Zhejiang University

2

University of New Brunswick

{jiangxinyi, NB21013, 22351300, junchengli, wenqiaozhang, siliang}@zju.edu.cn 2 RLU1@unb.ca

Abstract
In image question answering, due to the abundant and
sometimes redundant information, precisely matching and
integrating the information from both text and images is a
challenge. In this paper, we propose the DecompositionIntegration Enhancing Multimodal Insight (DIEM) which
initially decomposes the given question and image into multiple subquestions and several sub-images aiming to isolate
specific elements for more focused analysis. We then integrate these sub-elements by matching each subquestion
with its relevant sub-images, while also retaining the original image, to construct a comprehensive answer to the
original question without losing sight of the overall context. This strategy mirrors the human cognitive process of
simplifying complex problems into smaller components for
individual analysis, followed by an integration of these insights. We implement DIEM on the LLaVA-v1.5 model, and
evaluate its performance on ScienceQA and MM-Vet. Experimental results indicate that our method boosts accuracy in most question classes of the ScienceQA (+2.03%
in average), especially in the image modality (+3.40%). On
MM-Vet, our method achieves an improvement in MM-Vet
scores, increasing from 31.1 to 32.4. These findings highlight DIEM’s effectiveness in harmonizing the complexities
of multimodal data, demonstrating its ability to enhance accuracy and depth in image question answering through its
decomposition-integration process.

1. Introduction
With the rapid advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) [2, 6, 38], they have showed astonishing capabilities across various tasks, simultaneously catalyzing
the development of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) [1, 36, 40, 47]. In particular, when it comes to
complex reasoning tasks, a significant breakthrough method
of generating intermediate reasoning steps before inferring answers, known as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [42], has

gained considerable attention. This approach has sparked
the creation of numerous models aimed at improving the
CoT approach [24, 34, 41, 46]. Importantly, CoT [42] have
been extended to MLLMs, such as multimodal-CoT [52],
which utilizes a two-stage framework to focus on basic principles before deriving the final answer from these principles. However, a limitation of CoT [42], particularly in its
application to MLLMs, is its focus only on text processing,
but overlooking the integration and critical analysis of visual data.
Compared to text, images often convey richer and more
diverse details, providing an abundance of visual cues and
background knowledge. However, the high dimensionality, complex structure, and presence of visual noise make
extracting information from images more challenging than
text [3, 9, 35]. These complexities may cause models to
overlook crucial image details or focus on irrelevant content. Furthermore, the objects, relationships, and attributes
within images may have intricate connections with key textual information. Such intricacies in both image and text
highlight a need for a more holistic approach, ensuring that
both textual and visual elements are effectively utilized in
complex reasoning tasks.
To address this challenge, we drew inspiration from the
human method of processing text and image information.
When humans answer a question based on an image, the
process typically starts with a quick review of the question’s text and a rapid ”pre-scan” of the image to grasp the
main content and context of both the question and the image. Following this, we begin to think through the question
step by step and during this process, our attention is usually drawn to specific areas closely related to the question.
For instance, if the question mentions a particular object,
we might pay special attention to the color, shape, or other
details of that object within the image. This localized observation allows us to delve deeply into the specific details
and content within the image. Moreover, we also consider
the relationships between various elements in the image and
their connection to the question, which often furnish us with

27304

