This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Orchestrate Latent Expertise: Advancing Online Continual Learning with
Multi-Level Supervision and Reverse Self-Distillation

1

Hongwei Yan1
Liyuan Wang2∗
Kaisheng Ma3∗
Yi Zhong1 *
School of Life Sciences, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua University
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
3
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
yanhw22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {wly2023, kaisheng, zhongyithu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
To accommodate real-world dynamics, artificial intelligence systems need to cope with sequentially arriving content in an online manner. Beyond regular Continual Learning (CL) attempting to address catastrophic forgetting with
offline training of each task, Online Continual Learning
(OCL) is a more challenging yet realistic setting that performs CL in a one-pass data stream. Current OCL methods primarily rely on memory replay of old training samples. However, a notable gap from CL to OCL stems from
the additional overfitting-underfitting dilemma associated
with the use of rehearsal buffers: the inadequate learning of new training samples (underfitting) and the repeated
learning of a few old training samples (overfitting). To this
end, we introduce a novel approach, Multi-level Online Sequential Experts (MOSE), which cultivates the model as
stacked sub-experts, integrating multi-level supervision and
reverse self-distillation. Supervision signals across multiple
stages facilitate appropriate convergence of the new task
while gathering various strengths from experts by knowledge distillation mitigates the performance decline of old
tasks. MOSE demonstrates remarkable efficacy in learning
new samples and preserving past knowledge through multilevel experts, thereby significantly advancing OCL performance over state-of-the-art baselines (e.g., up to 7.3% on
Split CIFAR-100 and 6.1% on Split Tiny-ImageNet). †

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) aims to improve the adaptability
of AI systems to the ever-evolving environment of the real
world [35, 42, 47, 66, 74]. In this pursuit, Online Continual
Learning (OCL) has emerged as an important paradigm that
* Corresponding authors.
† Our code is available at https://github.com/AnAppleCore/MOSE

mirrors realistic scenarios with one-pass data streams and
attracted a wide range of interest in related fields [24, 41,
52]. However, OCL also faces serious challenges such as
efficient online operation, limited input data, and stringent
resource constraints, which remain to be solved.
In this work, we first analyze the unique requirements of
OCL compared to regular CL: the training samples for each
task are encountered only once, which makes the model
susceptible to inadequate learning of each task [31]. Saving samples of the current task in the buffer could partially
solve it, but overstepping the training of buffered data will
trigger a severe forgetting problem, namely, overfitting to
the memory buffer for old tasks [57, 73]. This critical issue
is attributed to the overfitting-underfitting dilemma across
data distributions of new and old tasks, which specifies the
distinction between CL and OCL. While recent strides have
been made with the help of data augmentation [73, 75] and
contrastive representation learning [12, 38, 40, 71], shortcomings such as the sub-optimality of convergence and the
demand for large batch size with higher computational overhead remind us a chasm in performance persists [52].
Unlike AI systems, the biological brain has evolved an
innate capacity for continual learning in an online manner.
In particular, the mammalian visual processing system extracts multi-level features of online inputs and memorizes
them for further reuse [19, 29, 33, 55]. Neurons in these areas not only process and transmit signals progressively but
also communicate across cortex levels through diverse neural circuits [14]. The Shallow Brain hypothesis [53] is proposed to describe the ability of the superficial cortex to work
independently and cooperate with deeper ones. Inspired by
this, we propose the Multi-level Online Sequential Experts
(MOSE), a novel approach to drive the leap forward in
OCL. MOSE consists of two major components: multilevel supervision and reverse self-distillation. The former
empowers the model to forge hierarchical features across

23670

