This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scale Decoupled Distillation
Shicai Wei
Chunbo Luo*
Yang Luo
School of Information and Communication Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
shicaiwei@std.uestc.edu.cn {c.luo, luoyang}@uestc.edu.cn *

Abstract
Logit knowledge distillation attracts increasing attention
due to its practicality in recent studies. However, it often suffers inferior performance compared to the feature
knowledge distillation. In this paper, we argue that existing logit-based methods may be sub-optimal since they only
leverage the global logit output that couples multiple semantic knowledge. This may transfer ambiguous knowledge to the student and mislead its learning. To this end,
we propose a simple but effective method, i.e., Scale Decoupled Distillation (SDD), for logit knowledge distillation. SDD decouples the global logit output into multiple local logit outputs and establishes distillation pipelines
for them. This helps the student to mine and inherit finegrained and unambiguous logit knowledge. Moreover, the
decoupled knowledge can be further divided into consistent and complementary logit knowledge that transfers the
semantic information and sample ambiguity, respectively.
By increasing the weight of complementary parts, SDD can
guide the student to focus more on ambiguous samples, improving its discrimination ability. Extensive experiments
on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of SDD for wide teacher-student pairs, especially in
the fine-grained classification task. Code is available at:
https://github.com/shicaiwei123/SDD-CVPR2024

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation is a general technique for assisting
the training of “student” networks via the knowledge of
pre-trained “teacher” networks [5]. Depending on the location of transferred knowledge, distillation methods are divided into two categories: logit-based distillation [7] and
feature-based distillation [13]. Due to the computational
efficiency [24] and ability to handle heterogeneous knowl* *Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National
Key Research and Development Program of China (2023YFC3806003,
2023YFC3806001) and Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province,
China (Grant No. 2022NSFSC0845)

Figure 1. Image visualization on ImageNet. (a) The top line shows
some misclassified samples of class 6 in ResNet34. The bottom
line displays their corresponding predicted class and sample. (b)
Illustrates the intuitive model for scale decoupling.

edge [16], logit distillation has gained increasing attention
in recent years.
To date, many logit distillation methods have been proposed and can be broadly categorized into two groups.
The first group aims to extract richer logit knowledge by
introducing multiple classifiers [23, 26] or through selfsupervision learning [18]. The second group aims to optimize the knowledge transfer by techniques like dynamic
temperature [19] or knowledge decoupling [20, 22, 24].
While these methods achieve good results, we argue they
could lead to sub-optimal results as they solely rely on the
global logit knowledge of the whole input.
Specifically, the whole image usually couples the information of multiple classes and leads to misclassification.
On one hand, two classes may belong to the same superclass, sharing similar global information in their samples.
Illustrated in the first column of Fig. 1(a), both classes 5 and
6 belong to the superclass ”fish” and exhibit similar shapes.
Additionally, as shown in the second column of Fig. 1(a),
a scene may encompass information from multiple classes,
such as classes 6 and 983, creating a logit output that is
semantically mixed. Consequently, the global logit output
fuses diverse and fine-grained semantic knowledge. This
may transfer the ambiguous knowledge to the student and
mislead its learning, resulting in sub-optimal performance.
To this end, we propose the SDD method to assist the

15975

