This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Efficient Replay in Federated Incremental Learning
Yichen Li
Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, China

Qunwei Li
Ant Group, China
qunwei.qw@antgroup.com

ycli0204@hust.edu.cn

Ruixuan Li*
Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, China

Haozhao Wang
Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, China
hz wang@hust.edu.cn

Wenliang Zhong
Ant Group, China

Guannan Zhang
Ant Group, China

yice.zwl@antgroup.com

zgn138592@antgroup.com

rxli@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
In Federated Learning (FL), the data in each client is
typically assumed fixed or static. However, data often
comes in an incremental manner in real-world applications,
where the data domain may increase dynamically. In this
work, we study catastrophic forgetting with data heterogeneity in Federated Incremental Learning (FIL) scenarios
where edge clients may lack enough storage space to retain
full data. We propose to employ a simple, generic framework for FIL named Re-Fed, which can coordinate each
client to cache important samples for replay. More specifically, when a new task arrives, each client first caches selected previous samples based on their global and local importance. Then, the client trains the local model with both
the cached samples and the samples from the new task. Theoretically, we analyze the ability of Re-Fed to discover important samples for replay thus alleviating the catastrophic
forgetting problem. Moreover, we empirically show that ReFed achieves competitive performance compared to stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed framework that allows multiple edge clients to learn a unified deep learning
model cooperatively while preserving the data privacy of
the local clients [23, 31, 44]. Recently, FL has attracted
growing attention and been applied to various fields such
as recommendation systems [7, 24] and smart healthcare
[35, 46].
Typically, FL has been actively studied in a static setting,
where the number of training samples does not change over
* Ruixuan Li is the corresponding author.

time. However, in a realistic FL application, each client
may continue collecting new data. It is difficult to learn
new data while retaining previous information in machine
learning due to the notorious phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting [9], leading to performance degradation
on previous tasks. This challenge is further compounded in
FL settings, where the data in a client remains inaccessible
to other ones and clients lack enough storage to retain full
previous samples.
To address this issue, researchers have studied federated
incremental learning (FIL), which enables each client to
continuously learn from a local private and incremental task
stream [4, 20]. The authors in [48] aim to personalize the
models for each client by decomposing the model parameters into shared parameters and adaptive parameters, facilitating the transfer of common knowledge across similar
tasks among clients. FCIL is proposed in [6] which specifically focuses on the federated class-incremental learning
scenario and a global model is developed by incorporating
additional class-imbalance losses. It is studied in [29] to
utilize extra distilled data at both the server and client sides,
where knowledge distillation is employed to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. FedCIL is proposed in [38] to learn a
generative network and reconstruct past samples for replay,
improving the retention of previous information.
While these approaches may be effective at learning new
tasks, it is essential to also consider the constraints of privacy concerns and data heterogeneity. For example, datareconstruction techniques with gradient or adversarial training are employed in FCIL and FedCIL to alleviate catastrophic forgetting, but it may cause privacy leakage of local
data. Moreover, existing works simply assume that each
client collects incremental data of different tasks in an independently and identically distributed (IID) manner, ignoring
the issue of data heterogeneity in real-world scenarios.

12820

