This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DanceCamera3D: 3D Camera Movement Synthesis with Music and Dance
Zixuan Wang1,2 , Jia Jia1,2∗ , Shikun Sun1,2 , Haozhe Wu1,2 , Rong Han1 , Zhenyu Li1 ,
Di Tang4 , Jiaqing Zhou4 , Jiebo Luo3∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, USA 4 ByteDance Hangzhou, China
{wangzixu21, ssk21, wuhz19, hanr21, zy-li21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jjia@tsinghua.edu.cn,
jluo@cs.rochester.edu, {minliu, jiashu}@bytedance.com

Camera Captured Video Frames

Camera & Dance Illustration

Rendering

Music

Figure 1. We present the DCM dataset, which contains 3.2 hours paired 3D Dance motion, Camera movement and Music audio.

Abstract
Choreographers determine what the dances look like,
while cameramen determine the final presentation of
dances. Recently, various methods and datasets have showcased the feasibility of dance synthesis. However, camera
movement synthesis with music and dance remains an unsolved challenging problem due to the scarcity of paired
data. Thus, we present DCM, a new multi-modal 3D
dataset, which for the first time combines camera movement
with dance motion and music audio. This dataset encompasses 108 dance sequences (3.2 hours) of paired dancecamera-music data from the anime community, covering 4
music genres. With this dataset, we uncover that dance
camera movement is multifaceted and human-centric, and
possesses multiple influencing factors, making dance cam* Corresponding author

era synthesis a more challenging task compared to camera
or dance synthesis alone. To overcome these difficulties,
we propose DanceCamera3D, a transformer-based diffusion model that incorporates a novel body attention loss
and a condition separation strategy. For evaluation, we
devise new metrics measuring camera movement quality,
diversity, and dancer fidelity. Utilizing these metrics, we
conduct extensive experiments on our DCM dataset, providing both quantitative and qualitative evidence showcasing
the effectiveness of our DanceCamera3D model. Code and
video demos are available at https://github.com/
Carmenw1203/DanceCamera3D-Official.

1. Introduction
Dancing with the camera is a unique cinematic experience
that merges cinematography and choreography. In the process of dance video production, moving the camera along

7892

