This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Spatial Propagation Network for Sparsity-Adaptive Depth Refinement
Jinyoung Jun
Korea University

Jae-Han Lee
Gauss Labs Inc.

Chang-Su Kim*
Korea University

jyjun@mcl.korea.ac.kr

jaehanlee@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Depth

Farther

1. Introduction
Image-guided depth completion is a task to estimate a dense
depth map using an RGB image with sparse depth measurements; it fills in unmeasured regions with estimated depths.
It is useful because many depth sensors, e.g. LiDAR and
ToF cameras, provide sparse depth maps only. With the recent usage of depth information in autonomous driving [22]
and various 3D applications [34, 45, 61, 75], depth completion has become an important research topic.
Recently, with the success of deep neural networks,
learning-based methods have shown significant performance improvement by exploiting massive amounts of
training data [51]. They attempt to fuse multi-modal features like surface normal [56, 72] or provide repetitive image guidance [74]. Especially, affinity-based spatial propagation methods have been widely studied [9, 11, 44, 54, 79].
The main function of depth completion is to compensate
* Corresponding author.

Nearer

Initial depth
Mask

1

0

Sparse depths

Refined depth

Larger

Error

The main function of depth completion is to compensate for an insufficient and unpredictable number of sparse
depth measurements of hardware sensors. However, existing research on depth completion assumes that the sparsity — the number of points or LiDAR lines — is fixed for
training and testing. Hence, the completion performance
drops severely when the number of sparse depths changes
significantly. To address this issue, we propose the sparsityadaptive depth refinement (SDR) framework, which refines
monocular depth estimates using sparse depth points. For
SDR, we propose the masked spatial propagation network
(MSPN) to perform SDR with a varying number of sparse
depths effectively by gradually propagating sparse depth
information throughout the entire depth map. Experimental results demonstrate that MPSN achieves state-of-the-art
performance on both SDR and conventional depth completion scenarios. Codes are available at https://
github.com/jyjunmcl/MSPN_SDR

Image

1

2

5

10

Smaller

Iterations

Figure 1. Illustration of the masked spatial propagation process
in the proposed MSPN. The initial mask is obtained from sparse
depths, assigned 1 if depth values are present and 0 otherwise. For
easier comparison, error maps are also provided for each depth
map, in which brighter pixels correspond to larger errors. MSPN
updates depth maps and masks gradually to generate the final refined depth map.

for the limitations of existing depth sensors, but conventional research on depth completion assumes that the sparsity is fixed for training and testing. However, in practice,
sparsity changes significantly, for it is difficult to measure
the depths of transparent regions, mirrors, and black objects. Sensor defects also affect the number of measurements. Besides, conventional spatial propagation methods
[9, 11, 44, 54, 79] refine the depths of all pixels simultaneously, regardless of the locations of sparse depth measurements. Therefore, erroneous depths can propagate during
the refinement when only a few sparse depths are available.
In this paper, we develop a sparsity-adaptive depth refinement (SDR) framework, which refines monocular dense
depth estimates adaptively according to the sparsity of depth
measurements. Also, we propose the masked spatial propagation network (MSPN) to propagate the information from
sparse depth points to unmeasured regions. First, an offthe-shelf monocular depth estimator is used to estimate an
initial depth map from an input RGB image. Next, a guidance network generates guidance features using the input
image, the sparse depths, and the initial depth map. Finally, using the guidance features, the proposed MSPN performs iterative refinement to obtain a refined depth map,
as shown in Figure 1. The proposed SDR framework can

19768

