This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Know Your Neighbors: Improving Single-View Reconstruction
via Spatial Vision-Language Reasoning
Rui Li1

Tobias Fischer1
Luc Van Gool1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Google

Mattia Segu1 Marc Pollefeys1
Federico Tombari2, 3
3
Technical University of Munich

1. Introduction
Humans have the extraordinary ability to estimate the geometry of a 3D scene from a single image, often including its occluded parts. It enables us to reason about where
dynamic actors in the scene might move, and how to best
navigate ourselves to avoid a collision. Hence, estimating the 3D scene geometry from a single input view is a
long-standing challenge in computer vision, fundamental to
autonomous navigation [16] and virtual reality applications
[33]. Since the problem is highly ill-posed due to scale ambiguity, occlusions, and perspective distortion, it has traditionally been cast as a 2.5D problem [6, 31, 58], focusing
on areas visible in the image plane and neglecting the non-

BTS [51]
Ours

Recovering the 3D scene geometry from a single view
is a fundamental yet ill-posed problem in computer vision.
While classical depth estimation methods infer only a 2.5D
scene representation limited to the image plane, recent approaches based on radiance fields reconstruct a full 3D representation. However, these methods still struggle with occluded regions since inferring geometry without visual observation requires (i) semantic knowledge of the surroundings, and (ii) reasoning about spatial context. We propose
KYN, a novel method for single-view scene reconstruction
that reasons about semantic and spatial context to predict
each point’s density. We introduce a vision-language modulation module to enrich point features with fine-grained
semantic information. We aggregate point representations
across the scene through a language-guided spatial attention mechanism to yield per-point density predictions aware
of the 3D semantic context. We show that KYN improves
3D shape recovery compared to predicting density for each
3D point in isolation. We achieve state-of-the-art results in
scene and object reconstruction on KITTI-360, and show
improved zero-shot generalization compared to prior work.
Project page: https://ruili3.github.io/kyn.

Input

Abstract

Figure 1. Single-view scene reconstruction results. We present
the predicted 3D occupancy grids given a single input image. The
camera is at the bottom left and points to the top right along the zaixs. Previous methods like BTS [51] struggle to recover accurate
object shapes (green box) and exhibit trailing effects in unobserved
areas (blue box). In contrast, KYN recovers more accurate boundaries and mitigates the trailing effects prevalent in prior art.

visible parts.
Recently, approaches based on neural radiance
fields [39] have shown great potential in inferring the
true 3D scene representation from a single [51, 59] or
multiple views [50]. For instance, Wimbauer et al. [51]
introduce BTS, a method that estimates a 3D density field
from a single view at inference while being supervised only
by photometric consistency given multiple posed views at
training time.
Intuitively, given only a single image at inference, the
model must rely on semantic knowledge from the neighboring 3D structure to predict the density of occluded points.
However, existing approaches lack explicit semantic modeling and, by modeling density prediction independently for
each point, are unaware of the semantic 3D context of the
point’s surroundings. This results in the clear limitations

9848

