This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CrossKD: Cross-Head Knowledge Distillation for Object Detection
Jiabao Wang1 ,* Yuming Chen1∗ , Zhaohui Zheng1 , Xiang Li2,1 , Ming-Ming Cheng2,1 , Qibin Hou2,1†
1

VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
https://github.com/jbwang1997/CrossKD

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) has been validated as an
effective model compression technique for learning compact object detectors. Existing state-of-the-art KD methods
for object detection are mostly based on feature imitation.
In this paper, we present a general and effective prediction
mimicking distillation scheme, called CrossKD, which delivers the intermediate features of the student’s detection
head to the teacher’s detection head. The resulting crosshead predictions are then forced to mimic the teacher’s predictions. This manner relieves the student’s head from receiving contradictory supervision signals from the annotations and the teacher’s predictions, greatly improving the
student’s detection performance. Moreover, as mimicking
the teacher’s predictions is the target of KD, CrossKD offers more task-oriented information in contrast with feature
imitation. On MS COCO, with only prediction mimicking
losses applied, our CrossKD boosts the average precision
of GFL ResNet-50 with 1× training schedule from 40.2 to
43.7, outperforming all existing KD methods. In addition,
our method also works well when distilling detectors with
heterogeneous backbones.

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD), serving as a model compression technique, has been deeply studied in object detection [5, 13, 29, 31, 55, 59, 60, 73, 74] and has received
excellent performance recently. According to the distillation position of the detectors, existing KD methods can
be roughly classified into two categories: prediction mimicking and feature imitation. Prediction mimicking (See
Fig. 1(a)) was first proposed in [24], which points out that
the smooth distribution of the teacher’s predictions is more
comfortable for the student to learn than the Dirac distribu* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparisons between conventional KD methods and
our CrossKD. Rather than explicitly enforcing the consistency
between the intermediate feature maps or the predictions of the
teacher-student pair, CrossKD implicitly builds the connection between the heads of the teacher-student pair to improve the distillation efficiency.

tion of the ground truths. In other words, prediction mimicking forces the student to resemble the prediction distribution of the teacher. Differently, feature imitation (See
Fig. 1(b)) follows the idea proposed in FitNet [53], which
argues that intermediate features contain more information
than the predictions from the teacher. It aims to enforce the
feature consistency between the teacher-student pair.
Prediction mimicking plays a vital role in distilling object detection models. However, it has been observed to be
inefficient than feature imitation for a long time. Recently,
Zheng et al. [73] proposed a localization distillation (LD)
method that improves prediction mimicking by transferring
localization knowledge, which pushes the prediction mimicking to a new level. Despite just catching up with the advanced feature imitation methods, e.g., PKD [5], LD shows
that prediction mimicking has the ability to transfer task-

16520

