This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-based Blind Text Image Super-Resolution
Yuzhe Zhang1
1

Jiawei Zhang2
Hao Li2
Zhouxia Wang3
2,4
Dongqing Zou
Liheng Bian1,∗

Luwei Hou2

Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 The University of Hong Kong, 4 PBVR

LR
ESRGAN
TSRN
TATT MARCONet
ours
GT
(a) Synthetic LR text image
with complex strokes

(b) Synthetic LR text image with
severe degradation and flexible style

(c) Real-world LR text image
with complex strokes

(d) Real-world LR text image
with severe degradation

Figure 1. Blind text image super-resolution results between different methods on synthetic and real-world text images. Our method can
restore text images with high text fidelity and style realness under complex strokes, severe degradation, and various text styles.

Abstract
Recovering degraded low-resolution text images is challenging, especially for Chinese text images with complex
strokes and severe degradation in real-world scenarios. Ensuring both text fidelity and style realness is crucial for
high-quality text image super-resolution. Recently, diffusion models have achieved great success in natural image
synthesis and restoration due to their powerful data distribution modeling abilities and data generation capabilities. In this work, we propose an Image Diffusion Model
(IDM) to restore text images with realistic styles. For diffusion models, they are not only suitable for modeling realistic image distribution but also appropriate for learning text
distribution. Since text prior is important to guarantee the
correctness of the restored text structure according to existing arts, we also propose a Text Diffusion Model (TDM) for
text recognition which can guide IDM to generate text im1 This work was done when Yuzhe Zhang was an intern at SenseTime.

* Corresponding author.

ages with correct structures. We further propose a Mixture
of Multi-modality module (MoM) to make these two diffusion models cooperate with each other in all the diffusion
steps. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate that our Diffusion-based Blind Text
Image Super-Resolution (DiffTSR) can restore text images
with more accurate text structures as well as more realistic
appearances simultaneously. Code is available at https:
//github.com/YuzheZhang-1999/DiffTSR.

1. Introduction
Blind text image super-resolution (SR) focuses on recovering high-resolution (HR) images from low-resolution (LR)
ones corrupted by various unknown degradations. Unlike
natural image super-resolution tasks which pay more attention to enriching and enhancing the image details, text
fidelity and style realness should also be guaranteed in
the restored text images. Mistakenly estimated text structures, such as distorted, missing, additional, or overlapping

25827

