This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking Implicit Neural Representation and Geometric Rendering in
Real-Time RGB-D SLAM

1

Tongyan Hua1
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ)

Lin Wang1,2 *
Dept. of CSE, HKUST

2

t.hua.msc@outlook.com, linwang@ust.hk
Project Page: https://vlis2022.github.io/nerf-slam-benchmark/

Abstract

(a)

RGB-D SLAM
𝑝$

Implicit neural representation (INR), in combination
with geometric rendering, has recently been employed in
real-time dense RGB-D SLAM. Despite active research endeavors being made, there lacks a unified protocol for fair
evaluation, impeding the evolution of this area. In this
work, we establish, to our knowledge, the first open-source
benchmark framework to evaluate the performance of a
wide spectrum of commonly used INRs and rendering functions for mapping and localization. The goal of our benchmark is to 1) gain an intuition of how different INRs and
rendering functions impact mapping and localization and
2) establish a unified evaluation protocol w.r.t. the design
choices that may impact the mapping and localization. With
the framework, we conduct a large suite of experiments, offering various insights in choosing the INRs and geometric rendering functions: for example, the dense feature grid
outperforms other INRs (e.g. tri-plane and hash grid), even
when geometric and color features are jointly encoded for
memory efficiency. To extend the findings into the practical scenario, a hybrid encoding strategy is proposed to
bring the best of the accuracy and completion from the gridbased and decomposition-based INRs. We further propose
explicit hybrid encoding for high-fidelity dense grid mapping to comply with the RGB-D SLAM system that puts the
premise on robustness and computation efficiency.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a pivotal task in 3D computer vision, with the goal of estimating
the position and orientation of a sensor, while concurrently
building a map of the surrounding scene. For the real-time
dense visual SLAM system, a large number of methods
have been proposed, predominantly based on the RGB-D
cameras [8, 23, 32, 36, 42, 43, 45].
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) is an emerging technique
* Corresponding author.

Implicit Neural
Representation
𝑠! , 𝑐! = ℱ(𝑝! )

Geometric
rendering
𝑤! = 𝒢(𝑠! )
𝑤!

𝑇* RGB-D
Stream

Mapping

NeRF

0

0 𝑠$

INR

(b)
𝑇(

ℱ" 𝒢!

ℱ! 𝒢!
(c)

∞

ℱ

𝒢

color
Loss

depth

𝑇(
Localization
Map updating
Pose updating

ℱ"#! 𝒢!

Gradient backpropagation
Ground truth trajectory
& Estimated trajectory
Camera ray & sample point

Benchmark: ℱ! + 𝒢! is good, Novel Design ℱ"#! + 𝒢! is better

Figure 1. (a) We establish a novel benchmark to evaluate different elements of NeRF, narrowly defined as a combination of INR
function F and geometric rendering function G, under the unified
RGB-D SLAM paradigm. (b) Rendering Loss guides the online
updating of the pose from T̃ to T̂ , and parameter of F . (c) A toy
example illustrates the impact of various combinations of F and
G: F2 surpasses F1 in trajectory estimation and reconstruction fidelity but compromising completeness, inspire new designs that
bring the benefits of F1 and F2 to form a hybrid encoding F1+2 .

based on the Implicit Neural Representation (INR), in combination with geometric rendering for novel view synthesis [28]. It employs a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) to
map a 3D point (i.e., spatial location along viewing direction) to density and color. Various NeRF variants have
emerged since, featuring unique representations such as
hash-grid [29] and tri-plane [4], or focusing on mapping the
3D point to different geometric properties, such as the sur-

21346

