This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What, How, and When Should Object Detectors Update
in Continually Changing Test Domains?
Jayeon Yoo1
1

Dongkwan Lee1 Inseop Chung1 Donghyun Kim2 * Nojun Kwak1 *
1
Seoul National University 2 Korea University

{jayeon.yoo, biancco, jis3613, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr, 2 d kim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
It is a well-known fact that the performance of deep
learning models deteriorates when they encounter a
distribution shift at test time. Test-time adaptation (TTA)
algorithms have been proposed to adapt the model online
while inferring test data. However, existing research
predominantly focuses on classification tasks through the
optimization of batch normalization layers or classification
heads, but this approach limits its applicability to various
model architectures like Transformers and makes it challenging to apply to other tasks, such as object detection. In
this paper, we propose a novel online adaption approach
for object detection in continually changing test domains,
considering which part of the model to update, how to
update it, and when to perform the update. By introducing
architecture-agnostic and lightweight adaptor modules and
only updating these while leaving the pre-trained backbone
unchanged, we can rapidly adapt to new test domains
in an efficient way and prevent catastrophic forgetting.
Furthermore, we present a practical and straightforward
class-wise feature aligning method for object detection to
resolve domain shifts. Additionally, we enhance efficiency
by determining when the model is sufficiently adapted or
when additional adaptation is needed due to changes in
the test distribution. Our approach surpasses baselines on
widely used benchmarks, achieving improvements of up to
4.9%p and 7.9%p in mAP for COCO ! COCO-corrupted
and SHIFT, respectively, while maintaining about 20
FPS or higher. The implementation code is available at
https://github.com/natureyoo/ContinualTTA ObjectDetection.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models excel in many vision tasks but struggle with domain shifts when test data distributions diverge
from training data [3, 27, 42]. These shifts, common in
real-world settings, arise from natural variations, weather
* Co-corresponding authors

Figure 1. We propose an online adaptation method for object
detection in continually changing test domains. Object detectors
trained with clean images suffer from performance degradation
due to various corruption, such as camera sensor degradation or
environmental changes (Direct-Test). Updating full parameters for
online adaptation require a large number of test samples and vulnerable to drastic domain changes (Full-Finetuning), while using
only our lightweight adaptor is robust and quickly adapts within a
few time steps (Ours). We can further improve efficiency by skipping unnecessary adaptation steps (Ours-Skip).

changes (e.g., fog, rain), camera differences (e.g., pixelate,
defocus blur), and various other factors. Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) [3, 27, 32, 42, 45, 49] addresses these shifts by
adapting models to the target (test) distribution online. Considering the dynamic nature of real-world applications, it
becomes crucial to extend this approach to Continual TestTime Adaptation (CTA), which accounts for the ongoing
evolution of test distributions. This is particularly vital in
environments like autonomous driving, where conditions
can change continuously (e.g., from clear to rainy, or day
to night). Despite its significance, continual test-time adaptation for object detection remains underexplored.
Recently, several TTA methods [6, 31, 38] tailored for
object detection have been proposed. ActMAD [31] aligns
all the output feature maps (RC⇥H⇥W ) after Batch Nor-

23354

