Arbitrary Templates

This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporally Consistent
Selective, Interpretable
and MotionObfuscation
Consistent
Source
Privacy Attribute Obfuscation for Action Recognition

Arbitrary Templates
Saliency MapOptical Flow
Templates
y Templates
Filip Ilic
TU Graz

He Zhao
York University

Thomas Pock
TU Graz

Richard P. Wildes
York University

filip.ilic@tugraz.at

zhufl@eecs.yorku.ca

pock@tugraz.at

wildes@cse.york.ca

Arbitrary Templates

Source

Temporally Consistent
Obfuscation

Saliency Map

Optical Flow

Figure 1. Our goal is to hide privacy attributes without action recognition performance dropping. Left: Arbitrary images can be used
to specify an interpretable template library defined by privacy attributes. Middle: A salience map is generated from privacy templates;
example illustrates use of templates for personal identification. Right: The source video is masked with noise as guided by salience and
animated by source video optical flow. Salience makes masking selective to privacy sensitive regions, while preserving scene context;
optical flow preserves motion – both of which are critical for action recognition. The obfuscated video can be input directly to arbitrary
privacy and action recognition systems without retraining. Zoomed circles highlight details only for illustration.

Saliency MapOptical Flow

Abstract
Concerns for the privacy of individuals captured in public imagery have led to privacy-preserving action recognition. Existing approaches often suffer from issues arising
through obfuscation being applied globally and a lack of
interpretability. Global obfuscation hides privacy sensitive
regions, but also contextual regions important for action
recognition. Lack of interpretability erodes trust in these
new technologies. We highlight the limitations of current
paradigms and propose a solution: Human selected privacy templates that yield interpretability by design, an obfuscation scheme that selectively hides attributes and also
induces temporal consistency, which is important in action
recognition. Our approach is architecture agnostic and
directly modifies input imagery, while existing approaches
generally require architecture training. Our approach offers more flexibility, as no training is required, and outperforms alternatives on three widely used datasets.

Code available f-ilic.github.io/SelectivePrivacyPreservation

1. Introduction
Advances in state-of-the-art computer vision and machine
learning enable deployment of such systems in the public
sphere. Accompanying these initiatives, concerns arise for
the privacy of individuals that are captured in acquired imagery [11, 19, 35, 46]. In particular, considerations arise
regarding attributes that individuals want to keep confidential, yet that are revealed through visual information, even
though they are not critical for the functioning of the deployed system, e.g. identity, age, gender and race. Videobased action recognition is an area of consideration as it has
potential for widespread applications in surveillance and
monitoring. These concerns have sparked interest in privacy preserving action recognition [13, 24, 34, 58]. These
approaches process input imagery to obscure privacy attributes while maintaining action recognition performance.
Contemporary approaches typically apply their obfuscation
across entire input video frames and improvements have
been made within this paradigm. Notably, however, there
are downsides to this paradigm, as follows.

18730

