This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Variance to Veracity: Unbundling and Mitigating Gradient Variance in
Differentiable Bundle Adjustment Layers
Swaminathan Gurumurthy1 , Karnik Ram1 → 2 , Bingqing Chen3 ,
Zachary Manchester1 , Zico Kolter1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 TU Munich
3
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Abstract
Various pose estimation and tracking problems in
robotics can be decomposed into a correspondence estimation problem (often computed using a deep network) followed by a weighted least squares optimization problem to
solve for the poses. Recent work has shown that coupling
the two problems by iteratively refining one conditioned
on the other’s output yields SOTA results across domains.
However, training these models has proved challenging, requiring a litany of tricks to stabilize and speed up training.
In this work, we take the visual odometry problem as an
example and identify three plausible causes: (1) flow loss
interference, (2) linearization errors in the bundle adjustment (BA) layer, and (3) dependence of weight gradients on
the BA residual. We show how these issues result in noisy
and higher variance gradients, potentially leading to a slow
down in training and instabilities. We then propose a simple, yet effective solution to reduce the gradient variance by
using the weights predicted by the network in the inner optimization loop to weight the correspondence objective in the
training problem. This helps the training objective ‘focus’
on the more important points, thereby reducing the variance
and mitigating the influence of outliers. We show that the
resulting method leads to faster training and can be more
flexibly trained in varying training setups without sacrificing performance. In particular we show 2–2.5× training
speedups over a baseline visual odometry model we modify.

1. Introduction
Ego and exo pose estimation are essential for agents to
safely interact with the physical world. These tasks have
a long history of being tackled using geometry-based optimizaton [23, 24, 36, 42], and in the last decade, using deep
networks to directly map inputs to poses [43, 57, 59, 62].
However, both these classes of approaches have shown britCorresponding author: gauthamsindia95@gmail.com
Code: https://github.com/swami1995/V2V

Inner Loop

Update
Operator

Feature
Extractor

δ
Σ

Optimizer

T, d

BA

ℒ = ℒflow + ℒpose
𝛽

(a) SOTA pose estimation methods [37, 54, 55] tightly-couple learned
front-ends with traditional BA optimizers. However, they can be slow
to converge.

Bundle Adjustment

p̄jk = p̄jk,i + δ

δ

Σ
WeightResidue
Dependency

argmin

∥p̄jk − ωjk(Ti, di))∥2Σ
j,k
Gauss-Newton Steps
∑

ω(T, d) = ω(Ti, di) + JTΔTi + JdΔdi

Linearization Errors

Ti+1

di+1

ℒflow

Flow Loss
Interference

(b) We identify three factors that lead to high variance in gradients
during their training.

Figure 1. We propose a simple, yet effective solution to stabilize and speed-up the training of SOTA pose estimation methods. (b) We first analyze the causes for their instability related
to variance in their gradients, and (a) then mitigate them by using
weights from the inner-loop optimization to weigh the correspondence outer objective, which leads to improved performance.

tleness — not being robust to outliers in the data or having
poor accuracy in unseen scenes.
More recently, approaches that combine the best of both
worlds in learning to optimize have demonstrated substantially better performance than previous methods [37, 54,
55]. These approaches combine a learned iterative update
operator that mimics an optimization algorithm with im-

27507

