This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SED: A Simple Encoder-Decoder for Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Bin Xie1 , Jiale Cao1 ,* Jin Xie2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan3,4 , and Yanwei Pang1,5
1
Tianjin University 2 Chongqing University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
Linköping University 5 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{bin xie,connor,pyw}@tju.edu.cn xiejin@cqu.edu.cn fahad.khan@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract

SED

SED

31

18

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to parse semantic categories of
each pixel in an image. Traditional methods [6, 31, 52] assume that the semantic categories are closed-set and struggle to recognize unseen category during inference. To this
* Corresponding author: Jiale Cao

SAN

CAT-Seg

26

OVSeg
DeOP
21

SimBaseline
ZegFormer

16
0

160

PC-459 mIoU

A-150 mIoU

CAT-Seg

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation strives to distinguish pixels into different semantic groups from an open
set of categories. Most existing methods explore utilizing
pre-trained vision-language models, in which the key is to
adapt the image-level model for pixel-level segmentation
task. In this paper, we propose a simple encoder-decoder,
named SED, for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation,
which comprises a hierarchical encoder-based cost map
generation and a gradual fusion decoder with category
early rejection. The hierarchical encoder-based cost map
generation employs hierarchical backbone, instead of plain
transformer, to predict pixel-level image-text cost map.
Compared to plain transformer, hierarchical backbone better captures local spatial information and has linear computational complexity with respect to input size. Our gradual fusion decoder employs a top-down structure to combine cost map and the feature maps of different backbone
levels for segmentation. To accelerate inference speed, we
introduce a category early rejection scheme in the decoder
that rejects many no-existing categories at the early layer
of decoder, resulting in at most 4.7 times acceleration without accuracy degradation. Experiments are performed on
multiple open-vocabulary semantic segmentation datasets,
which demonstrates the efficacy of our SED method. When
using ConvNeXt-B, our SED method achieves mIoU score
of 31.6% on ADE20K with 150 categories at 82 millisecond (ms) per image on a single A6000. Our source code is
available at https://github.com/xb534/SED.

13

SAN
OVSeg
DeOP
ZegFormer

8
320

Inference time (ms)

0

320

640

960

Inference time (ms)

Figure 1. Accuracy (mIoU) and speed (ms) comparison on
A-150 and PC-459. Here, the speed is reported on a single
NVIDIA A6000 GPU, and the changing factor of different points
is the input size of images. Our SED achieves an optimal tradeoff in terms of speed and accuracy compared to existing methods
in literature: SAN [56], CAT-Seg [12], OVSeg [29], DeOP [22],
SimBaseline [55] and ZegFormer [14].

end, recent works have explored open-vocabulary semantic
segmentation [3, 51, 59] to segment the pixels belonging to
the arbitrary categories.
Recently, vision-language models, such as CLIP [38]
and ALIGN [25], learn aligned image-text feature representation from millions of image-text paired data. The
pre-trained vision-language models exhibit superior generalization ability to recognize open-vocabulary categories.
This motivates a body of research works to explore using vision-language models for open-vocabulary semantic
segmentation [14, 29]. Initially, research works mainly
adopt two-stage framework [15, 29, 55] to directly adapt
vision-language models for open-vocabulary segmentation.
Specifically, they first generate class-agnostic mask proposals and then adopt the pre-trained vision-language models to
classify these proposals into different categories. However,
such a two-stage framework uses two independent networks
for mask generation and classification, thereby hampering
computational efficiency. Further, it does not fully utilize
contextual information.
Different to aforementioned two-stage approaches,
methods based on single-stage framework directly extend a

3426

