This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EscherNet: A Generative Model for Scalable View Synthesis
Xin Kong1 * Shikun Liu1 * Xiaoyang Lyu2 Marwan Taher1
Xiaojuan Qi2 Andrew J. Davison1
1

Dyson Robotics Lab, Imperial College London
∗

2

The University of Hong Kong

Corresponding Authors: {x.kong21,shikun.liu17}@imperial.ac.uk

Figure 1. We introduce EscherNet, a diffusion model that can generate a flexible number of consistent target views (highlighted in blue)
with arbitrary camera poses, based on a flexible number of reference views (highlighted in purple). EscherNet demonstrates remarkable
precision in camera control and robust generalisation across synthetic and real-world images featuring multiple objects and rich textures.

Abstract
We introduce EscherNet, a multi-view conditioned diffusion model for view synthesis. EscherNet learns implicit and generative 3D representations coupled with a
specialised camera positional encoding, allowing precise
and continuous relative control of the camera transformation between an arbitrary number of reference and target
views. EscherNet offers exceptional generality, flexibility,
and scalability in view synthesis — it can generate more
than 100 consistent target views simultaneously on a single consumer-grade GPU, despite being trained with a fixed
number of 3 reference views to 3 target views. As a result,
EscherNet not only addresses zero-shot novel view synthesis, but also naturally unifies single- and multi-image 3D

reconstruction, combining these diverse tasks into a single,
cohesive framework. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that EscherNet achieves state-of-the-art performance
in multiple benchmarks, even when compared to methods
specifically tailored for each individual problem. This remarkable versatility opens up new directions for designing
scalable neural architectures for 3D vision. Project page:
https://kxhit.github.io/EscherNet.

1. Introduction
View synthesis stands as a fundamental task in computer vision and computer graphics. By allowing the re-rendering
of a scene from arbitrary viewpoints based on a set of reference viewpoints, this mimics the adaptability observed in

9503

