This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Real-World HDR Video Reconstruction: A Large-Scale Benchmark
Dataset and A Two-Stage Alignment Network
Yong Shu, Liquan Shen*, Xiangyu Hu, Mengyao Li, Zihao Zhou
Shanghai University, China
{yungsyu,jsslq,arhu314,sdlmy,yi yuan}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
The demands for high dynamic range (HDR) video have
drastically increased in recent years since it can bring a
better visual experience for users [2, 10, 19, 40]. How* Corresponding author. This work was partially supported by China
NSFC grant (no.61931022 and no.62271301), Shanghai SSTP grant
(22511105200), Shanghai SEALP grant (23XD1401400).

Synthetic
dataset

Alternatingly-exposed LDR inputs (Middle frame is the reference frame)

Our
dataset

As an important and practical way to obtain high dynamic range (HDR) video, HDR video reconstruction from
sequences with alternating exposures is still less explored,
mainly due to the lack of large-scale real-world datasets.
Existing methods are mostly trained on synthetic datasets,
which perform poorly in real scenes. In this work, to facilitate the development of real-world HDR video reconstruction, we present Real-HDRV, a large-scale real-world
benchmark dataset for HDR video reconstruction, featuring
various scenes, diverse motion patterns, and high-quality
labels. Specifically, our dataset contains 500 LDRs-HDRs
video pairs, comprising about 28,000 LDR frames and
4,000 HDR labels, covering daytime, nighttime, indoor, and
outdoor scenes. To our best knowledge, our dataset is the
largest real-world HDR video reconstruction dataset. Correspondingly, we propose an end-to-end network for HDR
video reconstruction, where a novel two-stage strategy is
designed to perform alignment sequentially. Specifically,
the first stage performs global alignment with the adaptively estimated global offsets, reducing the difficulty of subsequent alignment. The second stage implicitly performs local alignment in a coarse-to-fine manner at the feature level
using the adaptive separable convolution. Extensive experiments demonstrate that: (1) models trained on our dataset
can achieve better performance on real scenes than those
trained on synthetic datasets; (2) our method outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods. Our dataset is available
at https://github.com/yungsyu99/Real-HDRV.

AHDRNet[42] Kalantari19[18]

Chen21[4]

CA-ViT[23]

LAN-HDR[6]

Figure 1. Row 1 shows a real-world sample from the Chen21
dataset[4]. Row 2-3 show the HDR frames reconstructed by models trained on the synthetic dataset [4] and our Real-HDRV, respectively. Obviously, models trained on our dataset are able to
recover more and better details of the over-exposed regions.

ever, most cameras cannot capture HDR videos directly
due to the limitations of sensors. Therefore, some specialized hardware devices [12, 17, 27, 30, 32] are developed to
capture HDR videos. However, these devices are typically
bulky and expensive, which are not widely adopted [6].
In contrast, the computational-based HDR video reconstruction [20, 24] is more practical and affordable for obtaining HDR videos. It captures low dynamic range (LDR)
sequences with alternating exposures (e.g., sequences with
exposure values of {-3,0,-3,0,...}), which are then used to
reconstruct the corresponding HDR video. The common
reconstruction pipeline is to align the input frames and then
merge the aligned inputs to reconstruct the HDR videos.
Before the era of deep learning, some optimization-based
reconstruction methods [19, 20, 24] are proposed. Recently,
learning based methods [4, 6, 18] have shown their effectiveness on HDR video reconstruction, which significantly
improve the performance over optimization-based methods.
Despite remarkable progress, the development of deep
models for HDR video reconstruction is relatively slow,
mainly due to the lack of suitable training datasets. The
only publicly accessible labeled real-world dataset of HDR

2879

