This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing the World through Your Eyes
Hadi Alzayer*

Kevin Zhang* Brandon Feng Christopher A. Metzler
University of Maryland, College Park
https://world-from-eyes.github.io/

Jia-Bin Huang

...

...

Input frames

Input frames

...
Cropped eye images

...
Novel view rendering

Cropped eye images

Novel view rendering

Figure 1. Radiance field reconstruction using eye reflections. The human eye is highly reflective. We show that from a sequence of
frames that capture a moving head, we can reconstruct the radiance field and render the scene of what the person is observing using only
the reflections off their eyes.

Abstract
The reflective nature of the human eye is an underappreciated source of information about what the world around
us looks like. By imaging the eyes of a moving person, we
capture multiple views of a scene outside the camera’s direct line of sight through the reflections in the eyes. In this
paper, we reconstruct a radiance field beyond the camera’s
line of sight using portrait images containing eye reflections. This task is challenging due to 1) the difficulty of accurately estimating eye poses and 2) the entangled appearance of the iris textures and the scene reflections. To address
these, our method jointly optimizes the cornea poses, the radiance field depicting the scene, and the observer’s eye iris
texture. We further present a regularization prior on the iris
texture to improve scene reconstruction quality. Through
various experiments on synthetic and real-world captures
featuring people with varied eye colors, and lighting conditions, we demonstrate the feasibility of our approach to
recover the radiance field using cornea reflections.

*Equal contribution

1. Introduction
The human eye is a remarkable organ that enables vision and holds valuable information about the surrounding
world. While we typically use our own eyes as two lenses
to focus light onto the photosensitive cells composing our
retina, we would also capture the light reflected from the
cornea if we look at someone else’s eyes. When we use
a camera to image the eyes of another, we effectively turn
their eyes into a pair of mirrors in the overall imaging system. Since the light that reflects off the observer’s eyes
share the same source as the light that reaches their retina,
our camera can form images containing information about
the surrounding world the observer sees.
Prior studies have explored recovering a panoramic image of the world the observer sees and simple 3D structures like boxes that the observer is looking at from manually specified correspondences from a single image of two
eyes [27, 28]. Follow-up works have further explored applications such as personal identification [10, 29], detecting
grasp posture [53], focused object estimation [40], illumination estimation [48], and relighting [26]. Given the recent
advancements in 3D vision and graphics, we wonder: Can
we do more than reconstruct a single panoramic environ-

4864

