This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coupled Laplacian Eigenmaps for Locally-Aware 3D Rigid Point Cloud
Matching
Matteo Bastico1⇤, Etienne Decencière2 , Laurent Corté1 , Yannick Tillier3 , David Ryckelynck1
Mines Paris, Université PSL
1
Centre des Matériaux (MAT), UMR7633 CNRS, 91003 Evry, France
2
Centre de Morphologie Mathématique (CMM), 77300 Fontainebleau, France
3
Centre de Mise en Forme des Matériaux (CEMEF), UMR7635 CNRS, 06904 Sophia Antipolis, France
Abstract
Point cloud matching, a crucial technique in computer
vision, medical and robotics fields, is primarily concerned
with finding correspondences between pairs of point clouds
or voxels. In some practical scenarios, emphasizing local differences is crucial for accurately identifying a correct match, thereby enhancing the overall robustness and
reliability of the matching process. Commonly used shape
descriptors have several limitations and often fail to provide meaningful local insights about the paired geometries. In this work, we propose a new technique, based
on graph Laplacian eigenmaps, to match point clouds by
taking into account fine local structures. To deal with the
order and sign ambiguity of Laplacian eigenmaps, we introduce a new operator, called Coupled Laplacian1 , that
allows to easily generate aligned eigenspaces for multiple
registered geometries. We show that the similarity between
those aligned high-dimensional spaces provides a locally
meaningful score to match shapes. We firstly evaluate the
performance of the proposed technique in a point-wise manner, focusing on the task of object anomaly localization on
the MVTec 3D-AD dataset. Additionally, we define a new
medical task, called automatic Bone Side Estimation (BSE),
which we address through a global similarity score derived
from coupled eigenspaces. In order to test it, we propose a
benchmark collecting bone surface structures from various
public datasets. Our matching technique, based on Coupled Laplacian, outperforms other methods by reaching an
impressive accuracy on both tasks.

1. Introduction
Point cloud matching, or more generally 3D shape matching, is a fundamental task in computer vision. It involves
⇤ Corresponding author: matteo.bastico@minesparis.psl.eu

1 Code: https://github.com/matteo-bastico/CoupLap

finding the closest matching geometry to a target shape
within a set of reference shapes [65]. In addition, if the
task involves finding rigid transformations that best align
the target shape with the reference, it is often part of a registration process. In particular, point-set rigid registration
determines the relative transformation needed to align two
point clouds without altering their internal structures [41].
This problem is essential for many practical computer vision tasks, such as medical image analysis [3, 32, 48, 61],
intelligent vehicles [21, 34], human pose estimation [22]
and objects retrieval and tracking [46, 64]. Traditional
[8, 19, 57] and probabilistic registration and matching methods [15, 20, 30, 45], while robust, often struggle to optimally align complex geometries, especially in cases with
intricate local structures or slight deformations.
Over the years, several methods have been proposed
to tackle the challenge of accurate and efficient 3D shape
matching and retrieval [5, 9, 11, 51, 53, 65, 73]. Data-driven
3D shape descriptors [54], capturing underlying properties
of the shapes under study, are the common denominator of
early shape matching techniques. Global descriptors, such
as volume and areas descriptors [78], describe the entirety
of the shape in one compact representation, often failing
to capture local fine details of complex geometries. On the
other hand, local descriptors [38, 57] aim to tackle this issue
but they generally are sensitive to noise, based on landmarks
and they might not capture semantic information [63]. More
recently, deep-learned shape descriptors [6, 72] and neural
networks for shape matching, based on auto-encoders [73]
or transformers [59, 68], have been proposed. Despite their
good performances, these methods require a huge amount
of annotated data for training, which are hard to collect in
fields such as medical imaging [37]. Furthermore, non-rigid
point cloud matching and retrieval methods [35, 36, 71] are
designed to handle shape deformations and, therefore, they
might be excessively flexible ignoring fine local details that
are not due to deformations, such as anomalies.

3447

