This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Small Steps and Level Sets: Fitting Neural Surface Models with Point Guidance
Chamin Hewa Koneputugodage1
1

Yizhak Ben-Shabat1,2

The Australian National University

2

Dylan Campbell1

Stephen Gould1

Technion Israel Institute of Technology

{chamin.hewa, dylan.campbell, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au sitzikbs@gmail.com

Abstract
A neural signed distance function (SDF) is a convenient
shape representation for many tasks, such as surface reconstruction, editing and generation. However, neural SDFs
are difficult to fit to raw point clouds, such as those sampled from the surface of a shape by a scanner. A major issue occurs when the shape’s geometry is very different from
the structural biases implicit in the network’s initialization.
In this case, we observe that the standard loss formulation
does not guide the network towards the correct SDF values. We circumvent this problem by introducing guiding
points, and use them to steer the optimization towards the
true shape via small incremental changes for which the loss
formulation has a good descent direction. We show that
this point-guided homotopy-based optimization scheme facilitates a deformation from an easy problem to the difficult reconstruction problem. We also propose a metric to
quantify the difference in surface geometry between a target
shape and an initial surface, which helps indicate whether
the standard loss formulation is guiding towards the target
shape. Our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art
approaches, with large improvements on shapes identified
by this metric as particularly challenging.

1. Introduction
Point cloud reconstruction using a neural signed distance
function (SDF) is a popular approach due to its simplicity and flexibility. Such methods show impressive performance improvements for cases with significant noise, outliers, missing regions or misalignment [20]. However, they
are still unable to outperform classical methods on clean
and relatively dense input data [20, 25], especially when the
shape exhibits challenging geometry. For example, thin surfaces near each other (see Fig. 1 bottom) or large concave
regions with small openings (see Fig. 1 top).
We address the task of reconstruction from raw point
clouds, i.e., without ground-truth normal vectors. We observe that the standard loss formulation used for the task

Figure 1. Given a point cloud without ground-truth normals (left),
neural SDF optimization for surface fitting frequently gets trapped
in local minima (middle). Note that these two shapes have geometry very different to a sphere, which causes the loss right after
spherical initialization to not provide a good descent direction towards the target shape (see Sec. 3.3). Our point-guided homotopybased approach provides a principled way to avoid this issue and
improve reconstruction quality (right).

does not give a good descent direction1 towards the target
SDF values, especially when the initialization does not align
with the target geometry. Since most methods initialize to
a sphere to bias the optimization result towards a bounded
shape, and rely on this bias to find a good descent direction,
their performance can be poor if the input shape has very
different geometry to a sphere (see Fig. 1).
Instead we propose a point-guided SDF (PG-SDF) approach, where we introduce guiding points to represent an
intermediate surface for the optimization to target. By incrementally moving the guiding points towards the sampled input and optimizing the network to their new location, we ensure that the loss formulation gives a good descent direction during optimization. We eventually converge the guiding points to the input points, leading the optimization stably towards the target SDF. We also propose
1 To avoid confusion, in this paper we use the term normal direction to
refer to vectors in the normalized gradient field of the SDF and descent
direction for the negative gradient of the loss function.

21456

