This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RealCustom: Narrowing Real Text Word for Real-Time Open-Domain
Text-to-Image Customization
Mengqi Huang1 *, Zhendong Mao1†, Mingcong Liu2 , Qian He2 , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China; 2 ByteDance Inc.
{huangmq}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zdmao, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, {liumingcong, heqian}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Text-to-image customization, which aims to synthesize
text-driven images for the given subjects, has recently revolutionized content creation. Existing works follow the
pseudo-word paradigm, i.e., represent the given subjects as
pseudo-words and then compose them with the given text.
However, the inherent entangled influence scope of pseudowords with the given text results in a dual-optimum paradox, i.e., the similarity of the given subjects and the controllability of the given text could not be optimal simultaneously. We present RealCustom that, for the first time, disentangles similarity from controllability by precisely limiting subject influence to relevant parts only, achieved by
gradually narrowing real text word from its general connotation to the specific subject and using its cross-attention
to distinguish relevance. Specifically, RealCustom introduces a novel “train-inference” decoupled framework: (1)
during training, RealCustom learns general alignment between visual conditions to original textual conditions by
a novel adaptive scoring module to adaptively modulate
influence quantity; (2) during inference, a novel adaptive
mask guidance strategy is proposed to iteratively update
the influence scope and influence quantity of the given subjects to gradually narrow the generation of the real text
word. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the superior real-time customization ability of RealCustom in the
open domain, achieving both unprecedented similarity of
the given subjects and controllability of the given text for
the first time. The project page is https://corleonehuang.github.io/realcustom/.

1. Introduction
Recent significant advances in the customization of pretrained large-scale text-to-image models [6, 24, 25, 28]
(i.e., text-to-image customization) has revolutionized con* Works done during the internship at ByteDance.
† Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison between the existing paradigm and ours.
(a) The existing paradigm represents the given subject as pseudowords (e.g., S ∗ ), which has entangled the same entire influence
scope with the given text, resulting in the dual-optimum paradox,
i.e., the similarity for the given subject and the controllability for
the given text could not achieve optimum simultaneously. (b) We
propose RealCustom, for the first time disentangles similarity from
controllability by precisely limiting the given subjects to influence
only the relevant parts while the rest parts are purely controlled by
the given text. This is achieved by iteratively updating the influence scope and influence quantity of the given subjects. (c) The
quantitative comparison shows that our paradigm achieves both
superior similarity and controllability to the existing paradigm.

tent creation. This task empowers pre-trained models with
the ability to generate imaginative text-driven scenes for
subjects specified by users, which is a foundation for AIgenerated content (AIGC) and real-world applications such
as personal image and video creation [7]. The primary goal
of customization is dual-faceted: (1) high-quality similarity, i.e., the target subjects in the generated images should
closely mirror the given subjects; (2) high-quality controllability, i.e., the remaining subject-irrelevant parts should
consistently adhere to the control of the given text.
Existing literature follows the pseudo-word paradigm,
i.e., (1) learning pseudo-words (e.g., S ∗ [10] or rare-tokens
[27]) to represent the given subjects; (2) composing these

7476

