This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MS-MANO: Enabling Hand Pose Tracking with Biomechanical Constraints
Pengfei Xie1,* , Wenqiang Xu2,* , Tutian Tang2 , Zhenjun Yu2 , Cewu Lu2
1
Southeast University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

xiepf2002@gmail.com 2 {vinjohn, tttang, jeffson-yu, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://ms-mano.robotflow.ai

Abstract
This work proposes a novel learning framework for visual hand dynamics analysis that takes into account the
physiological aspects of hand motion. The existing models, which are simplified joint-actuated systems, often produce unnatural motions. To address this, we integrate a
musculoskeletal system with a learnable parametric hand
model, MANO, to create a new model, MS-MANO. This
model emulates the dynamics of muscles and tendons to
drive the skeletal system, imposing physiologically realistic constraints on the resulting torque trajectories. We
further propose a simulation-in-the-loop pose refinement
framework, BioPR, that refines the initial estimated pose
through a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) network. Our evaluation of the accuracy of MS-MANO and the efficacy of the
BioPR is conducted in two separate parts. The accuracy of
MS-MANO is compared with MyoSuite, while the efficacy
of BioPR is benchmarked against two large-scale public
datasets and two recent state-of-the-art methods. The results demonstrate that our approach consistently improves
the baseline methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
From a physical perspective, human hand motion is actuated by the musculoskeletal system. As depicted in
Fig. 1, the brain transmits excitation signals via the nervous
system, intriguing the contraction and relaxation in muscles and generating torque to facilitate joint movement of
hands. Consequently, the dynamics of hand motion are naturally coordinated and constrained by the underlying musculoskeletal system. However, such physiological aspects
are seldom taken into consideration when designing a learning framework of visual hand dynamics analysis (e.g. hand
pose estimation [1, 28, 46] and tracking [6, 10]).
Previous works on visual hand analysis primarily consid* Equal contribution.

Excitation

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The physiological mechanism of hand dynamics. (a)
The excitation signal originating from the brain triggers the contraction or relaxation of muscles. The triggered muscle segments
are illustrated in green, while the relaxed ones are in brown. (b)
The muscle contraction triggered by excitation manifests as the
movement of the hand in appearance.

ered hand dynamics as multi-body dynamics. This means
that the hand is represented as an articulated object, with
kinematic movement directly propelled by joint torques.
Since the joint-actuated system simplifies the mechanism
of hand motion, it may produce robot-like movements that
are unnatural or infeasible to human hands [14]. In contrast, a musculoskeletal system explicitly emulates the dynamics of muscles and tendons to drive the skeletal system
so that it can impose physiologically realistic constraints
on the resulting torque trajectories and make the movements more human-like. Despite the advantages, this system is challenging to replicate due to the complexity of the
hand’s dynamic system, which uses over 30 muscles to support nuanced movements. In this work, we first integrate
a musculoskeletal system with a parametric hand model,
MANO [35], extending it to the musculoskeletal version,
MS-MANO. Then, we apply MS-MANO to the hand pose
tracking task with a simulation-in-the-loop learning framework, BioPR.

2382

