This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

iToF-flow-based High Frame Rate Depth Imaging
Yu Meng1 , Zhou Xue2 , Xu Chang3 , Xuemei Hu1 *, Tao Yue1
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, 2 Li Auto, 3 Bytedance Inc.
mengyu@smail.nju.edu.cn, xuezhou08@gmail.com, changxu.21@bytedance.com,
{xuemeihu,yuetao}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
iToF is a prevalent, cost-effective technology for 3D perception. While its reliance on multi-measurement commonly leads to reduced performance in dynamic environments. Based on the analysis of the physical iToF imaging process, we propose the iToF flow, composed of crossmode transformation and uni-mode photometric correction,
to model the variation of measurements caused by different measurement modes and 3D motion, respectively. We
propose a local linear transform (LLT) based cross-mode
transfer module (LCTM) for mode-varying and pixel shift
compensation of cross-mode flow, and uni-mode photometric correct module (UPCM) for estimating the depth-wise
motion caused photometric residual of uni-mode flow. The
iToF flow-based depth extraction network is proposed which
could facilitate the estimation of the 4-phase measurements at each individual time for high framerate and accurate depth estimation. Extensive experiments, including
both simulation and real-world experiments, are conducted
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.
Compared with the SOTA method, our approach reduces the
computation time by 75% while improving the performance
by 38%. The code and database are available at https://
github.com/ComputationalPerceptionLab/iToF_
flow.

1. Introduction
Time of flight (ToF) imaging is a cornerstone technology for depth imaging, renowned for its broad application
across numerous fields [17, 20, 36, 38]. The basic principle of ToF is to estimate the time difference between
emitting and receiving signals to retrieve depth information [22]. Commonly, ToF imaging technology can be categorized into direct-ToF (dToF) imaging and indirect-ToF
(iToF) imaging. In dToF imaging, single photon avalanche
diodes (SPAD) or avalanche photodiode arrays (APD) are
commonly utilized and the time delay can be directly measured [35]. However, the dToF system is constrained by
two main limitations, i.e. high hardware costs and low spa* Corresponding author.

𝑡
𝜃

(a)

Cross-mode

Uni-mode

𝑡
𝜃

(b)
Mapped
measurement

Predicted
measurement

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed iToF flow-based high frame
rate depth reconstruction. (a) Captured alternating iToF measurements, (b) iToF flow-based propagation of full-mode measurements, and reconstructed depths.

tial resolution. In iToF imaging with amplitude-modulated
continuous wave (AMCW), depth information is encoded
in multiple modes (e.g., 4 modes with 90◦ phase shifts respectively), which correspond to the cross-correlation integrals of the receiving and emitting signal with different
phase shifts [22]. The indirect working principle allows for
lower hardware costs and higher spatial resolution [38].
Nevertheless, the reliance on multiple measurements
leads to errors in the depth estimation of dynamic scenes
and limited framerate of depth imaging. To overcome the
problem, manually designed constraint rules and supplementary information were proposed to correct pixel values for specific motion scenes [5, 10, 21, 29]. Besides,
motion compensation methods based on optical flow estimation were also proposed for iToF measurements alignment [11, 28]. However, the realistic 3D motion can not be
represented losslessly with 2D optical flow (OF) [33]. Such
a dilemma can be tackled with an explicit 3D motion compensation (e.g. scene flow [33]) on the iToF measurement
while overcoming the photometric inconsistencies caused
by 3D motion and different modes. However, direct estimation of scene flow usually relies on explicit 3D reconstruction [32,33], and the 3D motion estimation is also highly illposed and computationally complex. Besides, photometric
inconsistency due to different modes of iToF measurements
also exacerbates the ill-posedness of OF estimation.

4929

