This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UltrAvatar: A Realistic Animatable 3D Avatar Diffusion Model with
Authenticity Guided Textures
Mingyuan Zhou* 1 , Rakib Hyder* 1 , Ziwei Xuan 1 , Guojun Qi 1,2
1

OPPO US Research Center, InnoPeak Technology, Inc., USA,

2

Westlake University, China

{mingyuan.zhou,rakib.hyder,ziwei.xuan}@innopeaktech.com, guojunq@gmail.com

“Leonardo
DiCaprio”

“An elder
white woman
with delicate
lines and
wrinkles”

Figure 1. UltrAvatar. Our method takes a text prompt or a single image as input to generate realistic animatable 3D Avatars with PBR
textures, which are compatible with various rendering engines, our generation results in a wide diversity, high quality, and excellent fidelity.

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D avatar generation have gained
significant attention. These breakthroughs aim to produce
more realistic animatable avatars, narrowing the gap between virtual and real-world experiences. Most of existing
works employ Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss, combined with a differentiable renderer and text condition, to
guide a diffusion model in generating 3D avatars. However, SDS often generates over-smoothed results with few
facial details, thereby lacking the diversity compared with
ancestral sampling. On the other hand, other works generate 3D avatar from a single image, where the challenges
of unwanted lighting effects, perspective views, and inferior
image quality make them difficult to reliably reconstruct the
3D face meshes with the aligned complete textures. In this
paper, we propose a novel 3D avatar generation approach
termed UltrAvatar with enhanced fidelity of geometry, and
superior quality of physically based rendering (PBR) textures without unwanted lighting. To this end, the proposed
approach presents a diffuse color extraction model and an
* Equal contribution.

authenticity guided texture diffusion model. The former removes the unwanted lighting effects to reveal true diffuse
colors, so that the generated avatars can be rendered under
various lighting conditions. The latter follows two gradientbased guidances for generating PBR textures to render diverse face-identity features and details better aligning with
3D mesh geometry. We demonstrate the effectiveness and
robustness of the proposed method, outperforming the stateof-the-art methods by a large margin in the experiments.

1. Introduction
Generating 3D facial avatars is of significant interest in the
communities of both computer vision and computer graphics. Recent advancements in deep learning have greatly
enhanced the realism of AI-generated avatars. Although
multi-view 3D reconstruction methods, such as Multi-View
Stereo (MVS) [62] and Structure from Motion (SfM) [61],
have facilitated avatar generation from multiple images captured at various angles, generating realistic 3D avatars from
few images, like a single view taken by a user or particularly generated from text prompts, is significantly challeng-

1238

