This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VicTR: Video-conditioned Text Representations for Activity Recognition
Kumara Kahatapitiya1 * Anurag Arnab2 Arsha Nagrani2 Michael S. Ryoo1,2
1
Stony Brook University 2 Google Research
kkahatapitiy@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Vision-Language models (VLMs) have excelled in the
image-domain— especially in zero-shot settings— thanks to
the availability of vast pretraining data (i.e., paired imagetext samples). However for videos, such paired data is not
as abundant. Therefore, video-VLMs are usually designed
by adapting pretrained image-VLMs to the video-domain,
instead of training from scratch. All such recipes rely on augmenting visual embeddings with temporal information (i.e.,
image → video), often keeping text embeddings unchanged
or even being discarded. In this paper, we argue the contrary,
that better video-VLMs can be designed by focusing more
on augmenting text, rather than visual information. More
specifically, we introduce Video-conditioned Text Representations (VicTR): a form of text embeddings optimized w.r.t. visual embeddings, creating a more-flexible contrastive latent
space. Our model can further make use of freely-available
semantic information, in the form of visually-grounded auxiliary text (e.g. object or scene information). We evaluate
our model on few-shot, zero-shot (HMDB-51, UCF-101),
short-form (Kinetics-400) and long-form (Charades) activity recognition benchmarks, showing strong performance
among video-VLMs.

1. Introduction
Video understanding poses significant challenges, often
adding to the complications in image domain such as model
complexity and annotation costs. The additional temporal
dimension and different modalities of data introduce useful
cues, but also can be redundant, raising interesting questions
about trade-offs. Activity Recognition (i.e., classification) in
particular— as the prominent task in video understanding—
has long been explored by the community in these research
directions. Whether it is efficient architecture variants ranging from CNNs [13, 31, 57] to Transformers [2, 5, 12], training schemes from fully-supervised [7, 14] to self-supervised
[15, 47, 53] or data regimes from unimodal [63, 73] to multimodal [20, 39], the progress has been steady and exciting.
More recently, with the availability of internet-scale paired
image-text data, the direction of vision-language models
* Work done as a student researcher at Google.

Tai
Tbi

Ta

Video

Tbj

Text
Tb

Taj
Vi

Vj

Video-conditioned Text
Change in Affinity

Tci
Tc

Tcj

Tai Tbi Tci

Taj Tbj Tcj

for Vi

for Vj

Figure 1. Video-conditioned Text Representations: Pretrained
image-VLMs can generate reasonable visual embeddings for videos
(e.g. by temporally-pooling frame embeddings), together with
paired text embeddings. However, usually, these text embeddings
are not dependent on visual information— meaning, they are common for every video. Such representations lack the flexibility to
align properly in a shared vision-language latent space, when optimized based on a contrastive similarity (i.e., Affinity) w.r.t. all
videos. However, with Video-conditioned Text representations that
specialize uniquely for each video, we grant more freedom for
text embeddings to move in the latent space, and adapt to different
scenarios (e.g. more-challenging recognition tasks).

(VLMs) [23, 50] have emerged dominant, achieving strong
generalization across numerous benchmarks. However, the
progress of VLMs in the video domain is yet to be caught-up
to its full potential.
Following the seminal VLMs such as CLIP [50] and
ALIGN [23], there have been significant strides in tasks such
as image classification [80, 85, 87], open-vocabulary object
detection [18, 38], text-to-image retrieval [61, 82] and robot
manipulation [24, 86]. Such models are usually pretrained
on paired image-text data based on a contrastive learning
framework. The idea is to have two separate backbones—
an Image Encoder and a Text Encoder, that generate embeddings in a joint latent space. To optimize this space, the
corresponding pairs of embeddings are drawn closer, by increasing their similarity (i.e., Affinity). The key advantage
of such models is that, at inference, any semantic concept
(given as a text input) can be embedded in the same space,
giving intriguing zero-shot or few-shot transfer capabilities
[1, 86]. For instance, CLIP [50] excels at classifying unseen
attribute categories (e.g. objects, scenes), or even counting

18547

