This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt Highlighter: Interactive Control for Multi-Modal LLMs
Yuechen Zhang1

Shengju Qian1
Bohao Peng1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Shu Liu2
2
SmartMore

Jiaya Jia1,2

https://github.com/dvlab-research/Prompt-Highlighter
Language
Prompt

I would like to control the degree of compactness
User: Write a summary of A Mid-Summer Nights'
Dream. Make it compact.

Vicuna Normal Inference

256 tokens

A Midsummer Night's Dream is a comedy play written by William
Shakespeare. The play follows the events that take place…
Prompt Engineering
MAKE IT COMPACT

Unstable
234 tokens

→ super compact

141 tokens

+ Compactness is important. 280 tokens
Prompt Highlighter: Control Partial Prompts

Vision &
Language
Prompt

I want to know more about the man
and the jersey...
User: Please describe this image.

LLaVA Normal Inference
The image features a man wearing a red and green soccer
jersey, smiling and posing for a picture. He is likely a soccer
player, as he is wearing a sports uniform and is standing on a
field. The man appears to be enjoying himself…
Prompt Highlighter: Inference with Highlighted Region

121 tokens

In A Mid-Summer Nights' Dream, a group of young lovers, including
Hermia, Lysander, Demetrius, and Helena, become…

The image features a smiling man, who is none other than
the famous soccer player, Cristiano Ronaldo. He is wearing
a red and green jersey and is standing in front of a crowd…

65 tokens
In A Mid-Summer Nights' Dream, four young lovers run away from an
arranged marriage and hide in the forest where they are controlled by
a mischievous fairy. A troupe of actors perform a play within the play
that resolves the conflicts and the lovers are reunited. </s>

The man in the image is wearing a red, green, and yellow shirt,
which is the national soccer team uniform of Portugal. He is
smiling and appears to be enjoying the game. The shirt has a
green and red stripe, and the number 7 is displayed on it …

Figure 1. Prompt Highlighter facilitates token-level user interactions for customized generation, compatible with both LLMs and VLMs.
Compared with vanilla inference and prompt engineering, the context-highlighted inference provided by our method offers controllable
generations and produces customized results. Outputs correlated with the highlighted parts are underlined.

Abstract
This study targets a critical aspect of multi-modal LLMs’
(LLMs&VLMs) inference: explicit controllable text generation. Multi-modal LLMs empower multi-modality understanding with the capability of semantic generation yet
bring less explainability and heavier reliance on prompt
contents due to their autoregressive generative nature.
While manipulating prompt formats could improve outputs,
designing specific and precise prompts per task can be challenging and ineffective. To tackle this issue, we introduce
a novel inference method, Prompt Highlighter, which enables users to highlight specific prompt spans to interactively control the focus during generation. Motivated by
the classifier-free diffusion guidance, we form regular and
unconditional context pairs based on highlighted tokens,
demonstrating that the autoregressive generation in models can be guided in a classifier-free way. Notably, we find
that, during inference, guiding the models with highlighted
tokens through the attention weights leads to more desired
outputs. Our approach is compatible with current LLMs

and VLMs, achieving impressive customized generation results without training. Experiments confirm its effectiveness
in focusing on input contexts and generating reliable content. Without tuning on LLaVA-v1.5, our method secured
70.7 in the MMBench test and 1552.5 in MME-perception.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have driven significant
progress in a multitude of natural language processing
tasks [1–9]. Further advancements have been achieved
by extending these models to handle vision-language
tasks [10–15] through visual-language alignment and instruction tuning. These efforts have led to the development
of Vision Language Models (VLMs), which can generate
text based on multi-modal inputs. Due to its autoregressive nature, the typical generation process in LLMs and
VLMs (multi-modal LLMs) is primarily conditioned on input contexts. Prompt engineering [16–19] has emerged
as a common interaction mechanism between humans and
language models, where diverse formats and content of
prompts are employed to steer the generation towards de-

13215

