This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoDi: Conditional Diffusion Distillation
for Higher-Fidelity and Faster Image Generation
Kangfu Mei* 1,2 , Mauricio Delbracio1 , Hossein Talebi1 ,
Zhengzhong Tu1 , Vishal M. Patel† 2 , Peyman Milanfar1
1

Google Research, 2 Johns Hopkins University
https://fast-codi.github.io

(b) Our 1-step InstructPix2Pix with: “Make it lowkey” and “Make it sunset”

(a) Our 4-step real-world super-resolution

(c) Our 4-step generation from depth-map

(d) Our 4-step inpainting results with prompts: Shiba, Husky, Alpaca, Panda, Hawk, Dragon

Figure 1. Our proposed CoDi efficiently distills a conditional diffusion model from an unconditional one, enabling rapid generation of
high-quality images under various conditional settings. We demonstrate CoDi’s capabilities through generated results across various tasks.
Abstract
Large generative diffusion models have revolutionized text-to-image generation and offer immense potential for conditional generation tasks such as image enhancement, restoration, editing, and compositing. However, their widespread adoption is hindered
by the high computational cost, which limits their realtime application. To address this challenge, we introduce a novel method dubbed CoDi, that adapts a
pre-trained latent diffusion model to accept additional
image conditioning inputs while significantly reducing the sampling steps required to achieve high-quality
results. Our method can leverage architectures such
as ControlNet to incorporate conditioning inputs without compromising the model’s prior knowledge gained
during large scale pre-training. Additionally, a conditional consistency loss enforces consistent predictions across diffusion steps, effectively compelling the
* This work was done during an internship at Google.
† VMP was supported by NSF CAREER award 2045489.

model to generate high-quality images with conditions
in a few steps. Our conditional-task learning and distillation approach outperforms previous distillation methods, achieving a new state-of-the-art in producing highquality images with very few steps (e.g., 1-4) across
multiple tasks, including super-resolution, text-guided
(a) Our 4-step real-world super-resolution
image editing, and
depth-to-image generation.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image diffusion models [29, 32, 37] trained on
large-scale data [15, 41] have significantly
dominated
gen(c) Our 1-step
InstructPix2Pix
erative tasks by delivering impressive high-quality and diverse results. A newly emerging trend is to use the prior
of pre-trained text-to-image models such latent diffusion
models (LDMs) [32] to guide the generated results with
external image conditions for image-to-image transformation tasks such as image manipulation, enhancement, or
super-resolution [4, 23, 24, 31, 52, 57]. Among these transformation processes, the diffusion prior introduced by pre-

9048

(b) Our

