This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Composing Object Relations and Attributes for Image-Text Matching
Khoi Pham1 Chuong Huynh1 Ser-Nam Lim2 Abhinav Shrivastava1
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 University of Central Florida
Abstract
We study the visual semantic embedding problem for
image-text matching. Most existing work utilizes a tailored cross-attention mechanism to perform local alignment
across the two image and text modalities. This is computationally expensive, even though it is more powerful than
the unimodal dual-encoder approach. This work introduces
a dual-encoder image-text matching model, leveraging a
scene graph to represent captions with nodes for objects
and attributes interconnected by relational edges. Utilizing a graph attention network, our model efficiently encodes object-attribute and object-object semantic relations,
resulting in a robust and fast-performing system. Representing caption as a scene graph offers the ability to utilize the strong relational inductive bias of graph neural
networks to learn object-attribute and object-object relations effectively. To train the model, we propose losses
that align the image and caption both at the holistic level
(image-caption) and the local level (image-object entity),
which we show is key to the success of the model. Our
model is termed Composition model for Object Relations
and Attributes, CORA. Experimental results on two prominent image-text retrieval benchmarks, Flickr30K and MSCOCO, demonstrate that CORA outperforms existing stateof-the-art computationally expensive cross-attention methods regarding recall score while achieving fast computation speed of the dual encoder. Our code is available at
https://github.com/vkhoi/cora_cvpr24

1. Introduction
Image-text matching is a fundamental computer vision
problem that aims to measure the semantic correspondence
between an image and a text. Such correspondence can be
used for image retrieval given a text description, or text retrieval provided an image query, both of which are important in various computer vision applications (e.g., weakly
supervised problems [18, 19]). The problem is inherently
challenging due to the ambiguous nature of the image and
text modalities [6, 46]. For example, an image can depict a
complicated situation that a multitude of different captions

Im
a
be ge
dd
ing

em

leap

in white

man

escape
air

angry

Similarity
score

bull

leap through

A man in white is leaping through the air escaping
the arena containing an angry black bull

black

Joint embedding
space

ph
gra g
in
ene
contain Sc bedd
em
arena

Figure 1. Illustration of CORA. CORA has a dual-encoder architecture, consisting of one encoder that embeds the input image
and one encoder that embeds the text caption scene graph into a
joint embedding space. (Best viewed in color and zoomed in.)

can describe, whereas a single caption is too abstract and
can semantically apply to multiple images. Various studies
have been proposed and can be categorized into two main
directions: (1) the unimodal dual encoder and (2) the crossattention approach.
In the dual-encoder framework, two modalityindependent encoders embed the image and text caption
separately into a joint embedding space. In this space, a
similarity function such as a dot product can measure the
image-text similarity. This strategy is also referred to as
the global alignment approach, as the goal is to holistically
represent an image (or text) as a single embedding. Due to
their simplicity and low computational cost (e.g., retrieving
an image given a text query can be done via a vector-matrix
multiplication with the cached embeddings), such methods
are more widely adopted for real-world retrieval databases.
The second approach, cross-attention network, constitutes the majority of recent work. Instead of embedding each modality separately, cross-modality attention is
adopted to locally align fine-grained visual cues of an image (image regions) with textual cues of a caption (word
tokens), from which the overall correspondence score is aggregated. While this approach outperforms dual encoder in
terms of power, it presents a substantial computational challenge. Upon receiving a text (or image) query, every image
vs. text query pair must be processed through the crossattention model to determine their similarity scores. This requirement renders the method impractical for retrieval systems managing large databases due to its extensive computational demands. This work focuses on the dual-encoder

14354

