This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Narrative Action Evaluation with Prompt-Guided Multimodal Interaction
Shiyi Zhang1, *, Sule Bai1, *, Guangyi Chen2 , Lei Chen3 , Jiwen Lu3 , Junle Wang4 , Yansong Tang2,†
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 4 Tencent

INPUT

{sy-zhang23@mails.,bsl23@mails.,tang.yansong@sz.}tsinghua.edu.cn

···

INFO

OUTPUT

Task1. Action Quality Assessment

88.0

···

Task2. Video Captioning

The athlete is diving in the Olympics Game.

Task3. Narrative Action Evaluation (Ours)
The diver executes a back rotation with an armstand and follows it up with two point zero somersaults and one point five twists in a
free position. It looked like she did a very good job and entered the water vertically. She managed to finish the dive successfully,
earning a good score of eighty eight point zero points. The tight execution to the platform has added to the difficulty and danger,
making this a standout performance. There is no doubt that she has done an excellent job! She has shown us a perfect performance!

Score

Professionalism

Action

Qual. Eval.

Language Richness

Description

Figure 1. A comparison of our proposed narrative action evaluation (NAE) task with action quality assessment (AQA) and video captioning.
The three lines in the figure represent the input video, the outputs of the three tasks, and the information contained in each task. In comparison
to AQA, NAE provides rich language descriptions. When compared to Video Captioning, NAE includes much more evaluation information
such as scores, actions, and qualitative evaluations, which is often rigorous and granular. In general, NAE aims to strike a balance between
the professionalism of assessment information and the richness of language. This duality is both the characteristic and challenge of NAE.

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a new problem called narrative action evaluation (NAE). NAE aims to generate professional commentary that evaluates the execution of an action.
Unlike traditional tasks such as score-based action quality assessment and video captioning involving superficial
sentences, NAE focuses on creating detailed narratives in
natural language. These narratives provide intricate descriptions of actions along with objective evaluations. NAE is a
more challenging task because it requires both narrative flexibility and evaluation rigor. One existing possible solution
is to use multi-task learning, where narrative language and
evaluative information are predicted separately. However,
this approach results in reduced performance for individual
tasks because of variations between tasks and differences
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

in modality between language information and evaluation
information. To address this, we propose a prompt-guided
multimodal interaction framework. This framework utilizes
a pair of transformers to facilitate the interaction between
different modalities of information. It also uses prompts to
transform the score regression task into a video-text matching task, thus enabling task interactivity. To support further
research in this field, we re-annotate the MTL-AQA and
FineGym datasets with high-quality and comprehensive action narration. Additionally, we establish benchmarks for
NAE. Extensive experiment results prove that our method
outperforms separate learning methods and naive multi-task
learning methods. Data and code are released at here.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed substantial advancements in
action description methods, including video captioning[13–
15, 17, 38, 39, 44] that describes content (Task2 in Figure

18430

