This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

USE: Universal Segment Embeddings for Open-Vocabulary Image Segmentation
Xiaoqi Wang1,2,3 Wenbin He1,2 Xiwei Xuan1,2,4 Clint Sebastian2 Jorge Piazentin Ono1,2
Xin Li1,2 Sima Behpour1,2 Thang Doan1,2 Liang Gou1,2 Han-Wei Shen3 Liu Ren1,2
1
2
Bosch Research North America
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
3
4
The Ohio State University
University of California Davis
wang.5502@osu.edu wenbin.he2@us.bosch.com xwxuan@ucdavis.edu, clint.sebastian@de.bosch.com
{jorge.piazentinono, xin.li9, sima.behpour, thang.doan, liang.gou}@us.bosch.com
shen.94@osu.edu liu.ren@us.bosch.com

Abstract
The open-vocabulary image segmentation task involves
partitioning images into semantically meaningful segments
and classifying them with flexible text-defined categories.
The recent vision-based foundation models such as the Segment Anything Model (SAM) have shown superior performance in generating class-agnostic image segments. The
main challenge in open-vocabulary image segmentation
now lies in accurately classifying these segments into textdefined categories. In this paper, we introduce the Universal Segment Embedding (USE) framework to address this
challenge. This framework is comprised of two key components: 1) a data pipeline designed to efficiently curate
a large amount of segment-text pairs at various granularities, and 2) a universal segment embedding model that enables precise segment classification into a vast range of textdefined categories. The USE model can not only help openvocabulary image segmentation but also facilitate other
downstream tasks (e.g., querying and ranking). Through
comprehensive experimental studies on semantic segmentation and part segmentation benchmarks, we demonstrate
that the USE framework outperforms state-of-the-art openvocabulary segmentation methods.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary image segmentation [7, 20, 35, 36] aims
to partition images into semantically meaningful segments
and classify them with arbitrary classes defined by texts.
Recent advances in vision foundation models such as the
Segment Anything Model (SAM) [15] have shown superior performance in grouping image pixels into semantically
meaningful segments at various granularities (e.g., object,
part, and subpart). However, the existing open-vocabulary
image segmentation methods [7, 20, 35, 36] face challenges

Data Pipeline

Segment Embeddings

Segment Embedding Head

Dataset: Segment-Text Pairs

Image Encoder
a bird, a hummingbird

it’s wings

a red bird feeder

a) USE data pipeline

Image

Segments

b) USE model

Figure 1. The proposed framework consists of two major components: a) data pipeline that generates segment-text pairs from
image datasets and b) segment embedding model.

in fully utilizing image segments generated by foundation
models. For instance, end-to-end methods such as side
adapter network (SAN) [36] cannot take image segments
generated by foundation models as input or prompt to assign
class labels. While two-stage methods (e.g., OVSeg [20])
decouple the image segmentation and classification, they
are still limited in classifying segments at various granularities because of limited human annotations [2].
In our study, we introduce a Universal Segment Embedding (USE) framework to tackle the identified challenges.
The goal of USE is to take an image and various segments
as input and generate an embedding vector for each segment that aligns with its corresponding text descriptions.
These segment embeddings can then be utilized for classifying the segments in a zero-shot manner, similar to the
CLIP [29] model used for image classification. Inspired
by the recent advances in vision-language foundation models [21, 28], we develop the USE framework with a datacentric approach. Specifically, we introduce a data pipeline
(Figure 1a) designed to autonomously generate segmenttext pairs at various granularities without human annotations. In addition, we develop a lightweight universal segment embedding model (Figure 1b) that can be trained efficiently on the large scale of segment-text pairs.
Data Pipeline. Training data with a large scale of high-

4187

