This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiSA: LiDAR Localization with Semantic Awareness
Bochun Yang1 * Zijun Li1 * Wen Li1 Zhipeng Cai2†
Chenglu Wen1 Yu Zang1 Matthias Müller2 Cheng Wang1†
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University 2 Intel Labs

Abstract
LiDAR localization is a fundamental task in robotics
and computer vision, which estimates the pose of a LiDAR point cloud within a global map. Scene Coordinate
Regression (SCR) has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in this task. In SCR, a scene is represented as a
neural network, which outputs the world coordinates for
each point in the input point cloud. However, SCR treats
all points equally during localization, ignoring the fact that
not all objects are beneficial for localization. For example, dynamic objects and repeating structures often negatively impact SCR. To address this problem, we introduce
LiSA, the first method that incorporates semantic awareness into SCR to boost the localization robustness and accuracy. To avoid extra computation or network parameters during inference, we distill the knowledge from a segmentation model to the original SCR network. Experiments show the superior performance of LiSA on standard
LiDAR localization benchmarks compared to state-of-theart methods. Applying knowledge distillation not only preserves high efficiency but also achieves higher localization accuracy than introducing extra semantic segmentation modules. We also analyze the benefit of semantic information for LiDAR localization. Our code is released at
https://github.com/Ybchun/LiSA.

1. Introduction
LiDAR localization estimates the pose of a LiDAR point
cloud in a global scene map, which is a fundamental task in
computer vision and robotics.
Learning-based regression methods [3–5, 19, 23, 36, 45]
have shown state-of-the-art performance in LiDAR localization, where they memorize the specific scene in a neural network. Based on their regression objectives, these
methods can be divided into Absolute Pose Regression
(APR) and Scene Coordinates Regression (SCR). APR
[5, 19, 36, 45] directly regresses the sensor pose. Despite
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

• GT
• SGLoc
• LiSA

• GT
• SGLoc
• LiSA

Figure 1. Teaser. This work studies the problem of LiDAR localization. We propose a novel method LiSA, which equips LiDAR localization methods with semantic awareness. We show the
ground-truth and predicted trajectories on Oxford (left) and NCLT
(right). Compared to the baseline method (SGLoc), LiSA achieves
a much higher average localization accuracy and has much fewer
catastrophic failures, without introducing extra computation or
network parameters during inference.

the compact architectures, direct pose regression without
explicitly utilizing the geometric information limits the accuracy of APR. Unlike APR, SCR [3, 4, 23] regresses the
coordinate of each point in the global map, which provides
correspondences between the input and the global point
clouds. Then RANSAC [10] is applied to the correspondences to estimate the final pose. Utilizing the geometric
information more explicitly allows SCR to more effectively
embed and understand the scene geometry in its model parameters, resulting in higher accuracy and better robustness.
SCR treats all points of the input equally. This is nonideal for the task of localization – objects that are dynamic
(e.g., pedestrians and vehicles) or repetitive (e.g., road surface and trees) intuitively should be less important than
salient and static objects. Motivated by this observation,
we propose LiSA, a novel method that equips SCR with semantic awareness. LiSA can robustly handle distracting objects and significantly improves the localization accuracy.
To avoid introducing extra computation or network parameters during inference, we apply diffusion-based knowledge
distillation during training so that we can enable semantic
understanding of the original SCR network by extracting

15271

