This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G-NeRF: Geometry-enhanced Novel View Synthesis from Single-View Images
Zixiong Huang1,3 * Qi Chen2 * Libo Sun2 Yifan Yang1
Naizhou Wang3 Qi Wu2 Mingkui Tan1,4,5†
1
South China University of Technology 2 The University of Adelaide
3
Guangzhou Shiyuan Electronics Co., Ltd 4 Pazhou Lab
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
sesmilhzx@mail.scut.edu.cn, qi.chen04@adelaide.edu.au; mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Novel view synthesis aims to generate new view images of
a given view image collection. Recent attempts address this
problem relying on 3D geometry priors (e.g., shapes, sizes,
and positions) learned from multi-view images. However,
such methods encounter the following limitations: 1) they
require a set of multi-view images as training data for a
specific scene (e.g., face, car or chair), which is often unavailable in many real-world scenarios; 2) they fail to extract the geometry priors from single-view images due to
the lack of multi-view supervision. In this paper, we propose a Geometry-enhanced NeRF (G-NeRF), which seeks
to enhance the geometry priors by a geometry-guided multiview synthesis approach, followed by a depth-aware training. In the synthesis process, inspired that existing 3D GAN
models can unconditionally synthesize high-fidelity multiview images, we seek to adopt off-the-shelf 3D GAN models,
such as EG3D, as a free source to provide geometry priors
through synthesizing multi-view data. Simultaneously, to
further improve the geometry quality of the synthetic data,
we introduce a truncation method to effectively sample latent codes within 3D GAN models. To tackle the absence
of multi-view supervision for single-view images, we design
the depth-aware training approach, incorporating a depthaware discriminator to guide geometry priors through depth
maps. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method in terms of both qualitative and quantitative results.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have emerged as a state-ofthe-art technique for synthesizing novel views of complex
scenes from 2D images. By using deep neural networks,
† Corresponding author, *Authors contributed equally.

This work was done when Zixiong Huang was a research intern at
Guangzhou Shiyuan Electronics Co., Ltd.

3D
GAN

3D
GAN

3D
GAN

3D
GAN

NeRF

(a) Multi-view training without fine-tuning

Latent Code
&
Camera Poses

(b) Single-view training with fine-tuning

3D GAN

NeRF

(c) Single-view training without fine-tuning (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of different methods. To achieve singleshot novel view synthesis, previous methods either (a) require
real-world multi-view images to establish geometry priors or (b)
need additional optimization for a specific image. (c) In contrast,
our method captures the geometry priors from an existing 3D GAN
trained on single-view images only.

NeRF models are capable of modeling both the geometry
and appearance of a scene, enabling the generation of highquality and photorealistic 3D renderings from any desired
viewpoint. Its remarkable performance has made it a mainstream method for novel view synthesis, and it has found
diverse applications in fields such as virtual reality and digital human generation [13, 20]. Although NeRF has demonstrated exceptional performance in synthesizing novel views
for many scenes, it does exhibit two prominent limitations.
First, it requires multi-view images for training on a specific scene, while in most practical conditions only a singleview image is available. This limitation is widespread in
real-world scenarios, such as when taking selfies or capturing a portrait of a pet. Some recent works [12, 49, 52]
have attempted to address this limitation by introducing additional supervision, such as depth, or by collecting extensive
multi-view images of the same class to learn sufficient ge-

10117

