This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Causal-CoG: A Causal-Effect Look at Context Generation for Boosting
Multi-modal Language Models

1

Shitian Zhao1 Zhuowan Li2 Yadong Lu1 Alan Yuille2 Yan Wang1 *
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University
2
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
While Multi-modal Language Models (MLMs) demonstrate impressive multimodal ability, they still struggle on
providing factual and precise responses for tasks like visual question answering (VQA). In this paper, we address
this challenge from the perspective of contextual information. We propose Causal Context Generation, Causal-CoG,
which is a prompting strategy that engages contextual information to enhance precise VQA during inference. Specifically, we prompt MLMs to generate contexts, i.e, text description of an image, and engage the generated contexts
for question answering. Moreover, we investigate the advantage of contexts on VQA from a causality perspective,
introducing causality filtering to select samples for which
contextual information is helpful. To show the effectiveness of Causal-CoG, we run extensive experiments on 10
multimodal benchmarks and show consistent improvements,
e.g., +6.30% on POPE, +13.69% on Vizwiz and +6.43%
on VQAv2 compared to direct decoding, surpassing existing methods. We hope Casual-CoG inspires explorations of
context knowledge in multimodal models, and serves as a
plug-and-play strategy for MLM decoding. 1

1. Introduction
Owing to the widespread adoption of Large Language Models (LLM) [31, 32], there has been a proliferation of research endeavors aimed at integrating visual ability into
language models to build Multi-modal Language Models
(MLM) [8, 23, 39]. Representative works, e.g., LLaVA [23]
and MiniGPT-4 [39], incorporates a pretrained visual encoder and a lightweight alignment module to align visual
features into LLMs. Leveraging the intrinsic power of
LLM, these models exhibit great capability in following
user instructions and show good performance across various multimodal benchmarks, underscoring their potential
in multimodal understanding.
* Corresponding author: ywang@cee.ecnu.edu.cn
1 Code is released zhaoshitian/Causal-CoG

Context (C):

Image (I):

The image is a baggage claim area inside
an airport, where many bags are being
unloaded from overhead compartments.
There are several people working together in this busy process, which indicates
that they are likely the airport staff. The
scene takes place in a busy airport,
where people are either waiting to pick
up their belongings or working to
transport the luggage.

Question (Q): Is there a monitor in the image?
Image (I):

Y(I, C, Q):
Yes
No
Y(I, Q):
Yes

Question (Q): Is there a monitor in the image?

No

Figure 1. Contextual information helps VQA. In this example, the
monitors in the image are too small to see, so the multi-modal
language model (MLM) incorrectly predicts “no” for the question
“Is there a monitor in this image?”. However, if contextual information is provided, describing that this is an airport baggage hall,
MLM can predict the right answer, since there are usually monitors in the baggage hall.

However, similar to LLMs, MLMs grapple with issues
related to hallucination2 [19]. The models may predict incorrect responses when inquired with misleading queries
like the existence of an object in the image, and may struggle to grasp complex relationships among multiple objects
in an image [21]. As the example shown in Fig. 1, when
asked the question “is there a monitor in the image” for an
image containing small monitors that can hardly be seen,
current MLM incorrectly predicts the answer as “no”. This
inability to provide factual answers based on the visual content is commonly observed in MLMs, due to possible rea2 Hallucination is referred to “the generated content is nonsensical or
unfaithful to the provided source content” [13]

13342

