This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-2-3-45++: Fast Single Image to 3D Objects with Consistent Multi-View
Generation and 3D Diffusion
Minghua Liu1 * Ruoxi Shi1* Linghao Chen1,2*† Zhuoyang Zhang3*† Chao Xu4* Xinyue Wei1
Hansheng Chen5 Chong Zeng2† Jiayuan Gu1 Hao Su1
1
UC San Diego 2 Zhejiang University 3 Tsinghua University 4 UCLA 5 Stanford University

Figure 1. One-2-3-45++ is capable of transforming a single RGB image of any object into a high-fidelity textured mesh in under one
minute. The generated meshes closely mirror the input image. Input image (and text prompt), textured mesh, and normal map are shown.

Abstract
Recent advancements in open-world 3D object generation have been remarkable, with image-to-3D methods offering superior fine-grained control over their text-to-3D
counterparts. However, most existing models fall short in
simultaneously providing rapid generation speeds and high
fidelity to input images - two features essential for practical applications. In this paper, we present One-2-3-45++,
an innovative method that transforms a single image into
a detailed 3D textured mesh in approximately one minute.
Our approach aims to fully harness the extensive knowledge
embedded in 2D diffusion models and priors from valuable
yet limited 3D data. This is achieved by initially finetun* Equal contribution.
† Work done during internship at UC San Diego.

ing a 2D diffusion model for consistent multi-view image
generation, followed by elevating these images to 3D with
the aid of multi-view-conditioned 3D native diffusion models. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate that
our method can produce high-quality, diverse 3D assets that
closely mirror the original input image.

1. Introduction
Generating 3D shapes from a single image or text prompt
is a long-standing problem in computer vision and is essential for numerous applications. While remarkable progress
has been achieved in the field of 2D image generation due
to advanced generative methods and large-scale image-text
datasets, transferring this success to the 3D domain is hindered by the limited availability of 3D data. Although many
works have introduced sophisticated 3D generative mod-

10072

