This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hybrid Functional Maps for Crease-Aware Non-Isometric Shape Matching
Lennart Bastian1*
1

Yizheng Xie1*

Nassir Navab1

Zorah Lähner2,3,4

Technical University of Munich, Germany 2 University of Siegen, Germany
3
University of Bonn, Germany 4 Lamarr Institute, Germany

Laplace-Beltrami Eigenbasis

𝜙!

𝜙"

Elastic Eigenbasis

𝜙#

𝜓!

𝜓"

𝜓#

Hybrid Functional Map

Figure 1. We propose a novel approach of hybridizing the eigenbases originating from different operators for mapping between function
spaces in deformable shape correspondence. While the Laplace-Beltrami operator (LBO) eigenbasis is robust to coarse isometric deformations,
it fails to encapsulate extrinsic characteristics between shapes. In contrast, elastic basis functions [21] align with high curvature details
but lack the robustness for coarse isometric matching. The proposed hybrid basis can be used as a drop-in replacement for the LBO basis
functions in modern functional map pipelines, improving performance in near-isometric, non-isometric, and topologically noisy settings.

1. Introduction
Abstract
Non-isometric shape correspondence remains a fundamental challenge in computer vision. Traditional methods
using Laplace-Beltrami operator (LBO) eigenmodes face
limitations in characterizing high-frequency extrinsic shape
changes like bending and creases. We propose a novel approach of combining the non-orthogonal extrinsic basis of
eigenfunctions of the elastic thin-shell hessian with the intrinsic ones of the LBO, creating a hybrid spectral space
in which we construct functional maps. To this end, we
present a theoretical framework to effectively integrate nonorthogonal basis functions into descriptor- and learningbased functional map methods. Our approach can be incorporated easily into existing functional map pipelines
across varying applications and can handle complex deformations beyond isometries. We show extensive evaluations across various supervised and unsupervised settings
and demonstrate significant improvements. Notably, our approach achieves up to 15% better mean geodesic error for
non-isometric correspondence settings and up to 45% improvement in scenarios with topological noise. Code is available at: https://hybridfmaps.github.io/
∗ Equal Contribution

: {lennart.bastian,yizheng.xie}@tum.de

Establishing dense correspondences between 3D shapes is
a cornerstone for numerous computer vision and graphics
tasks such as object recognition, character animation, and
texture transfer. The complexity of this task varies significantly depending on the nature of the transformation a shape
undergoes. Many classic correspondence methods leverage
that rigid transformations can be represented in six degrees
of freedom in R3 and preserve the Euclidean distance between pairs of points. Iterative closest point (ICP) [4], and
its variations [25, 40], which alternate between transformation and correspondence estimation, are very popular due
to their simplicity. In this setting, local extrinsic surface
properties in the embedding space stay invariant under rigid
transformations such that they can be used as features during
optimization, for example, the change of normals. For the
wider class of isometric deformations (w.r.t. the geodesic
distance), the relative embedding of the shape can change
significantly, and Euclidean distances between points may
not be preserved. In this class, only intrinsic properties –
those that do not depend on a specific embedding of the
surface – stay invariant, and the correspondence problem
becomes much harder due to the quadratic size of the solution space. For example, solving a quadratic assignment
problem preserving geodesic distances [24] or heat kernel

3313

