This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards 3D Vision with Low-Cost Single-Photon Cameras
Fangzhou Mu† , Carter Sifferman† , Sacha Jungerman, Yiquan Li‡ , Mark Han‡ ,
Michael Gleicher, Mohit Gupta, Yin Li
†

co-first author, ‡ equal contribution

University of Wisconsin-Madison
Low-Cost Proximity Sensor

Captured Scene

Neural SDF

Rendered Transients

Scene Reconstruction

Sensor
(TMF8820)
Minimize

5mm

Breakout Board

Captured Transients

Figure 1. We demonstrate that measurements from spatially distributed low-cost single-photon proximity sensors (left) can be used to
reconstruct 3D shape of real world objects (right). Our method combines a differentiable image formation model and neural rendering
to recover 3D geometry based on measurements (transient histograms) from sensors with known poses. This is done by minimizing the
difference between the observed and rendered sensor measurements. For clarity, a subset of sensor poses and measurements are shown.

Abstract
We present a method for reconstructing 3D shape of
arbitrary Lambertian objects based on measurements by
miniature, energy-efficient, low-cost single-photon cameras. These cameras, operating as time resolved image
sensors, illuminate the scene with a very fast pulse of diffuse light and record the shape of that pulse as it returns
back from the scene at a high temporal resolution. We propose to model this image formation process, account for its
non-idealities, and adapt neural rendering to reconstruct
3D geometry from a set of spatially distributed sensors with
known poses. We show that our approach can successfully
recover complex 3D shapes from simulated data. We further demonstrate 3D object reconstruction from real-world
captures, utilizing measurements from a commodity proximity sensor. Our work draws a connection between imagebased modeling and active range scanning, and offers a
step towards 3D vision with single-photon cameras. Our
project webpage is at https://cpsiff.github.io/
towards_3d_vision/.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D shape of real objects remains a central
problem in vision, solutions to which have evolved into
two parallel branches. Image-based modeling [45] leverages a plethora of visual cues from multiple photographs

(e.g., stereo, motion, shading), leading to problems including multi-view stereo [42], photometric stereo [1] and the
more recent neural radiance fields (NeRF) [33]. Conversely,
active range scanning [22] combines an active light source
with an imaging sensor, giving rise to imaging techniques
such as structured light [13], and time-of-flight [16]. Conventional wisdom suggests that range scanning yields more
precise 3D geometry than image-based modeling at the cost
of using specialized, expensive hardware.
An emerging approach for range scanning is direct timeof-flight imaging with active single-photon cameras, a form
of time-resolved image sensor. This approach couples
a pico-to-nanosecond detector with a fast coherent light
source, illuminates the scene with a very short pulse of light,
and measures the intensity of the light over time as it reflects
back from the scene. The resulting incident wavefront is
recorded and quantized, forming a transient histogram. A
special case of this approach is single-photon LiDAR, in
which the light source (laser) is highly focused, the detector finds the peak in the histogram, and the sensor reports a
single distance value per detector pixel. When using a diffuse light source, these time-resolved sensors capture visual
information beyond the distance measurements extracted in
LiDAR. Transient histograms in this case record distributions of times-of-flight, encoding the product of scene geometry and reflectance over each imaged scene patch [23].
The entirety of information in the transient histogram has
been previously utilized in applications such as fluorescence

5302

