This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BlockGCN: Redefine Topology Awareness for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Yuxuan Zhou1† Xudong Yan2† Zhi-Qi Cheng3∗ Yan Yan4 Qi Dai5 Xian-Sheng Hua6
1
University of Mannheim 2 City University of Macau 3 Carnegie Mellon University
4
SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Microsoft Research 6 Terminus Group
https://github.com/ZhouYuxuanYX/BlockGCN

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have long set the
state-of-the-art in skeleton-based action recognition, leveraging their ability to unravel the complex dynamics of human joint topology through the graph’s adjacency matrix.
However, an inherent flaw has come to light in these cuttingedge models: they tend to optimize the adjacency matrix
jointly with the model weights. This process, while seemingly efficient, causes a gradual decay of bone connectivity data, resulting in a model indifferent to the very topology it sought to represent. To remedy this, we propose a
two-fold strategy: (1) We introduce an innovative approach
that encodes bone connectivity by harnessing the power of
graph distances to describe the physical topology; we further incorporate action-specific topological representation
via persistent homology analysis to depict systemic dynamics. This preserves the vital topological nuances often lost
in conventional GCNs. (2) Our investigation also reveals
the redundancy in existing GCNs for multi-relational modeling, which we address by proposing an efficient refinement
to Graph Convolutions (GC) - the BlockGC. This significantly reduces parameters while improving performance
beyond original GCNs. Our full model, BlockGCN, establishes new benchmarks in skeleton-based action recognition across all model categories. Its high accuracy and
lightweight design, most notably on the large-scale NTU
RGB+D 120 dataset, stand as strong validation of the efficacy of BlockGCN.

1. Introduction
Skeleton-based action recognition has undergone a significant transformation, driven by the need for computational efficiency and adaptability to varying environmental conditions, particularly in fields such as medical applications. Early pioneering efforts predominantly utilized
† Internship at CMU. Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Performance vs. Model Size on NTU RGB+D 120
Cross-Subject. Our BlockGCN improves over previous methods
w.r.t. both performance and efficiency. [Best viewed zoomed in]

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [9, 35, 47] and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [18, 24], extracting
features or pseudo-images from human joint data to make
predictions. Despite reasonable performance, these approaches were inherently constrained in modeling the intricate inter-dependencies between joints, which is crucial
for fine-grained action recognition.
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [7, 19, 31] have
the potential to learn the topology, but they fail to fully exploit the inherent skeletal structure due to two key limitations: (1) The topology is initialized based on physical connections, but this vital knowledge decays during training,
limiting the retention of skeletal information. (2) The single
static topology struggles to capture diverse joint relationships that emerge across complex actions. Therefore, while
the graph modeling of GCNs is better suited to handle skeletal data than CNNs or RNNs, they have difficulty fully capturing the intricate multi-scale relationships within the human topology, which are crucial for sophisticated skeletonbased action recognition.

2049

