This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PolarMatte: Fully Computational Ground-Truth-Quality Alpha Matte
Extraction for Images and Video using Polarized Screen Matting
Kenji Enomoto

Capture setup
polarized screen

TJ Rhodes Brian Price
Adobe Research

Input images of target scene

Gavin Miller

Extracted ground-truth alpha matte

Target scene composited
onto a new background

polarized light

unpolarized light
polarization camera

Figure 1. PolarMatte extraction method. A modern polarization camera with a color polarization filter array (CPFA) is used to capture
four polarization states of a target scene and polarized background separately as input images. Our method extracts the alpha matte and
foreground color which can be composited onto an arbitrary background. The highlighted regions show fine-details, glasses, and motion
blur. We can computationally extract alpha mattes for dynamic scenes containing various materials without manual corrections.

Abstract
The creation of high-quality alpha mattes as groundtruth data for video matting is typically a laborious task.
The trade-off between accuracy, manual corrections, and
capture constraints often produces erroneous results or is
cost prohibitive. We propose PolarMatte, a fully computational alpha matte extraction method for images and
video without compromise between quality and practicality.
A single polarization camera is used to capture dynamic
scenes backlit by an off-the-shelf LCD monitor. PolarMatte
exploits the polarization channel to compute the per-pixel
opacity of the target scene, including the transparency of
fine-details, translucent objects, and optical/motion blur.
We leverage polarization clues to robustly detect indistinguishable pixels, and extract the alpha matte value at polarized foreground reflections with a polarimetric matting
Laplacian. Quantitative and qualitative evaluation demonstrate our ability to computationally extract ground-truthquality alpha mattes without human labour.

1. Introduction
Video matting has progressed immensely in recent history
with the adoption of large neural networks [9, 11] trained on
user-annotated datasets. However, the quantity and quality
of dataset assets in the matting community restricts their

accuracy and generalization ability [12]. The considerable
effort required to accurately label alpha mattes for groundtruth is the primary cause for the lack of assets. This paper
proposes a solution for the root cause and provides a pathway towards building large-scale video matting datasets.
Ground-truth alpha mattes for prior matting datasets
have been created by photographing objects against multiple backgrounds [8, 21], extracting the mattes manually
using existing matting methods [30, 31], or with chroma
keying [8, 13, 28, 32]. These methods have a trade-off between quality and manual post-processing to produce the
final matte. Such methods are impractical at scale and are
prone to inherent errors. A recent work [24] can achieve
high-quality results without manual keying, but the constrained lighting environment makes this less accessible for
widespread use. These trade-offs impede the creation of accurate ground-truth for video matting datasets at scale.
Inspired by an earlier work using polarization for matting [15, 16], we propose an improved video matte capture
method that eliminates the compromise between quality, effort, and setup. We present PolarMatte, a fully computational method for extracting ultra high-quality alpha mattes of dynamic scenes using polarization. A camera with
a color polarization filter array (CPFA) is used to capture
polarization images of a target object backlit with polarized light. While the foreground reflects the ambient light,
the background light is polarized. We formulate the matting problem in the polarization channel since less polar-

3901

