This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizing 6-DoF Grasp Detection via Domain Prior Knowledge
Haoxiang Ma1,2 Modi Shi1,2 Boyang Gao3,4 Di Huang1,2 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
4
Geometry Robotics
{mahaoxiang822,modishi,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, {boyang.gao}@geometryrobot.com

Abstract
We focus on the generalization ability of the 6-DoF grasp
detection method in this paper. While learning-based grasp
detection methods can predict grasp poses for unseen objects using the grasp distribution learned from the training set, they often exhibit a significant performance drop
when encountering objects with diverse shapes and structures. To enhance the grasp detection methods’ generalization ability, we incorporate domain prior knowledge of
robotic grasping, enabling better adaptation to objects with
significant shape and structure differences. More specifically, we employ the physical constraint regularization during the training phase to guide the model towards predicting grasps that comply with the physical rule on grasping.
For the unstable grasp poses predicted on novel objects,
we design a contact-score joint optimization using the projection contact map to refine these poses in cluttered scenarios. Extensive experiments conducted on the GraspNet1billion benchmark demonstrate a substantial performance
gain on the novel object set and the real-world grasping
experiments also demonstrate the effectiveness of our generalizing 6-DoF grasp detection method. Code is available at https://github.com/mahaoxiang822/
Generalizing-Grasp.

1. Introduction
Given an object, robotic grasp detection aims to find suitable and sufficient gripper configurations for various manipulation tasks. Traditional methods [6, 27, 30] establish
hand-crafted criteria to evaluate grasp samples according to
3D models of objects. Despite providing precise interaction
between objects and grippers, they assume that object models are available in advance and also suffer a slow running
speed, which limits their popularization. As the develop* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) the performance and distribution gap
between objects similar to training samples (similar objects) and
those with largely varied shapes and structures (novel objects) and
(b) the limitations of the object augmentation methods.

ment of deep learning, data-driven methods [9, 20, 32] have
been widely studied. These methods predict grasps without the need for pre-prepared 3D models and demonstrate
the capability to handle unseen objects. However, they often struggle when encountering objects whose shapes and
structures significantly deviate from those in the training
set, making them difficult to adapt to more diverse applications. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), learning-based grasp
detection methods are basically able to transfer to objects
similar to those appearing in training, but they do not effectively generalize to novel objects with their distribution
greatly changed.
To facilitate the generalization of learning-based grasp

18102

