This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DriveTrack: A Benchmark for Long-Range Point Tracking in Real-World Videos
Arjun Balasingam
MIT CSAIL

Joseph Chandler
MIT CSAIL

Chenning Li
MIT CSAIL

Zhoutong Zhang
Adobe Systems

Hari Balakrishnan
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
This paper presents DriveTrack, a new benchmark and
data generation framework for long-range keypoint tracking in
real-world videos. DriveTrack is motivated by the observation
that the accuracy of state-of-the-art trackers depends strongly
on visual attributes around the selected keypoints, such as
texture and lighting. The problem is that these artifacts are
especially pronounced in real-world videos, but these trackers
are unable to train on such scenes due to a dearth of annotations.
DriveTrack bridges this gap by building a framework to automatically annotate point tracks on autonomous driving datasets.
We release a dataset consisting of 1 billion point tracks across
24 hours of video, which is seven orders of magnitude greater
than prior real-world benchmarks and on par with the scale
of synthetic benchmarks. DriveTrack unlocks new use cases
for point tracking in real-world videos. First, we show that finetuning keypoint trackers on DriveTrack improves accuracy on
real-world scenes by up to 7%. Second, we analyze the sensitivity of trackers to visual artifacts in real scenes and motivate the
idea of running assistive keypoint selectors alongside trackers.

1. Introduction
Long-range keypoint tracking in videos underpins many computer vision applications, including autonomous driving [14],
robotics [24], pose estimation [8], 3D reconstruction [16], and
medical imaging [26]. Each of these applications involves moving objects and moving cameras. Keypoint tracking—whose
goal is to track unique points in the presence of mobility and
occlusions—is an active area of research [4, 5, 10, 29].
Most proposals follow the Track Any Point (TAP) [4]
formulation: given a video and a set of query points, the
algorithm must estimate the locations of those points in all
other frames where they are visible. The underlying tracking
algorithms vary significantly. TAPIR [4, 5] is an end-to-end
method that predicts correspondences using feature maps and
cost volumes. By contrast, PIPs++ [10, 29] stitches optical flow
vectors together to construct long-range trajectories. These are
two recent methods that improve the state-of-the-art, adding
to a number of techniques proposed over the last two decades.
This paper observes that the accuracy of state-of-the-art

Figure 1. DriveTrack automatically generates dense, accurate, and
long-range point track annotations for autonomous driving videos.

trackers suffers on real videos. In particular, noisy visual
characteristics—such as texture, lighting variations, occlusions,
and motion-induced image distortions—can hinder tracking
performance (§3). The key problem is that modern trackers train
on vast synthetic datasets [9, 13, 29] whose scenes do not exhibit
these imperfections. We are aware of only two benchmarks for
the TAP task on real-world videos [12, 19], with each offering
(only) tens of human-labeled annotations per scene.
To overcome this shortcoming, we propose DriveTrack,
a large-scale benchmark for long-range point tracking tasks.
DriveTrack brings to real-world videos the density and fidelity
of annotations available only for synthetic benchmarks today.
By using camera feeds from cars driven in urban areas,
DriveTrack captures realistic motion, noisy visual attributes, and
occlusions, which synthetic [9, 13] or rendered [29] datasets
do not model. Fig. 1 shows the annotations computed by
DriveTrack for a driving scene. Although DriveTrack is built
on autonomous driving videos, it captures the wide variety of
visual artifacts typical in real-world scenes.
To generate point tracks, we adapt methods used by synthetic
benchmarks [9, 29] that use rendering software to precisely
annotate the motion of simulated trajectories. However,
real-world videos do not have the luxury of a simulator.
To overcome this challenge, DriveTrack uses timestamped
LiDAR point clouds, object bounding box annotations, and
camera poses and orientations [2, 7, 21, 25]. Since LiDAR
point sweeps do not have 1:1 correspondence over time [21],
DriveTrack cannot compute correspondences between adjacent
point clouds, as synthetic benchmarks are able to. DriveTrack
instead transforms each timestamped point cloud according

22488

