This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Few-shot 3D Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Zhaochong An1,2 , Guolei Sun1∗ , Yun Liu3 ,* Fayao Liu3 , Zongwei Wu4 ,
Dan Wang2 , Luc Van Gool1 , Serge Belongie2
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich
2
Pioneer Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Copenhagen
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
4
Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Wurzburg

Abstract

Rapid advancements in deep neural networks have propelled the exploration of 3D point cloud understanding in
various applications [5, 8, 26, 31]. Unlike images, point
* Corresponding authors: Guolei Sun and Yun Liu

Support
Feat.

Support
Adaption
Prediction

Query
Feat.

LBP/COS

Support Mask
Support

Query

Base Prototypes

Backbone

1. Introduction

Query

Refined Prototypes
Backbone

This paper revisits few-shot 3D point cloud semantic
segmentation (FS-PCS), with a focus on two significant issues in the state-of-the-art: foreground leakage and sparse
point distribution. The former arises from non-uniform
point sampling, allowing models to distinguish the density
disparities between foreground and background for easier
segmentation. The latter results from sampling only 2,048
points, limiting semantic information and deviating from
the real-world practice. To address these issues, we introduce a standardized FS-PCS setting, upon which a new
benchmark is built. Moreover, we propose a novel FS-PCS
model. While previous methods are based on feature optimization by mainly refining support features to enhance
prototypes, our method is based on correlation optimization, referred to as Correlation Optimization Segmentation
(COSeg). Specifically, we compute Class-specific Multiprototypical Correlation (CMC) for each query point, representing its correlations to category prototypes. Then, we
propose the Hyper Correlation Augmentation (HCA) module to enhance CMC. Furthermore, tackling the inherent
property of few-shot training to incur base susceptibility for
models, we propose to learn non-parametric prototypes for
the base classes during training. The learned base prototypes are used to calibrate correlations for the background
class through a Base Prototypes Calibration (BPC) module.
Experiments on popular datasets demonstrate the superiority of COSeg over existing methods. The code is available
at github.com/ZhaochongAn/COSeg.

Support Mask
Support

Support
Feat.

Prototypes
Correlations

Prediction
HCA

Query
Feat.

Figure 1. Previous feature optimization vs. our correlation optimization. Top: Most prior work [11, 25, 29, 45, 56, 58] on FSPCS focuses on feature optimization by designing support adaption modules for enhanced prototypes and then making predictions
through non-parametric label propagation (LBP) or cosine similarity (COS), implicitly modeling correlations. Bottom: Instead
of optimizing features, we propose to directly uses correlations as
input to learnable modules, explicitly refining correlations.

clouds inherently capture intricate object structures, enabling fine-grained analyses. However, collecting and annotating point cloud data is significantly more labor-intensive
than its 2D counterpart, limiting the scale and semantic diversity of existing 3D datasets [1, 4, 7]. To reduce the substantial human effort required for dataset creation, few-shot
point cloud semantic segmentation (FS-PCS) emerges as a
crucial task, which empowers 3D segmentation models to
generalize to novel classes with few annotated samples.
In the realm of FS-PCS, attMPTI [56] stands as a pioneering model, introducing a multi-prototype transductive approach that leverages label propagation for predicting segmentation in novel classes. Subsequent works [11,

3996

