This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiple View Geometry Transformers for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Ziwei Liao1,* Jialiang Zhu2,* Chunyu Wang3,† Han Hu3 Steven L. Waslander1
1
University of Toronto 2 Southeast University 3 Microsoft Research Asia
ziwei.liao@mail.utoronto.ca, steven.waslander@robotics.utias.utoronto.ca
jialiangzhu@seu.edu.cn
chnuwa@microsoft.com, hanhu@microsoft.com

Initialized Queries

Abstract
Top-view space

AM

Refined 2D Poses

Query

In this work, we aim to improve the 3D reasoning ability
of Transformers in multi-view 3D human pose estimation.
Recent works have focused on end-to-end learning-based
transformer designs, which struggle to resolve geometric
information accurately, particularly during occlusion. Instead, we propose a novel hybrid model, MVGFormer,
which has a series of geometric and appearance modules
organized in an iterative manner. The geometry modules are
learning-free and handle all viewpoint-dependent 3D tasks
geometrically which notably improves the model’s generalization ability. The appearance modules are learnable
and are dedicated to estimating 2D poses from image signals end-to-end which enables them to achieve accurate estimates even when occlusion occurs, leading to a model
that is both accurate and generalizable to new cameras
and geometries. We evaluate our approach for both indomain and out-of-domain settings, where our model consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods, and especially does so by a significant margin in the out-of-domain
setting. We will release the code and models: https:
//github.com/XunshanMan/MVGFormer.

Figure 1. Overview of our MVGFormer which directly introduces
multiple view geometry reasoning in Transformers. It is fullydifferentiable and end-to-end trainable. The two types of modules
(AM & GM) iteratively refine the 2D and 3D poses, respectively.

1. Introduction

dergo large viewpoint variations in an environment unseen
during training. This observation inspires us to consider the
following question in our work:

* Equal contribution
† Correspondance author

Refined 3D Poses

Top-view space

AM

Query

𝑂1
𝑂2
Triangulation

Refined 2D Poses

…

Estimating 3D human pose from multiple cameras is an important task with diverse applications. Recently, state-ofthe-art accuracy on benchmark datasets [15, 17] has been
advanced significantly by the application of large neural
networks [29, 31, 36], due to their capabilities to learn complex priors required to handle severe occlusion. However,
our study shows that the learnable prior is a double-edged
sword that may harm its generalization ability, especially in
the multiple-view setting where the camera views may un-

GM

What sub-tasks should be addressed geometrically in a
learning-free style rather than by neural networks?
The core challenge of multiple view 3D human pose estimation is to establish correspondence across views and
reason about the 3D world from 2D measurements. Some
methods [4, 8, 9, 27, 37] address the task from a primarly
geometric direction. They first estimate 2D poses in each
view, group them into clusters, and then estimate a 3D
pose for each cluster by triangulation. They generalize well
to unseen settings because of explicit geometry modeling.
However, they struggle to handle severe occlusion due to

708

