This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LAN: Learning to Adapt Noise for Image Denoising
Changjin Kim
Dept. of Computer Science
Hanyang University

Tae Hyun Kim
Dept. of Computer Science
Hanyang University

Sungyong Baik†
Dept. of Data Science
Hanyang University

chjinny@hanyang.ac.kr

taehyunkim@hanyang.ac.kr

dsybaik@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Removing noise from images, a.k.a image denoising, can
be a very challenging task since the type and amount of
noise can greatly vary for each image due to many factors including a camera model and capturing environments.
While there have been striking improvements in image denoising with the emergence of advanced deep learning architectures and real-world datasets, recent denoising networks struggle to maintain performance on images with
noise that has not been seen during training. One typical
approach to address the challenge would be to adapt a denoising network to new noise distribution. Instead, in this
work, we shift our focus to adapting the input noise itself,
rather than adapting a network. Thus, we keep a pretrained
network frozen, and adapt an input noise to capture the finegrained deviations. As such, we propose a new denoising
algorithm, dubbed Learning-to-Adapt-Noise (LAN), where
a learnable noise offset is directly added to a given noisy
image to bring a given input noise closer towards the noise
distribution a denoising network is trained to handle. Consequently, the proposed framework exhibits performance
improvement on images with unseen noise, displaying the
potential of the proposed research direction.

1. Introduction
Noise, an unwanted byproduct during image processing,
can cause severe degradation not only in image quality but
also in high-level computer vision tasks. As such, noise has
been a target to eliminate in the field of image denoising.
One of the main challenges in image denoising is how to
distinguish a noise from an original source without knowing the noise distribution a priori.
To tackle such a challenging problem, a myriad of
learning-based models have been proposed to learn to remove noise that follows known distributions. To do so,
models are trained on datasets composed of pairs of clean
images and corresponding noisy images that are synthe† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Overview of the motivation of our framework,
Learning-to-Adapt-Noise (LAN). Instead of adapting a denoising network to unseen noise, LAN adapts the input noise itself by
directly learning to offset the deviations between the unseen noise
and the noise distribution a denoising network is trained on.

sized by adding noise to clean images. Under such formulation, learning-based models have prominently marked
progress in the performance of image denoising, ever since
the emergence of convolutional neural networks (CNN)
and its advanced architectures designed for image denoising [5, 11, 52, 54].
While early CNN-based models have brought substantial improvements, such impressive results are only limited
to images with known noise distribution. Since early neural networks are trained on images with fixed and known
noise distributions, models fail to generalize to images that
contain unseen noise. Considering that images often contain unseen/unknown noise, due to new environments and
camera models, in real-world applications, the incapability
of handling such noise is a critical shortcoming that needs
to be addressed.
To bridge the gap between the performance on controlled
environments and real-world environments, various works
have focused on constructing datasets consisting of realworld clean-noisy image pairs [1, 3, 4, 37, 39, 48]. For instance, SIDD [1] dataset, one of widely accepted and used
datasets, is constructed by capturing real-world noisy images with various smartphone cameras under different environment (e.g., ISO, shutter speed, and aperture settings).

25193

