This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C3Net: Compound Conditioned ControlNet for Multimodal Content Generation
Juntao Zhang1*

Yuehuai Liu1*
1

HKUST

Yu-Wing Tai2
2

Chi-Keung Tang1

Dartmouth College

Figure 1. C3Net generates multimodal contents (e.g., image, audio, and text) taking compound conditions in multiple modalities. The
green and blue arrows are two inferences made by C3Net using different combinations of conditions. C3Net can take any combination of
image, text, and audio as conditions for content synthesis.

Abstract
We present Compound Conditioned ControlNet, C3Net,
a novel generative neural architecture taking conditions
from multiple modalities and synthesizing multimodal contents simultaneously (e.g., image, text, audio). C3Net
adapts the ControlNet [46] architecture to jointly train and
make inferences on a production-ready diffusion model and
its trainable copies. Specifically, C3Net first aligns the
conditions from multi-modalities to the same semantic latent space using modality-specific encoders based on contrastive training. Then, it generates multimodal outputs
based on the aligned latent space, whose semantic information is combined using a ControlNet-like architecture
called Control C3-UNet. Correspondingly, with this system design, our model offers an improved solution for jointmodality generation through learning and explaining multimodal conditions, involving more than just linear interpolation within the latent space. Meanwhile, as we align
conditions to a unified latent space, C3Net only requires
one trainable Control C3-UNet to work on multimodal se-

mantic information. Furthermore, our model employs unimodal pretraining on the condition alignment stage, outperforming the non-pretrained alignment even on relatively
scarce training data and thus demonstrating high-quality
compound condition generation. We contribute the first
high-quality tri-modal validation set to validate quantitatively that C3Net outperforms or is on par with the first and
contemporary state-of-the-art multimodal generation [43].
Our codes and tri-modal dataset will be released here.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have recently emerged as the new stateof-the-art family of deep generative models, with remarkable performance on multimodal modeling [1, 33, 35, 37,
47]. Correspondingly, we have observed widespread and
increasing prevalence of strong cross-modal models that
allow generating one single modality from another, including but not limited to text-to-text [2, 30], text-to* Equal contributions. This work is supported in part by the Research
Grant Council of the Hong Kong SAR grant no. 16201420.

26886

