This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not All Classes Stand on Same Embeddings:
Calibrating a Semantic Distance with Metric Tensor
Jae Hyeon Park1
Gyoomin Lee1
Seunggi Park1
Sung In Cho1 *
1
Division of AI Software Convergence at Dongguk University
30, Pildong-ro 1-gil, Jung-gu, Seoul, 04620, Republic of Korea
{pjh0011,exceleaf,psg0912,csi2267}@dongguk.edu

Abstract
The consistency training (CT)-based semi-supervised
learning (SSL) bites state-of-the-art performance on SSLbased image classification. However, the existing CT-based
SSL methods do not highlight the non-Euclidean characteristics and class-wise varieties of embedding spaces in
an SSL model, thus they cannot fully utilize the effectiveness of CT. Thus, we propose a metric tensor-based consistency regularization, exploiting the class-variant geometrical structure of embeddings on the high-dimensional feature
space. The proposed method not only minimizes the prediction discrepancy between different views of a given image
but also estimates the intrinsic geometric curvature of embedding spaces by employing the global and local metric
tensors. The global metric tensor is used to globally estimate the class-invariant embeddings from the whole data
distribution while the local metric tensor is exploited to estimate the class-variant embeddings of each cluster. The two
metric tensors are optimized by the consistency regularization based on the weak and strong augmentation strategy.
The proposed method provides the highest classification accuracy on average compared to the existing state-of-the-art
SSL methods on conventional datasets.

1. Introduction
Most semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods [2, 7, 8, 13–
15, 20, 30, 38] on image classification make extensive use
of the equality of multiple views of the input. Specifically,
they encourage the consistency of the model’s prediction
vectors for two different versions of the input image derived from the same input image. FixMatch [30] which
utilizes pseudo labeling on weakly and strongly augmented
images is the most famous consistency training technique
and it suggests the research direction of numerous SSL
studies based on consistency training [37]. Furthermore,
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The performance of benchmarks on a broad range of
conventional datasets compared with existing SSL. The numerical
values under the dataset name (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN,
STL-10) with bracket represent the scenarios of the SSL.

this multi-view strategy is used for contrastive learning and
contributes to greatly improving classification accuracy. In
contrastive learning, positive and negative pairs are made
from the input anchor image and its augmented versions,
the input anchor image and other images in a batch, respectively. SimCLR [7, 8] achieved excellent classification performance by initializing the backbone network with a pretext stage that learns the similarity or dissimilarity relationship in positive or negative pairs.
Most of these SSL techniques strongly adopt the manifold hypothesis [18, 26] that assumes the original highdimensional data in the real world can be expressed on
the relatively low-dimensional latent manifold (embedding
space). In this manifold hypothesis, it is believed that the
overall structure of the manifold (non-Euclidean space) can
be found by clustering the positive pairs in a local region

17722

