This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X-3D: Explicit 3D Structure Modeling for Point Cloud Recognition
Shuofeng Sun1 , Yongming Rao2 , Jiwen Lu3 , Haibin Yan1 *
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications1 , Tencent2 , Tsinghua University3

Abstract
Numerous prior studies predominantly emphasize constructing relation vectors for individual neighborhood
points and generating dynamic kernels for each vector and
embedding these into high-dimensional spaces to capture
implicit local structures. However, we contend that such
implicit high-dimensional structure modeling approch inadequately represents the local geometric structure of point
clouds due to the absence of explicit structural information. Hence, we introduce X-3D, an explicit 3D structure
modeling approach. X-3D functions by capturing the explicit local structural information within the input 3D space
and employing it to produce dynamic kernels with shared
weights for all neighborhood points within the current local region. This modeling approach introduces effective geometric prior and significantly diminishes the disparity between the local structure of the embedding space and the
original input point cloud, thereby improving the extraction of local features. Experiments show that our method
can be used on a variety of methods and achieves stateof-the-art performance on segmentation, classification, detection tasks with lower extra computational cost, such
as 90.7% on ScanObjectNN for classification, 79.2% on
S3DIS 6 fold and 74.3% on S3DIS Area 5 for segmentation, 76.3% on ScanNetV2 for segmentation and 64.5%
mAP25 , 46.9% mAP50 on SUN RGB-D and 69.0% mAP25 ,
51.1% mAP50 on ScanNetV2. Our code is available at
https://github.com/sunshuofeng/X-3D.

1. Introduction
Using deep learning for point cloud analysis has garnered significant attention in research. However, the irregularity of point cloud data poses challenges for directly applying conventional convolutional methods.
In order to solve this problem, the existing methods [11,
17, 18, 24, 27, 32, 43] first construct the local neighborhood by kNN or ball query, and then design the relationship vector to represent the geometric relationship between
* Corresponding author

(a) Implict High-dimensional Structure Modeling

relative coordinates

(b) Explicit Three-dimensional Structure Modeling

Figure 1. Illustration of the different design paradigms. Implict
High-dimensional Structure Modeling (IHSM). Most of existing work can be classified into this design paradigm, and the focus of modeling usually lies in how to construct relation vectors
for each neighborhood point or how to generate a dynamic kernel
for each vector and then embed the relation vectors to the highdimension space to capture the implicit local structure. Explicit
3D Structure Modeling. The difference is that the basic unit of
our modeling is the structure, and we directly build the explicit geometric structure for the local neighborhood in the input space, and
generate the dynamic kernel which shares weights for all neighborhood points within the current local region through the geometric
structure. By this explicit introduction of structural information
into the embedding space, we greatly reduce the gap between the
local structure captured by the embedding space and the original
input point cloud.

each neighborhood point and the center point. For example, PointNet++ [24], PointNeXt [27], and other methods directly use the relative coordinate difference as the
relationship vector. Methods such as RandLA [12] and
RSConv [18] supplement the relation vectors with additional Euclidean distances and absolute coordinates. Then
most methods use shared-weight MLP to embed the relation
vector into the high-dimensional feature space. However,
in order to flexibly handle different relation vectors, some
methods [18, 32] dynamically generate the corresponding
vector kernel for each relation vector. Finally, the implicit
local structure is obtained by applying a symmetric aggre-

5074

