This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Gaze Representation Learning from Multi-view Face Images
Yiwei Bao Feng Lu *
State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
{baoyiwei, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Vision is one of the most important sense for humans. Human gaze reveals the direction of visual attention, which is
an important cue for understanding how humans perceive
the surrounding world. Thus, gaze estimation techniques
have become an vital tool in numerous applications, such
as Virtual Realty and Augmented Reality[2, 30, 34], automotive safety [13, 26, 27] and healthcare [3, 20, 23]. In recent years, appearance-based gaze estimation methods have
drawn a lot of attention, since these methods only require
simple web cameras, eliminating the need for expensive
eye trackers with dedicated devices such as infrared cameras. Among these methods, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) based approaches exhibit exceptional performance in unconstrained environments.
* Corresponding Author. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62372019.

1

Representation
Gaze

Gaze

Face

Dual-Encoder Architecture
View 1

Unsupervised

Multi-view Data

Gaze Estimation

MV-DE
Multi-View Consistency
View 1

View 2

Same
HCS Gaze

View 2

Annotating gaze is an expensive and time-consuming endeavor, requiring costly eye-trackers or complex geometric
calibration procedures. Although some eye-based unsupervised gaze representation learning methods have been proposed, the quality of gaze representation extracted by these
methods degrades severely when the head pose is large. In
this paper, we present the Multi-View Dual-Encoder (MVDE), a framework designed to learn gaze representations
from unlabeled multi-view face images. Through the proposed Dual-Encoder architecture and the multi-view gaze
representation swapping strategy, the MV-DE successfully
disentangles gaze from general facial information and derives gaze representations closely tied to the subject’s eyeball rotation without gaze label. Experimental results illustrate that the gaze representations learned by the MVDE can be used in downstream tasks, including gaze estimation and redirection. Gaze estimation results indicates
that the proposed MV-DE displays notably higher robustness to uncontrolled head movements when compared to
state-of-the-art (SOTA) unsupervised learning methods.

Decouple

Abstract

Proposed Framework

Gaze Redirection

Downstream Tasks

Figure 1. We propose the Multi-View Dual-Encoder, a face-based
unsupervised gaze representation learning framework that is robust to large head poses.

CNN-based gaze estimation methods are usually trained
in an end-to-end manner with substantial amount of labeled data. The performance of CNN-based gaze estimation
methods highly relies on the quantity and diversity of the
training dataset. Unfortunately, annotating gaze directions
is difficult. Unlike common Computer Vision tasks like Object Detection, gaze cannot be reliably annotated without
specialized hardware. Gaze direction is either measured by
costly eye trackers under controlled environment [29], or
obtained by the line connecting the 3D face center to the
3D position of the gaze target [39]. It takes great effort and
time to collect diverse labeled training data, since the participants need to stare at large amount of gaze targets as
instructed.
To address the challenge of annotation, a number of unsupervised representation learning approaches have been
proposed [4, 14, 19]. These approaches extract common
visual representations from the input image without annotation. However, such methods do not perform well in gaze
estimation, as gaze estimation differs significantly from
common visual tasks. Common visual tasks like object
classification and detection require representations of overall appearance of the subject. On the other hand, gaze is
an direction vector that manifested as rotations of the subtle eye structure in the image. Efforts have been made to
design unsupervised gaze representation learning methods

1419

