This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Score Distillation: When score distillation meets GAN
Min Wei1 * Jingkai Zhou2 * Junyao Sun3 Xuesong Zhang1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{mw, xuesong zhang}@bupt.edu.cn

2

Independent Researcher

fs.jingkaizhou@gmail.com

3

South China University of Technology

201810108390@mail.scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing score distillation methods are sensitive to
classifier-free guidance (CFG) scale, manifested as oversmoothness or instability at small CFG scales, while oversaturation at large ones. To explain and analyze these issues, we revisit the derivation of Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) and decipher existing score distillation with
the Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN)
paradigm. With the WGAN paradigm, we find that existing score distillation either employs a fixed sub-optimal discriminator or conducts incomplete discriminator optimization, resulting in the scale-sensitive issue. We propose the
Adversarial Score Distillation (ASD), which maintains an
optimizable discriminator and updates it using the complete
optimization objective. Experiments show that the proposed
ASD performs favorably in 2D distillation and text-to-3D
tasks against existing methods. Furthermore, to explore the
generalization ability of our paradigm, we extend ASD to
the image editing task, which achieves competitive results.
The project page and code are at this link.

1. Introduction
Score distillation is a rapidly growing technique attracting
a lot of attention [17, 25, 33, 41, 51, 52, 58]. It transfers
knowledge from a pretrained 2D diffusion model to downstream tasks, such as image editing [17, 25], video editing [25], diffusion model distillation [33, 43], and text-to3D [4, 7, 8, 29, 36, 41, 44, 51, 52, 57, 58], with no downstream data required.
However, as a milestone in score distillation methods,
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [41] is very sensitive to
the classifier-free guidance (CFG) [18] scale. Figure 1 takes
2D score distillation as an example. When setting a small
CFG scale, SDS tends to obtain over-smoothing results,
whereas when setting a large one, the generated images become over-saturated. Recently, Variational Score Distillation (VSD) [52] alleviates the over-smoothing problem at
* Equal contribution

Corresponding authors: Jingkai Zhou, Xuesong Zhang

SDS (CFG = 7.5)

SDS (CFG = 100)

(a) SDS is sensitive to the CFG scale.
Optimization Steps

(b) Unstable distillation progress of VSD.
Figure 1. 2D score distillation examples with the prompts “a photograph of an astronaut riding a horse” and “exterior frontal perspective shot of resort villa inspired by Mykonos architecture”.
SDS is very sensitive to the CFG scales while VSD exhibits fluctuation of generated contents during distillation at small CFG scales.

small CFG scales, but we observe that VSD is a bit unstable during the distillation progress at small CFG scales, as
shown in Figure 1. These phenomena make us conjecture
that there are still some unrevealed methodological issues
behind SDS and VSD.
We start from revisiting the derivation of SDS. In [41],
the gradient of SDS is derived from the L2 loss of the diffusion model. This derivation holds only when the vanillapredicted noise is used in the gradient. However, in practice, the SDS gradient exploits the CFG noise rather than
the vanilla-predicted one. This little trick changes the whole
thing. It means that, in practice, the real SDS loss is no
longer the L2 loss of the diffusion model, but some other
loss associated with the implicit classifier or discriminator.

8131

