This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compact 3D Gaussian Representation for Radiance Field
Joo Chan Lee1
1

Daniel Rho2 Xiangyu Sun1 Jong Hwan Ko1B
Sungkyunkwan University1 , KT2

Eunbyung Park1B

{maincold2@, xiangyusun@g., jhko@, epark@}skku.edu, 2 daniel.r@kt.com
Gaussian Center Points

Rendered Ellipsoids

Rendered Result

3DGS

3DGS (110 fps)
29.06 PSNR, 774 MB

GT

Ours (155 fps)
29.16 PSNR, 28 MB

Ours

Figure 1. Our method achieves reduced storage and faster rendering speed while maintaining high-quality reconstruction of 3DGS [18].
The core idea is to effectively remove the redundant Gaussians that do not significantly contribute to the overall performance (the sparser
distribution of Gaussian points and reduced ellipsoid redundancy shown in the figure). We also introduce a more compact representation
of Gaussian attributes, resulting in markedly improved storage efficiency and rendering speed.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have demonstrated remarkable potential in capturing complex 3D scenes with
high fidelity. However, one persistent challenge that hinders the widespread adoption of NeRFs is the computational bottleneck due to the volumetric rendering. On the
other hand, 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) has recently
emerged as an alternative representation that leverages a
3D Gaussisan-based representation and adopts the rasterization pipeline to render the images rather than volumetric rendering, achieving very fast rendering speed and
promising image quality. However, a significant drawback arises as 3DGS entails a substantial number of 3D
Gaussians to maintain the high fidelity of the rendered images, which requires a large amount of memory and storage. To address this critical issue, we place a specific
emphasis on two key objectives: reducing the number of
Gaussian points without sacrificing performance and compressing the Gaussian attributes, such as view-dependent
color and covariance. To this end, we propose a learnable mask strategy that significantly reduces the number
of Gaussians while preserving high performance. In addition, we propose a compact but effective representation
of view-dependent color by employing a grid-based neural
B Corresponding authors.

field rather than relying on spherical harmonics. Finally,
we learn codebooks to compactly represent the geometric
attributes of Gaussian by vector quantization. With model
compression techniques such as quantization and entropy
coding, we consistently show over 25× reduced storage and
enhanced rendering speed, while maintaining the quality of
the scene representation, compared to 3DGS. Our work provides a comprehensive framework for 3D scene representation, achieving high performance, fast training, compactness, and real-time rendering. Our project page is available
at https://maincold2.github.io/c3dgs/.

1. Introduction
The field of neural rendering has witnessed substantial advancements in recent years, driven by the pursuit of rendering photorealistic 3D scenes from limited input data.
Among the pioneering approaches, Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) [29] has gained considerable attention for its remarkable ability to generate high-fidelity images and 3D reconstructions of scenes from only a collection of 2D images
in diverse applications. Follow-up research efforts have
been dedicated to improving image quality [2, 31], accelerating training and rendering speed [7, 8, 10, 11, 31, 35],
and reducing memory and storage footprints [23, 36, 41].
Despite the massive efforts, one persistent challenge that

21719

